### Accession
PXD019559

### Title
Interaction mapping of endoplasmic reticulum ubiquitin ligases identifies modulators of innate immune signalling

### Description
Ubiquitin ligases (E3s) embedded in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane regulate essential cellular activities including protein quality control, calcium flux, and sterol homeostasis. At least 25 different, transmembrane domain (TMD)-containing E3s are predicted to be ER-localised, but for most their organisation and cellular roles remain poorly defined. Using a comparative proteomic workflow, we mapped over 450 protein-protein interactions for 21 different stably expressed, full-length E3s. Bioinformatic analysis linked ER-E3s and their interactors to multiple homeostatic, regulatory, and metabolic pathways. Among these were four membrane-embedded interactors of RNF26, a polytopic E3 whose abundance is auto-regulated by ubiquitin-proteasome dependent degradation. RNF26 co-assembles with TMEM43, ENDOD1, TMEM33 and TMED1 to form a complex capable of modulating innate immune signalling through the cGAS-STING pathway. This RNF26 complex represents a new modulatory axis of STING and innate immune signalling at the ER membrane. Collectively, these data reveal the broad scope of regulation and differential functionalities mediated by ER-E3s for both membrane-tethered and cytoplasmic processes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested at ~80% confluence, washed and subsequently resuspended in solubilisation lysis buffer (SLB: 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH7.4, 5 mM EDTA) containing 1% Lauryl Maltose Neopentyl Glycol (LMNG, Anatrace) and supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation (20,000 x g, 30 min.) and pre-cleared using CL-4B Sepharose beads (50 uL of 50:50 slurry, Pharmacia/GE). The resulting clarified whole cell lysate (WCL, 10 mg) was used as source material for immunoprecipitations with anti-FLAG agarose (M2, Sigma, A2220) for 2 h. Immunoprecipitated complexes were washed twice with SLB (without detergent), twice with TBS, and eluted by 2 x SDS + 10% Beta-Mercaptoethanol. Eluates were reduced by DTT, alkylated by IAA, and subject to double chloroform-methanol precipitation. Precipitated proteins were subject to tryptic digest prior to purification using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters). Purified peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS with a tandem mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fischer Scientific) with an EASY-Spray C18 LC Column (2 um, 100 Angstrom, 75 um x 50 cm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) over a 63 min 2-35% acetonitrile gradient in 5% DMSO (v/v)/0.1% formic acid (v/v). The data were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 full-width half maximum at mass/charge 400 with lock mass enabled (445.120025 m/z), Top 15 precursor ion selection, Dynamic Exclusion of 27 s, and fragmentation performed in Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) mode with Normalized Collision Energy of 28.

### Data Protocol
Chromatogram alignment and peptide intensity were determined by Progenesis-QI (Nonlinear Dynamics). Peptides were identified by Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) search against the SwissProt database (retrieved 26/11/2015). Each bait sample was assigned with more than 2,000 protein IDs. Assignment of p-values to identified proteins was accomplished by adapting the comparative BSCG method described previously (Keilhauer et al., 2015). High-confidence interacting proteins (HCIPs) were defined by an ability to meet four criteria: 1) p-value <0.05, 2) positive fold-change, 3) identified by >= 2 peptides, and 4) not classified as common contaminants. SINQ analysis (Trudgian et al., 2011) was also carried out to identify interactors unique to one E3 only, which would not be assigned a p-value with the comparative analytical method. Apart from being unique to one sample, SINQ HCIPs were defined as: 1) having a SINQ score of >= 1x10-7, 2) being identified by > 1 spectral count, and 3) not being classified as a common contaminant.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitin ligases (E3s) embedded in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane regulate essential cellular activities including protein quality control, calcium flux, and sterol homeostasis. At least 25 different, transmembrane domain (TMD)-containing E3s are predicted to be ER-localised, but for most their organisation and cellular roles remain poorly defined. Using a comparative proteomic workflow, we mapped over 450 protein-protein interactions for 21 stably expressed, full-length E3s. Bioinformatic analysis linked ER-E3s and their interactors to multiple homeostatic, regulatory, and metabolic pathways. Among these were four membrane-embedded interactors of RNF26, a polytopic E3 whose abundance is auto-regulated by ubiquitin-proteasome dependent degradation. RNF26 co-assembles with TMEM43, ENDOD1, TMEM33 and TMED1 to form a complex capable of modulating innate immune signalling through the cGAS-STING pathway. This RNF26 complex represents a new modulatory axis of STING and innate immune signalling at the ER membrane. Collectively, these data reveal the broad scope of regulation and differential functionalities mediated by ER-E3s for both membrane-tethered and cytoplasmic processes.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin ligase, Sting, Rnf26, Innate immune response, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr John Christianson
University of Oxford


