### Accession
PXD038725

### Title
Proteomic analysis of centrosome-associated proteins between non-activated non-polarized and activated polarized murine B cells R#1 (R#2 doi: 10.1038/ncomms10969) & R#3

### Description
Using stable isotope labelling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics on purified centrosomes from resting, non-activated non-polarized, and activated polarized mouse B cells, we established a list of proteins differentially associated with the centrosome between resting and polarized states.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse IIA1.6 B lymphoma cells were maintained in L-lysine-depleted SILAC RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% dialysed FBS and 0.1 mg/ml heavy [13C6] or light [12C6] L-lysine. Every 3–4 days, cells were split and media replaced with the corresponding light- or heavy-labelling medium. After six to seven cell divisions, cells achieved ≥96% incorporation of amino-acid isotopes. Centrosomes were purified following stimulation with either no-relevant beads (non-activated non-polarized) or anti-BCR coated beads (activated polarized) for 60 min, cells were incubated on ice with 200 nM nocodazole and 1 μg/ml cytochalasin D for 90 min. Cells were washed and lysed in TicTac buffer (16 mM PIPES, 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 50 mM KCl, 1.2 mM EGTA, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.1% Triton X-100 and 0.1% β-mercaptoethanol) for 15 min. Centrosomes were isolated by sequential centrifugations at (1) 10,000g for 30 min at 4 °C on top of a 60% w/v sucrose cushion and (2) 40,000g for 60 min at 4 °C on top of a discontinuous sucrose gradient (40–50–70%, w/w). Finally, 10 fractions of 0.5 ml were recovered from the bottom of the tube, and centrosome-containing fractions were identified by western blot, pooled per condition, and  then mix in a 1:1 (non-activated non-polarized:activated polarized) ratio prior to protein separation on a 10% SDS–PAGE gel (Invitrogen) and colloidal blue staining (LabSafe GEL BlueTM GBiosciences). Gel slices were excised (20 fractions) and proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol before alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After washing and shrinking of the gel fractions with 100% MeCN, in-gel digestion was performed using recombinant endoproteinase rLys-C (Promega) overnight in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 30 °C. Peptides were extracted and analysed by nano-LC–MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex S.A.) coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (v2.0.7) and the resulting spectra were analysed via the Mascot Software (v2.3) with Proteome Discoverer (v1.2, Thermo Scientific) using the SwissProt Mus musculus database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and heavy 13C6-lysine (Lys6) were set as variable modifications. We set specificity of trypsin digestion and allowed two missed cleavage sites and mass tolerances in MS, and MS/MS were set to 2 p.p.m. and 0.8 Da, respectively. The resulting Mascot result files were further processed using myProMS (https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms; PMID:17610305), allowing a maximum FDR of 1% by automatically filtering the Mascot score at the peptide level. For SILAC-based protein quantification, peptides XICs (extracted ion chromatograms) were retrieved from Proteome Discoverer. Scale normalization computed using the ‘package limma' from R was applied to compensate for mixing errors of the different SILAC cultures as described (PMID: 11842121). Protein ratios were computed as the geometrical mean of related peptides. To estimate ratio significance, a t-test was performed with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR control threshold set to 0.05. All quantified proteins have at least 3 peptides quantified (all peptides selected).

### Publication Abstract
Cell polarity is required for the functional specialization of many cell types including lymphocytes. A hallmark of cell polarity is the reorientation of the centrosome that allows repositioning of organelles and vesicles in an asymmetric fashion. The mechanisms underlying centrosome polarization are not fully understood. Here we found that in resting lymphocytes, centrosome-associated Arp2/3 locally nucleates F-actin, which is needed for centrosome tethering to the nucleus via the LINC complex. Upon lymphocyte activation, Arp2/3 is partially depleted from the centrosome as a result of its recruitment to the immune synapse. This leads to a reduction in F-actin nucleation at the centrosome and thereby allows its detachment from the nucleus and polarization to the synapse. Therefore, F-actin nucleation at the centrosome--regulated by the availability of the Arp2/3 complex--determines its capacity to polarize in response to external stimuli.

### Keywords
Antigen stimulation, Polarity, B cells, Centrosome

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


