### Accession
PXD015964

### Title
Investigation of fermentation process of a Lactobacillus suebicus

### Description
Investigation of fermentation process of a Lactobacillus suebicus strainan grown in anaerobic batch and chemostat cultures.

### Sample Protocol
A published protocol (Hansen et al., 2014) was modified to prepare whole protein extracts. Approximately 20 mg biomass (wet weight) were collected and solubilised in a solution consisting of 175 µL B-PER reagent (Illumina, San Diego, USA) and 175 µL triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (50 mM TEAB, 1% (w/w) sodium deoxycholate (NaDOC), adjusted to pH 8.0). After addition of 0.1 g glass beads (acid washed, 0.1 mm diameter), cells were disrupted by bead beating with a Fast Prep FP120 (MP Biomedicals, Fisher Scientific, Hampton, USA; 4 bursts of 20 s at a setting of 6 m s-1). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation. The supernatant was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube and proteins were precipitated by adding 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone. The solution was incubated at -20 °C for 30 min and centrifuged. The protein pellet was washed twice with 200 µL ice-cold acetone and re-dissolved in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 8 M urea, to a final concentration of approximately 100 µg protein µL-1. 30 µL of a 10 mM dithiothreitol solution was added to 100 µL of the resulting protein solution. After 1 h incubation at 37 °C, 30 µL of a freshly prepared 20 mM 3-idoleacetic acid (IAA) solution was added, followed by 30 min incubation in the dark at room temperature. The solution was then diluted to below 1 M urea with a 200 mM bicarbonate buffer. An aliquot of approximately 25 µg protein was digested overnight at 37 °C using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA), at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of approximately 1 : 50. Peptides were desalted using an Oasis HLB 96 well plate (Waters, Mildford, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The purified peptide eluate was dried with a speed vac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltman, USA). The dried peptide fraction was resuspended in 3 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid solution by careful vortexing. An aliquot corresponding to approximately 50-100 ng protein digest was analysed using a one-dimensional shot-gun proteomics (EASY nano LC connected with a QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltman, USA)) (Köcher et al., 2012). .

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analysed using PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., http://www.bioinfor.com) by searching against a global Lactobacillus suebicus database downloaded from UniProtKB (July 2018). The search included a GPM crap contaminant database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and used a decoy fusion for determining false discovery rates. Search parameters included 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02 Da fragment ion mass error tolerance, up to 3 missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation as fixed and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered against 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) and protein identifications were accepted as being significant when at least 2 unique peptides were identified

### Publication Abstract
D-galacturonate, a key constituent of pectin, is a ubiquitous monomer in plant biomass. Anaerobic, fermentative conversion of D-galacturonate is therefore relevant in natural environments as well as in microbial processes for microbial conversion of pectin-containing agricultural residues. In currently known microorganisms that anaerobically ferment D-galacturonate, its catabolism occurs via the galacturonate-isomerase pathway. Redox-cofactor balancing in this pathway strongly constrains the possible range of products generated from anaerobic D-galacturonate fermentation, resulting in acetate as the predominant organic fermentation product. To explore metabolic diversity of microbial D-galacturonate fermentation, anaerobic enrichment cultures were performed at pH 4. Anaerobic batch and chemostat cultures of a dominant <i>Lactobacillus suebicus</i> strain isolated from these enrichment cultures produced near-equimolar amounts of lactate and acetate from D-galacturonate. A combination of whole-genome sequence analysis, quantitative proteomics, enzyme activity assays in cell extracts, and <i>in vitro</i> product identification demonstrated that D-galacturonate metabolism in <i>L. suebicus</i> occurs via a novel pathway. In this pathway, mannonate generated by the initial reactions of the canonical isomerase pathway is converted to 6-phosphogluconate by two novel biochemical reactions, catalyzed by a mannonate kinase and a 6-phosphomannonate 2-epimerase. Further catabolism of 6-phosphogluconate then proceeds via known reactions of the phosphoketolase pathway. In contrast to the classical isomerase pathway for D-galacturonate catabolism, the novel pathway enables redox-cofactor-neutral conversion of D-galacturonate to ribulose-5-phosphate. While further research is required to identify the structural genes encoding the key enzymes for the novel pathway, its redox-cofactor coupling is highly interesting for metabolic engineering of microbial cell factories for conversion of pectin-containing feedstocks into added-value fermentation products such as ethanol or lactate. This study illustrates the potential of microbial enrichment cultivation to identify novel pathways for the conversion of environmentally and industrially relevant compounds.

### Keywords
Lactobacillus suebicus, Discovery proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
TUD
Delft University of Technology - TUD Department of Biotechnology, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pabst
Delft University of Technology - TUD Department of Biotechnology, The Netherlands


