### Accession
PXD009791

### Title
HLA-DM allotypes -  Distinct editing functions of natural HLA-DM allotypes impact antigen presentation and CD4+ T cell activation

### Description
Major Histocompatibility Complex of Class II (MHCII) antigen presentation is a key event of adaptive immunity. HLA-DM favors the presentation of kinetically stable peptide-MHCII complexes but does not bind peptides itself and exhibits only a low degree of polymorphism. To date, no evidence for altered function of DM due to natural variations has been reported. We define the presence of DM haplotypes in human populations covered by the 1000 Genomes Project and probe their activity in antigen presentation assays. Our results indicate a clear linkage between DMA*0103 and DMB*0107 never reported before. Thehe corresponding heterodimer features a distinct activity profile when compared to the most frequent allotype (DMA*0101-DMB*0101). In vitro experiments demonstrate a broader pH activity profile for the new allotype, explaining its characteristic cellular function. Together, our results suggest that natural variations of DM have important consequences for an individual’s adaptive immune response.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in Tris HCl 50 mM pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1% CHAPS and protease inhibitor cocktail, then spun down at 15000xg for 30 min. pMHCII complexes were purified using L243 coupled to FF-Sepharose. Beads were washed with 10 volumes of lysis buffer with 500 mM NaCl, 10 lysis buffer with no NaCl, 10 volumes of lysis buffer with 150 mM NaCl, and finally 10 volumes of H2O. MHCII and peptides were dissociated from each other and from the column by adding 5 volumes of TFA to 0.02 %. The resulting peptide mixtures were fractionated using a 10 kDa cutoff micro-spin filter device and washed using C18 zip-tips. Peptides were analyzed by a reversed-phase capillary system (Ultimate 3000 nanoLC) connected to an Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fischer). LC was performed on a reversed-phase C18 column (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a linear gradient ranging from 5 to 60 % of mobile phase B (10 to 60 min). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % Formic Acid in H 2 O and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1 % Formic acid in acetonitrile. A spray voltage of 2.1 kV was used for peptide ionization and collision-induced dissociation was performed for the 10 most intense precursor ions selected from each full scan in the Orbitrap (350–2000 m/z). An isolation width of 2 Da was used for the selected ions with an activation time of 30 ms. Dynamic exclusion was activated for the MS/MS scan with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) was used for peptide identification. A customized database featuring reviewed and non-redundant Uniprot human proteins (accessed March 2017) combined with 200 highly enriched bovine proteins found in FCS (21) was used for peptide identification. No enzyme specificity was used for the search, and a tolerance of 10 ppm was allowed for the main ion search and 50 ppm for the MSMS identification. The “match between runs” feature was enabled. The FDR was set at 0.01 (1 %). Reverse IDs and known contaminants like keratins were filtered before further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Classical human leukocyte antigen (HLA) molecules of the major histocompatibility class II (MHCII) complex present peptides for the development, surveillance and activation of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. The nonclassical MHCII-like protein HLA-DM (DM) catalyzes the exchange and loading of peptides onto MHCII molecules, thereby shaping MHCII immunopeptidomes. Natural variations of DM in both chains of the protein (DMA and DMB) have been hypothesized to impact peptide presentation, but no evidence for altered function has been reported. Here we define the presence of DM allotypes in human populations covered by the 1000 Genomes Project and probe their activity. The functional properties of several allotypes are investigated and show strong enhancement of peptide-induced T cell activation for a particular combination of DMA and DMB. Biochemical evidence suggests a broader pH activity profile for the new variant relative to that of the most commonly expressed DM allotype. Immunopeptidome analysis indicates that the compartmental activity of the new DM heterodimer extends beyond the late endosome and suggests that the natural variation of DM has profound effects on adaptive immunity when antigens bypass the canonical processing pathway.

### Keywords
Antigen presentation/ mhc class ii/ immunopeptidome/ peptide editing/ polymorphism

### Affiliations
FU Berlin
Laboratory of Protein Biochemistry. Department of Biology, Chemistry and Pharmacy. Freie Universität Berlin, Thielallee 63, 14195 Berlin

### Submitter
Miguel Alvaro

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Freund
Laboratory of Protein Biochemistry. Department of Biology, Chemistry and Pharmacy. Freie Universität Berlin, Thielallee 63, 14195 Berlin


