### Accession
PXD012792

### Title
Mapping differences in salivary gland secretions using dried saliva spots

### Description
Dried saliva spot (DSS) sampling is a minimally invasive extraction technique that allows for the spatial mapping of salivary protein distribution in the oral cavity. In conjunction with untargeted nanoLC-Orbitrap-MS/MS analysis, we used DSS to compare the unstimulated proteomes secreted by the parotid and submandibular/sublingual salivary glands

### Sample Protocol
Prior to nanoLC-MS/MS-analysis, salivary proteins were denaturized with 8 M urea, reduced and alkylated by the addition of DTT and IAA, and enzymatically digested with trypsin and purified via ultrafiltration and C18 extraction (Fig. 1.b). LC-MS/MS analyses in data-dependent analysis mode (DDA) were performed on an Easy-nLC 1000 system hyphenated to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy Spray ESI source

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification was performed by using the PEAKS Studio 8.5 software suite

### Publication Abstract
Dried saliva spot sampling is a minimally invasive technique for the spatial mapping of salivary protein distribution in the oral cavity. In conjunction with untargeted nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) analysis, DSS is used to compare the proteomes secreted by unstimulated parotid and submandibular/sublingual salivary glands. Two hundred and twenty proteins show a statistically significant association with parotid gland secretion, while 30 proteins are at least tenfold more abundant in the submandibular/sublingual glands. Protein identifications and label-free quantifications are highly reproducible across the paired glands on three consecutive days, enabling to establish the core proteome of glandular secretions categorized into eight salivary protein groups according to their biological functions. The data suggest that the relative contributions of the salivary glands fine-tune the biological activity of human saliva via medium-abundant proteins. A number of biomarker candidates for Sj&#xf6;gren's syndrome are observed among the gland-specifically expressed proteins, which indicates that glandular origin is an important factor to consider in salivary biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
Human, Proteome, Saliva, Gland secretion

### Affiliations
The Forsyth Institute
FORSYTH INSTITUTE

### Submitter
Markus Hardt

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hardt
The Forsyth Institute


