### Accession
PXD002264

### Title
Human Dental Pulp TAILS N-terminomics

### Description
We report the targeted analysis of the human dental pulp proteome and N-terminome using the positional proteomics technique TAILS, which allowed us to capture both naturally blocked and unblocked protein N-termini. Furthermore, by using a proteomically barely studied human tissue in combination with a non-shotgun proteomics approach, we were able to identify many so far missing proteins (PE level 2-4), and established together with our previously published studies on human erythrocytes (Lange et al. 2014) and platelets (Prudova et al. 2014), a general workflow suitable for the in-depth and high-throughput analysis of protein N-termini in human specimen, as envisioned by the Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome extraction. After extensive washing, extracted wisdom teeth were sectioned without traumatizing the pulp tissue, which was subsequently removed from the pulp chamber and coronal aspects of the root canals using sterile curettes and barbed broaches and transferred into 8 M guanidine hydrochloride, frozen on dry ice, and stored at - 80 °C for a maximum period of 1 month. Nine dental pulp specimens from nine different patients, 5 male, 4 female, were separately processed using using an Ultra-Turrax tissuehomogenizer on ice. Supernatants of three rounds of proteome extraction (0.5ml each) were pooled and proteins precipitated with chloroform/methanol. Pellets were redissolved in 0.5ml of 8M guanidine hydrochloride and protein concentrations were estimated using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad) with bovine serum albumin as a standard.  TAILS N-terminomics. Aliquots of approx. 1.0 mg of total protein were denatured and reduced with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride and 5 mM dithiothreitol (30 min, 65 °C) prior to cysteine carbamidomethylation using 10 mM iodoacetamide (45 min, room temperature) in the dark. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched by adding 10 mM dithiothreitol (30 min, room temperature). The pH was subsequently adjusted to 6.5 for reductive dimethylation of primary amines with 40 mM isotopically heavy formaldehyde (13CD2 in D2O, Cambridge Isotopes) and 20 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (overnight, 37 °C). Note, contrary to conventional shotgun proteomics, blocking of primary amines is performed at the whole protein level before tryptic digestion. To ensure completion of amine derivatization, 20 mM heavy formaldehyde and 20 mM cyanoborohydride were added (2h, 37°C). Reactions were quenched using 100 mM (tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane buffer at pH 6.8 (30 min, 37°C), and proteins were purified by chloroform/methanol precipitation, and pellets resolubilized in a small volume of 50 mM NaOH and neutralized with 100 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid, pH 7.5, and digested with mass spectrometry‐grade trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega), at a protein:enzyme ratio of 100:1 (w/w) overnight at 37 °C. An aliquot of 50 μg of tryptic digest was saved for shotgun-like analysis (preTAILS) before adjusting the samples to pH 6.5 and coupling trypsin-generated internal and C-terminal peptides to a 5 times excess (w/w) of commercially available HPG-ALD polymer (http://flintbox.com/public/project/1948/) by incubation with 20 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (37 °C, overnight). Reactions were quenched by adding 100 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane buffer pH 6.8 (30 min, 37°C), and samples desalted using C18 StageTips prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry. Purified peptide samples were analyzed using a quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Accurate Mass G6550A Q-TOF; Agilent), coupled on-line to an Agilent 1200 Series nanoflow HPLC using a Chip Cube nanospray ionization interface (Agilent). A high capacity HPLC-Chip with 160 nL enrichment column and a 0.075 mm x 150 mm analytical column containing Zorbax 300SB-C18 5 μm stationary phase (Agilent) was used, and the thermostat temperature was set at 6°C. Each sample was automatically loaded on the enrichment column at flow rate 4 μL/min of Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and at 4 μL injection flush volume. After that, a 110.2 min gradient was run with the nano-pump at 300 nL/min from 0% B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 5% B over 2 min, then from 5% B to 45% B in the next 78 min, then increased to 60% B over 10 min period, further increased to 95% over 0.1 min, held at 95% B for 20 min, and then dropped to 3% B for 0.1 min to recondition the column for the next analysis. Peptides were ionized by ESI (1.8 kV), and mass spectrometry analysis was performed in positive polarity with precursor ions detected from 300 to 2000 m/z. The top three ions per scan were selected for CID using a narrow exclusion window of 1.3 amu and an MS/MS scan rate of two spectra per second. Collision energy was calculated automatically depending on the charge state of the parent ions, and precursor ions were then excluded from further CID for 30 s. The entire LC/MS system was run by Mass Hunter version B.02.01 (Agilent).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Acquired MS/MS raw data were converted to mgf and mzXML files using MSConvert and spectra were matched to peptide sequences in the human UniProt protein database (release 2013_10) using four different search engines, namely Mascot v2.4, X! TANDEM CYCLONE TPP 2011.12.01.1, MS-GF+ v10072, and Comet 2015.01 rev 0. The expected cleavage pattern was set to semi-ArgC and allowed for 2 missed cleavages. Search parameters included 20 ppm tolerance for MS1 and 0.25 Da or 50 ppm for MS2, fixed lysine dimethylation (+34.0631 Da), fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da), variable Met oxidation (+15.9949 Da), variable N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da), variable N-terminal dimethylation (+34.0631 Da), variable cyclization of N-terminal (i) glutamine (Gln->pyro‐Glu; -17.0266 Da), (ii) glutamate (Glu->pyro-Glu; -18.0106 Da), and (iii) carbamidomethylated cysteine (pyro-cmC; -17.0266 Da). Peptide identifications from multiple searches were statistically evaluated and integrated using PeptideProphet and iProphet, as implemented in the Trans Proteomic Pipeline v4.8.0 PHILAE, using a false discovery rate cut-off of 1%. Peptides were grouped and assigned to proteins using the ProteinProphet module at a protein probability >0.95, corresponding to a false discovery rate of 0.7%. If peptides matched multiple protein sequences, ProteinProphet determined protein groups sharing the same set of peptides, and identified for each protein group one protein entry as representative. Identified proteins were further annotated using the neXtProt release 2014-09-19, the retrieve/ID mapping tool from UniProtKB, and the knowledgebase TopFIND. N-termini were defined according to their position within the corresponding protein sequence and their N-terminal amino acid modification. Classification as N-termini required: (i) a N-terminus carrying a heavy dimethyl—indicative of a free N-terminus in vivo as reductive dimethylation is performed in TAILS at the protein level and not at the peptide level as in shotgun proteomics, or a natural modification such as acetylation or N-terminal pyro-Glu from terminal glutamate (Glu->pyro-Glu), and (ii) a C-terminal arginine residue matching the specificity of trypsin as lysines are experimentally dimethylated prior to digest and thus not recognized. Peptides with blocked N-termini derived from N-terminal cyclization of glutamine (Gln->pyro‐Gl) or carbamidomethylated cysteine (pyro-cmC), both known side reaction under the employed conditions, were used together with peptides possessing free N-termini for protein identification only. Identified N-termini corresponding to proteins identified at 1% FDR level were further annotated using the N-terminomics tool TopFINDER.

### Publication Abstract
An underexplored yet widespread feature of the human proteome is the proteolytic proteoforms of proteins. We used terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS), a high-content N-terminal positional proteomics technique, for in-depth characterization of the human dental pulp proteome from its N-terminome and to provide data for the Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP). Dental pulp is a unique connective tissue maintaining tooth sensation and structure by supporting a single cell layer of odontoblasts that synthesize mineralization-competent dentine extracellular matrix. Therefore, we posited pulp to be a rich source of unique tissue-specific proteins and hence an abundant source of "missing" proteins as defined by neXtProt. From the identified 4332 proteins (false discovery rate (FDR) &#x2264; 0.7%), 21&#x202f;528 unique peptides (FDR &#x2264; 1.0%) and 9079 unique N-termini, we analyzed N-terminal methionine excision, co- and posttranslational N&#x3b1;-acetylation, protein maturation, and proteolytic processing. Apart from 227 candidate alternative translation initiation sites, most identified N-termini (78%) represented proteolytic processing and mechanism-informative internal neo-N-termini, confirming a pervasive amount of proteolytic-processing generated proteoforms in vivo. Furthermore, we identified 17 missing protein candidates for the C-HPP, highlighting the importance of using (i) less studied human specimens and (ii) orthogonal proteomic approaches such as TAILS to map the human proteome. The mass spectrometry raw data and metadata have been deposited to ProteomeXchange with the PXD identifier &lt;PXD002264&gt;.

### Keywords
Human, Agilent g6550a q-tof, Tails n-terminomics, Lc-ms/ms, Dental pulp

### Affiliations
Centre for Blood Research, Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Ulrich ECKHARD

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Christopher Mark Overall
Centre for Blood Research, Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada


