### Accession
PXD040040

### Title
SWATH proteomics analysis of pig liver microsomes

### Description
Identification of protein changes and pathways involved in combined effects of aflatoxin B1 and ochratoxin A and the preventive effect of dietary by-product antioxidants administration against these mycotoxins damage.

### Sample Protocol
Three experimental groups (A, M, AM) and one control group (C) of piglets after weaning (TOPIGS-40 hybrid) were fed with experimental diets for 30 days. They fed on a basal diet which was served as a control (control group – C) with normal compound feed for starter piglets. The feeding treatments for the experimental groups were as follows: group A received basal diet including a mixture (1:1) of two meal by-products (grape seed and sea buckthorn) in a percentage of 5% which replace corn and soya bean meal; group M received the basal diet artificially contaminated with a mixture of 62 ppb aflatoxin B1- AFB1 and 479 ppb ochratoxin A-OTA (E2 group) and group AM get the basal diet with 5% by-product meal mixture and contaminated with AFB1 and OTA mycotoxins (62 and 479 ppb respectively). At the end of the experiment (day 30), animals were slaughtered and liver was collected and perfused with ice-cold saline solution for the microsomal fraction isolation. The obtained microsomes were used for protein digestion with Trypsin Gold (Promega). After digestion, obtained peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on AB SCIEX TRIPLE TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer and separated using NanoLC 400 system (Eksigent) equipped with C18, 5 μm, 300 μM ID, 25 mm long precolumn and analytical column Eksigent 5C18-CL-120, 300 μM ID, 150 mm length, connected to DuoSpray ion source. The peptides were loaded on the trap column at 40 μL /min using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted using a gradient from 5 to 80% Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 105 min at 5 μL per min. The TRIPLE TOF 5600+ was operated in DIA SWATH-MS mode, 64-variable-windows. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 400–1250 m/z, MS2 spectra were acquired in high-sensitivity mode from 100–2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
DIA data were analyzed using DIA-NN v1.8.1. in library free mode, spectra library was generated from actual DIA data using fasta file of the complete Sus scrofa proteome with a precursor m/z range 400 - 1250. Data was searched with MBR enabled and robust LC as quantification strategy and FDR = 0.01. C carbamidomethylation and Ox(M) were selected as modification. Retention time dependent normalization was used, quantitation was performed in DIA-NN with MaxLFQ algorithm. Statistical and differential downstream analysis was performed using PolySTest. FDR adjusted p-value threshold was set to 0.01 and log2 fold change of -1 respective 1 to discriminate significantly down respective up regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver, Swath, Dia, Microsomes, Pig

### Affiliations
Independent Research Association
Independent Research Association, Timisului 58, Bucharest, Romania.

### Submitter
Roua Popescu

### Lab Head
Dr George Catalin Marinescu
Independent Research Association, Timisului 58, Bucharest, Romania.


