### Accession
PXD037701

### Title
The proteome of Processing Bodies in Arabidopsis.

### Description
An Affinity Purification (AP) step coupled with Proximity-dependent biotin ligation (PDL) reveals the proteome of Processing Bodies (PBs) in Arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analyzed by LC-MS using a Nano LC-MS/MS apparatus (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RLSCnano System) interfaced with an Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a fused silica trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific). After washing for 5 min at 5 µL/min with 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), the trap column was brought in-line with an analytical column (Nanoease MZ peptide BEH C18, 130 A, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm, Waters) for LC-MS/MS. Peptides were fractionated at 300 nL/min using a segmented linear gradient 4–15% B in 30 min (where A: 0.2% formic acid, and B: 0.16% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile), 15–25% B in 40 min, 25–50% B in 44 min, and 50–90% B in 11 min. Solution B was then returned to 4% for 5 min for the next run. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, scan range from m/z 350–1600, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1E6, maximum injection time 100 ms). The top S (3 sec) and dynamic exclusion of 60 sec were used for the selection of parent ions for MS/MS. Parent masses were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1E5, and fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 30%. The fragments were scanned in Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. The MS/MS scan range was determined by the charge state of the parent ion, but the lower limit was set at 100 amu.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed with Maxquant (version 1.6.10.43) with the Andromeda search engine. The type of LC-MS run was set to 1 (label-free). LC-MS data were searched against The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) plus a common contaminant database. Protease was set as trypsin, which allowed two miscuts. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation at methionine were set as variable modifications. Maximum two variable modification was allowed. Protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) were set to 1%. Reverse hit and common contaminants, as well as proteins identified only by modified sites, were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Processing bodies, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Biology, Uppsala BioCenter, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences and Linnean Center for Plant Biology, Uppsala, Sweden  Department of Biology, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece  Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Greece
Foundation for Research and Technology Hellas (FORTH)

### Submitter
Andriani Mentzelopoulou

### Lab Head
Dr Panagiotis Moschou
Department of Plant Biology, Uppsala BioCenter, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences and Linnean Center for Plant Biology, Uppsala, Sweden  Department of Biology, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece  Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Greece


