### Accession
PXD024018

### Title
Kininogen–Nitric Oxide Signaling at Nearby Non-excited Acupoints After Long-term Stimulation

### Description
Acupuncture treatment is based on acupoint stimulation; however, the biological basis is not understood. We stimulated one acupoint with catgut embedding (CEP) for 8 weeks and then used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation to screen proteins with altered expression in adjacent acupoints of Sprague Dawley rats. The expression levels of 10 proteins, including kininogen (KNG), consistently changed >1.5-fold in all three acupoints in CEP versus sham CEP-treated rats. Eight-week, but not 3-day, CEP treatment enhanced KNG expression. The enhanced KNG expression among small vessels in the subcutaneous layer was revealed via immunofluorescence. Nitric oxide synthesis was enhanced similar to KNG. These findings uncover biological changes at acupoints and suggest the critical role of the KNG–nitric oxide signaling pathway in acupoint activation.

### Sample Protocol
Three pairs of skin samples from the bilateral points GB34, Fengshi (GB31), or Huantiao (GB30) were collected at 72 h after the last CEP/SCEP treatment. Each tissue was ground to powder in liquid nitrogen and then was briefly mixed with 500 μL lysis buffer(Urea 210g, thiourea 76g, SDS 1g, Tris 1.2g were placed in the beaker. Add 250 ml Milli-Q water and place on the magnetic stirrer overnight (or completely dissolve). Adjust the pH of concentrated HCl to 8.0-8.5, and fix the volume to 500ml with Milli-Q water). Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid were added for a final concentration of 1 mM and 2 mM, respectively; after 5 min, dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM. The suspension was sonicated at 200 Watts for 15 min and then centrifuged at 25,000 × g for 20 min. The supernatant was transferred to another tube, 10 mM DTT was added, and the solution was kept at 56 ℃ for 1 h to reduce peptide disulfide bonds. Iodoacetamide (55 mM) was added to the solution and the tube was kept in the darkroom for 45 min. The solution was incubated in 5 volumes chilled acetone for 2 h at -20 ℃ and centrifuged again at 25,000 × g for 20 min. The pellet was air-dried, dissolved in 0.5 M tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB, 200 μL), and then sonicated at 200 Watts for 15 min. The solution was centrifuged at 4 ℃, 25,000 × g for 20 min, and the protein concentration of the supernatants was determined using a Bradford kit. Protein from each sample (100 μg) was digested with Trypsin Gold at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:20 for 4 h at 37 ℃, and then the digestion step was repeated for 8 h. After trypsin digestion, the peptide was dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using the MASCOT search algorithm (Version 2.3.02). MASCOT was used to search the international protein index (IPI) rat protein database (IPI.RAT.fasta. v3.87, ftp://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/IPI/current/) from the European Bioinformatics Institute using the following constraints: trypsin as the digestion enzyme; 10 ppm mass tolerance was permitted for intact peptide masses; 0.05 Da was allowed for fragment ions; one missed cleavage was allowed from the trypsin digest; Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M) and iTRAQ (Y) were accepted as a potential variable modifications; and carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ (N-term), and iTRAQ (K) were taken as the fixed modifications. All identified peptides had an ion score above the Mascot peptide identity threshold, and a protein was considered identified if at least one such unique peptide match was apparent for the protein. For protein-abundance ratios measured using iTRAQ, we set a 1.5-fold change as the threshold and a two-tailed p-value,0.05 to identify significant changes.. 

### Publication Abstract
Acupuncture treatment is based on acupoint stimulation; however, the biological basis is not understood. We stimulated one acupoint with catgut embedding for 8 weeks and then used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation to screen proteins with altered expression in adjacent acupoints of Sprague Dawley rats. We found that kininogen expression was significantly upregulated in the stimulated and the nonstimulated adjacent acupoints along the same meridian. The enhanced kininogen expression was meridian dependent and was most apparent among small vessels in the subcutaneous layer. Enhanced signals of nitric oxide synthases, cGMP-dependent protein kinase, and myosin light chain were also observed at the nonstimulated adjacent acupoints along the same meridian. These findings uncover biological changes at acupoints and suggest the critical role of the kininogen-nitric oxide signaling pathway in acupoint activation.

### Keywords
Kng–nitric oxide signaling pathway，acupoints， long-term stimulation，

### Affiliations
Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Development and Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, and Brain Science and Technology Research Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China.
Kao (China) Research & Development Center

### Submitter
Liyue Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng-Tian Li
Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Development and Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders, and Brain Science and Technology Research Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China.


