### Accession
PXD033799

### Title
Cryptococcus neoformans Hsf3 LC-MS/MS

### Description
Mitochondrial quality control is essential in modulating intramitochondrial ROS (mtROS) homeostasis that is a critical determinant for many human disorders. Here we identified an atypical function of a heat shock factor, Hsf3, as an important mtROS regulator. Despite HSFs are nuclear proteins and master regulators of protein unfolded response (UPR) across taxa, we demonstrate that Hsf3 is a both nuclei and mitochondria targeting transcription factor that plays an irrelevant function in controlling UPR process. Instead, Hsf3 represses TCA cycle genes and simultaneously regulates electron transfer chain genes encoded from both nuclei and mitochondria. Moreover, both nuclear and mitochondrial targeting signal are required for promising Hsf3 function. Hsf3 regulation responds to multiple intramitochondrial stresses, which activates and ameliorates Hsf3 DNA binding via oxidation of the cysteine residue on DNA binding domain of Hsf3. Collectively, our findings reveal a previously unknown role of HSF family in modulation of mitochondrial function and damage.

### Sample Protocol
Hsf3-Flag-tagged strains were grown in YPD medium overnight, and inoculated into 50ml fresh YPD medium at OD600=0.2 until the OD600 reached to 0.8 in a shaking incubator. As control group, hsf3 mutant strains were treated in the same process. Briefly, Cell proteins were extracted using lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, pH 7.5) with 1 X protease inhibitor cocktail (CWBIO) and 40 mM PMSF and lysed as Western Blot. Aliquots of protein extracts were retained as input samples. Three-microgram lysed protein samples were incubated with Anti-Flag Magnetic Beads (MedChemExpress) at 4°C overnight. The beads were washed by TBS buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, pH 7.4) three times. The final peptide mixture is obtained by in-gel enzymatic hydrolysis and solid phase extraction.

### Data Protocol
The obtained mass spectrum data was retrieved by Mascot (version 2.5.1). The database used in this project is UniProt database: uniprot_cryptococcus_neoformans_grubii_serotype_A_7441_20180905.fasta. Data quality control is processed by Scaffold Q+ (version 4.6.2). The quality control parameters are: false discovery rate (FDR) of protein <1.0%, false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide <1.0%, and at least one specific peptide is identified for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrial, Cryptococcus neoformans

### Affiliations
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Xindi Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Chen Ding
Northeastern University


