### Accession
PXD012053

### Title
Impact of Acute methionine restriction on proteome of Th1 cells - Part 2

### Description
CD4 T cells were activated using CD3/CD28 antibodies in the presence of IL2 and IL12, to generate Th1 cells. Th1 cells were maintained and expanded in IL2 and IL12, on D5 Th1 cells were sorted for CD4+ expression and DAP1 exclusion. After flow sorting, live TH1 cells were resuspended (1e6 per ml) in methionine free RPMI, supplemented with 10% dialysed FBS, IL2 and IL12, and with L-methionine (100μM, or 1μM). Cells were cultured for 5 hrs before collection for proteomics processing.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were processed using the SP3 method. After elution of peptides with DMSO, samples were processed by single shot LC-MS. Analysis of peptides was performed on a Q-exactive-HFX (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Scientific). LC buffers were the following:  buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Aliquots of 15 μL of each sample were loaded at 10 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 2% buffer B. The trap column was washed for 5 min at the same flow rate and then the trap column was switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 5% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 120 min, and then to 98% buffer B by 122 min. The column was then washed with 98% buffer B for 15 min and re-equilibrated in 2% buffer B for 17 min. Q-exactive HFX was used in data dependent mode. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 335-1800, with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms, a resolution of 60,000 and automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3x106) followed by 40 sequential dependant MS2 scans (with an isolation window set to 1.4 Da, resolution at 7500, maximum ion injection time at 50 ms and AGC 1x105.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1. Proteins and peptides were identified using a uniport mouse canonical plus isoforms database (2nd August 2018). Estimates of protein copy number were used to calculate the fold change of protein abundance between 100µM and 1µM methionine and a two-sample T test with unequal variance was performed to identify proteins significantly changing.

### Publication Abstract
Immune activated T lymphocytes modulate the activity of key metabolic pathways to support the transcriptional reprograming and reshaping of cell proteomes that permits effector T cell differentiation. The present study uses high resolution mass spectrometry and metabolic labelling to explore how murine T cells control the methionine cycle to produce methyl donors for protein and nucleotide methylations. We show that antigen receptor engagement controls flux through the methionine cycle and RNA and histone methylations. We establish that the main rate limiting step for protein synthesis and the methionine cycle is control of methionine transporter expression. Only T cells that respond to antigen to upregulate and sustain methionine transport are supplied with methyl donors that permit the dynamic nucleotide methylations and epigenetic reprogramming that drives T cell differentiation. These data highlight how the regulation of methionine transport licenses use of methionine for multiple fundamental processes that drive T lymphocyte proliferation and differentiation.

### Keywords
Metabolism, Methioine, Transport, T cells

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dundee
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Doreen Cantrell
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dundee


