### Accession
PXD024912

### Title
T. gondii TIR1 strain temperature range thermal profiling experiment

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is a single-celled eukaryotic parasite that chronically infects a quarter of the global population. In recent years, phenotypic screens have identified compounds that block parasite replication. Unraveling the complexity of pathogenesis and molecular mechanisms and pathways perturbed by such compounds requires target deconvolution. Thermal proteome profiling (TPP), also known as the cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA), recently emerged as a method to identify small molecule–target interactions in living cells and cell extracts in a variety of organisms, including unicellular eukaryotic pathogens. Ligand binding induces a thermal stability shift—stabilizing or destabilizing proteins that change conformationally in response to the ligand—that can be measured by mass spectrometry (MS). Cells are incubated with different concentrations of ligand and heated, causing thermal denaturation of proteins. The soluble protein is extracted and quantified with multiplexed, quantitative MS, giving rise to thousands of thermal denaturation profiles. Proteins engaging the ligand can be identified by their concentration-dependent thermal shift. The protocol provided here can be used to identify compound-target interactions and assess the impact of environmental or genetic perturbation on the thermal stability of the proteom in T. gondii and other eukaryotic pathogens. Here, we generate a reference dataset of the thermal profiles of extracellular T. gondii tachyzoites.

### Sample Protocol
Parasites were extracellularly harvested following growth in light or heavy (Lys8/Arg10) SILAC media and were melted as live cells or as lysates. The proteins were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with MMTS, and digested with trypsin. Multiplexing was performed with TMT10plex reagents, and samples were fractionated offline into 8 fractions usiing high pH approaches. Spectra were acquired using a Thermo Fisher Exploris 480 with a FAIMS Pro interface. SILAC multiplexing was used to run two biological replicates together on the MS.

### Data Protocol
Spectral searching and quantification were performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Search modifications included Phospho on S/T/Y, Oxidation, Methylthio on Cys, and the TMT6plex modification on Lys and peptide N-termini as a static modification. Heavy samples were searched with the same modifications, with the addition of Arg10 and a custom Lys8-TMT modification. The abundance ratios were not normalized due to global denaturation at higher melting temperatures.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> is a single-celled eukaryotic parasite that chronically infects a quarter of the global population. In recent years, phenotypic screens have identified compounds that block parasite replication. Unraveling the pathways and molecular mechanisms perturbed by such compounds requires target deconvolution. In parasites, such deconvolution has been achieved via chemogenomic approaches-for example, directed evolution followed by whole-genome sequencing or genome-wide knockout screens. As a proteomic alternative that directly probes the physical interaction between compound and protein, thermal proteome profiling (TPP), also known as the cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA), recently emerged as a method to identify small molecule-target interactions in living cells and cell extracts in a variety of organisms, including unicellular eukaryotic pathogens. Ligand binding induces a thermal stability shift-stabilizing or destabilizing proteins that change conformationally in response to the ligand-that can be measured by mass spectrometry (MS). Cells are incubated with different concentrations of ligand and heated, causing thermal denaturation of proteins. The soluble protein is extracted and quantified with multiplexed, quantitative MS, resulting in thousands of thermal denaturation profiles. Proteins engaging the ligand can be identified by their compound-dependent thermal shift. The protocol provided here can be used to identify ligand-target interactions and assess the impact of environmental or genetic perturbations on the thermal stability of the proteome in <i>T. gondii</i> and other eukaryotic pathogens. Graphic abstract: Thermal proteome profiling for target identification in the apicomplexan parasite <i>T. gondii</i>.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Tpp, Parasite, Cetsa

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Massachusettes Institute of Technology
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA 02142
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Insitute of Technology

### Submitter
Alice Herneisen

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Associate Professor, Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Massachusettes Institute of Technology


