### Accession
PXD006674

### Title
Comparative degradomics of porcine and human wound exudates unravels biomarker candidates for assessment of wound healing progression in trauma patients

### Description
Impaired cutaneous wound healing is a major complication in elderly people and patients suffering from diabetes with raising rates in industrialized countries. Heterogeneity of clinical manifestations hampers effective molecular diagnostics and decisions for appropriate therapeutic regimens. Using a customized positional quantitative proteomics workflow, we have established a time-resolved proteome and N-terminome resource from wound exudates in a clinical pig wound model that we exploited as robust template to interpret a heterogeneous dataset from patients undergoing the same wound treatment. With Zyxin, IQGAP1 and HtrA1, this analysis and validation by targeted proteomics identified differential abundances and proteolytic processing of proteins of epidermal and dermal origin as prospective biomarker candidates for assessment of critical turning points in wound progression. Thus, we demonstrate the power of a fine-tuned animal wound model to bridge the translational gap as prerequisite for future extended clinical studies with large cohorts of individuals affected by healing impairments.

### Sample Protocol
Pig wound healing model: Wounds extending to the fascia were created on the back of female pigs. Foam dressings were placed inside the wounds and sealed with adhesive polyurethane films. A tubing system was attached to apply a vacuum. At day 2, 4, 6 and 8 days after injury foams were replaced and used for proteomics analysis. Human trauma wounds: Foam dressings from wounds of trauma patients undergoing vacuum treatment were collected following standard clinical procedures and upon ethical approval by the local authorities. Foams were collected at each change of dressing, and parts of these foams were frozen and used for extraction and analysis of wound exudates. Processing of wound fluids and equalization of protein amounts: Wound fluids were extracted from foams and protein amounts equalized using the ProteoMiner Protein Enrichment Large-Capacity Kit (BioRad). 4plex-iTRAQ-TAILS procedure: Aliquots of processed wound fluids were labeled in a 1:4 protein:iTRAQ (w/w) ratio with 4plex-iTRAQ reagents. Samples were digested with trypsin (TrypsinGold, Promega; 1:100 enzyme:protein (w/w)) and 1/10 of the peptide mixture was removed for analysis prior to N-terminal enrichment. A 435 kDa HPG-ALD polymer was used in 3-fold excess (w/w) to deplete the remaining sample for internal tryptic peptides (TAILS). Strong cation exchange chromatography and mass spectrometry analysis: Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, peptides were fractionated on an Agilent Technologies 1100 Series HPLC system (Agilent Technologies) with a PolySULFOETHYL A 200 x 2.1 mm, 5 µm, 200 ≈ (PolyLC Inc.) column. Peptide fractions were cleaned up using C18 OMIX tips (Agilent Technologies), pooled and analyzed on either an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (porcine samples) or a Q Exactive (human samples) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Eksigent-Nano-HPLC system (Eksigent Technologies).

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were extracted from raw data files and CID/HCD spectra merged using Mascot Distiller v2.4.3.3 (Matrix Science). Mascot v2.4.1 was used to search peak lists (mgf) against a database compiled from the UniProt (release 2013_01) reference proteome for Sus Scrofa (taxid: 9823) (26107 entries) or Homo Sapiens (taxid: 9606, release 2014_05, 88708 entries) and extended by reversed decoy sequences and common contaminants with the following parameters: semi-ArgC for enzyme specificity allowing up to 1 missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl(C), iTRAQ(K) as fixed modifications; acetyl(N-term), pyroQ (N-term), iTRAQ (N-term), oxidation(M) as variable modifications; parent mass error at 10 ppm, fragment mass error at 0.8 Da (Velos) or 0.02 Da (Q Exactive). Mascot search results were processed using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.6, rev 3, Build 201310301508) employing PeptideProphet (parameters: MINPROB=0.05 ACCMASS LEAVE NONTT) and iProphet for secondary validation and for combining results from multiple peptide fractions (before (PO) and after N-terminal enrichment (NPO)). For proteome analysis, iProphet results were further evaluated by ProteinProphet without assembling protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
Impaired cutaneous wound healing is a major complication in elderly people and patients suffering from diabetes, the rate of which is rising in industrialized countries. Heterogeneity of clinical manifestations hampers effective molecular diagnostics and decisions for appropriate therapeutic regimens. Using a customized positional quantitative proteomics workflow, we have established a time-resolved proteome and N-terminome resource from wound exudates in a clinically relevant pig wound model that we exploited as a robust template to interpret a heterogeneous dataset from patients undergoing the same wound treatment. With zyxin, IQGA1, and HtrA1, this analysis and validation by targeted proteomics identified differential abundances and proteolytic processing of proteins of epidermal and dermal origin as prospective biomarker candidates for assessment of critical turning points in wound progression. Thus, we show the possibility of using a fine-tuned animal wound model to bridge the translational gap as a prerequisite for future extended clinical studies with large cohorts of individuals affected by healing impairments. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006674.

### Keywords
Positional proteomics, Biomarker, Wound fluids, Negative pressure wound therapy, Impaired wound healing, Tails

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
ETH Zurich, Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Health Sciences

### Submitter
Ulrich auf dem Keller

### Lab Head
Dr Ulrich auf dem Keller
ETH Zurich, Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Health Sciences


