### Accession
PXD023251

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of proteins interacting with STC1

### Description
identify the potential partners of STC1 at the protein level, we performed mass spectrometry on B16-F10 tumor cells stably expressing FLAG-tagged STC1.

### Sample Protocol
Whole-cell lysates were prepared from UV-irradiated, FLAG-tagged STC1 or control vector expressing B16-F10 tumor cells. The cell lysates were subjected to IP with anti-FLAG Magnetic Agarose (Pierce, A36797) overnight at 4°C. Interaction complexes were separated from the beads by competitive elution using 3x DYKDDDDK Peptide (Pierce™, A36806). The samples were analyzed using LC/MS/MS on Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Product ion data were searched against the NCBI protein database using the Mascot and X-Tandem search engines. Mascot output files were parsed into the Scaffold program (www.proteomesoftware.com) for filtering to assess false discovery rates and allow only correct protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Immunotherapy induces durable clinical responses in a fraction of patients with cancer. However, therapeutic resistance poses a major challenge to current immunotherapies. Here, we identify that expression of tumor stanniocalcin 1 (STC1) correlates with immunotherapy efficacy and is negatively associated with patient survival across diverse cancer types. Gain- and loss-of-function experiments demonstrate that tumor STC1 supports tumor progression and enables tumor resistance to checkpoint blockade in murine tumor models. Mechanistically, tumor STC1 interacts with calreticulin (CRT), an "eat-me" signal, and minimizes CRT membrane exposure, thereby abrogating membrane CRT-directed phagocytosis by antigen-presenting cells (APCs), including macrophages and dendritic cells. Consequently, this impairs APC capacity of antigen presentation and T&#xa0;cell activation. Thus, tumor STC1 inhibits APC phagocytosis and contributes to tumor immune evasion and immunotherapy resistance. We suggest that STC1 is a previously unappreciated phagocytosis checkpoint and targeting STC1 and its interaction with CRT may sensitize to cancer immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Ms, Ip, Stc1, B16-f10 tumor cells

### Affiliations
University of Michigan

### Submitter
Heng Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Weiping Zou
University of Michigan


