### Accession
PXD046363

### Title
Simultaneous selection of nanobodies for immune epitopes in the complex tumor microenvironment

### Description
In the rapidly advancing field of synthetic biology, there is a critical need for technology to discover targeting moieties for therapeutic biologics. We developed INSPIRE-seq, an approach that utilizes a nanobody library and next-generation sequencing to identify nanobodies selected for complex environments. INSPIRE-seq enables the parallel enrichment of immune cell-binding nanobodies that penetrate the tumor microenvironment. Clone enrichment and specificity varies across immune cell subtypes in the tumor, lymph node, and spleen. INSPIRE-seq identified a dendritic cell binding clone that binds PHB2. Single-cell RNA sequencing revealed a connection with cDC1s, and immunofluorescence confirmed nanobody-PHB2 colocalization along cell membranes. Structural modeling and docking studies assisted binding predictions and will guide nanobody selection. In this work, we demonstrate that INSPIRE-seq offers an unbiased approach to examine complex microenvironments and assist in the development of nanobodies, which could serve as active drugs, modified to become drugs, or used as targeting moieties.

### Sample Protocol
Identification of nanobodies specific target proteins by immunoprecipitation (IP) analysis using membrane protein extracts of mouse splenocytes. Membrane protein was isolated with Mem-PERTM plus membrane protein extraction kit (ThermoFisher). For IP, Protein G Dynabead (ThermoFisher) was mixed with either anti-his-tag or nanobody-IgG-Fc fusion protein. Briefly, Protein G Dynabead was washed with PBS, mixed with 5 μl of anti-his-tag antibody, incubated for 1 h at RT, and washed three times with PBS. Nanobody protein at a concentration of 10 μg was mixed with 500 μg of membrane protein in PBS and mixed with Dynabead-antibody complex after 1 h incubation at 4 oC. The nanobody-membrane protein mixture was incubated further for 2 h at 4 oC, washed three times with PBS, pelleted, and resuspended in 15 μl of water with 15 μl of 4X protein loading dye (BioRad, Hercules, CA). The sample was resolved in 4 to 15 % gradient acrylamide gel and stained with silver stain (BioRad, Hercules, CA). Alternatively, nanobody-IgG-Fc fusion protein was used in place of anti-his-tag antibody. Specific pulled-down protein bands were analyzed by mass spectrometry for protein identification using Q Exactive HF (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using a precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02Da.  The data were searched against the Mouse reviewed database from Uniprot using SequestHT.

### Publication Abstract
In the rapidly advancing field of synthetic biology, there exists a critical need for technology to discover targeting moieties for therapeutic biologics. Here we present INSPIRE-seq, an approach that utilizes a nanobody library and next-generation sequencing to identify nanobodies selected for complex environments. INSPIRE-seq enables the parallel enrichment of immune cell-binding nanobodies that penetrate the tumor microenvironment. Clone enrichment and specificity vary across immune cell subtypes in the tumor, lymph node, and spleen. INSPIRE-seq identifies a dendritic cell binding clone that binds PHB2. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals a connection with cDC1s, and immunofluorescence confirms nanobody-PHB2 colocalization along cell membranes. Structural modeling and docking studies assist binding predictions and will guide nanobody selection. In this work, we demonstrate that INSPIRE-seq offers an unbiased approach to examine complex microenvironments and assist in the development of nanobodies, which could serve as active drugs, modified to become drugs, or used as targeting moieties.

### Keywords
Immune cells, Nanobodies, Phage

### Affiliations
Department of Radiation Oncology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA
UT Southwestern Medical Center

### Submitter
Andrew Lemoff

### Lab Head
Dr Todd A. Aguilera
Department of Radiation Oncology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA


