### Accession
PXD037736

### Title
Coupled induction of prophage and virulence factors during tick transmission of the Lyme disease spirochete

### Description
The alternative sigma factor RpoS plays a central role in the critical host-adaptive response of the Lyme disease spirochete, Borrelia burgdorferi. We previously identified bbd18 as a negative regulator of RpoS but could not inactivate bbd18 in wild-type spirochetes. In the current study we employed an inducible bbd18 gene to demonstrate the essential nature of BBD18 for viability of wild-type spirochete viability in vitro and at a unique point in vivo. Transcriptomic analyses of BBD18 depleted cells demonstrated global induction of RpoS-dependent genes prior to lysis, with the absolute requirement for BBD18, both in vitro and in vivo, circumvented by deletion of rpoS. The increased expression of plasmid prophage genes and the presence of phage particles in the supernatants of lysing cultures indicate that RpoS regulates phage lysis-lysogeny decisions. Through this work we identify a mechanistic link between endogenous transducing prophages and the RpoS-dependent adaptive response of the Lyme disease spirochete. The alternative sigma factor RpoS plays a central role in the critical host-adaptive response of the Lyme disease spirochete, Borrelia burgdorferi. We previously identified bbd18 as a negative regulator of RpoS but could not inactivate bbd18 in wild-type spirochetes. In the current study we employed an inducible bbd18 gene to demonstrate the essential nature of BBD18 for viability of wild-type spirochete viability in vitro and at a unique point in vivo. Transcriptomic analyses of BBD18 depleted cells demonstrated global induction of RpoS-dependent genes prior to lysis, with the absolute requirement for BBD18, both in vitro and in vivo, circumvented by deletion of rpoS. The increased expression of plasmid prophage genes and the presence of phage particles in the supernatants of lysing cultures indicate that RpoS regulates phage lysis-lysogeny decisions. Through this work we identify a mechanistic link between endogenous transducing prophages and the RpoS-dependent adaptive response of the Lyme disease spirochete.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentrations of diluted lysates were determined by BCA assay. Four hundred micrograms of protein in 6M guanidinium HCl from each sample was reduced and alkylated using 5mM DTT, followed by 15mM iodoacetamide. Samples were diluted with 50mM HEPES, pH 8.5 to a guanidinium concentration of 2.5M. Two micrograms of LysC protease was added and the samples incubated at 37°C for 8 hours. The samples were diluted with 100mM HEPES, pH 8.0 to a concentration of 1.5M guanidinium and incubated with 8ug of trypsin for 15 hours at 37°C. The pH was adjusted to 2.0 with TFA and the samples were desalted and concentrated on 1cc Oasis HLB cartridges on a vacuum manifold. The eluted peptides were dried under vacuum and dissolved in 100ul of di water. The peptide concentrations were determined by fluorescent assay (Pierce Quantitative Peptide Assay) and 100ug of peptides from each sample were labeled with isobaric tags from a TMT-6plex reagent set (ThermoFisher) in 40ul reactions containing 100mM TEABC, pH 8.5, and 40% acetonitrile. Labeling was determined to be > 95% by mass spectrometry. The reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine, combined and the volume was reduced 50% under vacuum. Three hundred and fifty microliters of 0.1% TFA was added and the pH adjusted to 2.5 with the addition of 10% TFA. The mixture was desalted and concentrated as described. The peptides were dissolved in 50mM TEABC, pH 8.5 and were loaded on to a 2.1 x 50mm C18 Extend HPLC column equilibrated in 5mM TEABC-3% AcCN and developed with an acetonitrile gradient to 50%. Seventy fractions were collected and consolidated into five fraction pools, which were lyophilized. The residue was dissolved in 0.1% FA-3% AcCN, the peptides were quantitated (Pierce Colorimetric Assay) and adjusted to 100ng/ul for injection. For acquisition, the peptide samples were injected on to a Pepmap 100 C18, 2 μm, Φ 75 μm x 25 cm nano column (ThermoFisher) equilibrated in 0.1% formic acid developed with a gradient to 60% of 80% AcCN-20% 0.1% formic acid over 120 minutes at 300nl/min. This was followed by a 5 minute wash at 80% AcCN. Acquisition was done on a Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer at 2000V, precursor selection 400-2000m/z at 10ppm mass tolerance, 120,000 resolution. MS2 was CID, ion trap detection, in data dependent mode with an activation energy 35%, 0.7 m/z isolation and precursor selection from 400 to 1500 m/z. MS3 was HCD, OrbiTrap detection, at 65% collision energy with a scan range of 100 to 500 m/z, MS1 and MS2 isolation windows of 2 m/z, synchronous precursor selection and an Orbitrap resolution of 50,000.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with a SEQUEST HT search against the Borreliella burgdorferi proteome (Taxon ID 139, Uniprot KB 03/2020) and common contaminants (cRAP.fasta; theGPM.org) as implemented in Proteome Discoverer v2.4 [typtic digestion; 10 ppm percursor mass tolerance; 0.6 Da fragment tolerance; maximum 2 missed cleavages; dynamic modifications: Oxidation [M], Acetyl [protein n-term], Met-loss [protein n-term], Met-loss+Acetyl [protein n-term]; static modifications: TMT6plex [K, peptide n-term], Carbamidomethyl [C]]. Proteins and peptides were filtered at a 1% FDR using a concatenated target/decoy approach and the percolator algorithm. Reporter Ion quantification (TMT 6-plex) was performed (MS3) on unique and razor proteins with quan value corrections (Lot UK288831 for B and C; Lot TC256667 for WT) with a total peptide normalization and ratios calculated at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Borrelia burgdorferi, Rpos, Bbd18

### Affiliations
Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization
Molecular Genetics Section Laboratory of Bacteriology Rocky Mountain Laboratories, DIR, NIAID, NIH USA

### Submitter
Jenny Wachter

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia Rosa
Molecular Genetics Section Laboratory of Bacteriology Rocky Mountain Laboratories, DIR, NIAID, NIH USA


