### Accession
PXD016654

### Title
Mouse Liver Lysine β-hydroxybutyrylome

### Description
Characterization of the lysine β-hydroxybutyrylome, proteome-wide, will start to define its cellular targets and enable investigation of its impact under ketogenesis. Here, we show the induction of global protein Kbhb in the liver. We identified 891 sites of Kbhb within 267 proteins belonging to macronutrient, detoxification and 1-carbon metabolic pathways, among others, in starved liver.

### Sample Protocol
Livers from starved (48 hr fasted) mice were homogenized on ice in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM, 5 mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III). Proteins in the cell lysate were reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide, and the excess iodoacetamide was blocked by 15 mM cysteine. Then the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to reduce the urea concentration to 1 M. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 hr digestion. Finally, 18 mg of protein was digested for subsequent experiments. Peptides were fractionated into 23 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC. Then, total peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and Kbhb peptides were enriched with pan anti-Kbhb beads (PTM Biolabs Inc., Chicago, IL).

### Data Protocol
Database searching was performed with MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 against the mouse proteome downloaded from UniProt. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing a maximum of 2 missing cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation of proteins, and lysine β-hydroxybutyrylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide, protein and modification sites. Peptides identified from reverse or contaminant protein sequences, peptides with score below 40 or site localization probability below 0.75 were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Ketone bodies are bioactive metabolites that function as energy substrates, signaling molecules, and regulators of histone modifications. &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrate (&#x3b2;-OHB) is utilized in lysine &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrylation (Kbhb) of histones, and associates with starvation-responsive genes, effectively coupling ketogenic metabolism with gene expression. The emerging diversity of the lysine acylation landscape prompted us to investigate the full proteomic impact of Kbhb. Global protein Kbhb is induced in a tissue-specific manner by a variety of interventions that evoke &#x3b2;-OHB. Mass spectrometry analysis of the &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrylome in mouse liver revealed 891 sites of Kbhb within 267 proteins enriched for fatty acid, amino acid, detoxification, and one-carbon metabolic pathways. Kbhb inhibits S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine hydrolase (AHCY), a rate-limiting enzyme of the methionine cycle, in parallel with altered metabolite levels. Our results illuminate the role of Kbhb in hepatic metabolism under ketogenic conditions and demonstrate a functional consequence of this modification on a central metabolic enzyme.

### Keywords
Lysine β-hydroxybutyrylation, Mouse, Liver

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica
Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago

### Submitter
He Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yingming Zhao
Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago


