### Accession
PXD034836

### Title
Exploring direct and indirect targets of current antileishmanial drugs using a novel thermal proteomics profiling approach

### Description
We have implemented a novel approach based on thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to further characterize the mode of action of antileishmanials antimony, miltefosine and amphotericin B, as well as to better understand the mechanisms of drug resistance deployed by Leishmania.

### Sample Protocol
The dimethyl labeling chemistry was previously described by Boersema et al, 2009 (Boersema et al., 2009). After incubation, samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation for 1 h. Digested samples were reconstituted in 100 µL of 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich). Next, 4 µL of formaldehyde solution (Sigma Aldrich #252549) and formaldehyde-d2 solution (Sigma Aldrich #492620) at 4% (vol/vol) were mixed into samples now labeled with light (test samples) and heavy dimethyl (internal standard; Leishmania infantum WT maintained at 37 °C), respectively. Afterward, 4 µL of 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (Aldrich Chemistry #156159) was added to the labeled samples. Solutions were incubated in a fume hood for 1 h at room temperature while mixing with a benchtop test tube mixer. Subsequently, to quench the labeling reaction, 16 µL of 1% (vol/vol) ammonia solution (J.T. Baker) was added and mixed briefly. Finally, 8 µL of formic acid (Sigma Aldrich #27001) was added to further quench the reaction and acidify the sample. Differentially labeled samples were then mixed together for consecutive HPLC-MS/MS analysis.  High-performance liquid chromatography was performed using a Thermo Scientific Vanquish FLEX UHPLC system (San Jose, CA, USA) using gradient elution along with a microbore column (Thermo Biobasic C18 100 × 1 mm, with a particle size of 5 µm). The initial mobile phase condition consisted of acetonitrile and water (both fortified with 0.1% formic acid) at a ratio of 5:95. From 0 to 3 min, the ratio was maintained at 5:95. From 3 to 63 min, a linear gradient was applied up to a ratio of 40:60 and maintained for 2 min. The mobile phase composition ratio was reverted at the initial conditions and the column was allowed to re-equilibrate for 25 min. The flow rate was fixed at 50 µL/min and 5 µL of sample was injected. A Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (San Jose, CA, USA) was interfaced with the UHPLC system using a pneumatic assisted heated electrospray ion source. Nitrogen was used for sheath and auxiliary gases, and they were set at 10 and 5 arbitrary units (a.u.). Auxiliary gas was heated to 200 °C. The heated ESI probe was set to 4,000 V and the ion transfer tube temperature was set to 200 °C. MS detection was performed in positive ion mode and operating in TOP-10 Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA). A DDA cycle entailed one MS1 survey scan (m/z 400-1500) acquired at 70,000 resolution (FWHM) and precursor ions meeting user-defined criteria for charge state (i.e., z = 2, 3 or 4), monoisotopic precursor intensity (dynamic acquisition of MS2 based TOP-10 most intense ions with a minimum 2x104 intensity threshold) was selected for MS2 acquisition. Precursor ions were isolated using the quadrupole (1.5 Da isolation width) and activated by HCD (28 NCE) and fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap at 17,500 resolution (FWHM)

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4) in conjunction with SEQUEST, using default settings unless otherwise specified. SEQUEST used a curated database consisting of FASTA sequences extracted from UniProt (i.e., Leishmania infantum TAXON ID 5671). The following Proteome Discoverer parameters were set: MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm; MS2 mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for Orbitrap detection; enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; dymethylation of lysine and N-terminus was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Dimethylation 2plex Proteome Discoverer node was used. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids, and proteins identified by only one peptide were removed. Data sets were further analysed with Percolator (The et al., 2016). Peptide-spectrum-matches (PSMs) and protein identification were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold. For protein quantification and comparative analysis, we used the peak integration feature of the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Orsburn, 2021). For each identified protein, the average ion intensity of the unique peptides was used for protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Visceral leishmaniasis (VL), caused by <i>Leishmania infantum</i>, is an oft-fatal neglected tropical disease. In the absence of an effective vaccine, the control of leishmaniasis relies exclusively on chemotherapy. Due to the lack of established molecular/genetic markers denoting parasite resistance, clinical treatment failure is often used as an indicator. Antimony-based drugs have been the standard antileishmanial treatment for more than seven decades, leading to major drug resistance in certain regions. Likewise, drug resistance to miltefosine and amphotericin B continues to spread at alarming rates. In consequence, innovative approaches are needed to accelerate the identification of antimicrobial drug targets and resistance mechanisms. To this end, we have implemented a novel approach based on thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to further characterize the mode of action of antileishmanials antimony, miltefosine and amphotericin B, as well as to better understand the mechanisms of drug resistance deployed by <i>Leishmania</i>. Proteins become more resistant to heat-induced denaturation when complexed with a ligand. In this way, we used multiplexed quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to monitor the melting profile of thousands of expressed soluble proteins in WT, antimony-resistant, miltefosine-resistant, and amphotericin B-resistant <i>L. infantum</i> parasites, in the presence (or absence) of the above-mentioned drugs. Bioinformatics analyses were performed, including data normalization, melting profile fitting, and identification of proteins that underwent changes (fold change &gt; 4) caused by complexation with a drug. With this unique approach, we were able to narrow down the regions of the <i>L. infantum</i> proteome that interact with antimony, miltefosine, and amphotericin B; validating previously-identified and unveiling novel drug targets. Moreover, analyses revealed candidate proteins potentially involved in drug resistance. Interestingly, we detected thermal proximity coaggregation for several proteins belonging to the same metabolic pathway (i.e., tryparedoxin peroxidase and aspartate aminotransferase in proteins exposed to antimony), highlighting the importance of these pathways. Collectively, our results could serve as a jumping-off point for the future development of innovative diagnostic tools for the detection and evaluation of antimicrobial-resistant <i>Leishmania</i> populations, as well as open the door for new on-target therapies.

### Keywords
Leishmania; leishmaniasis; thermal proteome profiling; drug resistance; proteomics; antimony; miltefosine; amphotericin b

### Affiliations
University of Montreal
University of Montréal

### Submitter
Ana Ibarra Meneses

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Fernandez-Prada (CFP-Lab)
University of Montréal


