### Accession
PXD017768

### Title
Impact of subclinical intramammary infection by coagulase-negative staphylococci on the bovine milk peptidome

### Description
Previous studies have investigated the peptidomic changes occurring in cow milk during mastitis; however, these focused mainly on clinical mastitis, either spontaneous (Mansor et al., 2013) or induced by experimental infection (Thomas et al., 2016). Mansor and coworkers were the first to use mass spectrometry to demonstrate that several peptides found increased in milk from cows with clinical S. aureus or E. coli mastitis were mainly derived from aS1- and b-casein. In that study, 48 peptides were significantly different between the milks of healthy and mastitic cows. Non-mastitic samples were confirmed to be non-mastitic by having SCC <100,000 cells/mL (Mansor et al., 2013). Thomas and coworkers expanded the peptidomic repertoire in a study evaluating the kinetics of experimental S. uberis infection, and found signature peptides with potential as mastitis markers (Thomas et al., 2016). Only one study evaluated the milk peptidome in subclinical mastitis (Guerrero et al., 2015) demonstrating that even subclinical infections can cause significant increases in the total number of released peptides when compared to uninfected milk. However, neither the IMI agents nor the somatic cell counts were reported. With the aim of understanding high abundance protein and peptidomic changes due to subclinical CNS mastitis, to identify signature peptides with potential for subclinical mastitis detection, and to compare the proteomic and peptidomic findings with those reported in clinical mastitis, we investigated the influence of CNS IMI on high abundance milk proteins by SDS-PAGE and densitometric analysis, followed by a detailed characterization of the milk peptidome by means of high-performance liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry and bioinformatic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Milk samples were collected from subclinical mastitis (CNS) (n=17) and healthy (Control) (n=13) Holstein Friesian cows.

### Data Protocol
500 µL of milk samples from subclinical mastitis (CNS) (n=17) and healthy cows (Control) (n=13) were diluted with an equal volume of 32% (v/v) acetic acid and ultrafiltered using an Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL centrifugal filter (MWCO 10K) to deplete the high molecular weight proteins [Aletti et al., 2016]. The filtrate was then precipitated with 2 volumes of cold acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged at 13,200 rpm for 30 minutes to remove residual proteins. The supernatant was collected, dried, dissolved in 1% (v/v) formic acid and desalted (Zip-Tip C18, Millipore) before mass spectrometric (MS) analysis [Vernocchi et al., 2014]. NanoHPLC coupled to MS/MS analysis was performed on Dionex UltiMate 3000 directly connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides mixtures were enriched on 75 μm ID x 150 mm Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column and separated employing the LC gradient: 4% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 3 min, 4–28% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 130 min, 28–40% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 20 min, 40–95% ACN in 0.1% formic for 2 min and 95–4% ACN in 0.1% formic acid for 3 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. MS spectra of eluting peptides were collected over an m/z range of 375-1500 using a resolution setting of 120,000, operating in the data-dependent mode to automatically alternate between Orbitrap-MS and Orbitrap-MS/MS acquisition. HCD MS/MS spectra were collected for the most 20 most abundant ions in each MS scan using a normalized collision energy of 30%, and an isolation window of 1,7 m/z. Rejection of +1, and unassigned charge states was enabled.  Raw label-free MS/MS files from Thermo Xcalibur software (version 4.1) [Tedeschi et al., 2017] were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched with Sequest algoritm against the proteome of Bos Taurus from Uniprot 10-02-2019. Unspecific digestion was chosen and the minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Neither fixed nor variable modifications were set. Resulting peptides and protein hits were further screened accepting only those hits listed as high confidence and with an Xcorr≥ 1.5.Statistical analyses were performed using the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3, www.biochem.mpg.de/mann/tools/). Two replicates were carried out for each sample. Only polypeptides present at a frequency > 70% in at least one group (Control or CNS) were chosen for the analysis, leading to three groups of peptides: only-CNS peptides (251 peptides), only-Healthy (63), and peptides that were present in both CNS and Healthy (1049). Peptides were considered increased or decreased if they were present only in either the Control or CNS group or, in the case of the 1049 peptides found in both groups, if they showed a significant Welch t-test difference (cut-off at 1% permutation based FDR) [Maffioli et al., 2018].

### Publication Abstract
Coagulase-negative staphylococci (CNS) are the most prevalent microorganisms isolated from cow milk and are associated with subclinical mastitis and persistent increases in the bulk milk somatic cell count (BMSCC) of low BMSCC herds. By combining peptide enrichment, LC-ESI-MS/MS, and statistical analysis, we investigated the influence of subclinical mastitis and CNS infection on the milk peptidome. Quarter milk samples from clinically healthy Holstein cows were subjected to bacteriological culture (BC) and somatic cell counting (SCC) for two consecutive samplings and 28 (including 11 negatives and 17 positives) were selected for peptidomic analysis. The study identified 1363 different endogenous peptides and highlighted a significant increase of peptides in CNS-positive milk, mainly represented by casein fragments. Milk peptidome changes increased with the SCC, as also demonstrated by protein electrophoresis and densitometry. Peptides significantly different in CNS or CONTROL samples were identified and characterized. Our results indicate that subclinical mastitis by CNS can induce significant changes in the milk peptidome, opening the way to future studies for the identification of a biomarker panel as well as for the understanding of their consequences for the technological and sensorial characteristics of cow milk and dairy products. SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first investigation on the impact of subclinical CNS mastitis on the bovine milk peptidome. The peptide enrichment strategy combined with a highly sensitive MS/MS analysis enabled the compilation of a very large peptide dataset for healthy and mastitic milk. The comparison of CNS and Control samples, also considering SCC classes, highlighted several peptides with potential for understanding milk protein and peptide dynamics in subclinical mastitis, with possible implications for its detection.

### Keywords
Peptidomics;subclinical mastitis; coagulase-negative staphylococci; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan
Università degli Studi di Milano

### Submitter
Elisa Maffioli

### Lab Head
Dr elisa maffioli
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan


