### Accession
PXD017050

### Title
A quantitative tissue-specific landscape of protein redox regulation during aging

### Description
Mammalian tissues engage in specialized physiology that is regulated by post-translational protein modification.  A major mode of protein regulation is initiated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) that reversibly modify protein cysteine residues.  ROS regulate a myriad of biological processes and ROS dysregulation has long been implicated in age-related dysfunction.  However, the protein targets of ROS modification that underlie tissue-specific physiology in vivo are largely unknown.  Here we develop a mass spectrometric technology for the first comprehensive and quantitative mapping of the mouse cysteine redox proteome in vivo.  We report the cysteine redox landscape across 10 tissues in young and old mice and establish several unexpected and fundamental paradigms of redox signaling. We define and validate cysteine redox networks within each tissue that are highly tissue-selective and underlie tissue-specific biology. We determine a common mechanism for encoding cysteine redox sensitivity by local electrostatic gating. Finally, we comprehensively identify redox-modified disease networks that remodel in aged mice, providing a systemic molecular basis for the longstanding proposed links between redox dysregulation and tissue aging. We provide the Oximouse compendium as a framework for understanding mechanisms of redox regulation in physiology and aging.

### Sample Protocol
Ten tissues from old and young male C57BL/6J mice (5 biological replicates each)were extracted using freeze-clamping and lysed in 20% TCA. Proteins were evenly split and differentially labeled by CPT to analyze %oxidation on cysteine residues. After digestion and purification, peptides were labeled by TMT-10plex, treated with Lambda Phosphatase, and enriched using IMAC and fractionated (6 fractions each tissues). All fractions were analyzed by the nLC-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system. Quantification was performed using SPS-MS3.

### Data Protocol
the SEQUEST algorithm (Eng et al., 1994) was used to search all MS/MS spectra against a database containing sequences of mouse (Mus Musculus) proteins downloaded from UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/, 2014). Reversed sequences were appended as decoys for FDR filtering, and common contaminant proteins (e.g. human keratins, trypsin) were included. The following parameters were used for the database search: 25 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 1.0 Da product ion mass tolerance; fully tryptic digestion; up to three missed cleavages; Methionine oxidation (+15.9949) and cysteine 6C-CPT modification (+221.08169) were dynamic modifications, and TMT (+229.162932) on lysines and protein N-termini was static. Peptide-level FDR was set to 0.5 % filtering labeled cysteine-containing peptides, and protein-level FDR was controlled to 1%. Consequently, peptide reverse hits were further dramatically decreased. Peptides were matched to the least number of sites. TMT reporter ion signal-to-noise ratios for all peptides matched to the same site were used to quantify the site.  A ModScore was calculated for each cysteine site in order to evaluate the confidence of site localization (Beausoleil et al., 2006). This algorithm examines the presence of MS/MS fragment ions unique to each cysteine site on the same peptide to evaluate whether the best site match is correct when comparing to the next best match. Sites with Modscore ≥13 (P ≤ 0.05) were considered to be confidently localized. For quantification, sites from peptides with only one site quantified are listed in the “single” category, and the rest are in the “composite” category. Due to the fact that cysteine is a rare amino acid, most sites are single sites and unambiguously localized on the parent peptides.  TMT reporter ion signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) from the oxidized cysteine channel was divided by S/N from the fully TMT-labeled cysteine channel of the same protein to obtain the % reversible oxidation value, effectively controlling for proteins abundance change. Values from five biological replicates were used to calculate the average and standard error of the mean (SE).  Single sites quantified from high confidence peptides (sum S/N > 200, isolation specificity > 0.75) were  used for population data analyses. Unless otherwise stated, we considered sites  with percent oxidation changes ±10% and Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p value ≤ 0.01 as “changed significantly”. For redox network analyses we define cysteines with % oxidation ≥ 20% as extensively/highly modified.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian tissues engage in specialized physiology that is regulated through reversible modification of protein cysteine residues by reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS regulate a myriad of biological processes, but the protein targets of ROS modification that drive tissue-specific physiology in&#xa0;vivo are largely unknown. Here, we develop Oximouse, a comprehensive and quantitative mapping of the mouse cysteine redox proteome in&#xa0;vivo. We use Oximouse to establish several paradigms of physiological redox signaling. We define and validate cysteine redox networks within each tissue that are tissue selective and underlie tissue-specific biology. We describe a common mechanism for encoding cysteine redox sensitivity by electrostatic gating. Moreover, we comprehensively identify redox-modified disease networks that remodel in aged mice, establishing a systemic molecular basis for the long-standing proposed links between redox dysregulation and tissue aging. We provide the Oximouse compendium as a framework for understanding mechanisms of redox regulation in physiology and aging.

### Keywords
Cpt, Cysteine proteomics, Redox, Aging

### Affiliations
1) Department of Cancer Biology, Dana–Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. 2) Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Haopeng Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Chouchani
1) Department of Cancer Biology, Dana–Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. 2) Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.


