### Accession
PXD027447

### Title
HDX-MS studies of the bacterial multidrug ABC transporter BmrA in presence or absence of a ligand (rhodamine-6G)

### Description
Multidrug ATP-Binding Cassette (ABC) exporters use an alternating access mechanism to translocate drugs across membranes, but the molecular mechanism of substrate release is still elusive due to the poor affinity of the drug-binding pocket for its ligand at this stage. Here, we bring new information on this mechanism by resolving two ATP-bound outward-facing conformations of the homodimer BmrA from Bacillus subtilis by X-ray crystallography with no drug bound and by cryo-EM in the presence of rhodamine 6G. This revealed the first structure of a multidrug pump with a substrate bound to the drug-binding pocket in a pre-release state. Two R6G molecules bind to the drug-binding cavity at the level of the outer leaflet, between transmembrane (TM) helices 1-2 of one monomer and TM5’-6’ of the other. Hydrogen-Deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) and molecular dynamics simulations confirmed the high flexibility of this region, presumably driving the release of structurally divergent compounds.

### Sample Protocol
BmrA reconstituted in nanodiscs labelling. All the reactions were carried out manually. Labeling was initiated by diluting 5 µL of 15 µM BmrA WT or 37 µM BmrA E504A in nanodiscs, in 95 µL D2O labeling buffer (5 mM Hepes pD 8.0, 50 mM NaCl). For the ATP/Vi- and ATP-incubated conditions, the labeling buffer additionally contained 10 mM ATP, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Vi and 10 mM ATP, 10 mM MgCl2, respectively. For the drug-bound condition, the labeling buffer additionally contained 10 mM ATP, 10 mM MgCl2, and 100 μM R6G. Prior to labeling, the samples were incubated with the respective ligands for 15 min at 20 °C. Samples were labeled for 2, 5, 15 and 30 min at 20 °C. Subsequently, the reactions were quenched by adding 22 µL of ice-cold quenching buffer (0.5 M glycine, 8 M guanidine-HCl pH 2.2, 0.035% DDM and 0.03% sodium cholate) to 100 µL of labelled sample, in ice bath. After 1 min, the 122-µL quenched sample was added into a microtube containing 200 µg of activated zirconium magnetic beads (MagReSyn Zr-IMAC from Resyn Biosciences, USA), to remove the phospholipids. After 1 min, magnetic beads were removed, and the supernatant was injected immediately into a 100-µL loop. BmrA in detergent mixture labelling. The reactions were carried out by a Twin HTS PAL dispensing and labelling robot (LEAP Technologies, Carborro, NC, USA) coupled to a Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer (Waters Scientific, Manchester, UK). Labeling was initiated by diluting 5.2 µL, of typically 37 µM protein, in 98.8 µL D2O labeling buffer (5 mM Hepes pD 8, 50 mM NaCl, 0.035% DDM, 0.03% sodium cholate). For the ATP/Vi- and ATP-incubated conditions, the labeling buffer additionally contained 10 mM ATP, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Vi and 10 mM ATP, 10 mM MgCl2, respectively. For the drug-bound condition, the labeling buffer additionally contained 10 mM ATP, 10 mM MgCl2, and 100 μM R6G. Prior labeling the samples were incubated with the respective ligands for 15 min at 20 °C. Samples were labeled for 2, 5, 15 and 30 min at 20 °C. Subsequently the samples were quenched by adding 22 µL of ice-cold quenching buffer (0.5 M glycine, 8 M guanidine-HCl pH 2.2) to 100 µL of labelled sample, in ice bath. After 1 min, 105-µL quenched sample were injected immediately into a 100-µL loop. UPLC-MS. Labelled proteins were then subjected to on-line digestion at 15 °C using a pepsin column (Waters Enzymate™ BEH Pepsin Column 300 Å, 5 µm, 2.1 x 30 mm).  The resulting peptides were trapped and desalted for 3 min on a C4 pre-column (Waters ACQUITY UPLC Protein BEH C4 VanGuard pre-column 300 Å, 1.7 µm, 2.1 x 5 mm, 10K - 500K) before separating them with a C4 column (Waters ACQUITY UPLC Protein BEH C4 Column 300 Å, 1.7 µm, 1 x 100 mm) using 0.2% formic acid and a 5-40 % linear acetonitrile gradient in 15 min and then 4 alternative cycles of 5% and 95% until 25 min. The valve position was adjusted to divert the sample after 14 min of each run from C4 column to waste, to avoid a contamination of the mass spectrometer with detergent. Two or three full kinetics were run for each condition, one after the other, to get either duplicate or triplicates of each deuteration timepoint. Blanks (equilibration buffer: 5 mM Hepes pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl) were injected after each sample injection and pepsin column washed during each run with pepsin wash (1.5 M guanidine-HCl, 4% acetonitrile, 0.8% formic acid pH 2.5) to minimize the carryover. Electrospray ionization mass spectra were acquired in positive mode in the m/z range of 50−2000 and with a scan time of 0.3 s.

### Data Protocol
For the identification of non-deuterated peptides, data was collected in MSE mode and the resulting peptides were identified using PLGS™ software (ProteinLynx Global SERVER 3.0.2 from Waters™). Peptides were then filtered in DynamX 3.0 software (Waters, Manchester, UK), with the following parameters: minimum intensity of 1000, minimum products per amino acid of 0.3 and file threshold of 2. After manual curation, Deuteros 2.0 software was used for data analysis, visualization and statistical treatments.

### Publication Abstract
Multidrug ABC transporters translocate drugs across membranes by a mechanism for which the molecular features of drug release are so far unknown. Here, we resolved three ATP-Mg<sup>2+</sup>-bound outward-facing conformations of the <i>Bacillus subtilis</i> (homodimeric) BmrA by x-ray crystallography and single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (EM) in detergent solution, one of them with rhodamine 6G (R6G), a substrate exported by BmrA when overexpressed in <i>B. subtilis</i>. Two R6G molecules bind to the drug-binding cavity at the level of the outer leaflet, between transmembrane (TM) helices 1-2 of one monomer and TM5'-6' of the other. They induce a rearrangement of TM1-2, highlighting a local flexibility that we confirmed by hydrogen/deuterium exchange and molecular dynamics simulations. In the absence of R6G, simulations show a fast postrelease occlusion of the cavity driven by hydrophobicity, while when present, R6G can move within the cavity, maintaining it open.

### Keywords
Bmra, Abc transporter, Hydrogen-deuterium ms

### Affiliations
IPBS
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology (IPBS), CNRS, Toulouse

### Submitter
Julien Marcoux

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Marcoux
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology (IPBS), CNRS, Toulouse


