### Accession
PXD030672

### Title
Off-target effects of the lysosomal acid lipase inhibitors Lalistat-1 and Lalistat-2 on neutral lipid hydrolases

### Description
Lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) is the key enzyme of lysosomal lipid hydrolysis, which degrades cholesteryl esters (CE), triacylglycerols (TG), diacylglycerols (DG), and retinyl esters. The role of LAL in various cellular processes has mostly been studied in LAL-deficient (Lal-/-) mice, which share phenotypical characteristics with humans suffering from LAL deficiency. In vitro, the cell-specific functions of LAL have been commonly investigated by using the LAL inhibitors Lalistat-1 (L1) and Lalistat-2 (L2). Here, we show that pharmacological LAL inhibition but not genetic loss of LAL impairs isoproterenol-stimulated lipolysis and neutral TG hydrolase (TGH) and CE hydrolase (CEH) activities in mature adipocytes, indicating that L1 and L2 inhibit other lipid hydrolases apart from LAL. Since adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) and hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) are the major enzymes that degrade cytosolic TG and CE, respectively, at neutral pH, we hypothesized that L1 and L2 also inhibit ATGL and/or HSL through off-target effects. In fact, both inhibitors drastically reduced neutral CEH activity in cells overexpressing mouse and human HSL and neutral TGH activity in cells overexpressing mouse and human ATGL, albeit to a lesser extent. By performing serine hydrolase-specific activity-based labeling in combination with quantitative proteomics, we confirmed that L2 inhibits HSL and other lipid hydrolases, whereas L1 treatment results in less pronounced inhibition of neutral lipid hydrolases. These results demonstrate that commonly used concentrations of L2 (and L1) are not suitable for investigating the role of LAL-specific lipolysis in lysosomal function, signaling pathways, and autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Activity-based probe (ABP) labelling and enrichment BMDM were isolated and differentiated as described earlier. On day 5, cells were treated with 30 µM lalistat1 (L1), 30 µM lalistat2 (L2) or no inhibitor (control) in FBS-free DMEM medium. The following day, the cells were incubated for 30 minutes with (probe) or without (noprobe) 30 µM ABP C6 (Hexyl 4-nitrophenyl (3-azidopropyl)phosphonate)). The cells were washed with cold PBS and lysed by ultrasonication (15 sec) in lysis buffer (100 mM TrisHCl, pH = 8.5; 1 % SDS; 10 mM TCEP; 30 mM NEM; 1:2000 protease inhibitor cocktail (#P8340, Sigma Aldrich)) followed by incubation at 95˚C for 10 minutes. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4˚C. After protein estimation by BCA assay (#23225, Thermo Fisher Scientific) 500 µg per sample was used for acetone precipitation. Precipitates were redissolved in 100 mM TrisHCl, pH = 8.5; 1 % SDS. Subsequently, 1.2 nmol DBCO-TEV-Biotin strain-promoted click linker (PiChem, Austria) was added and incubated at 37˚C on an orbital shaker at 500 rpm overnight to ensure click reaction between the ABP C6 probe and the biotin-containing linker. Amicon Ultra 3 kDa cetrifugal filters were employed to remove excess linker and reduce SDS concentration. The retentate was washed with 8M urea in 100 mM TrisHCl, pH = 8.5 and subsequently with 2M urea in 100 mM TrisHCl, pH = 8.5. For enrichment, the retentate was incubated on streptavidin-agarose resin (#20347, Thermo Scientific) in micro-spin columns on an overhead rotor for 5 hours. The beads were subsequently washed with 2 M urea in 100 mM TrisHCl, pH = 8.5, and incubated with 100 ng sequencing-grade modified trypsin (#V5111, Promega) in 100 mM TrisHCl, pH = 8.5, overnight. The on-bead digested proteins were collected from the spin columns and brought to 1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for desalting prior to LC-MS/MS measurement.   LC-MS/MS  In-house packed 2-layered polystyrene-divinylbenzene, reversed-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) stage tips (#66886-U, Empore SPE disks) were employed for desalting. The samples were loaded onto the stage tips, washed once with 0.2 % TFA and eluted with 5 % ammonium hydroxide in 80 % acetonitrile (ACN) followed by vacuum centrifugation until complete desiccation. The samples were redissolved in 16 µl solvent A, and 3 µl of each sample was subjected to chromatographic separation by nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000). Separation was carried out on an Aurora Series UHPLC C18 column (250 mm x 75 µm, 1.6 µm) (Ionopticks) at 40 ˚C and a flow rate of 0.4 µl/min with the following gradient: 0 to 8 min: 2 % B; 8 to 68 min: 2 to 17 % B;  68 to 98 min: 17 to 25 % B; 98 to 108 min: 25 to 37 % B; 108 to 118 min: 37 to 95 % B; 118 to 128 min: 95 % B;  128 to 129 min: 95 to 2 % B; 129 to 139 min: 2 % B; solvent A: 0.1 % FA in H2O; solvent B: 0.1 % FA in ACN. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) operated in positive data dependent Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode with trapped Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) enabled at 100% duty cycle (100 ms cycle time). Source capillary voltage was set to 4500V and dry gas flow was set to 3 L/m in at 180 ˚C.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 2.0.3.0 was employed for database search and protein quantitation and data analysis was performed with Perseus version 1.6.15.0. As a database, the UniProt mus musculus FASTA file (downloaded on 17.08.2021) including common protein contaminants (derived from the cRAP database) was used with a reverted decoy database. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 % for PSM, 1 % for protein and 1 % for site decoy fraction. Label free quantitation (LFQ) was performed with a minimum of 2 ratio counts of razor and unique peptides and match between runs was enabled with a retention time window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. The peptide tolerance was set to ±20 for the first peptide search and ±10 for the main peptide search. N-Ethylmaleimide on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation on methionine as well as acetylation at the N-terminal were set as variable modifications, and a maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was allowed. Tryptic digestion was chosen with a maximum of two allowed missed cleavages and a minimum required peptide length of 7 amino acids. From the MaxQuant protein search we obtained a list of 5,116 proteins with LFQ intensity values (representing protein abundance) that were further processed in Perseus. First, the protein matrix was reduced through removal of contaminants. The list of proteins with respective LFQ intensity values was further log2 transformed, which resulted in invalid values for any missing value. The individual samples were then assigned to appropriate groups based on their treatment: control, lalistat1 treatment (L1), lalistat2 treatment (L2) and based on ABP C6 probe treatment: treated with ABP C6 probe (probe) or not treated (noprobe).  In order to check for serine hydrolase enrichment, the probe samples were compared to the noprobe samples within one inhibitor group (e.g. control, L1 or L2). First, each matrix was reduced to proteins that are identified in at least 3 individual samples in at least one group (e.g. probe or noprobe), which resulted in a list of 4,578 proteins among all control samples, 4,456 proteins among L1 samples and 4,301 proteins among L2 samples. The remaining missing values were imputed from normal distribution with a downshift of 1.6 and a width of 0.4 and normal distribution of the data was checked through log histograms. For statistical analysis, two-sided t-test with a p-value of 0.05 and s0 of 1 and permutation-based FDR of 5 % (250 randomizations for multi-testing correction) was performed. In order to check for enzymes that are targeted by L1 or L2, t-tests as described above but with s0 of 0.1 were performed between control samples and L1 or L2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lal; lipolysis; lipid hydrolase activity; atgl; hsl; mgl

### Affiliations
Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstraße 6, 8010 Graz, Austria
Research and Diagnostic Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 6, 8010 Graz, Austria; Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Sophie Honeder

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Research and Diagnostic Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 6, 8010 Graz, Austria; Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria


