### Accession
PXD003781

### Title
Parallel reaction monitoring using quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer: principle and applications

### Description
The PRM dataset corresponds to the raw data files supporting the comparison between conventional database search using Mascot and spectral matching strategy (Figure 3). The PRM and DDA raw data files support the comparison between these two acquisition methods using the spectral matching strategy to corroborate the identity of the peptides (Figure 4D). The data were generated from the triplicate analyses of a dilution series of 778 SIL peptides spiked in a yeast tryptic digest at concentrations ranging from 50 amol/µL to 37 fmol/µL.

### Sample Protocol
Mixture of 778 isotopically labeled peptides with 15N and 13C-labeled on arginine and lysine residues spiked at concentration ranging from 50 to 37000 amol/µL in yeast lysate tryptic digest (300 ng/µL).

### Data Protocol
Mascot database searches were performed against a home-made database only including the sequences of the entire set of peptides targeted in the experiment (778 entries), using a mass tolerance of 0.5 and 0.01 Da for MS and MS/MS data, respectively, pertinent 15N and 13C-labeled residues as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted mass spectrometry-based approaches are nowadays widely used for quantitative proteomics studies and more recently have been implemented on high resolution/accurate mass (HRAM) instruments resulting in a considerable performance improvement. More specifically, the parallel reaction monitoring technique (PRM) performed on quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometers, leveraging the high resolution and trapping capabilities of the instrument, offers a clear advantage over the conventional selected reaction monitoring (SRM) measurements executed on triple quadrupole instruments. Analyses performed in HRAM mode allow for an improved discrimination between signals derived from analytes and those resulting from matrix interferences translating in the reliable quantification of low abundance components. The purpose of the study defines various implementation schemes of PRM, namely: (i) exploratory experiments assessing the detectability of very large sets of peptides (100-1000), (ii) wide-screen analyses using (crude) internal standards to obtain statistically meaningful (relative) quantitative analyses, and (iii) precise/accurate quantification of a limited number of analytes using calibrated internal standards. Each of the three implementation schemes requires specific acquisition methods with defined parameters to appropriately control the acquisition during the actual peptide elution. This tutorial describes the different PRM approaches and discusses their benefits and limitations in terms of quantification performance and confidence in analyte identification.

### Keywords
Dda, Exploratory study, Prm

### Affiliations
Luxembourg Clinical Proteomics Center, Luxembourg Institute of Health, Luxembourg (lab head)
LIH

### Submitter
Adèle Bourmaud

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Domon
Luxembourg Clinical Proteomics Center, Luxembourg Institute of Health, Luxembourg (lab head)


