### Accession
PXD030067

### Title
LFQ of mouse brain in ischemic stroke

### Description
Ischemic disorders are the leading cause of death worldwide. The extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) are part of the Raf/MEK/ERK1/2 cascade and are thought to affect the outcome of ischemic stroke. However, it is under debate whether activation or inhibition of ERK1/2 is beneficial. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the impact of ERK1/2 after cerebral ischemia using transgenic mice with ubiquitous overexpression of ERK2 or of the Raf kinase inhibitor protein (RKIP), an inhibitor of the ERK1/2 signaling cascade.

### Sample Protocol
For lysis of snap-frozen mouse brain was prepared. 300 µL lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.8] 150 mM NaCl, 1 % [w/v] SDS supplemented with cOm-plete™ ULTRA protease inhibitor and PhosStop [Roche, Penzberg]) and approx. 20 glass beads were added to approx. 8 mg punched tissue. Then, tissue was disrupted by sonication for 20 min (30 s on, 30 s off, 20 cycles) using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) at 4 °C. Subsequently, protein concentration was determined by BCA assay according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Pierce BCA protein assay kit). Reduction and  carbamidomethylation of the samples were carried out using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56 °C followed by application of 15 mM iodacetamide (IAA) for further 30 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark. Samples were further processed using the S-Trap™ (Protifi) sample preparation procedure according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis. All Peptides samples were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS using 1 μg, respectively. Samples were loaded on an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid chromatography (RSLC) nano system with a ProFlow flow control device coupled to a Q Exactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Scientific). Loaded peptides were concentrated on a trapping column (Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 100 μm, 2 cm) using 0.1 % TFA at a flowrate of 10 μl/min. For sample separation a reversed phase column (Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 75 μm 50 cm) using a binary gradient was used (5 % solvent B (84 % ACN with 0.1 % TFA) for 3 min, a linear increase of solvent B to 25 % for 102 min, a linear increase of solvent B to 33 % for 10 min, a linear increase of solvent B to 95 % for 2 min followed by a linear decrease of solvent B to 5 % for 5 min). MS survey scans were acquired using the following settings: mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with full MS scans from 300 to 1600 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 using the polysiloxane ion at 371.10124 m/z as lock mass27. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6 and the maximum injection time to 120 ms. The 15 most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 5E3 were selected for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy (nCE) of 27 % in each cycle of the acquisition analysis, following each survey scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s. Fragment ions were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 with an AGC of 5E4 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.3.0.523 (Thermo Scientific, Germany) and searched in a target/decoy fashion against a mouse Uniprot database (downloaded on November 2019, UniProt (www.uniprot.org)); using MASCOT algorithm. The search parameters were: precursor and fragment ion tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Trypsin was set as enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification and oxidation of Met was selected as dynamic modification. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications using Percolator. A Label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis was performed including replicates (no. stated in corresponding tables) for each condition.  Proteins identified with ≥ 2 unique peptides and a log2 ratio ≥ 1 (XX-fold enrichment), p-Value ≥ 0.05 were considered as significantly regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Ischemic disorders are the leading cause of death worldwide. The extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) are thought to affect the outcome of ischemic stroke. However, it is under debate whether activation or inhibition of ERK1/2 is beneficial. In this study, we report that the ubiquitous overexpression of wild-type ERK2 in mice (ERK2<sup>wt</sup>) is detrimental after transient occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (tMCAO), as it led to a massive increase in infarct volume and neurological deficits by increasing blood-brain barrier (BBB) leakiness, inflammation, and the number of apoptotic neurons. To compare ERK1/2 activation and inhibition side-by-side, we also used mice with ubiquitous overexpression of the Raf-kinase inhibitor protein (RKIP<sup>wt</sup>) and its phosphorylation-deficient mutant RKIP<sup>S153A</sup>, known inhibitors of the ERK1/2 signaling cascade. RKIP<sup>wt</sup> and RKIP<sup>S153A</sup> attenuated ischemia-induced damages, in particular via anti-inflammatory signaling. Taken together, our data suggest that stimulation of the Raf/MEK/ERK1/2-cascade is severely detrimental and its inhibition is rather protective. Thus, a tight control of the ERK1/2 signaling is essential for the outcome in response to ischemic stroke.

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Lfq

### Affiliations
Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie Versbacher Straße 9 D-97078 Würzburg Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.  Bunsen-Kirchhoff-Str. 11 D-44139 Dortmund
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

### Submitter
Yvonne Reinders

### Lab Head
Dr Kristina Lorenz
Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie Versbacher Straße 9 D-97078 Würzburg Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.  Bunsen-Kirchhoff-Str. 11 D-44139 Dortmund


