### Accession
PXD000403

### Title
Sphingomonas wittichii RW1 shotgun proteomics

### Description
Chlorinated congeners of dibenzo-p-dioxin and dibenzofuran are widely dispersed pollutants that can be treated using microorganisms, such as the Sphingomonas wittichii RW1 bacterium, able to transform some of them into non-toxic substances. The enzymes of the upper pathway for dibenzo-p-dioxin degradation in S. wittichii RW1 have been biochemically and genetically characterized, but its genome sequence has indicated the existence of a tremendous potential for aromatic compound transformation, with 56 ring-hydroxylating dioxygenase subunits, 34 extradiol dioxygenases, and 40 hydrolases. To further characterize this enzymatic arsenal, new methodological approaches should be employed. Here, a large shotgun proteomic survey has been performed on cells grown on dibenzofuran, dibenzo-p-dioxin, and 2-chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, and compared to growth on acetate. Changes in the proteome were monitored over time.        Peak lists were generated with the Mascot Daemon software (version 2.3.2; Matrix Science, London, UK) using the extract_msn.exe data import filter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) from the Xcalibur FT package (version 2.0.7; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data import filter options were set to 400 (minimum mass), 5000 (maximum mass), 0 (grouping tolerance), 0 (intermediate scans) and 1000 (threshold). The mgf files from technical triplicates were merged, and MS/MS spectra were assigned using the Mascot Daemon 2.3.2 (Matrix Science) and a database containing the nonredundant RefSeq protein entries for S. wittichii RW1 (NCBI Taxonomy ID: 392499), comprising 5345 protein sequences totalling 1 800 684 amino acids. The search was performed using the following criteria: tryptic peptides with a maximum of two miscleavages, mass tolerances of 5 ppm on the parent ion and 0.5 Da on the MS/MS, fixed modification for carbamidomethylated cysteine, and variable modification for methionine oxidation. Mascot results were parsed using the IRMa 1.28.0 software. Peptides were identified with a P-value threshold below 0.05. Proteins were considered validated when at least two distinct peptides were detected. Using a selection of 11 result files and the appropriate decoy database, the false discovery rate for protein identification was estimated to be 0.33% with these parameters.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Chlorinated congeners of dibenzo-p-dioxin and dibenzofuran are widely dispersed pollutants that can be treated using microorganisms, such as the Sphingomonas wittichii RW1 bacterium, able to transform some of them into non-toxic substances. The enzymes of the upper pathway for dibenzo-p-dioxin degradation in S.&#x2009;wittichii RW1 have been biochemically and genetically characterized, but its genome sequence indicated the existence of a tremendous potential for aromatic compound transformation, with 56 ring-hydroxylating dioxygenase subunits, 34 extradiol dioxygenases and 40 hydrolases. To further characterize this enzymatic arsenal, new methodological approaches should be employed. Here, a large shotgun proteomic survey was performed on cells grown on dibenzofuran, dibenzo-p-dioxin and 2-chlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, and compared with growth on acetate. Changes in the proteome were monitored over time. In total, 502 proteins were observed and quantified using a label-free mass spectrometry-based approach; all data were deposited to the ProteomeXchange (PXD000403). Our results confirmed the roles of the dioxin dioxygenase DxnA1A2, trihydroxybiphenyl dioxygenase DbfB, meta-cleavage product hydrolase DxnB and reductase RedA2, and corroborated the proposed involvement of the Swit_3046 dioxygenase and DxnB2 hydrolase. Trends across substrates and over the course of growth do not support concerted pathway regulation and suggest the involvement of an additional hydrolase and several TonB-dependent receptors.

### Keywords
Sphingomonas wittichii rw1 dioxin dibenzofuran

### Affiliations
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head


