### Accession
PXD009380

### Title
Kinome profiling of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cells in response to dasatinib

### Description
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a heterogeneous disease, with at least one-third of its patients not responding to the current chemotherapy regimen, R-CHOP.  By gene expression profiling, patients with DLBCL can be categorized into two clinically relevant subtypes: activated B-cell (ABC) DLBCL and germinal center B-cell (GCB).  Patients with ABC DLBCL have a worse prognosis, and are defined by chronic, overactive signaling through the B-cell receptor and NF-κB pathways.  We examined the effects of the Src family kinase (SFK) inhibitor dasatinib in a panel of ABC and GCB DLBCL cell lines, and found that the ABC DLBCL cell lines are much more sensitive to dasatinib than the GCB DLBCL cell lines.  However, using multiplexed inhibitor bead coupled to mass spectrometry (MIB/MS) kinome profiling competition and western blot analysis, both subtypes display inhibition of the SFKs in response to dasatinib after both short- and long-term treatment.  MIB/MS analyses revealed several cell cycle kinases, including CDK4, CDK6, and the Aurora kinases, are inhibited by dasatinib treatment in the ABC DLBCL subtype, but not in the GCB DLBCL subtype.  The present findings have important implications for the clinical use of dasatinib for the treatment of ABC DLBCL, either alone or in combination with other agents.

### Sample Protocol
Two DLBCL cell lines, HT (GCB subtype) and TMD8 (ABC subtype), were used in all proteomics experiments. Biological triplicates of each cell line were treated with either DMSO or with 100 nM dasatinib for 30 min and 24 hr. Lysates were collected then incubated with multiplexed inhibitor beads (MIBs) to enrich for kinases, followed by trypsin digestion. All samples were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using a Thermo Easy nLC 1000-QExactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Identification and label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant. Data were searched against a reviewed Uniprot human database and a 1% FDR was applied to all results. Only proteins with 2 or more unique+razor peptide were used for label-free quantitation. Statistical analysis was conducted in Perseus, followed by bioinformatics analysis using DAVID and STRING.

### Publication Abstract
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a heterogeneous disease, and at least one-third of its patients relapse after treatment with the current chemotherapy regimen, R-CHOP. By gene-expression profiling, patients with DLBCL can be categorized into two clinically relevant subtypes: activated B-cell (ABC) and germinal center B-cell (GCB) DLBCL. Patients with the ABC subtype have a worse prognosis than those with GCB, and the subtype is defined by chronic, over-active signaling through the B-cell receptor and NF-&#x3ba;B pathways. We examined the effects of the Src family kinase (SFK) inhibitor dasatinib in a panel of ABC and GCB DLBCL cell lines and found that the former are much more sensitive to dasatinib than the latter. However, using multiplexed inhibitor bead coupled to mass spectrometry (MIB/MS) kinome profiling and Western blot analysis, we found that both subtypes display inhibition of the SFKs in response to dasatinib after both short- and long-term treatment. The MIB/MS analyses revealed that several cell-cycle kinases, including CDK4, CDK6, and the Aurora kinases, are down-regulated by dasatinib treatment in the ABC, but not in the GCB, subtype. The present findings have potential implications for the clinical use of dasatinib for the treatment of ABC DLBCL, either alone or in combination with other agents.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Dasatinib, Kinome, Lymphoma, Cancer

### Affiliations
UNC Proteomics Core Facility, Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Laura E. Herring
UNC Proteomics Core Facility, Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


