### Accession
PXD027545

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Trichomonas vaginalis phagolysosome, lysosomal targeting, and unconventional secretion of cysteine peptidases

### Description
Lysosomes represent a central degradative compartment of eukaryotes, yet little is known about biogenesis and function of this organelle in parasitic protists. Whereas the mannose-6 phosphate (M6P)-dependent system is dominant for lysosomal targeting in metazoans, oligosaccharide independent sorting was reported in other eukaryotes. In this study, we investigated the phagolysosomal proteome of the human parasite Trichomonas vaginalis, protein targeting and involvement of lysosomes in hydrolase secretion. The organelles were purified using conventional Percoll and OptiPrep density gradient centrifugation, and a novel purification protocol based on phagocytosis of lactoferrin-covered magnetic nanoparticles. The analysis resulted in the lysosomal proteome of 462 proteins, which were sorted into 21 functional classes. Hydrolases represent the largest functional class and include proteases, lipases, phosphatases, glycosidases, and other hydrolases. Identification of a large set of proteins involved in vesicular trafficking (80) and turnover of actin cytoskeleton rearrangement (29) indicate high dynamics of phagolysosomal compartment. Several lysosomal proteins including the cysteine protease TvCP2 were previously shown to be secreted. Our experiment showed that secretion of TvCP2 was strongly inhibited by chloroquine that increased intralysosomal pH and thus indicated TvCP2 secretion through lysosomes rather than the classical secretory pathway. Unexpectedly, we identified in the phagolysosomal proteome divergent homologs of M6P receptor TvMPR, although T. vaginalis lacks enzymes for M6P formation. To test whether oligosaccharides are involved in lysosomal targeting, we selected the lysosome-resident cysteine protease CLCP that possesses two glycosylation sites. Mutation of any of the sites redirected CLCP to the secretory pathway. Similarly, introduction of glycosylation sites to secreted β-amylase redirected this protein to lysosomes. Thus, unlike other parasitic protists, T. vaginalis seems to utilize glycosylation as recognition marker for lysosomal hydrolases. Whether TvMPR or other possible receptors are involved in this process and what is the precise structure of the lysosomal recognition marker need to be clarified in future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of lysosomal fractions.Lysosomes were isolated by three approaches. (i) For density gradient centrifugation in Percoll we used a modified procedure based on the protocol by Bradley et al. 1997 (41). Briefly, 1 l TV17-48 expressing HA-tagged TvRab7a (TV17-48-Rab7a) (1.5x106 cells/ml) was harvested by centrifugation (1,200 x g, 10 min, 4°C) and washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and once with sucrose-tris (ST) buffer (500 mM Sucrose, 20 mM Tris, 1 mM KCl), pH 7.2. The cells were resuspended in 7.5 ml of ST buffer with 10 µg/ml leupeptin and 50 µg/ml TLCK. The cells were disintegrated on ice by sonication, and unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation at 800 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 20 min at 4°C. The top white layer of the pellet was separated from a brown layer of hydrogenosomes and gently resuspended in 7.5 ml of ST buffer and centrifuged again under the same conditions. The white pellet was collected and resuspended in 2 ml of ST buffer with protease inhibitors as above (large granule fraction, LGF) and centrifuged in a 45% Percoll gradient at 30,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C using a Beckman Optima XPN-90 ultracentrifuge and the Ti70 rotor. Deceleration was set to 9 to avoid disruption of the gradient. The upper lysosomal fraction was collected and centrifuged again in a 45% Percoll gradient under the same conditions. The final lysosomal fraction was washed twice with ST at 14,000 x g for 20 min at 4°C, resuspended in 500 µl ST buffer with protease inhibitors and frozen before further processing. (ii) Density gradient centrifugation in Optiprep. The LGF of TV17-48-Rab7a was obtained as above and resuspended in 800 µl of a buffer consisting of 0.25 M Sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4.  The suspension was loaded on a 5% to 50% continuous Optiprep gradient and centrifuged at 200,000 x g for 2 hours at 4°C using a Beckman Optima XPN-90 ultracentrifuge with SW 41 Ti rotor. Acceleration was set to 4 and deceleration to 9. Three fractions corresponding to three visible bands were collected, washed and frozen.  (iii) Phagolysosomes were isolated using lactoferrin (Lf) covered Dynabeads. Lf was coupled with Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) in one volume PBS and two volumes borate buffered saline (BBS, pH 9) with a final concentration of 100 ng FITC/1 µg Lf as described (42). Then, the PBS-BBS solution was exchanged for 25 mM 2-[n-morpholino]-ethanesulfonic acid (MES) buffer (pH 6) using Amicon Ultra-4 30K Centrifugal Filters (Millipore) (43). Therefore, 2 ml of FITC-Lf in PBS-BBS was added to the device, filled up with MES buffer to the maximum volume of 4 ml, and centrifuged at 5,000 x g for 15 min. The flowthrough was discarded and the concentrated FITC-Lf filled up to 4 ml with MES buffer. This buffer replacement was repeated four times in total. Magnetic Dynabeads MyOne Carboxylic Acid (Invitrogen) of 1 µm diameter were coupled with FITC-Lf in MES buffer according to Invitrogen’s two-step protocol using 1-ethyl-3-[3-dimethylaminopropyl] carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC) and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) (44). Briefly, 100 µl of Dynabeads (1 mg) were washed twice with MES buffer for 10 min. Then, the Dynabeads were incubated with 50 µl EDC (50 mg/ml in 25 mM MES, pH 6) and 50 µl NHS (50 mg/ml in 25 mM MES, pH 6) for 30 min at room temperature with slow tilt rotation. Next, the Dynabeads were washed twice for 10 min with MES buffer. Then, 50 µl FITC-Lf and 50 µl MES buffer were added and the mixture was incubated for 30 min at room temperature with slow tilt rotation. Subsequently, the FITC-Lf coupled Dynabeads were incubated with 300 µl of 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, for 15 min to quench non-reacted activated carboxylic acid groups. Then, the FITC-Lf coupled Dynabeads were washed four times with Tris for 5 min and taken up in 100 µl PBS. For the isolation of phagolysosomes, 1 l of TV17-48-Rab7a cells (1.5x106 cells/ml) was harvested. The cells were resuspended in 20 ml TYM medium and incubated with 100 µl of FITC-Lf-coupled Dynabeads in a 150 ml culture tissue flask for 1 h at 37°C. After the incubation, the cells were gently disintegrated on ice by sonication. The disintegration was checked under the microscope in 30-sec intervals. Leupeptin and TLCK were added as before to avoid protein degradation. The lysosomes containing Dynabeads were washed three times with PBS by applying a magnet for 15 min each and then filtered through a 3 µm pore size filter (Whatman, GE Healthcare). Then, the lysosomes were treated with 0.1% Triton X-100 to release the Dynabeads. A magnet was applied and the supernatant containing lysosomal content was transferred into a new tube and frozen.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis Protein samples were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 1 h at -20°C (49), pelleted at 21,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C, washed twice with cold acetone, dried for 5 min at 95°C and stored at -80°C. LFQ MS analysis was performed as described (10). Briefly, proteins were dissolved in 100 mM TEAB with 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC). Samples were digested with trypsin and detergent was removed by liquid-liquid extraction (50). Digested peptides were injected on a nano reverse-phase liquid chromatography coupled with MS (nanoLC-MS) using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Mass spectrometer. Raw data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.0 (Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) (51). Searches were performed using the Trichomonas vaginalis database from EUpathDB (52) (release 2020-05-27, 60,330 entries). Trypsin was used to generate the peptides, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The protein modifications were set as follows: cysteine (unimod nr: 39) as static and methionine oxidation (unimod: 1384) and protein N-terminus acetylation (unimod: 1) as variable.  Experimental design and statistical rationale Three different isolation methods were used, and with each three independent biological experiments were performed, and each biological sample was analysed by MS in three technical replicates. To distinguish lysosomal proteome from contaminants, we applied three criteria: (i) the protein must appear in at least two out of three replicates per method used, (ii) it must be represented by at least three peptides, and (iii) it must appear in all three methods used.  Bioinformatics For each protein identified in the lysosomal proteome, protein features were predicted using SignalP 4.1 server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP-4.1/), TargetP 2.0 server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TargetP/), and SecretomeP 2.0 server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SecretomeP/). Transmembrane domains were predicted using TMHMM server v. 2.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/). Conserved domains were predicted using Pfam 34.0 database (http://pfam.xfam.org, 19,179 entries). Identified proteins were sorted using Pfam annotations, molecular function gene ontology (http://geneontology.org/docs/ontology-documentation/), and manual curation. Putative lysosomal targeting motifs were detected using the Protein Motif Pattern tool (https://trichdb.org/trichdb/app/search/transcript/GenesByMotifSearch). For sequence alignments, Clustal Omega 1.2.4 was used (53).

### Publication Abstract
The lysosome represents a central degradative compartment of eukaryote cells, yet little is known about the biogenesis and function of this organelle in parasitic protists. Whereas the mannose 6-phosphate (M6P)-dependent system is dominant for lysosomal targeting in metazoans, oligosaccharide-independent sorting has been reported in other eukaryotes. In this study, we investigated the phagolysosomal proteome of the human parasite Trichomonas vaginalis, its protein targeting and the involvement of lysosomes in hydrolase secretion. The organelles were purified using Percoll and OptiPrep gradient centrifugation and a novel purification protocol based on the phagocytosis of lactoferrin-covered magnetic nanoparticles. The analysis resulted in a lysosomal proteome of 462 proteins, which were sorted into 21 classes. Hydrolases represented the largest functional class and included proteases, lipases, phosphatases, and glycosidases. Identification of a large set of proteins involved in vesicular trafficking (80) and turnover of actin cytoskeleton rearrangement (29) indicate a dynamic phagolysosomal compartment. Several cysteine proteases such as TvCP2 were previously shown to be secreted. Our experiments showed that secretion of TvCP2 was strongly inhibited by chloroquine, which increases intralysosomal pH, thus indicating that TvCP2 secretion occurs through lysosomes rather than the classical secretory pathway. Unexpectedly, we identified divergent homologues of the M6P receptor TvMPR in the phagolysosomal proteome, although T.&#xa0;vaginalis lacks enzymes for M6P formation. To test whether oligosaccharides are involved in lysosomal targeting, we selected the lysosome-resident cysteine protease CLCP, which possesses two glycosylation sites. Mutation of any of the sites redirected CLCP to the secretory pathway. Similarly, the introduction of glycosylation sites to secreted &#x3b2;-amylase redirected this protein to lysosomes. Thus, unlike other parasitic protists, T.&#xa0;vaginalis seems to utilize glycosylation as a recognition marker for lysosomal hydrolases. Our findings provide the first insight into the complexity of T.&#xa0;vaginalis phagolysosomes, their biogenesis, and role in the unconventional secretion of cysteine peptidases.

### Keywords
Trichomonas vaginalis, Cysteine peptidase, Phagolysosome, Proteome, Glycosylation, Mannose-6-phosphate receptor

### Affiliations
Charles University
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Prague, Czech Republic  ORCID logohttp://orcid.org/0000-0001-6976-8446

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr prof. RNDr. Jan Tachezy, Ph.D.
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Prague, Czech Republic  ORCID logohttp://orcid.org/0000-0001-6976-8446


