### Accession
PXD033167

### Title
Crosslinking-Mass Spectrometry data for structural analysis of Doublecortin-Microtubule interaction

### Description
Doublecortin (DCX) is a microtubule (MT) associated protein that regulates MT structure and function during neuronal development and mutations in DCX lead to a spectrum of neurological disorders. The structural properties of MT-bound DCX remain poorly resolved. Here, we describe the molecular architecture of the DCX-MT complex through an integrative modeling approach that combines data from X-ray crystallography, cryo-EM and a high-fidelity chemical crosslinking method. We demonstrate that DCX interacts with MTs through its N-terminal domain and induces a lattice-dependent self-association involving both the C-terminal structured domain and the C-tails, in a conformation that favors an open, domain-swapped state. The networked state is shown to accommodate multiple different attachment points on the MT lattice, all of which orient the C-tails away from the lattice. As numerous disease mutations cluster in the C-terminus and regulatory phosphorylations cluster in the C-tail, our study shows that lattice-driven self-assembly is an important property of DCX.

### Sample Protocol
Doublecortin-Microtubule (DCX-MT) construct was reconstituted in-vitro and Succinimidyl 6-(4, 4'-azipentanamido)hexanoate (LC-SDA)crosslinking was performed by adding the reagent to final 1mM concentration. The sample was incubated for 10 minutes at 37°C, followed by 5 sec of photolysis at 355 nm. Crosslinked DCX-MT was separated from free protein by centrifugation. Samples were prepared for MS analysis by performing reduction/alkylation of Cysteines followed by Trypsin digestion. Samples were then aliquoted and either lyophilized for size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) or desalted using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (SPE) for direct LC-MS/MS analysis. Another set of samples were prepared by mixing 14N-DCX (light) and 15N-DCX (heavy) in 1:1 ratio and then applied to tubulin as above.

### Data Protocol
DDA runs were searched in Mass Spec Studio(CRIMP v2, www.msstudio.ca). The crosslinked peptides were searched using Tubulin isoforms (TB-alpha-1A, TB-alph-1B, TB-alpha-1C, TB-alpha-1D, TB-alpha-4A, and TB-beta, TB-beta-2B, TB-beta-4A, TB-beta-4B, TB-beta-3, TB-beta-5)and DCX sequence. Crosslinked peptides were searched using the following parameters: MS accuracy, 5 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 10 ppm; E-threshold, 70; Enzyme, Trypsin (K/R onlyNaive); m/z range: 350 and 1300; Peptide length range: 3-50 residues. All crosslinking results filtered at an estimated 1% FDR level were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Doublecortin, Crosslinking-mass spectrometry, Integrative structural modeling, Microtubule

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada
University of Calgary 

### Submitter
Atefeh Rafiei

### Lab Head
Dr David C. Schriemer
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada


