### Accession
PXD027844

### Title
Tomato fruit ripening Phosphoproteome

### Description
Through the quantitative proteomics research strategy of TMT labeling and phosphorylation enrichment technology and high-resolution liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, this project carried out the quantitative research of phosphorylated proteomics. In this study, a total of 6227 phosphorylation sites were identified, of which 4501 sites contained quantitative information. In order to ensure the high reliability of the results, we used the standard of localization probability>0.75 to filter the identification data, and finally determined 4842 phosphorylation sites located on 2328 proteins, of which 4,011 sites of 1996 proteins contained quantitative Information, and use the filtered data for subsequent bioinformatics analysis. If 1.5 times is the change threshold, t-test p-value<0.05 is the standard, and after full proteomics normalization, then among the quantified phosphorylation sites, there are 161 in the AC-B4vsAC-MG comparison group The modification level of the locus was up-regulated, and the modification level of 364 sites was down-regulated (for more information about the differences between the comparison groups, please see the main body of the report). Based on the above data, we conducted a systematic bioinformatics analysis of proteins containing quantitative information, including protein annotation, functional classification, functional enrichment, and cluster analysis based on functional enrichment. And combining the above information provides a reference direction for the downstream in-depth research based on proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Peptide mixtures were first incubated with IMAC microspheres suspension with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid). The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
GO Annotation The Gene Ontology, or GO, is a major bioinformatics initiative to unify the representation of gene and gene product attributes across all species. More specifically, the project aims to:  1. Maintain and develop its controlled vocabulary of gene and gene product attributes; 2. Annotate genes and gene products, and assimilate and disseminate annotation data; 3. Provide tools for easy access to all aspects of the data provided by the project. The ontology covers three domains: 1. Cellular component: A cellular component is just that, a component of a cell, but with the proviso that it is part of some larger object; this may be an anatomical structure (e.g. rough endoplasmic reticulum or nucleus) or a gene product group (e.g. ribosome, proteasome or a protein dimer). 2. Molecular function: Molecular function describes activities, such as catalytic or binding activities, that occur at the molecular level. GO molecular function terms represent activities rather than the entities (molecules or complexes) that perform the actions, and do not specify where or when, or in what context, the action takes place. 3. Biological process: A biological process is series of events accomplished by one or more ordered assemblies of molecular functions. It can be difficult to distinguish between a biological process and a molecular function, but the general rule is that a process must have more than one distinct steps. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotationbased on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. For further hierarchical clustering based on different protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
The tomato is a research model for fruit-ripening, however, its fruit-ripening mechanism still needs more extensive and in-depth exploration. Here, using TMT and LC-MS, the proteome and phosphoproteome of AC<sup>++</sup> (wild type) and <i>rin</i> (ripening-inhibitor) mutant fruits were studied to investigate the translation and post-translational regulation mechanisms of tomato fruit-ripening. A total of 6141 proteins and 4011 phosphorylation sites contained quantitative information. One-hundred proteins were identified in both omics' profiles, which were mainly found in ethylene biosynthesis and signal transduction, photosynthesis regulation, carotenoid and flavonoid biosynthesis, chlorophyll degradation, ribosomal subunit expression changes, MAPK pathway, transcription factors and kinases. The affected protein levels were correlated with their corresponding gene transcript levels, such as NAC-NOR, MADS-RIN, IMA, TAGL1, MADS-MC and TDR4. Changes in the phosphorylation levels of NAC-NOR and IMA were involved in the regulation of tomato fruit-ripening. Although photosynthesis was inhibited, there were diverse primary and secondary metabolic pathways, such as glycolysis, fatty acid metabolism, vitamin metabolism and isoprenoid biosynthesis, regulated by phosphorylation. These data constitute a map of protein-protein phosphorylation in the regulation of tomato fruit-ripening, which lays the foundation for future in-depth study of the sophisticated molecular mechanisms of fruit-ripening and provide guidance for molecular breeding.

### Keywords
Fruit ripening, Phosphoproteome, Tomato

### Affiliations
Chongqing University

### Submitter
Qiaoli Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Qiaoli Xie
Chongqing University


