### Accession
PXD017940

### Title
Two siblings with strong NER inactivation due to inherited ERCC1 deficiency display mild clinical features of XP and CS with severe liver impairment

### Description
The ERCC1-XPF heterodimer is a multifunctional endonuclease involved in nucleotide excision repair (NER), inter-strand crosslink (ICL) repair, and DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair. Only two patients with inherited ERCC1 defects have been reported who both died at an early age. Here, we describe a new case of ERCC1 deficiency in two siblings (11 and 13 years) who show mild features of Xeroderma Pigmentosum and Cockayne Syndrome. Both patients displayed microcephaly, mild developmental delay, mild photosensitivity, and severe cholestatic liver problems. Genetic analysis revealed a maternal deletion and a paternal missense variant in ERCC1 (R156W) that affect a salt bridge just below the XPA-binding pocket. Studies in patient-derived fibroblasts and reconstituted knockout cells confirmed that mutant ERCC1 is not efficiently recruited to the NER complex due to a decreased interaction with XPA. Consequently, patient cells show a strong NER defect, although residual repair could be detected. The steady-state protein levels of ERCC1 and XPF were severely reduced in patient cells, but this only led to a mild defect in ICL repair, and no impact on DSB repair. We report a new case of ERCC1 deficiency that particularly affect NER and has only a mild impact on other ERCC1-dependent repair pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were mock treated or UV irradiated (20 J/m2) and harvested after 1 h. Cell pellets were lysed for 20 min on ice in EBC-150 buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 2 mM MgCl2, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) supplemented with 500 U/mL Benzonase® Nuclease (Novagen). Cell lysates were incubated for 1.5 h at 4°C with GFP-Trap®_A beads (Chromotek). The beads were then washed 4-6 times with EBC-150 buffer and boiled in Laemmli-SDS sample buffer for immublotting. For the mass spectrometry analysis, the beads were washed 5 times with EBC-150 buffer without NP-40. Next, the beads were resuspended in 250 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate supplemented with  250 ng of mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega) an incubated overnight at 37 ºC while shaking. Subsequently, tryptic-digested peptides were separated from the beads with a 0.45 µm spin column filter (Millipore) and purified and desalted using in-house packed Stage-Tips.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data acquisition. Mass spectrometry was performed essentially as previously described43. All the experiments were performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) through a nano-electrospray ion source. The Q-Exactive was coupled to a 25 cm silica emitter (FS360-75-15-N-5-C25, NewObjective, Woburn, MA, USA) in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Manish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Samples were run in a 40 min chromatography gradient from 0% to 30% acetonitrile and then increasing to 95% acetonitrile prior to column re-equilibration with flow rate of 200 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode with a top-7 method and a scan range of 300-1600 m/z. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 × 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 × 105 and with a resolution of 35,000, an isolation window of 2.2 m/z, and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The minimum AGC target was 1x104. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 250 and 120 ms, respectively The precursor ion masses of scanned ions were dynamically excluded (DE) from MS/MS analysis for 30 s. Ions with charge 1, and higher than 6, were excluded from triggering MS2 analysis. Mass spectrometry data analysis All raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) as described previously 44. We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens including canonical and isoform sequences (27th May 2019). Database searches were performed according to standard settings with the following modifications. Digestion with Trypsin/P was used, allowing 4 missed cleavages. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term) were allowed as variable modifications with a maximum number of 3. Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled as a fixed modification. Label-Free Quantification was enabled, not allowing Fast LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
ERCC1-XPF is a multifunctional endonuclease involved in nucleotide excision repair (NER), interstrand cross-link (ICL) repair, and DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair. Only two patients with bi-allelic ERCC1 mutations have been reported, both of whom had features of Cockayne syndrome and died in infancy. Here, we describe two siblings with bi-allelic ERCC1 mutations in their teenage years. Genomic sequencing identified a deletion and a missense variant (R156W) within ERCC1 that disrupts a salt bridge below the XPA-binding pocket. Patient-derived fibroblasts and knock-in epithelial cells carrying the R156W substitution show dramatically reduced protein levels of ERCC1 and XPF. Moreover, mutant ERCC1 weakly interacts with NER and ICL repair proteins, resulting in diminished recruitment to DNA damage. Consequently, patient cells show strongly reduced NER activity and increased chromosome breakage induced by DNA cross-linkers, while DSB repair was relatively normal. We report a new case of ERCC1 deficiency that severely affects NER and considerably impacts ICL repair, which together result in a unique phenotype combining short stature, photosensitivity, and progressive liver and kidney dysfunction.

### Keywords
Cockayne syndrome, Ercc1, Xeroderma pigmentosum, Nucleotide excission repair

### Affiliations
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center  Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center  Leiden, The Netherlands


