### Accession
PXD006829

### Title
BPA Gestational Exposure Affects F1 Capacitated Spermatozoa

### Description
Proteomic investigations of spermatozoa provide practical tools for distinguishing normal, functional spermatozoa from abnormal spermatozoa. Indeed, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) applies high-throughput industrial applications to identify sperm-specific proteins indicative of chemical exposure. As such, a direct comparison of protein expression profiles between control and exposed cells returned a set of protein markers. Because mature mammalian spermatozoa are virtually incapable of protein synthesis, the predicted protein biomarkers in spermatozoa offer considerable stability for use in clinical application. In the current study, we applied 2-DE coupled with ESI-MS/MS to investigate the modified protein profile in F1 capacitated spermatozoa due to gestational bisphenol-A (BPA) exposure to ascertain whether these proteomic modifications could explain the observed functional alterations in spermatozoa.

### Sample Protocol
Capacitated spermatozoa collected from F1 males were washed twice by centrifugation (100 × g for 2.5 min), re-suspended in basic media, and allowed to swim-up for 15 min at 37°C. Swim-up technique was used to separate the motile sperm fraction from immature spermatozoa and somatic cells. After collection of the motile sperm fraction, the resulting spermatozoa were carefully checked for immature spermatozoa as well as somatic cells using microscopic examination. Then the swim-up sperm fractions were collected from different groups and subsequently incubated (50 × 106/ml) in rehydration buffer for protein extraction. Two hundred and fifty micrograms of solubilized protein were used for first-dimension electrophoresis using 24-cm NL Immobiline DryStrips (pH 3–11; Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ, USA). After subsequent equilibration of the strip, second-dimension electrophoresis was conducted using 12.5 % (w/v) SDS-PAGE gels. The 2-DE gel was silver-stained for in-gel protein visualization according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Amersham Biosciences Pharmacia Bio-tech).

### Data Protocol
A high-resolution GS-800 calibrated scanner (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) was used to scan the gel for identification and comparison of the matched spots between treated and control samples. Detected spots were matched and analyzed using the PD Quest 8.0 software (Bio-Rad). Finally, the density of the spots were calculated and normalized as the ratio of BPA-treated/control per spermatozoa gel. The excised gel spots from 2-DE gel images were subject to in-gel trypsin digestion. Subsequently MS/MS of the peptides generated by in-gel digestion was subject to nano-electrospray ionization (ESI) using a MicroQ-TOF2 III mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). MS/MS finding was allocated as the ion search option in MASCOT software (v2.4, Matrix Science, London, UK). Peptide fragment files were obtained from the peptide peaks in ESI-MS by ESI-MS/MS. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme together with one potentially missing cleavage site. ESI-QUAD-TOF has been selected as the instrument type. The peptide fragment files were searched in the MASCOT search engine [Databases: NCBIprot 20170521 (122709180 sequences; 45032055098 residues, timestamp: 1 Jun 2017), NCBIprot 20170530 (123117878 sequences; 45199647709 residues, timestamp: 1 Jun 2017), and SwissProt 2017_05 (554515 sequences; 198509421 residues; timestamp: Jun 2017)]. The search results were limited to the Mus musculus taxonomy. Oxidized methionine and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable and fixed modification, respectively. Mass tolerance ±0.5 and ±1 Da were set as fragment and peptide mass tolerance. High ions scores corresponded to each peptides were above the default significance threshold in MASCOT (p < 0.05, peptide score ≥ 31).

### Publication Abstract
Studies regarding bisphenol A (BPA) exposure and male (in)fertility have conventionally focused on modifications in ejaculated spermatozoa function from exposed individuals. However, mammalian spermatozoa are incapable of fertilization prior to achieving capacitation, the penultimate step in maturation. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate BPA-induced changes in capacitated spermatozoa and assess the consequences on subsequent fertilization. Here, we demonstrate the effect of gestational BPA exposure (50 &#x3bc;g/kg bw/day, 5 mg/kg bw/day, and 50 mg/kg bw/day) on the functions, biochemical properties, and proteomic profiles of F1 capacitated spermatozoa from adult mice. The data showed that high concentrations of BPA inhibited motility, motion kinematics, and capacitation of spermatozoa, perhaps because of increased lipid peroxidation and protein tyrosine nitration, and decreased intracellular ATP levels and protein kinase-A activity in spermatozoa. We also found that BPA compromised the rates of fertilization and early embryonic development. Differentially expressed proteins identified between BPA-exposed and control groups play a critical role in energy metabolism, stress responses, and fertility. Protein function abnormalities were responsible for the development of several diseases according to bioinformatics analysis. On the basis of these results, gestational exposure to BPA may alter capacitated spermatozoa function and the proteomic profile, ultimately affecting their fertility potential.

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Mouse, 2-de, Esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Chung-Ang University

### Submitter
Md Saidur Rahman

### Lab Head
Dr Myung-Geol Pang
Chung-Ang University


