### Accession
PXD031257

### Title
Abnormal expression of glucose transporter-1 are a driver of early relapse in follicular lymphoma

### Description
FL patients with high GLUT1 levels are at increased risk for early relapse and show only limited responses to PI3K inhibitors. The development of new therapies requires an understanding of the changes in their tumor immune microenvironment (TIME). Using novel IMC and proteomics techniques, we comprehensively identified distinguishing features in the TIME as a function of GLUT1 levels. Bioinformatics analyses identified a crosstalk between GLUT1 and TIME in tumor development and suggest that FL patients expressing high GLUT1 may benefit from metabolic-modulating therapies to prevent early relapse.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 64 paraffin-embedded specimens were obtained from the Cancer Hospital of Harbin Medical University. The Institutional Review Board (IRB) of this institution granted approval for the research protocol and procedures. All participants signed the consent forms before participating. The patients were stratified according to the medical records, FLIPI scores and the international prognostic standard for FL according to the current WHO criteria. Early relapse was defined as relapse within 24 months of frontline initial chemoimmunotherapy, as predicted by the performance of clinical and radiographic biomarkers. The early relapse period within 24 months was the period in which most early events occurred consistently, as suggested by the majority of FL studies.

### Data Protocol
TMT® Mass Tagging Kits and Reagents（Thermo）were applied for TMT labeling of the peptides with lysed (Sigma) sample. The tissues were fractionated and shotgun proteomics analyses were performed by EASY-nLCTM 1200 ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher) with Q Exactive HF (X) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The final spectra of each run were hunted solely according to the homo_sapiens_uniprot_2020_7_2.fasta (192320 sequences) database by using the search software Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo), followed by filtering of the retrieved data. The proteins significantly different between two groups were classified using t-test, and the differentially expressed proteins (DEP) were defined as fold change (FC) ≥ 1.2 and p-value ≤ 0.05 for the upregulated proteins and FC ≤ 0.83 and p-value ≤ 0.05 for the downregulated proteins. Gene Ontology (GO), Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and InterPro (IPR) functional analysis were carried out with the non-redundant protein database (Pfam, PRINTS, ProDom, SMART, ProSite, PANTHER, etc.). Volcanic map and cluster heatmap as well as GO, IPR, and KEGG enrichments were marked based on DPEs. The STRING-db server (http://string.embl.de/) was used to predict the probable interprotein interactions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tumor immunomicroenvironment, Glut1, Proteomic, Pi3k/akt /mtor signaling, Early-relapsed follicular lymphoma, Imc

### Affiliations
Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital, Heilongjiang Cancer Institute, Harbin 150081, Heilongjiang Province, People’s Republic of China.
Department of Medical Oncology, Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital, Harbin 150081, Heilongjiang Province, People’s Republic of China.

### Submitter
qingyuan zhang

### Lab Head
Dr qingyuan zhang
Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital, Heilongjiang Cancer Institute, Harbin 150081, Heilongjiang Province, People’s Republic of China.


