### Accession
PXD005712

### Title
HELA cells PARL Immunoprecipitation part II

### Description
Mitochondria drive apoptosis by releasing pro-apoptotic proteins that promote caspase activation in the cytosol. The rhomboid-like protease PARL, an intramembrane cleaving peptidase in the inner membrane, regulates mitophagy and cell death pathways, but its role in apoptosis remained enigmatic. Here, we employed PARL-based proteomics to define its substrate spectrum. Our data identified the mitochondrial pro-apoptotic protein Smac/DIABLO as a PARL substrate. In apoptotic cells, Smac/DIABLO is released into the cytosol and promotes caspase activity by inhibiting IAPs. Intramembrane cleavage of Smac/DIABLO by PARL generates an amino terminal IAP-binding motif, which is required for its apoptotic activity. Loss of PARL impairs proteolytic maturation of Smac/DIABLO, which fails to bind XIAP. Smac/DIABLO peptidomimetics, downregulation of XIAP or cytosolic expression of cleaved Smac/DIABLO restores apoptosis in PARL-deficient cells. Our results discover a pro-apoptotic function of PARL and identify PARL-mediated Smac/DIABLO processing and cytochrome c release facilitated by OPA1 dependent cristae remodeling as two independent pro-apoptotic pathways in mitochondria.  Please note that these data are overlapping with data uploaded under: PXD004914. Exclusively in this upload, you will find the S277A mutant immunoprecipitations.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation experiments and immunoblot analysis Cells were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer [50 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM  EDTA,  1.0%  Triton  X-100,  0.1%  SDS,  0.5%  sodium  deoxycholate,protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)] for 15 min at 4°C. After centrifugation at 16,100 × g for 15 min at 4°C, supernatant fractions were analysed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting.  For immunoprecipitation experiments, cells were lysed by incubation for 15 min at 4°C with  lysis  buffer  [40  mM  HEPES/NaOH,  pH  7.5,  150  mM  NaCl,  1.0% digitonin,protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)]. After a clarifying centrifugation at 16,100 × g for 15 min at 4°C, supernatant fractions were subjected directly to immunoprecipitation and incubated  for  1  h  at  4°C  with  antibodies  and  protein  G–Sepharose  4  Fast  Flow (Amersham Biosciences) or EZviewTM Red anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma). After repeated washing steps, bound proteins were eluted with SDS sample buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 5% glycerol, 0.002% bromophenol blue) and analysed by SDS-PAGE. In-gel digestion for affinity enrichment  Immunoprecipitated proteins were analysed by SDS-PAGE and staining with colloidal Commassie. Gel lanes were cut into equal pieces and washed several times. Proteins were  reduced  by  DTT  (100  mM)  and  alkylated  (550  mM  IAA)  prior  digestion  with trypsin and Lys-C overnight at 37°C. Generated peptides were extracted by incubating gel pieces with an increasing amount of acetonitrile, concentrated in a speed-vac and primed prior LC-MS/MS  analysis  by  the  STAGE  tip  technique.   Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry  For LC-MS/MS analysis, an easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) was coupled to the quadrupole based  QExactive  Plus  (Thermo  Scientific)  instrument by  a  nano-spray ionization source. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm in house packed column by a two solvent  buffer  system:  buffer  A)  0.1%  formic  acid  and  B)  0.1%  formic  acid  in acetonitrile. The content of buffer B was increased from 7% to 23% within 40 min and followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a washing and re-equilibration step prior next sample injection. The mass spectrometer operated in a Top10 data-dependent mode using the following settings: MS1 – 70.000 (at 200 m/z) resolution, 3e6 AGC target, 20 ms  maximum  injection  time,  300-1750  scan  range  and  MS2  –  35.000 (at  200  m/z) resolution, 5e5 AGC target, 120 ms maximum injection time, 1.8 Th isolation window, 25 normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant analysis and bioinformatics  All raw files were processed by MaxQuant 1.5.12 and the implemented Andromeda search engine correlation acquired MS/MS spectra against the human reference Uniprot proteome.  Default mass tolerance and modification settings were used.  Re-quantify, label-free quantification and match-between-runs were enabled.  Label-free intensities were log2 transformed and averaged over biological replicates to calculate the log2 fold change between PARL and PARLS277A. P values were calculated by a two-sided t-test assuming equal variances.  False  discovery  rate  was estimated  by  a permutation  based  approach  (s0  =  0.1,  #  of  permutations:  500).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, S277a parl mutant

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany;

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany;


