### Accession
PXD033871

### Title
A cooperative organelle biogenesis program in mammalian cells

### Description
The compartmentalisation of distinct organelles within eukaryotic cells is essential for their diverse functions, however, how their structures and functions depend on each other has not been systematically explored. We combined a fluorescent reporter of mitochondrial stress with genome-wide CRISPR knockout screening and identified networks of genes involved in the biogenesis and metabolism of diverse organelles. Targeted organelle gene knockouts identified that defects in peroxisomes, Golgi, and ER cause mitochondrial fragmentation and dysfunction. Correlative light and electron microscopy analysed using artificial intelligence-directed voxel extraction revealed in unprecedented detail how impaired mitochondrial interactions with diverse organelles caused cell-wide defects in their morphology and biogenesis. Multi-omics analyses identified a unified proteome stress response and global shifts in lipid and glycoprotein homeostasis that are elicited when organelle biogenesis is compromised. Our comprehensive resource has defined metabolic and morphological interactions between organelles that can be mined to understand how changes in organelle components drive diverse cellular pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (5% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate), 200 µg of protein was dissolved in 50 µl cell lysis buffer and digested using S-trap Micro Spin columns (ProtiFi) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubated at 70˚C for 60 min. Proteins were alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubating at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Proteins were acidified with 2.5 µl of 12% phosphoric acid and diluted with 165 µl of binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM final Tris). Samples were added to the S-Trap Micro Spin columns by centrifugation at 4,000 g for 30 s then subsequently washed three times by successively loading 150 µl of binding buffer and centrifuging at 4,000 g for 30 s. Digestion was achieved by adding 1 µg sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and 25 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubating overnight 37˚C. Peptides were eluted by successively adding 40 µl of 5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, 40 µl of 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and 40 µl of 75% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid with a 30 s centrifugation step at  4,000 g between the addition of each elution buffer. The eluants were pooled, dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 20 µl of buffer A (5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid).  Samples were analysed using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLC UHPLC and an Exploris mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with FAIMS. Samples were injected on a reverse-phase PepMap 100 C18 trap column (5 µm, 100 Å, 150 µm i.d. x 5 mm) at a flowrate of 20 µl/min. After 2.7 minutes, the trap column was switched in-line with a Waters nanoEase M/Z Peptide CSH C18 resolving column (1.7 µm, 130 Å, 150 µm i.d. x 100 mm) and the peptides were eluted at a flowrate of 0.5 µl/min buffer A (5 % acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid) as the mobile phases. The gradient consisted of: 8% B for 0-4 min, 8-24% B for 4 to 47 min, 24-40% B from 47 to 50 min, 40%-95% B from 50-54 min, 95% B for 54-57 min, followed by a wash, a return of 8 % buffer B and equilibration prior to the next injection. The mass spectra were obtained in DIA mode with an MS1 resolution of 120,000, automatic gain control target set to standard, maximum injection time set to auto and scan range from 400-1100 m/z. DIA spectra were recorded at resolution 30,000 and an automatic gain control target set to standard. The 70 isolation windows were 10 m/z each from mass 399.5-1100.5. FAIMS settings were -45 and -65 V respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with Spectronaut (Bruderer et al., 2015) version 14 (14.10.201222.47784) using direct DIA analysis and default settings. Briefly, spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens proteome database from UniProt with carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) cut-offs at the peptide spectral match, peptide and protein group levels. Quantitation was performed at the MS2 level with Q-value data filtering and cross run normalization with Q-complete row selection.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
['Crispr screens', 'Mitochondria', 'Glycomics', 'Proteomics', 'Lipidomics', 'Stress signalling', 'Fib-clem', 'Organelles']

### Affiliations
['Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research and ARC Centre of Excellence in Synthetic Biology, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia', 'University of Queensland']

### Submitter
['Timothy McCubbin']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research and ARC Centre of Excellence in Synthetic Biology, QEII Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia 6009, Australia', 'email': 'aleksandra.filipovska@uwa.edu.au', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Aleksandra Filipovska', 'id': '2399113'}]

