### Accession
PXD018602

### Title
Identification of barrier-specific proteins in the human brain

### Description
We present a proteomic analysis of the basal lamina of the human BBB. We combined laser capture microdissection with shotgun proteomics for selective enrichment and identification of specific proteins present in the cerebral microvasculature and arachnoidal vessels collected from normal human brain tissue specimens. Proteins found to be barrier-specific were validated by immunohistochemistry.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected using laser capture microdissection, digested with trypsin and measured with shotgun proteomics. Digestion protocol: The digestion protocol includes addition of 20 µL 0.3M Tris-HCl pH=8 buffer to the LCM samples and incubation at 90°C for 90 minutes to remove protein crosslinks caused by formalin fixation. Next, samples were disrupted in a cup horn sonifier bath using Ultrasonic Disruptor Sonifier II (Bransons Ultrasonics BV, Eemnes, the Netherlands) at 70% amplitude. Proteins were reduced and alkylated by additing 1 µL 0.1 M dithiothreitol with a 30 minutes incubation period at 60°C and 1 µL 0.3 M iodoacetamide with a 30 minutes incubation period at room temperature in dark, respectively. Next, pH was checked to be 8 and 1 μL 0.1 μg/μL gold-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added for overnight incubation at 37°C. Digestion was terminated with lowering the pH by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a pH < 2 and incubating samples 30 minutes at 37°C. Samples were then centrifuged for 45 minutes at 14000 rpm at 4°C and supernatants were transferred to glass vials.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra from the raw data files of each sample were converted into mgf files using ProteoWizard (version 3.0) and used to carry out searches using Mascot (version 2.3.02) against the Uniprot database (selected for Homo sapiens, downloaded 15th November 2015, 20194 entries). The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of four missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 u) was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation (+15.996 u) as a variable modification. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was 10 ppm, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was 0.5 Da. Database search results were processed by Scaffold (version 4.6.1) to merge the individual search results and filter peptide identifications. Protein confidence thresholds were set to 1% false discovery rate (FDR), at least 1 peptide per protein identified, and a 1% FDR at the peptide level. FDRs were estimated by inclusion of a decoy database search generated by Mascot. In Scaffold, quantitative analysis was performed using ANOVA statistical test including Benjamini-Hochberg as a multiple test correction and p value of <0.05 was considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) is essential for cerebral homeostasis and controls the selective passage of molecules traveling in and out of the brain. Despite the crucial role of the BBB in a variety of brain diseases and its relevance for the development of drugs, there is little known about its molecular architecture. In particular, the composition of the basal lamina between the astrocytic end-feet and the endothelial cells is only partly known. Here, we present a proteomic analysis of the basal lamina of the human BBB. We combined laser capture microdissection with shotgun proteomics for selective enrichment and identification of specific proteins present in the cerebral microvasculature and arachnoidal vessels collected from normal human brain tissue specimens. Proteins found to be associated with the blood-brain barrier were validated by immunohistochemistry. Expression of membrane protein MLC1 was found in all brain barriers. Phosphoglucomutase-like protein 5 appeared to be variably present along the outer part of intracerebral vessels, and multidrug resistance protein 1 was identified in both intracerebral, as well as arachnoidal blood vessels. The results demonstrate the presence of so far unidentified proteins in the human BBB and illustrate topic differences in their expression. In conclusion, we showed that sample purification by microdissection followed by shotgun proteomics provides a list of proteins identified in the BBB. Subsequent immunohistochemistry detailed the respective expression sites of membrane protein MLC1 and phosphoglucomutase-related protein 5. The role of the identified proteins in the functioning of the BBB needs further investigations.

### Keywords
Blood-brain barrier, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Marina Zajec

### Lab Head
Dr Theo Luider
Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC


