### Accession
PXD005234

### Title
In vivo and in vitro proteome analysis of HIV-1 infected, human CD4+ T cells

### Description
Host directed therapies against HIV-1 are thought to be critical for long term containment of the HIV-1 pandemic but remain elusive. Since HIV-1 infects and manipulates important effectors of both the innate and adaptive immune system, identifying modulations of the host cell systems in humans during HIV-1 infection may be crucial for the development of immune based therapies.  Here, we quantified the changes of the proteome in human CD4+ T cells upon HIV-1 infection, both in vitro and in vivo. A SWATH-MS approach was used to measure the proteome of human primary CD4+ T cells infected with HIV-1 in vitro as well as CD4+ T cells from HIV-1 infected patients with paired samples on and off antiretroviral treatment. In the in vitro experiment, the proteome of CD4+ T cells was quantified over a time course following HIV-1 infection. 1,725 host cell proteins and 4 HIV-1 proteins were quantified, with 145 proteins changing significantly during the time course. Changes in the proteome peaked 24 hours after infection, concomitantly with significant HIV-1 protein production. In the in vivo branch of the study, CD4+ T cells from viremic patients and those with no detectable viral load after treatment were sorted and the proteomes quantified. We consistently detected 895 proteins, 172 of which were considered to be significantly different between viraemic patients and patients undergoing successful treatment. The proteome of in vitro infected CD4+ T cells was modulated on multiple functional levels, including TLR-4 signalling and the type 1 interferon signalling pathway. Perturbations in the type 1 interferon signalling pathway were recapitulated in CD4+ T cells from patients.  The study shows that proteome maps generated by SWATH-MS indicate a range of functionally significant changes in the proteome of HIV infected human CD4+ T cells. Exploring these perturbations in more detail may help identify new targets for immune based interventions.

### Sample Protocol
- Patients 10 HIV-1 infected individuals were enrolled from the longitudinal Zurich Primary HIV-1 Infection Study (ZPHI), which is an open-label, non-randomized, observational, single-center study (http://clinicaltrials.gov, ID 5 NCT00537966)(17). Blood samples at two different time points of each patient were investigated. At time point 1, the patients were not treated and had HIV-1 detectable. At time point 2, the patients were treated and had no detectable viral load for a minimum of 6 months - CD4+ T cell culture and infection Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from buffy coats as previously described (18)and enriched for CD4+ T cells by magnetic microbeads according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Milteny Biotec). After 3-way stimulation (PHA 5.0 ug/ml; PHA 0.5 ug/ml and Oct3) for 3 days, the cells were infected with HIV-1JR-FL by spinoculation for 2 hours at 1200 g at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1(19). After infection the cells were washed twice in PBS and cultured in RPMI containing P/S, 10% FCS and 50 U IL2/ml. Supernatant for p24 ELISA was collected 0, 12, 24 and 48 hours post infection. The time points were chosen to allow the virus to finish a full infectious circle(5). CD4+ T cell purity was confirmed by flow cytometry, ranging between 96.3 to 99.8 %. The HIV-1JR-FL virus stock was generated by transfection of 293 T cells with pJR-FL and titrated on PBMCs(18). - Cryopreserved PBMC procedures Cryopreserved PBMC were thawed in a 36°C water bath and were washed twice with PBS at room temperature. 1x106 cells were lysed immediately, and the remaining cells were positively selected using magnetically labelled CD4 and CD8 microbeads and subsequent column purification according to the manufacturer's protocol (Miltenyi Biotec). CD4+ and CD8+ T cell purity, verified by flow cytometry, was 97.8% (96.3–99%) and 78% (73.2–82.9%) [median (range)]. - Proteomics sample preparation Approximately 1x106 cells were washed with PBS and resuspended in lysis buffer containing 1.2% sodium deoxycholate monohydrate in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (150 µl per 1x106 cells). The cell suspension was thoroughly vortexed and incubated at room temperature for 10 min while shaking at 1000 rpm. Subsequently, cells were subjected to three 10-min cycles of sonication at 4°C (100% output, 50% intervals, Branson Sonifier 450, Emerson).  Ice cold acetone (-20”C) was added to the lysate at a rate of 6 vol to 1 vol lysate, and incubated for 1 h on ice. The cell lysate was centrifuged for 15 min at full speed at 4°C, washed another 3 times with ice cold acetone and then allowed to dry completely. The proteins were re-suspended in 8 M urea 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. The protein concentration was estimated using the BCA Assay (Pierce). From each sample only 50 µg of protein was used for subsequent steps. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by adding 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and incubating for 30 min at 30°C. Free cysteine residues were alkylated by adding 40 mM iodoacetamide and incubating for 60 min in the dark at room temperature. Subsequently, the samples were diluted with 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer to a urea concentration <2 M and 1 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin was added (w/w 1:50). The samples were incubated over night at 30°C with shaking at 300 rpm. To stop the tryptic digest, the pH was lowered to 2 using trifluoro acetic acid (final concentration of ~1%) followed by an incubation for 30 min at 37°C with shaking at 500 rpm.  The cleared peptide solution was desalted with C18 MicroSpin columns (The Nest Group, 5-60 µg loading capacity). Prior to use, the C18 columns were activated with 100% methanol, followed by 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA, followed by equilibration with 2% ACN/0.1% TFA. After loading, the columns were washed with 2% ACN/0.1% TFA. Subsequently, the peptides were eluted with 40% ACN/0.1% TFA, dried under vacuum, resolubilised in 2% ACN/0.1% FA and spiked at 1:20 with iRT peptides (Biognosys).

### Data Protocol
- Spectral library generation Raw data files (wiff) were centroided and converted into mzML format using the AB Sciex converter (beta version 2011) and subsequently converted into mzXML using openMS (version 1.8). The converted data files were searched using the search engines X!Tandem (k-score, version 2013.06.15.1)and Comet (version 2013.02, revision 2) against the UniProt-SwissProt complete proteome for homo sapiens (canonical sequences) with the protein sequences derived from full-length consensus sequences of viral RNA genome of both the HIV-1JR-FL strain used for the in vitro infection model and the viral RNA sequences of 8 out of 10 patients(21). In total, the database contained 20,149 target sequences and 20,117 decoy sequences. The tolerated mass errors were 50 ppm on MS1 level and 0.1 Da on MS2 level. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. The search results were processed with PeptideProphet and iProphet as part of the TPP 4.7.0. The spectral library was constructed from the iProphet results with an iProphet probability cut-off of 0.98422, corresponding to a 1% FDR on protein level as determined by Mayu (v1.08). The raw and consensus spectral libraries were built with SpectraST (version 5.0) using the -cICID_QTOF option for high resolution and high mass accuracy and -c_IRT and -c_IRR options to normalise all retention times according to the iRT peptides with a linear regression. The 6 most intense y and b fragment ions of charge state 1 and 2 were extracted from the consensus spectral library using spectrast2tsv.py from msproteomicstools (https://pypi.python.org/pypi/msproteomicstools). Fragment ions falling into the swath window of the precursor were excluded as the resulting signals are often highly interfered. Decoy transition groups were generated based on shuffled sequences (decoys similar to targets were excluded) by the OpenMS tool OpenSwathDecoyGenerator (version 1.10.0) and appended to the final SWATH library in TraML format. - SWATH data analysis with OpenSWATH The SWATH data was analysed using OpenSWATH v1.10 with the following parameters: Chromatograms were extracted with 0.05 m/z around the expected mass of the fragment ions and with an extraction window of +/-5 min around the expected retention time after iRT alignment. The best model to separate true from false positives (per run) was determined by pyprophet with 10 cross-validation runs. The runs were subsequently aligned using TRIC as described with a target FDR of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Host-directed therapies against HIV-1 are thought to be critical for long term containment of the HIV-1 pandemic but remain elusive. Because HIV-1 infects and manipulates important effectors of both the innate and adaptive immune system, identifying modulations of the host cell systems in humans during HIV-1 infection may be crucial for the development of immune based therapies. Here, we quantified the changes of the proteome in human CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells upon HIV-1 infection, both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> A SWATH-MS approach was used to measure the proteome of human primary CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells infected with HIV-1 <i>in vitro</i> as well as CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells from HIV-1-infected patients with paired samples on and off antiretroviral treatment. In the <i>in vitro</i> experiment, the proteome of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells was quantified over a time course following HIV-1 infection. 1,725 host cell proteins and 4 HIV-1 proteins were quantified, with 145 proteins changing significantly during the time course. Changes in the proteome peaked 24 h after infection, concomitantly with significant HIV-1 protein production. In the <i>in vivo</i> branch of the study, CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells from viremic patients and those with no detectable viral load after treatment were sorted, and the proteomes were quantified. We consistently detected 895 proteins, 172 of which were considered to be significantly different between the viremic patients and patients undergoing successful treatment. The proteome of the <i>in vitro</i>-infected CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells was modulated on multiple functional levels, including TLR-4 signaling and the type 1 interferon signaling pathway. Perturbations in the type 1 interferon signaling pathway were recapitulated in CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells from patients. The study shows that proteome maps generated by SWATH-MS indicate a range of functionally significant changes in the proteome of HIV-infected human CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. Exploring these perturbations in more detail may help identify new targets for immune based interventions.

### Keywords
Hiv, Cd4 t cell, Swath

### Affiliations
Department of Biology Institute of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zurich Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Ben Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Ben Collins
Department of Biology Institute of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zurich Switzerland


