### Accession
PXD005184

### Title
Discovery of Age-Related Protein Folding Stability Differences in the Mouse Brain Proteome

### Description
Described here is the application of thermodynamic stability measurements to study age-related differences in the protein folding and stability of proteins in a rodent model of ageing.  Using the Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX) technique the thermodynamic stability profiles were generated for 807 proteins in brain cell lystaes from mice, aged 6- (n=7) and 18-months (n=9).  The biological variability of the protein stability measurements was low and within the experimental error of SPROX.   A total of 83 protein hits were detected with age-related stability differences in the brain samples.  Remarkably, the large majority of the brain protein hits were destabilized in the old mice, and the hits were enriched in proteins that have slow turnover rates (p <0.07).  Furthermore, 70% of the hits have been previously linked to ageing or age-related diseases.  These results help validate the use of thermodynamic stability measurements to capture relevant age-related proteomic changes, and they establish a new biophysical link between these proteins and ageing.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, ~100 ug of total protein from each lysate was distributed into a series of 8 GdmCl-containing SPROX buffers comprised of 20 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, and increasing concentrations of GdmCl. A concentrated solution of hydrogen peroxide was added into each protein-containing buffer to selectively oxidize solvent exposed methionine residues in each denaturant-containing SPROX buffer.  The final GdmCl concentrations in SPROX buffers were 0.8, 1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2.0, and 2.5 M. The final hydrogen peroxide concentration (3% v/v) and reaction time (3 min) was the same in each SPROX buffer. The oxidation reaction in each SPROX buffer was quenched with L-methionine, and the protein precipitated with trichloroacetic acid.   The protein pellets from each denaturant-containing buffer were submitted to a standard quantitative, bottom-up proteomics workflow using iTRAQ reagents for quantitation.  The workflow included:  dissolution of each pellet in 30 μL of 0.5M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 7.5) containing 0.1% sodium dodecylsufate (SDS), disulfide bond reduction using 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 1 hour at 60°C, free cysteine modification using 10 mM methylmethanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10 minutes at RT, and trypsin digestion using 1 μg of trypsin at 37°C with shaking overnight.  The tryptic peptides derived from the proteins in each denaturant-containing SPROX buffer were labeled with iTRAQ reagents from an iTRAQ 8-plex (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA).  The protein samples from the 0.8, 1.1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2.0, 2.5 M denaturant concentrations were labeled with the 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, and 121 iTRAQ reagents, respectively.  The iTRAQ labeling reaction was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol, with the exception that 0.5 unit instead of 1 unit of each iTRAQ reagent was used in each labeling reaction.       Ultimately, 50 μL of each iTRAQ-labeled sample in each set of 8 SPROX samples was combined. From the combined sample an aliquot of 120 μL was desalted with a C18 column (Nest Group, Southborough, MA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and 240 μL was enriched for methionine-containing peptides using a Pi3 TM-Methionine Reagent kit (Nest Group, Southborough, MA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.  The methionine enriched sample was also desalted using a C18 column (Nest Group, Southborough, MA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.     All samples were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Plus high-resolution mass spectrometer with a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corp, Milford, MA).   This instrument also utilized a nano-electrospray ionization source.   Sample was trapped on a column (Symmetry C18 300 mm x 180 μm) for 3 minutes at 5 μL/min 0.1% formic acid in water.  The sample was then separated using the following gradient: 3% to 30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 90 minutes.  The column used for separation was 75 μm x 250 mm packed with 1.7 μm Acquity HSST3 C18 stationary phase (Waters Corp).  The flow rate used was 0.4 μL/min at 55°C.  This mass spectrometer used a full MS scan from m/z 375-1600 with a target AGC value of 1 x 106 ions in profile mode and a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200) for data dependent acquisition.  This was followed by 20 MS/MS scans at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z of 200 in centroid mode with an AGC target value of 1 x 105.   The MS/MS scans also had a normalized collision energy of 30 V and max fill time of 60 msec.  Dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds was used to reduce MS/MS oversampling.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were extracted from the LC-MS/MS data and were searched against the 24,855 proteins in the SwissProt Mus musculus database version 2016-04-13, downloaded on 05/17/16 using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1.0.81).   Cysteine residues modified by MMTS  was a fixed modification in the search. N-termini and lysine residues modified by iTRAQ 8-plex and oxidized methionine residues and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine were variable modifications in the search. Up to three missed tryptic cleavages after R and K were allowed.  The parameters included a 10 ppm mass tolerance window for precursor masses and 0.02 Da for fragment mass tolerance.  Only peptide spectra with FDR <1% and iTRAQ reporter ion intensities that summed to >1000 were used in subsequent analyses of the data.    Briefly, the 8 iTRAQ reporter ion intensities generated in each product ion mass spectra were averaged, and the raw intensity of each reporter ion in the product ion mass spectrum was divided by the average to generate so-called N1-normalized values. All the N1 values for non-methionine containing peptides were averaged for each reporter ion. Summarized in SI 3 are the set of 8 average values (so-called N2 normalization factors) that were generated in each SPROX analysis. Ultimately, the N1-normalized values generated for the methionine containing peptides were divided by the corresponding N2 normalization factor to determine the final N2-normalized reporter ion intensity. SI 4 includes a summary of all the N2-normalized iTRAQ reporter ion intensities (i.e., chemical denaturation data sets) generated for all the peptides that were successfully identified and quantified in the iTRAQ-SPROX analyses performed on the brain tissue lysates from the 16 mice studied here.  The chemical denaturation data sets were fitted to a four parameter sigmoidal equation, with a nonlinear-least squares analysis via an in-house Java based program.  Briefly, the 8 iTRAQ reporter ion intensities generated in each product ion mass spectra were averaged, and the raw intensity of each reporter ion in the product ion mass spectrum was divided by the average to generate so-called N1-normalized values. All the N1 values for non-methionine containing peptides were averaged for each reporter ion. Summarized in SI 3 are the set of 8 average values (so-called N2 normalization factors) that were generated in each SPROX analysis. Ultimately, the N1-normalized values generated for the methionine containing peptides were divided by the corresponding N2 normalization factor to determine the final N2-normalized reporter ion intensity. SI 4 includes a summary of all the N2-normalized iTRAQ reporter ion intensities (i.e., chemical denaturation data sets) generated for all the peptides that were successfully identified and quantified in the iTRAQ-SPROX analyses performed on the brain tissue lysates from the 16 mice studied here.  The chemical denaturation data sets were fitted to a four parameter sigmoidal equation, equation 1 , with a nonlinear-least squares analysis via an in-house Java based program.  Subsequent analyses of the data only utilized the chemical denaturation data sets that were determined to be high quality (R2 ≥ 0.8)  and generated from product ion mass spectra with low isolation interference ( Isolation Interference ≤ 30%).  If a peptide was identified multiple times within the same mouse the N2-normalized iTRAQ reporter ion intensities from the high quality data was averaged together to generate one set of iTRAQ reporter ion intensities at the 8 denaturant concentrations, and the averaged data was fit to equation 1 as described above to extract a single C1/2 SPROX value

### Publication Abstract
Described here is the application of thermodynamic stability measurements to study age-related differences in the folding and stability of proteins in a rodent model of aging. Thermodynamic stability profiles were generated for 809 proteins in brain cell lysates from mice, aged 6 (n = 7) and 18 months (n = 9) using the Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX) technique. The biological variability of the protein stability measurements was low and within the experimental error of SPROX. A total of 83 protein hits were detected with age-related stability differences in the brain samples. Remarkably, the large majority of the brain protein hits were destabilized in the old mice, and the hits were enriched in proteins that have slow turnover rates (p &lt; 0.07). Furthermore, 70% of the hits have been previously linked to aging or age-related diseases. These results help validate the use of thermodynamic stability measurements to capture relevant age-related proteomic changes and establish a new biophysical link between these proteins and aging.

### Keywords
Mouse, Ageing, Sprox, Itraq

### Affiliations
Duke University
Department of Chemistry, Duke University

### Submitter
Julia Roberts

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Department of Chemistry, Duke University


