### Accession
PXD005829

### Title
The 3’-UTR of MYC couples RNA polymerase II function to ribonucleotide levels

### Description
Deregulated expression of MYC enhances glutamine utilization and renders cell survival dependent on glutamine, inducing “glutamine addiction”. Surprisingly, colon cancer cells that express high levels of MYC due to WNT pathway mutations, are not glutamine-addicted but undergo a reversible cell cycle arrest upon glutamine deprivation. We show here that glutamine deprivation suppresses translation of endogenous MYC via the 3’-UTR of the MYC mRNA, enabling escape from apoptosis. This regulation is mediated by glutamine-dependent changes in adenosine nucleotide levels. Glutamine deprivation causes a global reduction in promoter association of RNA Polymerase II (RNAPII) and slows transcriptional elongation. While activation of MYC restores binding of MYC and RNAPII function on most promoters, restoration of elongation is imperfect and activation of MYC in the absence of glutamine causes stalling of RNAPII on multiple genes, correlating with R-loop formation. Stalling of RNAPII and R-loop formation can cause DNA damage, arguing that the MYC 3’-UTR is critical for maintaining genome stability when ribonucleotide levels are low.

### Sample Protocol
Enriched proteins were eluted from the […] beads with 30 ul 1x LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies) containing 50 mM DTT at 70 °C for 10 min. Proteins in the supernatant were alkylated by adding 120 mM iodoacetamide and incubation at room temperature for 20 min. Samples were loaded onto NuPAGE 4-12% Bis/Tris gels (Life Technologies), after SDS-PAGE gels were stained with Simply Blue Safe Stain (Life Technologies). Whole gel-lanes were cut into 15 pieces, destained with 30 % acetonitrile in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8), shrunk with 100 % acetonitrile, and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, Germany). Digests were performed with 0.1 µg trypsin (Promega) per gel band overnight at 37 °C in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8). After removing the supernatant, peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5 % formic acid, and extracted peptides were pooled with the supernatant. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 25 cm x 150 µm ID, New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch) with a 30-minute linear gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer, MS scans with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400, MS/MS scans with a resolution of 7,500 at m/z 400 using HCD fragmentation with 30% normalized collision energy. A TOP5 data-dependent MS/MS method was used; dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 seconds; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50.000. Predictive AGC was used with AGC target a value of 1e6 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. The lock mass option was applied for internal calibration using background ions from protonated decamethylcyclopentasiloxane (m/z 371.10124).

### Data Protocol
For raw-data processing, database searches and label-free quantification MaxQuant version 1.5.7.0 was used [JV1]. The search was performed against the human UniProt reference proteome database (download date: 2016-12-09). Additionally, a database containing common contaminants (included in MaxQuant) was used. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity and 3 allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (FDR) with <1% FDR on both protein and peptide level. In addition to default settings, protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Q), and oxidation (M) were included as variable modifications; Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification.  For further data analysis, in-house developed R scripts were utilized.

### Publication Abstract
Deregulated expression of <i>MYC</i> enhances glutamine utilization and renders cell survival dependent on glutamine, inducing "glutamine addiction". Surprisingly, colon cancer cells that express high levels of <i>MYC</i> due to WNT pathway mutations are not glutamine-addicted but undergo a reversible cell cycle arrest upon glutamine deprivation. We show here that glutamine deprivation suppresses translation of endogenous <i>MYC</i> via the 3'-UTR of the <i>MYC</i> mRNA, enabling escape from apoptosis. This regulation is mediated by glutamine-dependent changes in adenosine-nucleotide levels. Glutamine deprivation causes a global reduction in promoter association of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) and slows transcriptional elongation. While activation of MYC restores binding of MYC and RNAPII function on most promoters, restoration of elongation is imperfect and activation of MYC in the absence of glutamine causes stalling of RNAPII on multiple genes, correlating with R-loop formation. Stalling of RNAPII and R-loop formation can cause DNA damage, arguing that the <i>MYC</i> 3'-UTR is critical for maintaining genome stability when ribonucleotide levels are low.

### Keywords
Mrna-protein interaction, Nanolc-ms/ms, Myc, Glutamine

### Affiliations
University Wuerzburg
Prof. Dr. Andreas Schlosser Rudolf-Virchow-Zentrum für Experimentelle Biomedizin Universität Würzburg Josef-Schneider-Str. 2 97080 Würzburg  Germany

### Submitter
Jens Vanselow

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Schlosser
Prof. Dr. Andreas Schlosser Rudolf-Virchow-Zentrum für Experimentelle Biomedizin Universität Würzburg Josef-Schneider-Str. 2 97080 Würzburg  Germany


