### Accession
PXD024439

### Title
Identification of protein co-localized with Foxl2 on chromatin

### Description
Foxl2 is a forkhead transcription factor essential for proper reproductive function in females. It is expressed in the somatic cell population of the gonad (granulosa cells) which forms the follicles of the ovary, the structures responsible for embedding and nurturing the oocytes during their development. FOXL2 directly regulate the aromatase that synthesizes estrogens CYP19A1, thus promoting female differentiation, as well as acting as a repressor of the male factors SOX9 and DMRT1.Expression is also found in the eyelids, pituitary gland and uterus. In the goat, frog and many fish species FOXL2 is a sex-determining gene which, when deleted, leads to female-to-male sex reversal.

### Sample Protocol
Ovaries were harvested from 8 weeks old mice and snap-frozen on dry ice. Three pools of gonads equivalent to 100 mg each (~16 gonads each) were ground under liquid nitrogen to a fine powder. Chromatin is cross-linked by the addition of 1.5 % formaldehyde for 15 minutes. Cross-linking is stopped by quenching with 120 mM glycine. Pellets are rinsed with PBS, harvested in PBS and frozen.  Cells are lysed in lysis buffer 1 (50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5), 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10 % glycerol, 0.5 % NP-40 or IGEPAL CA-630, 0.25 % Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors) and the lysate centrifuged at 2000×g. The pellet is suspended in lysis buffer 2 (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA and protease inhibitors) and the lysate centrifuged at 2000×g.  The pellet is resuspended in lysis buffer 3 (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.1 % Na-deoxycholate, 0.5 % N-lauroylsarcosine and protease inhibitors) and sonicated in a bioruptor sonicator, 10 % volume of 10 % Triton-X solution is added to the sonicated chromatin followed by centrifugation at 20000×g. The supernatant is collected for immunoprecipitation.  Antibody (Foxl2 or IgG)-bound beads (Dynabeads protein A or protein G) are added to the chromatin and incubated overnight at 4 °C. The next day, the beads are washed with Tris-HCl 100mM pH 7.5 and resuspended in 100 µl TdT buffer 1X and kept 5 min at RT. After removal of the liquid, the beads are resuspended in 93 µl TdT buffer 1x and supplemented with 5 µl ddUTP-biotin (1 mM stock) and 2 µl TdT. The sample will be incubated for 30 min at 37 °C.   Following incubation, the beads will be washed 6X with 1 ml ice cold IP buffer (Triton 1 %, NP40 0.5 %, Tris HCP pH 7.5 50 mM, EDTA 5 mM, NaCl 150 mM) and resuspended in 100 µl of the elution buffer (SDS 7.5, DTT 200 mM in H2O) followed by incubation for 15 min at 37 °C. Next the supernatant will be collected and added to 1300 µl IP buffer and 50 µl Streptavidin magnetic beads and incubated 1 h RT. Following incubation, the beads are washed 3X with SDS wash buffer (Tris HCl 10 mM, EDTA 1 mM, SDS 1 %, NaCl 200 mM), 1X with BW2X buffer (Tris HCl pH 8 10 mM, EDTA 1 mM, 0.1 % triton 100, NaCl 2000 mM), 2X with isopropanol and 4X with acetonitrile wash buffer (acetonitrile 40 % in water).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using ProteomeDiscoverer 2.1 using Sequest as the search node with the following parameters. Protein database: Swissprot Mus musculus. Precursor mass tolerance 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.6 Da, dynamic peptide modification: Oxidation of Methionine, dynamic protein N-terminal modification: Acetylation. Perculator was used for PSM validation with default parameters. The identified proteins were quantified using label-free quantification (Feature Mapper node). Chromatographic aligment was set on True with max. RT shift 10min, and min. S/N 5-fold.Fold-change ratios and adj. p-values were calcualted using limma package in R-studio.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chip-sicap, Trim28, Foxl2

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute London, UK

### Submitter
Mahmoudreza Rafiee

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Lovell-Badge
The Francis Crick Institute London, UK


