### Accession
PXD021504

### Title
Different protein cargo of whole cell lysates from yeast or hyphal Candida albicans cells

### Description
Whole cell lysates from yeast or hyphal Candida albicans cells were obtained and proteins were analysed by MS in order to have a global view of proteome differences between both fungal morphologies. This analysis constitute an interesting approach to decipher proteomic differences underlying morphological switch intimately related to Candida albicans virulence. A total of 811 different proteins were identified from hyphal whole cell lysates and 976 from yeast whole cell lysates. In terms of biological significance, we only took into consideration proteins that were identified in at least two biological replicates with at least two peptides and a q-value< 0.01.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent experiments were done with yeast and hyphal cultures. All the process was conducted at 4°C.  20mL of yeast and hyphal specific culture media grown during 16h at 37°C and 180rpm, were collected in a 50mL falcon by 10 minutes’ centrifugation at 2500 rpm at 4°C in an Eppendorf 5810R centrifuge. Supernatant was discarded and pellet was washed with 20mL of ice-cold PBS twice. Washed pellet was then transfer to a 2ml Eppendorf and an equal volume of 0.45-mm glass beads was added. The cell pellet was disrupted in 500ul of lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 1mM EDTA, 150mM NaCl) with 1 mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche) by vigorous shaking in a fast prep cell breaker (Bio 101; level of 5.5, 5 times for 30) with. Cell debris and glass beads were removed by centrifugation (13 000 rpm for 15 min) and cell extracts were collected in a new Eppendorf tube. Protein quantification was performed using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and protein samples were stored at -80 °C. Twenty-five micrograms of each protein extract were concentrated in a stacking gel and protein bands were cut from the acrylamide gel for gel trypsin digestion. Briefly, cut protein bands were first DTT reduced (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) to be subsequently treated with Iodacetamide for protein alkylation  (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and ultimately digested with 1.25 µg of recombinant Trypsin (sequencing grade; Roche, Mannheim, Germany) overnight at 37 ºC (Sechi and Chait, 1998). A C18 reverse phase chromatography was used for desalting and concentration of the peptides from the digested proteins).  (POROS R2 (Applied Bioystems), being afterwards eluted with 80% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Elution buffer was then evaporated in Speed-vac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), and the freeze-dried samples resuspended in 2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) before the Nano LC–MS/MS analysis. The desalted peptides were analysed by a reversed phase liquid chromatography electrospray ionisation tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC-ESI-MS/MS) in an an Ultimate 3000 nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion® Lumos® Tribrid® (Thermo Fisher).  (an ultrahigh-field mass orbitrap analyzer) through the Nano-Easy spray source (all from Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded first onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 Trapping column (Thermo Scientific, 20 mm 75 lm inner diameter (ID), 3 lm of C18 resin with 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany) using buffer A (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and then separated and eluted on a C18 resin analytical column NTCC (50 cm 75 lm ID, 3 lm C18 resin with 100 Å pore size, Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) with an integrated spray tip. A 95 min gradient of 5–27% Buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), from 27% to 44% in 5 min and finally 10 min more until 95% in Buffer A at a constant flow rate of 0,3 µl/min.

### Data Protocol
All data were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and in positive mode with Xcalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA).Peptide identifications from raw data were carried out using the Mascot v. 2.6.1 (MatrixScience, London, UK) search engine through the Protein Discoverer 2.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). A database search was performed against Candida albicans CGD21  (6209 sequences) from http://www.candidagenome.org  The following parameters were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage, up to two missed cleavage sites allowed, and tolerances of 10 p.p.m. for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS fragment ions, and the searches were performed allowing optional methionine oxidation and acetyl protein N-terminal and fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine. A search against the decoy database (integrated decoy approach) was used to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR). The Mascot Scores were adjusted by a percolator algorithm. The acceptance criteria for protein identification were an FDR <0.01).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, C. albicans, Hyphae, Proteome, Dimorphic transition, Cytoplasmic extract

### Affiliations
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
UCM

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Concha Gil
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain


