### Accession
PXD020901

### Title
P-VIS: internally-controlled validation of mass spectrometry-based peptide identifications

### Description
Peptide-Spectrum Match (PSM) Validation with Internal Standards (P-VIS) is an objective approach to validating individual PSMs. A biological sample is analyzed by LC-MS/MS and the data are searched using a traditional approach such as a database search or de novo sequencing. A PSM of interest is identified, and a synthetic version of the putative peptide is obtained. Internal standard peptides (ISPs) are spiked into both the biological sample and the validation peptide sample and both samples are analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Using PSM_validator (https://github.com/Delong-Lab/PSM_validator/releases), an open-source program we created to implement the P-VIS workflow, both the fragmentation spectrum and the chromatographic retention time for the peptide of interest in the biological sample are compared to those of the validation peptide. The same comparisons are made for each of the ISPs, and these results are used to establish a prediction interval for valid matches. If the values for the comparisons between the biological and validation peptide fall within the prediction intervals, the match is considered valid. This submission contains the data and P-VIS results from a study aimed at benchmarking the P-VIS workflow.

### Sample Protocol
In a publication by Liepe et al (Liepe et al, 2016, Science), the investigators re-analyzed a published data set characterizing peptides eluted from human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I molecules on the surface of human cells and identified a large number of putative proteasomally-spliced peptides.  A second group re-analyzed the data and contended that many of the spectra matched to spliced peptides could be matched with greater confidence to non-spliced (native) peptides present in the traditional UniProt database (Mylonas et al, 2018, Mol Cell Proteomics). For 11 of these spectra, we obtained synthetic versions of both the spliced and native peptides and tested if P-VIS could differentiate between the spliced and native peptides. Our benchmarking results demonstrated that P-VIS was effective at distinguishing the peptides and could have been used to strengthen the work done by either group. P-VIS provides an objective and systematic approach for the validation of individual PSMs that can provide an additional measure of rigor in many types of LC-MS/MS-based proteomics/peptidomics experiments.

### Data Protocol
Data files were filtered and converted to the appropriate format using MSConvert (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/tools.shtml), and data were analyzed using PSM_validator.

### Publication Abstract
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry is an increasingly powerful tool for studying proteins in the context of disease. As technological advances in instrumentation and data analysis have enabled deeper profiling of proteomes and peptidomes, the need for a rigorous, standardized approach to validate individual peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) has emerged. To address this need, we developed a novel and broadly applicable workflow: PSM validation with internal standards (P-VIS). In this approach, the fragmentation spectrum and chromatographic retention time of a peptide within a biological sample are compared with those of a synthetic version of the putative peptide sequence match. Similarity measurements obtained for a panel of internal standard peptides are then used to calculate a prediction interval for valid matches. If the observed degree of similarity between the biological and the synthetic peptide falls within this prediction interval, then the match is considered valid. P-VIS enables systematic and objective assessment of the validity of individual PSMs, providing a measurable degree of confidence when identifying peptides by mass spectrometry.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Validation, Immunopeptidomics, Peptide splicing, Hybrid insulin peptides, Immunotherapy, Peptide-spectrum match, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences University of Colorado Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences
University of Colorado

### Submitter
Timothy Wiles

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Delong
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences University of Colorado Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences


