### Accession
PXD030720

### Title
High-throughput identification of RNA localization elements reveals a regulatory role for A/G rich sequences

### Description
This experiment aims to identify the RNA-binding proteome that is pulled-down from a cellular lysate with biotinylated RNA probes.

### Sample Protocol
The pull-down experiments and subsequent mass spectrometry were performed according to an adapted experimental pipeline that was previously established (https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.27.441590). Specifically, 10 µL (~20-35 ng/µL) of cleaned-up PCR amplicon (primer sequences are provided in the table below, used with screening pooled library) were used as template of the in vitro transcription (HiScribe™ T7 Quick High Yield RNA Synthesis Kit, #E2050S, New England Biolabs), performed at 37°C for 16 hr, followed by DNase I treatment (37°C for 15 min). IVT RNAs were then cleaned-up and concentrated (DNA Clean & Concentrator-5; #D4013, Zymo Research). 3′-desthiobiotin labeling was carried following the manufacturer’s’ guidelines of Pierce™ RNA 3′ End Desthiobiotinylation (ThermoFisher, #20163). Briefly, ~115 pmol of each RNA was first subjected to fast denaturation in the presence of 25% v/v DMSO (85°C for 4 min) to relax secondary structures and subsequently labelled at 16°C for 16 hr. RNA binding proteins were isolated using Pierce™ Magnetic RNAProtein Pull-Down Kit (ThermoFisher, #20164). Briefly, 3′-desthiobiotin labelled RNAs were incubated with magnetic streptaividin-coated beads (50 µL of slurry for each RNA probe) for 30 min at room temperature under agitation (600 RPM in a ThermoMixer, Eppendorf). 200 µg of cell lysates (in Pierce IP lysis buffer; #87787, ThermoFisher) derived from fully differentiated CAD or N2a cells was then incubated with 3′- desthiobiotinylated-RNA/streptavidin beads at 4°C for 1 hr under agitation (600 RPM). 20 µL of each eluate was then analyzed by mass spectrometry.  The pulldown samples were subjected to Trichloroacetic (TCA) precipitation. 20 μL of each eluate was mixed with 80 μL of water and 100 μL of 10% TCA (5% TCA final concentration). The resulting protein pellets were washed twice with cold acetone, dried and dissolved as follows: 45 μl of 10 mM Tris/2 mM CaCl2, pH 8.2 buffer; 5 μl trypsin (100 ng/μl in 10 mM HCl); 0.3 μl trypsin Tris 1M, pH 8.2 to adjusted to pH 8. The samples were then processed with microwave-assisted digestion (60°C for 30 min) and dried. The dried digested samples were dissolved in 20 μL ddH2O + 0.1% formic acid and transferred to autosampler vials for Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS). 2 μL of sample were injected on a nanoAcquity UPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant v1.6.2.3 and the data were searched against the Swissprot mouse database.

### Publication Abstract
Hundreds of RNAs are enriched in the projections of neuronal cells. For the vast majority of them, though, the sequence elements that regulate their localization are unknown. To identify RNA elements capable of directing transcripts to neurites, we deployed a massively parallel reporter assay that tested the localization regulatory ability of thousands of sequence fragments drawn from endogenous mouse 3' UTRs. We identified peaks of regulatory activity within several 3' UTRs and found that sequences derived from these peaks were both necessary and sufficient for RNA localization to neurites in mouse and human neuronal cells. The localization elements were enriched in adenosine and guanosine residues. They were at least tens to hundreds of nucleotides long as shortening of two identified elements led to significantly reduced activity. Using RNA affinity purification and mass spectrometry, we found that the RNA-binding protein Unk was associated with the localization elements. Depletion of Unk in cells reduced the ability of the elements to drive RNAs to neurites, indicating a functional requirement for Unk in their trafficking. These results provide a framework for the unbiased, high-throughput identification of RNA elements and mechanisms that govern transcript localization in neurons.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
ETH Zürich
D-BSSE, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Andreas Moor

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Moor
D-BSSE, ETH Zürich, Switzerland


