### Accession
PXD028241

### Title
Proteomic analysis of sulfur-respiring haloarchaea from hypersaline lakes

### Description
Dimitry Y. Sorokin et al., (2021, Russian Academy of Sciences, Russia and Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands) describe the isolation and physiological and genomic properties of a fifth functional group of sulfur-respiring haloarchaea enriched from hypersaline lake sediments with CO as the electron donor. Additional shotgun proteomic profiling of the described strains has been performed.

### Sample Protocol
Approx. 10–20 mg of each cell pellet (biomass wet weight) were lysed using B-PER reagent/TEAB buffer and bead beating followed by centrifugation at 14.000 g under cooling, using a bench top centrifuge. TCA was added to the protein supernatant (20% TCA, v/v), incubated at 4°C and centrifuged to collect the protein precipitate. The pellet was washed with ice cold acetone and dissolved in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 6 M urea. The disulphides were reduced using DTT (Dithiothreitol, 10 mM) and sulfhydryl groups were blocked using 20 mM IAA (iodoacetamide). The solution was diluted to below 1 M urea and digested using sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega). The proteolytic peptide digest was desalted using an Oasis HLB solid phase extraction well plate (Waters) according to the manufacturers protocol. An aliquot corresponding to approximately 500 ng of protein digest was analysed with a shotgun proteomics approach. The peptides were analysed using a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an EASY nano LC 1200, equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column (50 um × 150 mm, 2 µm, 100Å) and a QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Germany). The flow rate was maintained at 350 nL over a linear gradient from 5% to 30% solvent B over 38 minutes and finally to 60% B over 15 min. Solvent A was H2O containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile in H2O and 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode acquiring peptide signals from 385–1250 m/z. The top 10 signals were isolated at a window of 2.0 m/z and fragmented at a NCE of 28.

### Data Protocol
The collected mass spectrometric raw data were analysed against a genomics constructed sequence database using PEAKS Studio 10 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Canada) allowing 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02 Da fragment ion mass error tolerance, 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation as fixed and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation as variable modifications. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered for 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and protein identifications with at least 2 unique peptides were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Anaerobic carboxydotrophy is a widespread catabolic trait in bacteria, with two dominant pathways: hydrogenogenic and acetogenic. The marginal mode by direct oxidation to CO<sub>2</sub> using an external e-acceptor has only a few examples. Use of sulfidic sediments from two types of hypersaline lakes in anaerobic enrichments with CO as an e-donor and elemental sulfur as an e-acceptor led to isolation of two pure cultures of anaerobic carboxydotrophs belonging to two genera of sulfur-reducing haloarchaea: Halanaeroarchaeum sp. HSR-CO from salt lakes and Halalkaliarchaeum sp. AArc-CO from soda lakes. Anaerobic growth of extremely halophilic archaea with CO was obligatory depended on the presence of elemental sulfur as the electron acceptor and yeast extract as the carbon source. CO served as a direct electron donor and H<sub>2</sub> was not generated from CO when cells were incubated with or without sulfur. The genomes of the isolates encode a catalytic Ni,Fe-CODH subunit CooS (distantly related to bacterial homologs) and its Ni-incorporating chaperone CooC (related to methanogenic homologs) within a single genomic locus. Similar loci were also present in a genome of the type species of Halalkaliarchaeum closely related to AArc-CO, and the ability for anaerobic sulfur-dependent carboxydotrophy was confirmed for three different strains of this genus. Moreover, similar proteins are encoded in three of the four genomes of recently described carbohydrate-utilizing sulfur-reducing haloarchaea belonging to the genus Halapricum and in two yet undescribed haloarchaeal species. Overall, this work demonstrated for the first time the potential for anaerobic sulfur-dependent carboxydotrophy in extremely halophilic archaea.

### Keywords
Shotgun discovery proteomics, Haloarchaea, Qe plus

### Affiliations
TUD
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.


