### Accession
PXD018461

### Title
Copper Limitation in Nitrososphaera viennensis

### Description
Pure cultures of N. viennensis were subjected to copper limitation using the copper chelator TETA.  Two samples that were subjected to copper limiation for approximately two weeks were used for protein extraction and subsequent proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Biomass was harvested by filtration.  Cells were lysed using bead beating and proteins were extracted using a TRIzol extraction.  Proteins were washed using methanol and acetone and then subjected to an in solution digesition using rLysC and trypsin. Peptides were desalted and 0.5 micrograms was loaded onto an EASY-Spray C18 column and then analyzed using an LC-QExactive Plus (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Raw files taken from a LC-QEx active-Plus (Thermo) were analyzed using MaxQuant. The variable modifications oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were allowed along with the fixed modification carbamidomethyl (C).  Digestion mode was set for trypsin and lysC with a maximum missed cleavages of 2.  The protein false discovery rate was set at 0.01 and a minimum number of peptides at 1.

### Publication Abstract
Ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) are widespread in nature and are involved in nitrification, an essential process in the global nitrogen cycle. The enzymes for ammonia oxidation and electron transport rely heavily on copper (Cu), which can be limited in nature. In this study the model soil archaeon Nitrososphaera viennensis was investigated via transcriptomic analysis to gain insight regarding possible Cu uptake mechanisms and compensation strategies when Cu becomes limiting. Upon Cu limitation, N. viennensis exhibited impaired nitrite production and thus growth, which was paralleled by downregulation of ammonia oxidation, electron transport, carbon fixation, nucleotide, and lipid biosynthesis pathway genes. Under Cu-limitation, 1547 out of 3180 detected genes were differentially expressed, with 784 genes upregulated and 763 downregulated. The most highly upregulated genes encoded proteins with a possible role in Cu binding and uptake, such as the Cu chelator and transporter CopC/D, disulfide bond oxidoreductase D (dsbD), and multicopper oxidases. While this response differs from the marine strain Nitrosopumilus maritimus, conserved sequence motifs in some of the Cu-responsive genes suggest conserved transcriptional regulation in terrestrial AOA. This study provides possible gene regulation and energy conservation mechanisms linked to Cu bioavailability and presents the first model for Cu uptake by a soil AOA.

### Keywords
Ammonia oxidizing archaea, Soil, Copper

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Archaea Biology and Ecogenomics Division University of Vienna

### Submitter
Logan Hodgskiss

### Lab Head
Dr Christa Schleper
Archaea Biology and Ecogenomics Division University of Vienna


