### Accession
PXD012633

### Title
Protein interactome analysis -  Targeted and Interactome Proteomics Revealed the Role of PHD2 in Regulating BRD4 Proline Hydroxylation

### Description
The overall goal of the project was to identify proline hydroxylation dependent Brd4 interactome through label-free quantitative proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Brd4 interacting proteins under different conditions were pulled-down through co-immunoprecipitation. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested prior to extensive LCMSMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed by Maxquant for protein identification and LFQ-based label-free quantification. Quantification data was processed by Perseus for statsitical significance analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Proline hydroxylation is a critical cellular mechanism regulating energy homeostasis and development. Our previous study identified and validated Bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRD4) as a proline hydroxylation substrate in cancer cells. Yet, the regulatory mechanism and the functional significance of the modification remain unknown. In this study, we developed targeted quantification assays using parallel-reaction monitoring and biochemical analysis to identify the major regulatory enzyme of BRD4 proline hydroxylation. We further performed quantitative interactome analysis to determine the functional significance of the modification pathway in BRD4-mediated protein-protein interactions and gene transcription. Our findings revealed that PHD2 is the key regulatory enzyme of BRD4 proline hydroxylation and the modification significantly affects BRD4 interactions with key transcription factors as well as BRD4-mediated transcriptional activation. Taken together, this study provided mechanistic insights into the oxygen-dependent modification of BRD4 and revealed new roles of the pathway in regulating BRD4-dependent gene expression.

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction, Brd4

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Yue Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yue Chen
University of Minnesota


