### Accession
PXD008944

### Title
Profiling of fasting-feeding dynamics in mouse liver

### Description
Daily biological rhythms are orchestrated by a combination of the intrinsic circadian clock and external food/feeding-related signals which influence metabolism in health and disease. Understanding how and to which extent both circadian and fasting/feeding rhythms contribute to regulating daily physiology and metabolism is therefore an important ongoing effort. We generated a comprehensive proteomics dataset performing large scale time-series analysis of mouse liver obtained from feeding restricted mice over 2 full days with 16 time points in total, including as a first, a shorter post-feeding sampling-rate focus. Using our label-free absolute quantitative proteomics platform we obtained timelines with very few missing values (>99% data completeness) for over 4000 mouse liver proteoforms using 1D-LC-MS analysis of all time points and replicates (48 samples in total) allowing for robust statistical testing, as well as over 8000 mouse liver proteoforms using online 2D-LC-MS analysis of pooled replicates, providing additional depth of detection. Together our dataset provides an important resource recapitulating and extending current datasets. Our extra focus on post-feeding time points revealed a highly dynamic third metabolic period not previously observed with respect to more classic diurnal rhythmicity, providing an important addition to current knowledge.

### Sample Protocol
Liver samples (48) obtained at 16 time points over 2 days from feeding-restricted mice were homogenized, proteins were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides were analysed by two different LC-MS strategies. First, all time points and replicates were analysed individually by 1D reverse phase liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), yielding 48 raw MS files in total. Secondly, equal amounts of each replicate per time point were pooled and the resulting 16 samples were analysed by online high/low pH-based 2D-LC-MS/MS, with 10 fractions per sample, yielding 160 raw files in total. In both cases, peptide separation was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion Biosciences) as ionization source.

### Data Protocol
The 1D-LC-MS raw files were first imported and aligned in Progenesis LC-MS v2.0, followed by feature detection and single MGF file export of associated MS/MS spectra. Peptide identification at 1% FDR was performed with Proteome Discoverer v2.1 interfaced to a Mascot server and identification results, exported as pep.xml files, were imported into Progenesis followed by assembly into proteins and label-free absolute protein quantification based on peak areas. For the 2D-LC-MS/MS data each set of 16 raw files, corresponding to the same fraction among all time points, were first separately imported and aligned in 10 separate Progenesis project files, followed by MS/MS spectra export, peptide identification and import of search results. The 10 fraction results were thereafter combined into a single project file followed by assembly into proteins and label-free absolute quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fasting, Mouse, 1d-lc-msms, Online 2d-lc-msms, Liver, Metabolism, Feeding

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Richard Sprenger

### Lab Head
Dr Christer S. Ejsing
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark


