### Accession
PXD006147

### Title
Definition of a high-confidence mitochondrial proteome at quantitative scale_q-AP-MS of mitochondrial protein complexes

### Description
Mitochondria perform central functions in cellular bioenergetics, metabolism and signaling and their malfunction has been linked to numerous diseases. The available studies cover only part of the mitochondrial proteome and a separation of core mitochondrial proteins from associated fractions has not been achieved. We developed an integrative, quantitative MS-based experimental approach to define the high confidence proteome of yeast mitochondria and to identify new mitochondrial proteins. The analysis includes protein abundance under fermentable and non-fermentable growth, submitochondrial localization, single-protein analysis and subcellular classification of mitochondria-associated fractions. We identified novel mitochondrial interactors of respiratory chain supercomplexes, ATP synthase, AAA proteases, the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) and coenzyme Q biosynthesis cluster as well as new mitochondrial proteins with dual cellular localization. The integrative proteome provides a high confidence source for the characterization of physiological and pathophysiological functions of mitochondria and their integration into the cellular environment.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type yeast (WT) and yeast expressing Protein A-tagged proteins were grown in in SILAC medium (0.67% [w/v] yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 3% [v/v] glycerol, selected amino acids and nucleobases) containing either 'heavy' arginine (13C6/15N4) and lysine (13C6/15N2) or the respective 'light' amino acids. Crude mitochondrial fractions were prepared by differential centrifugation as described (Meisinger et al., Anal. Biochem. 287, 2000). For the affinity-purification of protein complexes, mitochondria (2 mg each) from WT cells and cells expressing the Protein A-tagged bait were suspended in 2 ml of solubilization buffer (1% [w/v] digitonin, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 50 mM NaCl, 10% [v/v] glycerol, 0.1 mM EDTA) supplemented with 1.5 mM PMSF and protease inhibitors. Mitochondria were incubated for 30 min at 4 °C and non-solubilized material was removed by centrifugation. 150 µl of a 50% slurry of human IgG-coupled Sepharose beads, equilibrated with solubilization buffer, were mixed with the solubilized mitochondria and incubated for 2 hours at 4 °C. Beads were re-collected by centrifugation (100 x g, 1 min, 4 °C) and transferred to Mobicol mini-columns. To remove non-specifically bound proteins, beads were washed 12 times with 500 µl of wash buffer (0.1-0.3% [w/v] digitonin, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 60 mM NaCl, 10% [v/v] glycerol, 0.5 mM EDTA) containing 1.5 mM PMSF and protease inhibitors. Specifically bound proteins were eluted by adding 10 µl of TEV protease (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) in 150 µl of wash buffer (without protease inhibitors), followed by vigorous shaking at 4 °C for 16 hours. For removal of the His-tagged TEV protease, 10 µl of Ni-NTA agarose, equilibrated with wash buffer, was added, followed by vigorous shaking for 30 min at 4 °C. Eluted mitochondrial protein complexes were collected by centrifugation (200 x g, 1 min, 4 °C). Residual protein complexes were collected by adding another 50 µl of wash buffer and centrifugation yielding a total of 215 µl of eluate. 100 µL of eluates obtained from differentially labeled WT cells and cells expressing the Protein A-tagged bait were mixed and analyzed by LC-MS. For each bait, two biological replicates were performed. Proteins of of mixed eluates were acetone-precipitated and resuspended in 8 M urea/50 mM NH4HCO3. Cysteine residues were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (30 min, 37°C) and free thiol groups were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM NH4HCO3 (30 min at RT in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding DTT to a final concentration of 25 mM. Urea concentration was adjusted to 1.6 M, trypsin was added and proteins were digested overnight at 37°C. Proteolysis was stopped by acidifying the samples with 100% TFA and peptide mixtures were cleared by centrifugation (5 min, 12,000 x g, RT).        Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on an LTQ Orbitrap XL or an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) each directly coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Peptides were washed and concentrated on PepMap C18 precolumns and separated using AcclaimPepMap RSLC columns (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and 40°C. For peptide elution, a binary solvent systems consisting of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA)/4% (v/v) DMSO (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) FA/4% (v/v) DMSO/48% (v/v) methanol/30% (v/v) ACN (solvent B) was used. Peptides were separated with  a gradient of 1-30% solvent B in 65 min, 30-45% B in 30 min, 45-70% B in 25 min, 70-99% B in 15 min, and 5 min at 99% followed by MS analysis at the Orbitrap Elite (Ybr230w-a, Ybr255c-a, Yil077c, Aim11, and Ybl059w-a complexes) or the LTQ Orbitrap XL (Ykl133c and Yor020w-a complexes). Replicates 1 of Ybr230w-a, Ybr255c-a, and Yil077c complexes were analyzed in two technical replicates.  MS instruments were externally calibrated using standard compounds. The Orbitrap Elite was operated with the following parameters: MS survey scans ranging from m/z 370-1,700 were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution (R) of 120,000 (at m/z 400). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 10E6 ions and the maximum injection time (IT) to 200 ms. A TOP25 method was used for low energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) of multiply charged precursor peptides in the linear ion trap applying a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%, an activation q of 0.25, an activation time of 10 ms, an AGC of 5 x 10E3, and a max. IT of 150 ms. The dynamic exclusion time (DE) for previously fragmented precursors was set to 45 s. LTQ Orbitrap XL parameters were as follows: MS scans, m/z 370-1,700; R, 60,000 (at m/z 400); AGC, 5 x 10E5 ions; max. IT, 500 ms; TOP5 CID method for fragmentation of precursor peptides (z ≥ 2); NCE, 35%; activation q, 0.25; activation time, 30 ms; AGC, 10E4 ions, max. IT, 100 ms; DE, 45 s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed for protein identification and SILAC-based relative quantification using MaxQuant/Andromeda (version 1.5.3.12). MS/MS were searched against a custom-made protein database containing all entries of the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; http://www.yeastgenome.org/, downloaded  02/04/2016; 6,726 entries) and 47 entries for putative small open reading frames reported by Smith et al. (Cell Reports 7, 2014). Data were also correlated with a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. The database search was performed with mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment ions and tryptic specificity (trypsin/P ) allowing three missed cleavages. Acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were considered as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. Arg10 and Lys8 were set as heavy label. The options 'requantify' and 'match between runs' (match from and to) were enabled. Proteins were identified based on at least one unique peptide with a length of six amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. Lists of peptides and proteins identified by MaxQuant were filtered applying a false discovery rate of 0.01. For SILAC-based protein quantification, at least one unique peptide and a minimum ratio count of one were required.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria perform central functions in cellular bioenergetics, metabolism, and signaling, and their dysfunction has been linked to numerous diseases. The available studies cover only part of the mitochondrial proteome, and a separation of core mitochondrial proteins from associated fractions has not been achieved. We developed an integrative experimental approach to define the proteome&#xa0;of yeast mitochondria. We classified &gt; 3,300 proteins of mitochondria and mitochondria-associated fractions and defined 901 high-confidence mitochondrial proteins, expanding the set of mitochondrial proteins by 82. Our analysis includes&#xa0;protein abundance under fermentable and nonfermentable growth, submitochondrial localization, single-protein&#xa0;experiments, and subcellular classification of mitochondria-associated fractions. We identified mitochondrial interactors of respiratory chain supercomplexes, ATP synthase, AAA proteases, the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS), and the coenzyme Q biosynthesis cluster, as well as mitochondrial proteins with dual cellular localization. The integrative proteome provides a high-confidence&#xa0;source for the characterization of physiological and pathophysiological functions of mitochondria and their integration into the cellular environment.

### Keywords
Silac, New mitochondrial proteins, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
Universität Freiburg, Warscheid Lab

### Submitter
Christian D. Peikert

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


