### Accession
PXD042894

### Title
BioID screen for PRSS35 interactors in human primary fibroblasts

### Description
We identified the serine protease PRSS35 as a major player in the response to hyperosmotic stress. To gain insight into the mechanisms of action of PRSS35 in human primary fibroblasts, we searched for PRSS35-BirA-HA proximal proteins using BioID interaction screening.

### Sample Protocol
PRSS35-BirA-HA-expressing human primary fibroblasts were pre-treated with 20 ng/ml Dox or vehicle (DMSO) for 16 h, followed by 24 h incubation with 20 ng/ml Dox or vehicle + 50 μM biotin (#B4501; Sigma-Aldrich). Biotinylated proteins were pulled down from total lysates using Dynabeads™ MyOne™ Streptavidin C1 (#65001; Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Hesketh et al., 2017). The pull-down efficiency of biotinylated proteins was monitored by Western blot. Trypsin digestion and mass spectrometry analyses were conducted by the Functional Genomics Center Zurich. On-bead digestion was performed using 100 ng/μl trypsin in 10 mM Tris/2 mM CaCl2 buffer at pH 8 for 30 min at 60°C. Residual peptides were collected using 0.1% TFA/50% acetonitrile and pooled with the supernatant from the digestion step.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptide mixtures were dried and dissolved in ddH2O + 0.1% formic acid, transferred to autosampler vials and injected to a NanoAcquity UPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Hesketh, G.G., Youn, J.Y., Samavarchi-Tehrani, P., Raught, B., and Gingras, A.C. (2017). Parallel Exploration of Interaction Space by BioID and Affinity Purification Coupled to Mass Spectrometry. Methods Mol Biol 1550, 115-136. 10.1007/978-1-4939-6747-6_10.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (V 2.0.1.0.). Spectra were searched against the PRSS35 sequence merged with the homo sapiens background database (Swiss-Prot, Lausanne, Switzerland) using the following variable modifications: acetyl (Protein N-term), oxidation (M), deamination (NQ) and no fixed modifications. Protein identification results were imported into the Scaffold software (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) and the following settings were applied: protein FDR=1%, minimum number of peptides per protein=2, peptide FDR=0.1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Bioid, Primary fibroblasts, Q-exactive hf

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Biology Department, Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Catharina Samira Sänger

### Lab Head
Dr Sabine Werner
Biology Department, Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


