### Accession
PXD004413

### Title
Protein turnover measurement using selected reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry (SRM-MS) C4PR_LIV

### Description
Protein turnover represents an important mechanism in the functioning of cells, with deregulated synthesis and degradation of proteins implicated in many diseased states.  Therefore, proteomics strategies to measure, with high confidence, turnover rates are of vital importance to understanding many biological processes.  In this study, the more widely used approach of non-targeted precursor ion signal intensity (MS1) quantification is compared to selected reaction monitoring (SRM), a data acquisition strategy that records data for specific peptides, to determine if improved quantitative data would be obtained using a targeted quantification approach.  Using mouse liver as a model system, turnover measurement of four tricarboxylic acid cycle proteins was performed using both MS1 and SRM quantification strategies.  SRM outperformed MS1 in terms of sensitivity and selectivity of measurement, allowing more confident determination of protein turnover rates.  SRM data is acquired using cheaper and more widely available tandem quadrupole mass spectrometers, making the approach accessible to a larger number of researchers than MS1 quantification, which is best performed on high mass resolution instruments.  SRM acquisition is ideally suited to focussed studies where the turnover of tens of proteins is measured, making it applicable in determining the dynamics of proteins complexes and complete metabolic pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Protein and peptide selection Tryptic peptides for monitoring in SRM assays were selected from four tricarboxylic acid cycle proteins. Non-unique peptides in the reviewed UniProt canonical and isoform database of Mus musculus (accessed 25/11/2015) were removed. All arginine-terminating and non-lysine-containing protein C-terminal peptides were excluded from consideration due to the absence of an isotopic label in these proteolytic fragments, and no missed cleavage peptides were considered. N-terminal peptides were also excluded due to potential for exoproteolytic fraying.  Experimental animals Eleven adult male C57BL/6JOlaHsd mice of over 12 months of age at the start of the experiment were housed individually in 48 x 15 x 15 cm polypropylene cages. Each cage contained substrate (Corn Cob Absorb 10-14 substrate), paper wool nest material and environmental enrichment. Food and water were provided ad libitum. The mice were maintained on a reversed photo-period (light, 12 h; dark, 12 h; lights on at 20:00 hrs) and at 19-21 oC ± 2 oC. Standard laboratory diet was replaced with a semisynthetic diet with the inclusion of [13C6]lysine at a relative isotope abundance (RIA) of 0.5. The dietary pellets were dissociated with water containing the dissolved [13C6]lysine to form a thick paste and mixed extensively. Once homogeneous, the paste was then extruded into strips 1 cm across and dried in a commercial foodstuff drying oven at 40 oC. The mice had access to the labelled diet for varying amounts of time: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 12, 17, 22 or 30 days exposure to the diet. The day that the animals were introduced to the labelled diet was staggered in order for all culls and dissections to take place on the same day. All mice were humanely killed on day 30 and dissected to recover the liver tissue from each animal. All resected tissue was frozen at -80 oC prior to analysis.  Sample preparation A small section of liver tissue was removed and further cut into small pieces prior to homogenisation in 1 mL of lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2 % [w/v] CHAPS, 5 mM DTT) using a Precellys lysis kit. Total protein extracted was quantified using a Bradford assay. Two hundred µg quantities of protein were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin using the FASP approach.  LC-MS/MS analysis Non-targeted MS1-DDA analyses were conducted on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatograph. The 16 most intense precursor ions with charges states of between 2+ and 5+ were selected for MS/MS with an isolation window of 1.2 m/z units. The maximum injection time was 45 ms, and the automatic gain control was set to 1e5. Fragmentation of the peptides was by higher-energy collisional dissociation using a stepped normalised collision energy of 28-30 %. Dynamic exclusion of m/z values to prevent repeated fragmentation of the same peptide was used with an exclusion time of 20 sec.   SRM experiments were conducted on a Waters TQ-S mass spectrometer coupled to a Waters nanoACQUITY nano-liquid chromatograph. Both quadrupoles were operated at unit mass resolution. Transitions were selected using a combination of in-house acquired data from the non-targeted DDA analysis, and publicly available peptide spectral libraries from NIST for all peptides passing the criteria outlined above. This led to a total of between eight and 18 peptides being targeted for each protein. Between four and 13 product ions for each peptide were selected, and the samples analysed using an unscheduled SRM method to determine the two-to-four transitions with the highest signal-to-background ratios to monitor in the final quantitative assay. The peptides were separated into two categories based on their ionisation efficiency; “good” and “poor”. Methods were retention time scheduled into 3 min windows to achieve dwell times per transition of ≥ 16 ms for good ionisation efficiency peptides, and ≥ 28 ms for poor ionisation efficiency peptides.

### Data Protocol
MS1-DDA data Raw data files were imported into Progenesis QI for Proteomics v.2.0 (Waters Ltd., Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK) for peak detection and alignment. Data from all time-points were combined and searched against the UniProt canonical and isoform database of Mus musculus (accessed 25/11/2015) using Mascot v.2.4.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK). The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the product ion tolerance to 10 mmu. Carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and oxidised methionine and [13C6]lysine were set as variable modifications. Two missed cleavages were permitted. The false discovery rate at the peptide-level was set to 1 %, and peptide identifications were further filtered using a peptide ion score of 23 or greater (score indicating identity or extensive homology). Peptides for which both the light and heavy isotopologue were identified were included in the downstream analysis. Raw data was imported into Skyline, the monoisotopic peak of each precursor ion extracted using the software’s defined settings for MS1 quantification, peak picking manually checked and correlated in terms of retention time with the identifications from Mascot, peaks smoothed using Savitsky-Golay smoothing, and integrated peak areas exported for further processing.    SRM data Raw data was imported into Skyline, peak picking manually checked, peaks smoothed using Savitsky-Golay smoothing, and integrated peak areas exported for further processing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantification, Proteomics, Ms1, Mass spectrometry, Protein turnover, Srm

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, Department of Biochemistry, University of Liverpool, UK

### Submitter
Stephen Holman

### Lab Head
Dr Robert J. Beynon
Centre for Proteome Research, Department of Biochemistry, University of Liverpool, UK


