### Accession
PXD008440

### Title
The response to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy to 5-fluorouracil in locally advanced colorectal cancer patients: a predictive proteomic signature.

### Description
Background: Colorectal cancer is the third most common and the fourth most lethal cancer in the world. In the majority of cases, patients are diagnosed at an advanced stage or even metastatic, thus explaining the high mortality. The standard protocol for treating patients with locally advanced non-metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) is neoadjuvant radio-chemotherapy (NRCT) with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), but the resistance rate to this treatment remains high with approximately 30% of non-responders. The lack of evidence available in clinical practice to predict NRCT resistance to 5-FU and to guide clinical practice therefore encourages the search for biomarkers of this resistance. Methods: From twenty-three formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) biopsies performed before NRCT with 5-FU of locally advanced non-metastatic CRC patients, we extracted and analysed the tumor proteome of these patients. From clinical data, we were able to classify the twenty-two patients in our cohort into three treatment response groups: non-responders (NR), partial responders (PR) and total responders (TR), and to compare the proteomes of these different groups.  Results: We have highlighted 384 differentially expressed proteins between NR and PR, 248 between NR and TR and 417 between PR and TR. Among these proteins, we have identified many differentially expressed proteins identified as having a role in cancer (IFIT1, FASTKD2, PIP4K2B, ARID1B, SLC25A33: overexpressed in TR; CALD1, CPA3, B3GALT5, CD177, RIPK1: overexpressed in NR). We have also identified that DPYD, the main degradation enzyme of 5-FU, was overexpressed in NR, as well as several ribosomal and mitochondrial proteins also overexpressed in NR.  Conclusions: From these retrospective study, we implemented a protein extraction protocol from FFPE biopsy to highlight protein differences between different response groups to RCTN with 5-FU in patients with locally advanced non-metastatic CRC. These results will pave the way for a larger cohort for better sensitivity and specificity of the signature to guide decisions in the choice of treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Dewaxing and homogenisation of the FFPE biopsies 100% xylene was added (100 µl for 1 mg of biopsy) for 1 hour under agitation. Xylene is replaced by 50% ethanol to dehydrate the biopsy for 1 hour under agitation. After dehydration, FFPE biopsies were homogenised in MS grade water (300 µl for 1 mg of remaining biopsy) using a TissueRuptor (Qiagen). Biopsies were then incubated in 2.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 10 mM dithiothréitol at 98°C for 1 hour. After centrifugation at 13 000 rpm for 1 min, the supernatant was collected (Figure 1C).  Concentration, reduction and alkylation.      Solubilised biopsies were concentrated (250 µl to 50 µl) using Nanosep 3K Omega (Pall Life Sciences) and treated with 1X Laemmli and 2 mM dithiothréitol at 98°C for 5 minutes (reduction). 50 mM iodoacetamide was added for 30 min and incubated in the dark for alkylation (Figure 1C).   In-gel separation and tryptic digestion.      50 µg of concentrated biopsies were separated on NuPAGE gel 4-12% bis-Tris 1.5 mm x 10 well (Invitrogen). After migration, the gel is stained with Coomassie Blue (SimplyBlue SafeStain) for 1 hour under agitation and then discoloured overnight under agitation. Each band is divided in four fractions. Each fraction is washed with MS grade water for 15 minutes under agitation then with 50% acetonitrile for 15 minutes under agitation. The fractions are then subjected to a wash cycle (20 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15 minutes under agitation and 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile for 15 minutes under agitation) until the gel is clear. The samples are then dehydrated by washing with 100% acetonitrile for 5 minutes under agitation until the precipitate is solid. Dehydrated samples are digested in 12.5 ng/ml Trypsin Gold (Promega) modified in 50 mM acetic acid and 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, at 30°C overnight under agitation (Figure 1C).  Peptides extraction and purification.      Digested samples underwent twice drying/wetting steps (100% acetonitrile for 30 minutes at 30°C under agitation and 1% formic acid for 20 minutes at 30°C under agitation) for extracting peptides from gel. The samples are then dehydrated by washing with 100% acetonitrile for 10 minutes at 30°C under agitation until the precipitate is solid. Peptides were cleaned-up (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid), eluted (50% acetonitrile/1% formic acid) on C18 column Zip-Tip (Thermo Scientific), previously washed with 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and resuspended in 1% formic acid (Figure 1C).  High performance liquid chromatography separation, coupled to mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS).      Trypsin-digested purified peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. 2 µg of the sample in 1% formic acid (v:v) were loaded with a constant flow of 4 µL/min on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0,3 mm id x 5 mm). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted in a PepMap C18 nanocolumn (75 µm x 50 cm) with a linear gradient of 5-35% solvent B over 240 minutes with a constant flow of 200 nL/min.  Mass spectrometry analysis.      The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the column was set to 40°C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350-1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35% and resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 40 seconds and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
Quantification and bioinformatics analysis.  Data were processed, searched and quantified using the MaxQuant software package employing the Human Uniprot database [15]. The following settings were used for the MaxQuant analysis: 2 miscleavages allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzyme was trypsin (K/R not before P); variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation; mass tolerance of 7 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. The analysis of mass spectrometry data were next carried out with the Perseus software [16] and subjected to a normalization (z-score) and an ANOVA statistical test (comparison of the three groups) or Student’s T-test (comparison of two groups), both corrected with a p-value of 0.05.  Statistical analysis.  The different groups of patients were first compared according to clinicopathological parameters. Due to a small number of patients per group, Fisher's exact test was done with the R software [17]. When the p-value was less than 0.05, the result was considered to have statistical significance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
5-fluorouracil, Predictive biomarkers, Proteomics, Colorectal cancer, Resistance to neoadjuvant radio-chemotherapy, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medecine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada

### Submitter
Francois-Michel Boisvert

### Lab Head
Dr Francois-Michel Boisvert
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medecine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada


