### Accession
PXD007910

### Title
The mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 5 regulates the proliferation and biosynthetic processes in procyclic forms of Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
The pathogenic protozoan T. brucei alternates into distinct developmental stages in the mammalian and insect hosts. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways transduce extracellular stimuli into a range of cellular responses, which ultimately lead to the adaptation to the external environment. Here, we combined a loss of function approach with stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based mass spectrometry (MS) to investigate the role of the mitogen-activated kinase kinase 5 (MKK5) in T. brucei. The silencing of MKK5 significantly decreased the proliferation of procyclic forms of T. brucei. To shed light into the molecular alterations associated with this phenotype, we measured the total proteome and phosphoproteome of cells silenced for MKK5. In the total proteome, we observed a general decrease in proteins related to ribosome and translation as well as down-regulation of several components of the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway. In addition, we observed alterations in the protein levels and phosphorylation of key metabolic enzymes, which point toward a suppression of the oxidative metabolism. Taken together, our findings show that the silencing of MKK5 alters cell growth, energy metabolism, protein and fatty acid biosynthesis in procyclic T. brucei.

### Sample Protocol
To accurately quantify the global changes induced by MKK5 silencing in T. brucei we used a SILAC-based approach. The SDM-79 medium without lysine and arginine was prepared in house. Procyclic forms of T. brucei transfect with the MKK5 RNAi plasmid were cultivated in SDM-79 SILAC medium supplemented with 10% 10 kDa dialysed FBS (Sigma), 15 μg/ml of G418 (Sigma) and 50 μg/ml of hygromycin (Sigma) either in the presence of ‘unlabelled’ lysine and arginine (Arg0 and Lys0) or in the presence of the ‘labelled’ counterparts (Arg10 and Lys4). In total, 18 mg/l of lysine and 53.75 mg/l of arginine were used. After incorporation of the labelled amino acids (4 days in culture in the SILAC medium), cells were treated with 2 μg/ml of tetracycline in the first day of RNAi induction and with 1 μg/ml of tetracycline in the subsequent three days. Four days post induction, cells were harvested and the same number of MKK5 silenced cells (Tet+) was mixed to the control cells (Tet-). The experiments were performed in biological triplicates. The cells were washed twice with PBS and spin at 8,000 x g for 5 minutes at 4 °C. The resulting pellet was lysed in 8M urea buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo) and the pH was adjusted to 8. For reduction and alkylation, the protein mixture was treated with 1 mM DTT (Sigma) for 1h, room temperature; followed by 5.5 mM IAA (Sigma) treatment for 45 minutes, room temperature, protected from light. Subsequently, sample was diluted 1:6 in 50mM ABC (ammonium bicarbonate) and digested overnight with 2.5 µg of Trypsin (Promega). In the following day, the tryptic peptides were acidified to pH 2.5 with TFA (Sigma). For the analysis of the total proteome, 10 µg of the resulting peptides were desalted in C18 stage-tips25,26. For the analysis of the phosphoproteome, TiO2-based phospho-enrichment was performed. The TiO2 beads (GL Sciensces) were resuspended in TiO2 buffer (30 mg/ml DHB, 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA) at a concentration of 500 µg/µl. The mixture was incubated for 10 min at 600 rpm. Subsequently, the beads were added to the peptides at a 5:1 ratio and incubated during 1h in rotor wheel at room temperature. Then, the mixture was spin at 3,000 rpm and the supernatant was collected and subjected to two additional rounds of incubation with TiO2 beads. The phosphopeptides bound to the TiO2 beads were resuspended in washing buffer I (30% ACN, 3% TFA), placed in a C8 stage-tip and spin at 2,600 rpm for 2 minutes. The wash with washing buffer I was repeated. Subsequently, three washes with washing buffer II (80% ACN, 0.3% TFA) were performed. Three sequential elution with 15% ammonium hydroxide in 40% ACN were performed. Samples were speed vacuum dried to eliminate the ACN and resuspended in buffer A (0.5% acetic acid). Then, phosphopeptides were purified in C18 stage-tips. The peptides were loaded onto an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to the mass spectrometer Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The chromatography was carried out in a  20 cm fused silica emitter, 75 µm inner diameter (New Objective) packed in house with Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH). For peptide elution, buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) were used. For the total proteome, a 250 min gradient of 300 nl/min with 2% to 30% buffer B was used. For each fraction of the phosphoproteome, a 120 min gradient of 300 nl/min with 2% to 42% buffer B was used. The eluting peptides were ionized and injected into the mass spectrometer via electrospray, spray voltage 2.1 kV, capillary heater 200 °C. The mass range for the full MS scan was 375-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 at 250 Th. From total proteome and phosphoproteome fractions, the top 15 and top 10 most intense ions, respectively, were isolated for higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The mass window for precursor ion selection was 1.4 m/z. The threshold for triggering MS2 was 1.8E5 for the total proteome and 1.0E4 for the phosphoproteome. The relative collision energy used was 27 and the mass resolution for the MS2 was 15,000. The singly charged ions were excluded and the ions that have been isolated for MS/MS were added to an exclusion list for 30 sec (total proteome) and 20 sec (phosphoproteome fractions). MS data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and raw data was processed using the MaxQuant computational platform.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software version 1.5.0.36 coupled to the Andromeda search engine were used to process the raw data with the following settings: Multiplicity 2 (labels Arg10 and Lys4); variable modifications Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M) and Phospho (STY); fixed modification Carbamidomethyl (C); digestion mode Trypsin, maximum 2 missed cleavages. The re-quantify parameter was enabled. The curated reference proteome used for peptide identification was downloaded from Uniprot Trypanosoma brucei TREU 927 (8,587 entries). For identification, the false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. For quantification, only unique peptides with minimum 2 ratio counts were used. The analysis of the data was done using Perseus version 1.5.2.11. Reverse peptides, potential contaminants and only identified by modification site (for the proteome) were removed. Only the class 1 phosphosites, as determined by localization probability ≥ 0.75 and score difference > 5, were considered for the analysis. The normalized SILAC ratios from the MaxQuant tables of each biological replicate were log2 transformed and the intensities log10. For downstream analyses, we required that proteins and phosphosites were quantified in at least two out of three biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
The pathogenic protozoan T. brucei alternates into distinct developmental stages in the mammalian and insect hosts. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways transduce extracellular stimuli into a range of cellular responses, which ultimately lead to the adaptation to the external environment. Here, we combined a loss of function approach with stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based mass spectrometry (MS) to investigate the role of the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 5 (MKK5) in T. brucei. The silencing of MKK5 significantly decreased the proliferation of procyclic forms of T. brucei. To shed light on the molecular alterations associated with this phenotype, we measured the total proteome and phosphoproteome of cells silenced for MKK5. In the total proteome, we observed a general decrease in proteins related to ribosome and translation as well as down-regulation of several components of the fatty acids biosynthesis pathway. In addition, we observed alterations in the protein levels and phosphorylation of key metabolic enzymes, which point toward a suppression of the oxidative metabolism. Taken together, our findings show that the silencing of MKK5 alters cell growth, energy metabolism, protein and fatty acids biosynthesis in procyclic T. brucei.

### Keywords
T. brucei, Fatty acids biosynthesis, Energy metabolism, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 5 (mkk5)

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz Parana, Functional Genomics Laboratory, Brazil Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz Parana, Mass Spectrometry Facility RPT02H, Brazil

### Submitter
Fernanda Kugeratski

### Lab Head
Dr Fabricio Marchini
Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz Parana, Functional Genomics Laboratory, Brazil Carlos Chagas Institute, Fiocruz Parana, Mass Spectrometry Facility RPT02H, Brazil


