### Accession
PXD039685

### Title
Bioaerosols in swine confinement buildings: A metaproteomic view

### Description
Swine confinement buildings (SCBs) represent workplaces with high biological air pollution. It is suspected that individual components of inhalable air are causatives of chronic respiratory disease that are regularly detected among workers. In order to understand the relationship between exposure and stress, the aim of this study was to develop a method to investigate the components of bioaerosols in more detail. For this purpose, bioaerosols from pig barns were collected on quartz filters from two exclusively housed pig types (porkers and gestating sows) and subsequently analyzed via a combinatorial approach of 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing and metaproteomics. The workflow helps to clarify diversity in bioaerosols from a taxonomic perspective, but also from a functional perspective.

### Sample Protocol
Bioaerosols from pig barns were collected on quartz filters (3days, 5-6h per day) from two exclusively housed pig types (porkers and gestating sows). The extraction of proteins from quartz filters were carried out by paddle blending the filters (60s, Stomacher®80 micro-Biomaster, Seward Limited, Worthing, UK) with 8 ml of 5 % (w/v) SDC (sodium deoxycholate) solubilized in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) in sterile plastic bags and heated at 90 °C for 15 min with a subsequent sonication step for 3 minutes. After centrifugation, the supernatants were stored at -20 °C for at least 1h. Purification and digestion of proteins based on the adapted single pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3*) protocol published by Blankenburg et al. (2019) with following changes. We used hydrophobic and hydrophilic magnetic beads from GE Healthcare (Sera-Mag SpeedBeads™ Carboxyl-Magnet-Beads, hydrophob; Sera-Mag SpeedBeads™ Carboxyl-Magnet-Beads, hydrophile), mixed 10 µl of beads (50:50) and prepared them freshly by strongly washing with 50 µl ultra-pure water 5 times. The beads mix was suspended in 25 µl ultra-pure water and 2 µl of this mix was added to each of the protein samples. A final concentration of 70 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) was adjusted , before shaking (INFORS HT Ecotron, INFORS AG, Bottmingen, Switzerland) for 20 min at 160 rpm. The beads were then separated and strongly washed twice with 1ml 100 % (v/v) Ethanol and 1 ml 100 % (v/v) ACN in a Magna-50ml-Rack by sedimentation for 2 min, before they were air-dried. Protein samples were digested with 200 ng trypsin in 20 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer) solution (18 h, 37 °C) and peptides were eluted with 12.5 µl 2 % DMSO (Dimethyl sulfoxide) and incubated in an ultrasonic bath for 3 minutes. Samples were then purified with  PierceTM C18 tips according to the protocol of the manufacturer using the following solutions: Wetting solution: 50:50 ACN (Acetonitrile):water; Equilibration solution: 0.1% FA (Formic acid) in water; Rinse solution: 0.1% FA in 5% ACN:water; Elution with 10 µl 0.1% FA in 60% ACN:water. After removing acetonitrile by a vacuum centrifuge step and making up the sample to 10 µl with 0.1 % FA in water, each sample was analyzed twice by LC-MS/MS. Peptide samples were analyzed by an Ultimate 3000 coupled to a QExactive Plus (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). After loading the peptides onto the analytical column with buffer A (water in 0.1% formic acid) (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm ID x 25 cm) a binary 115 min gradient from 5 % to 95 % buffer B (80:20 acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid: water in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min was used to separate the peptides from bioaerosol samples. Precursor spectra were acquired in profile mode in the scan range of 350 to 1600 m/z with a resolution of 70,000, an automatic gain control (AGC) of 1x106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. A data dependent acquisition (DDA) of the 10 most intense precursor ions was performed by collision-induced dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 27.5 %, with an AGC of 2x105 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. The isolation window was set to 2 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and ions with unknown, single or charges >7 were excluded from fragmentation. The fragment ions were detected at 17.500 resolution with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data per condition were processed in the Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Scientific). The recalibration of the MS/MS spectra was performed via the implemented PD node “Spectrum Files RC” with default parameter. The database searches of acquired LC-MS/MS spectral data were performed using the 2stage Sequest HT algorithm with subsequent intensity-based INFERYS rescoring of Sequest HT search engine results. In both phases of the database search, the following parameters were used: 0.02 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, 10 ppm parent ion tolerance, maximum two missed cleavages, full tryptic digestion, default modification per search step, FDR of 0.01 on peptide level by rescoring the spectra with Percolator. After adhering to a strict peptide FDR of 0.01, we accepted all peptide identifications, including those matching only by a single peptide spectrum (PSM).

### Publication Abstract
Swine confinement buildings represent workplaces with high biological air pollution. It is suspected that individual components of inhalable air are causatives of chronic respiratory disease that are regularly detected among workers. In order to understand the relationship between exposure and stress, it is necessary to study the components of bioaerosols in more detail. For this purpose, bioaerosols from pig barns were collected on quartz filters and analysed via a combinatorial approach of 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing and metaproteomics. The study reveals the presence of peptides from pigs, their feed and microorganisms. The proportion of fungal peptides detected is considered to be underrepresented compared to bacterial peptides. In addition, the metaproteomic workflow enabled functional predictions about the discovered peptides. Housekeeping proteins were found in particular, but also evidence for the presence of bacterial virulence factors (e.g., serralysin-like metalloprotease) as well as plant (e.g., chitinase) and fungal allergens (e.g., alt a10). Metaproteomic analyses can thus be used to identify factors that may be relevant to the health of pig farmers. Accordingly, such studies could be used in the future to assess the adverse health potential of an occupationally relevant bioaerosol and help consider defined protective strategies for workers.

### Keywords
Bioaerosol, Pig

### Affiliations
Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Berlin, Germany
BAuA—Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, D-10317 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Susann Meyer

### Lab Head
Dr PD Dr. Udo Jäckel
BAuA—Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, D-10317 Berlin, Germany


