### Accession
PXD034834

### Title
Reanalysis of PXD012038: "Molecular characterization of Histomonas meleagridis exoproteome with emphasis on protease secretion and parasite-bacteria interaction - SWATH dataset"

### Description
Exoproteome from parasitic protists constitutes of extracellular proteins which play a fundamental role in multifactorial host-parasite interactions. Lytic factors, especially secreted proteases in extracellular milieu, are capable to modulate tissue invasion, thereby aggravating host susceptibility. Despite the important role of exoproteins during infection, exoproteomic data on Histomonas meleagridis are non-existent. The present study employed traditional 1D-in-gel-zymography (1D-IGZ) and micro-LC-ESI-MS/MS (shotgun proteomics), to scrutinize H. meleagridis exoproteomes, obtained from a clonal virulent and attenuated strains. Both strains were maintained as mono-eukaryotic monoxenic culture with Escherichia coli. We demonstrated active in vitro secretion kinetics of proteases by both parasites, with widespread proteolytic activity ranging from 17 kDa to 120 kDa. Based on protease inhibitor-susceptibility tests, a predominant repertoire of cysteine proteolysis was present in the parasite exoproteomes, with stronger activity from virulent H. meleagridis. Shotgun proteomics, aided by customized database, identified 176 proteins including actin, potential moonlighting glycolytic enzymes, lytic molecules such as pore-forming proteins (PFPs) and proteases like cathepsin-L like cysteine protease. To quantify the exoproteomic differences between the virulent and the attenuated H. meleagridis cultures, a sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra mass spectrometric (SWATH-MS) approach was applied. Surprisingly results showed most of the exoproteomic differences to be of bacterial origin, involving metabolism and locomotion. By deciphering such molecular signatures, novel insights into an inherent complex in vitro protozoan- bacteria relationship was elucidated.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation The H. meleagridis exoproteomes were obtained following 6h serum-free incubation of each of three virulent and three attenuated H. meleagridis cultures. Concentrated cell-free filtrates were submitted to on-filter digestion to remove excess reagents, detergents and salts. This was followed by HPLC interfaced with micro electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS). Briefly, the exoproteomes were treated with protease inhibitors (1000 μM TLCK, E-64, PMSF, EDTA, and cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Applied Science, Penzberg, Germany)). Following this, 20µg protein from each samples were digested according to the standard eFASP protocol (enhanced filter-aided sample preparation) using Amicon Ultra 0.5mL Ultracel 10 K centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore, Burlington MA, USA) . In brief, after washing, proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide. On-filter digestion was performed with trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) using 4% sodium deoxycholate for 14 hours at 37°C. Afterwards, digested peptides were recovered from the filter with three changes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Removal of sodium deoxycholate was achieved by phase transfer with ethyl acetate according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Extracted peptides were dried down in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Afterwards, a C18 cleanup step using Pierce™ C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Fischer Scientific; Waltham, MA; USA) was performed according to the manufacturer’s manual. Dried peptides were redissolved in 5% acetonitril (ACN), 0.5% triflouroacetic acid (TFA) for sample loading. Washing was performed using 5% ACN with 0.5% TFA. Finally, peptide elution was accomplished with 70%ACN with 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptides were dried down in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Dried peptides were redissolved in 0.1% aqueous TFA prior to LC-MS injection (4.5 µg protein absolute in 9 µl injection volume). All samples were spiked with standardized indexed retention time reference peptides (iRT-Kit; Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) for facilitation of retention time alignment (0.8 µl iRTs added to 40 µl sample). Acquisition of SWATH data Peptides were separated on an Eksigent NanoLC 425 system using a microflow pump module (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Sample pre-concentration and desalting were accomplished with a 5 mm YMC-Triart C18 precolumn (500 µm inner diameter, 3 µm particle size, and 12 nm pore size) (YMC, Dinslaken, Germany). For sample loading and desalting ultra pure LC-MS grade H2O with 0.1% formic acid (FA) was used as a mobile phase with a flow rate of 10 µl/min. Separation of peptides was performed on a 15 cm YMC-Triart C18 column (300 µm inner diameter, 3 µm particle size, and 12 nm pore size; YMC, Dinslaken, Germany) with a flow rate of 5 µl/min. The gradient started with 3% B (ACN with 0.1% FA) and increased in two steps to 25% B (38 min) and 35% (43min). For information independent data acquisition (SWATH runs) MS1 spectra were collected in the range of 400-1250 m/z with an accumulation time of 50 ms. Product ion spectra were collected in 70 windows in the range of 400-1250 m/z with a width of 4.8 to 323.9 Da depending on the density of precursor masses in the mass segment. For each window ions were accumulated for 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The database was derived by conceptual translation of coding genomic sequences from virulent and attenuated Histomonas meleagridis strains. It was combined with E. coli proteins (UniProt taxonomy ID: 562, EcolX https://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/562) and proteins from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) (n= 117) (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta). Acquired raw data were processed with ProteinPilot Software version 5.0.2 (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) for re-calibration and database searches. Mass tolerance in MS mode was set with 0.05 and 0.1 Da in MSMS mode for the rapid recalibration search, and 0.0011 Da in MS and 0.01 Da in MSMS mode for the final search. Parameters for database search were: trypsin digestion, cysteine alkylation set to iodoacetamide, search effort set to rapid ID. False discovery rate analysis (FDR) was performed using the integrated tools in ProteinPilot Software version 5.0.2 (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Global false discovery rate was set to <1% on protein level. Statistical evaluation was performed using R programming language. Raw peak areas were exported for further analysis with the DEP package in R. Prior to the import into R, E.coli proteins were excluded. Afterwards the technical replicates were aggregated by the mean. Following statistical analysis of the virulent vs. the attenuated strain by a t-test was performed according to the DEP script including normalization of protein abundances. From these, proteins with more than two peptides displaying a fold change higher than 2-fold with an adjusted p-value lower than 0.05 were considered to be up-regulated in our analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Histomonas meleagridis,</i> a poultry-specific intestinal protozoan parasite, is histomonosis's etiological agent. Since treatment or prophylaxis options are no longer available in various countries, histomonosis can lead to significant production losses in chickens and mortality in turkeys. The surfaceome of microbial pathogens is a crucial component of host-pathogen interactions. Recent proteome and exoproteome studies on <i>H. meleagridis</i> produced molecular data associated with virulence and <i>in vitro</i> attenuation, yet the information on proteins exposed on the cell surface is currently unknown. Thus, in the present study, we identified 1485 proteins and quantified 22 and 45 upregulated proteins in the virulent and attenuated strains, respectively, by applying cell surface biotinylation in association with high-throughput proteomic analysis. The virulent strain displayed upregulated proteins that could be linked to putative virulence factors involved in the colonization and establishment of infection, with the upregulation of two candidates being confirmed by expression analysis. In the attenuated strain, structural, transport and energy production proteins were upregulated, supporting the protozoan's adaptation to the <i>in vitro</i> environment. These results provide a better understanding of the surface molecules involved in the pathogenesis of histomonosis, while highlighting the pathogen's <i>in vitro</i> adaptation processes.

### Keywords
Shotgun exoproteomics, Protozoa, Exoproteome profiling, Protein secretion, Proteases, Virulence factors, Pathogenesis, Microbial microenvironment, Protease inhibitor

### Affiliations
Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Ivana BILIC

### Lab Head
Dr Ivana Bilic
University Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria


