### Accession
PXD029285

### Title
Comparative proteomic profiling identifies reciprocal expression of mitochondrial proteins between white and grey matter lesions from multiple sclerosis brains

### Description
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory and demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (CNS), where ongoing demyelination and remyelination failure are the major factors for progressive neurological disability. In this report, we employed a comprehensive proteomic approach and immunohistochemical (IHC) validation to gaininsight into the pathobiological mechanisms that may be associated with the progressive phase of MS disease. Isolated proteins from myelinated regions, demyelinated white matter lesions (WMLs), and grey-matter lesions (GMLs) of well-characterized progressive MS brain tissues were subjected to label-free quantitative mass spectrometry (LFQ-MS). Using a system-biology approach, we detected increased expression of proteins belonging to mitochondrial electron transport complexes and oxidative phosphorylatio pathway in WMLs. Intriguingly, many of these proteins and pathways had opposite expression patterns in GMLs of progressive MS brains. A comparison to the huma MitoCarta database mapped the mitochondrial proteins to mitochondrial subunits in both WMLs and GMLs. Taken together, we provide evidence of opposite expression of mitochondrial proteins in response to demyelination of white- and grey-matter regions in progressive MS brain.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation: Cryostat sections (14μm) of fresh frozen tissue blocks with myelinated, normal-appearing white matter (NAWM) and grey matter (NAGM), and demyelinated (WMLs/GMLs) areas from progressive MS brains were stained for PLP and MHC Class II to select the control and lesion tissues. Myelinated and lesioned areas were scored on the frozen block with a scalpel before cutting 60μm- thick sections and processed for total lysates preparation. Briefly, tissue was lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific) with tissue homogenizer followed by sonication (Ultrasonic Disruptor Sonifier II, Model W-250/W-450, Bransons Ultrasonics, Danbury, CT, USA) for 1 min at 70% amplitude. Total protein concentration was measured by PierceTM bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) and stored at -800C until ready to use. Fifty micrograms of tissue lysate from the respective sample were digested using an in-solution trypsin digestion protocol, followed by denaturation at 99°C for 5 min, reduction with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 30 min, and alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 60 min, respectively. Samples were then incubated for digestion overnight at 37°C by adding trypsin in a 1:50 protease: protein ratio. After digestion, RapiGest was degraded by acidifying to 0.5% (v/v) TFA and incubating for 30 min at 37°C. Samples were desalted through ZipTip C18, and vacuum dried.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS measurements: Digested peptides were analyzed on a ThermoFisher Scientific UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with a ThermoFisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Liquid chromatography was performed prior to MS/MS analysis for peptide separation. The HPLC column used is a Dionex 15 cm x 75 μm Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2 μm, 100 Å reversed-phase capillary chromatography column. Five-microliter volumes of the peptide extract were injected, and peptides were eluted from the column by a 90-minute acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.30 μL/min and introduced to the source of the mass spectrometer on-line. The nanoelectrospray ion source was operated at 2.3 kV. The digest was analyzed using the data-dependent multitask capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra using a Fourier Transform (FT) orbitrap analyzer to determine peptide molecular weights and collision-induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS product ion spectra with an ion-trap analyzer to determine the amino acid sequence in successive instrument scans. The MS method used in this study was a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) with 3-second duty cycles. It includes one full scan at a resolution of 120,000 followed by as many MS/MS scans as possible on the most abundant ions in hat full scan. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count 137 of 1 and ions within 10 ppm of the fragmented mass were excluded for 60 seconds. Protein quantification, identification, and data analysis: The data were analyzed using MaxQuant V1.6.1.0 with the search engine Andromeda, which is integrated with MaxQuant software. The parameters used were default settings for an Orbitrap instrument (16). The database used to search the MS/MS spectra was the Uniprot human protein database containing 25,035 entries with an automatically- generated decoy database (reversed sequences). The search was performed looking for fully tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of Methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as static modifications. The precursor mass tolerance for these searches was set to 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. The search was performed including the common contaminant database available in MaxQuant and these proteins were excluded in the data analysis. A false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein with a minimum length of seven amino acids, one unique and two total peptides were required for positive identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis, Mitochondria, Mass spectrometry, Gray matter lesion, White matter lesion

### Affiliations
Department of Neurosciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Ranjan Dutta
Department of Neurosciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic


