### Accession
PXD005025

### Title
Label-free Proteomics Reveals that Cowpea Severe Mosaic Virus Transiently Suppresses the Host Leaf Protein Accumulation During the Compatible Interaction with Cowpea (Vigna unguiculata [L.] Walp.)

### Description
Viruses are important plant pathogens that threaten diverse crops worldwide. Diseases caused by Cowpea severe mosaic virus (CPSMV) have drawn attention because of the serious damages they cause to economically important crops including cowpea. This work was undertaken to quantify and identify the responsive proteins of a susceptible cowpea genotype infected with CPSMV, in comparison with mock-inoculated controls, using label-free quantitative proteomics and databanks, aiming at providing insights on the molecular basis of this compatible interaction. Cowpea leaves were mock-inoculated or inoculated with CPSMV and 2 and 6 days later proteins were extracted and analyzed. More than 3000 proteins were identified and 75 and 55 of them differentially accumulated in response to CPSMV, at 2 and 6 DAI, respectively. At 2 DAI, 76% of the proteins were down-represented and 24% upaccumulated. However, at 6 DAI, 100% of the identified proteins were up-accumulated. Thus CPSMV transiently suppresses the synthesis of proteins involved particularly in the redox homeostasis, protein synthesis, defense, stress, RNA/DNA metabolism, signaling, and other functions, allowing viral invasion and spread in cowpea tissues. It is expected that identification of differentially accumulated proteins and their interactions advance our understanding on how a susceptible cowpea genotype responds to CPSMV infection.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion, the protein samples were ressuspended in 20.0 μL of 0.2% (v/v) ProteaseMAX in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0. After quantification, 20 μg of protein extracts were reduced with 1 mM DTT at 57 °C for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 5 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. Trypsin (0.5 μg) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, was added and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Reaction was stopped by adding 1% (v/v) TFA. The peptides present in the resulting supernatant were desalted on C18 Empore 3M resin filters (St. Paul, MN). All experiments were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system connected to a quadrupole-Orbitrap (QExactive) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Easy Spray/Thermo Scientific). For liquid chromatography separation an in-house reverse phase C18 capillary column from Thermo Scientific (Easy Spray column, 2-μm beads, 100 Å, 75-μm inner diameter, and 25-cm bed length) was used. The flow rate was adjusted to 0.3 μL/min, and the column equilibrated with solvent A consisting of aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. Gradient elution was performed using solvent B composed of aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 90% (v/v) acetonitrile. The gradient was 5%-32% of B in 240 min, and 32-80% B in 20 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1,750) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R = 70,000 at m/z 200 (after accumulation to a target of 3,000,000 ions in the quadruple or 50 ms injection time). The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense multiply-charged ions, up to ten, depending on signal intensity, for fragmentation on the HCD cell using high-energy collision dissociation at a target value of 100,000 charges or maximum acquisition time of 100 ms. MS/MS scans were collected at 17,500 resolution at the Orbitrap cell. Target ions previously selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s. General mass spectrometry conditions were: electrospray voltage, 2.0 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature of 250 °C; and normalized HCD collision energy of 25%. Ion selection threshold was set to 1e4 counts. Isolation width of 3.0 Da was used.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 for protein identification. Parameters were set as follow: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification; protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Mass tolerance for MS1 (First search option) was 20 ppm and main search tolerance was 6 ppm after recalibration of data. MS/MS mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. Minimal unique peptides were set to 1, and FDR allowed was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. The LFQ intensities of each protein per sample from MaxQuant outputs (i.e., normalized quantitative values calculated by MaxQuant) were loaded into Perseus, a statistics script from the MaxQuant package. Those values were log transformed to base 2, categorical groups were created based on sample replicates, and groups were statistically tested using Student t-test. Statistical significance was determined under stringent criteria (cut-off value p<0.05). An in-house Uniprot database was built including Uniprot sequences for Glycine max, Phaseolus sp., and Vigna sp. (download at April 27, 2015). Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rates. The VigGS database 23 was used (January 4, 2016) to validate protein identification done with the above databases. MaxQuant also adds a list of common contaminants to the database to avoid false-discoveries from contaminant proteins. Proteins identified from the Reversed or the Contaminant list are manually removed prior to sample comparison and statistics.

### Publication Abstract
Viruses are important plant pathogens that threaten diverse crops worldwide. Diseases caused by Cowpea severe mosaic virus (CPSMV) have drawn attention because of the serious damages they cause to economically important crops including cowpea. This work was undertaken to quantify and identify the responsive proteins of a susceptible cowpea genotype infected with CPSMV, in comparison with mock-inoculated controls, using label-free quantitative proteomics and databanks, aiming at providing insights on the molecular basis of this compatible interaction. Cowpea leaves were mock- or CPSMV-inoculated and 2 and 6 days later proteins were extracted and analyzed. More than 3000 proteins were identified (data available via ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD005025) and 75 and 55 of them differentially accumulated in response to CPSMV, at 2 and 6 DAI, respectively. At 2 DAI, 76% of the proteins decreased in amount and 24% increased. However, at 6 DAI, 100% of the identified proteins increased. Thus, CPSMV transiently suppresses the synthesis of proteins involved particularly in the redox homeostasis, protein synthesis, defense, stress, RNA/DNA metabolism, signaling, and other functions, allowing viral invasion and spread in cowpea tissues.

### Keywords
Label-free proteomic, Vigna unguiculata, Cpsmv, Compatible interaction

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biochemistry, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte
Laboratory of Plant Defense Proteins, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Federal University of Ceara, Fortaleza, Brazil.

### Submitter
Gustavo De Souza

### Lab Head
Dr Luiza Paiva
Laboratory of Plant Defense Proteins, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Federal University of Ceara, Fortaleza, Brazil.


