### Accession
PXD005018

### Title
LCMS analysis of Hela cells -  Proteomic analysis reveals diverse proline hydroxylation-mediated oxygen-sensing cellular pathways in cancer cells

### Description
Systematic peptide identification in Hela cells through fractionation and LCMS anlaysis

### Sample Protocol
trypsin digestion, immunoaffinity purification and shot-gun LCMS analysis

### Data Protocol
Maxquant and Andromeda searches of Uniprot human database using target-decoy FDR

### Publication Abstract
Proline hydroxylation is a critical cellular mechanism regulating oxygen-response pathways in tumor initiation and progression. Yet, its substrate diversity and functions remain largely unknown. Here, we report a system-wide analysis to characterize proline hydroxylation substrates in cancer cells using an immunoaffinity-purification assisted proteomics strategy. We identified 562 sites from 272 proteins in HeLa cells. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that proline hydroxylation substrates are significantly enriched with mRNA processing and stress-response cellular pathways with canonical and diverse flanking sequence motifs. Structural analysis indicates a significant enrichment of proline hydroxylation participating in the secondary structure of substrate proteins. Our study identified and validated Brd4, a key transcription factor, as a novel proline hydroxylation substrate. Functional analysis showed that the inhibition of proline hydroxylation pathway significantly reduced the proline hydroxylation abundance on Brd4 and affected Brd4-mediated transcriptional activity as well as cell proliferation in AML leukemia cells. Taken together, our study identified a broad regulatory role of proline hydroxylation in cellular oxygen-sensing pathways and revealed potentially new targets that dynamically respond to hypoxia microenvironment in tumor cells.

### Keywords
Short-gun, Ptm, Lcms

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Yue Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yue Chen
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN


