### Accession
PXD045411

### Title
Functional analysis of Cdc20 reveals a critical role of CRY box in mitotic checkpoint signaling

### Description
Accurate chromosome segregation is coordinated by the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) through its effector the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC), to inhibit the anaphase-promoting complex or cyclosome (APC/C). Cdc20 is an essential mitotic regulator since it promotes mitotic exit through activating the APC/C and monitors kinetochore-microtubule attachment through activating the SAC. The proper functioning of Cdc20 requires multiple interactions with APC/C and MCC subunits. To functionally assess each of these interactions within cells requires efficient depletion of endogenous Cdc20, which is highly difficult to achieve by RNAi. Here we generated Cdc20 RNAi sensitive cell lines by CRISPR/Cas9 which display a penetrant metaphase arrest phenotype by a single RNAi treatment. In this null background, we accurately measured the contribution of each known motif of Cdc20 on APC/C and SAC activation. The CRY box, a previously identified degron was found to be critical for the SAC by promoting theMCC formation and stabilizing the interaction between the MCC and APC/C. These data reveal additionalregulatory components within the SAC and establish a novel method to interrogate Cdc20 function.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were collected by mitotic shake-off and washed twice with ice-cold PBS. Cell extracts were prepared by resuspending cell pellet in ice-cold lysis buffer (10 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, pH 8.0, 0.5% NP-40) and incubating on ice for 30 min before centrifugation at 17,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube. 2 µg Cdc20 antibody (BETHYL,A301-180A) was added into 1.5 mg of cell lysate and the mixture was rotated end-to-end at 4 °C overnight. 40 µl of Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose (Santa Cruz,sc-2003) was applied to the mixture the next morning for 3 hours at 4 °C on the rotating device. The beads were collected by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 2 minutes at 4 °C and washed 4 times with ice-cold wash buffer (10 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl,0.5 mM EDTA). The beads were resuspended with 40 µl of 2 x sample buffer and boiled for 3 minutes. Immunoprecipitates were separated by SDS-PAGE and sent for mass spectrometry analysis.The digestion was quenched by adding 50mL of 1% formic acid to the gel piece, then 300mL of acetonitrile was added and mixed with gel piece thoroughly for 30 min at room temperature to extract digested protein (i.e. peptide mixtures) from the gel piece. The peptide mixtures were transfered to a 1.5mL centrifuge tube and dried in SpeedVacuum concentrator (ThermoScientific). The dried peptide mixtures were dissolved in 50mL of 1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis using a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer coupled with a EASY nLC-1200 (ThermoScientific). Liquid chromatography separation was performed on a 25 cm column (Picofrit 75mm i.d., packed Magic C18 resin) and was pre-equilibrated with 100% of mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC Water) . The peptide mixtures were eluted from the column with a gradient elution consisting of an increase from 3 to 35% of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 35min at 300 nL/min, 35-55% mobile phase B for 10 min at 300 nL/min, 55-100%mobile phase B for 5 min at 500 nL/min, and held at 100% mobile phase B for 5 min at 500 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode over m/z range 400-1800, and included selection of the 20 most abundant doubly or triply charged ions of each MS spectrum for MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometer parameters included capillary voltage of 2.0 kV, capillary temperature of 320 °C, resolution of 60,000, target value of 3,000,000, and the collision energy is 27 NCE. Mass spectra were processed and searched using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4, ThermoScientific) against the human Human Protein Database (UniProt release 2022_01). The mass tolerance allowed for the precursor ions is 10 ppm, while the mass tolerance of fragment ions is set to 0.01 Da. A fixed propionamide modification for Cysteine, and a variable oxidation modification for Methionine are specified. Peptide identification is performed using the trypsin digestion rule with one missed cleavage. The search thresholds used are: minimum fragment ion matches per peptide, 3; minimum fragment ion matches per protein, 7; minimum peptides per protein, 1; and false discovery rate for protein identification, 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cdc20;cry box;crispr cas9;mitosis

### Affiliations
Qingdao University
Cancer Institute, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao University,Qingdao, China

### Submitter
Yuqing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Gang Zhang
Cancer Institute, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao University,Qingdao, China


