### Accession
PXD022812

### Title
Proteome-wide identification of NEDD8 modification sites reveals distinct proteomes for canonical and atypical NEDDylation

### Description
The Ubiquitin-like molecule NEDD8 controls several biological processes and is a promising target for therapeutic intervention. NEDDylation occurs through specific NEDD8 enzymes (canonical) or enzymes of the Ubiquitin system (atypical). Identification of NEDD8 sites on substrates is critical for delineating the processes controlled by NEDDylation. By combining the use of the NEDD8 R74K mutant with anti-diGly antibodies we identified 1101 unique NEDDylation sites in 620 proteins. Bioinformatics analysis reveals that canonical and atypical NEDDylation have distinct proteomes; the spliceosome/mRNA surveillance/DNA replication and ribosome/proteasome respectively. The data also reveal the formation of poly-NEDD8, hybrid NEDD8-Ubiquitin and NEDD8-SUMO-2 chains as potential molecular signals. In particular, NEDD8-SUMO-2 chains are induced upon proteotoxic stress (atypical) through NEDDylation of K11 in SUMO-2 and conjugates accumulate in previously described nucleolus-related inclusions. The study uncovers a diverse proteome for NEDDylation, and is consistent with the concept of extensive cross-talk between Ubiquitin and Ubls under proteotoxic stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Parental and NEDP1 knockout HCT116 cells stably expressing 6His-NEDD8R74K were washed with PBS and lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% Na-deoxycholate, protease inhibitors) then incubated for 15min on ice. Lysate was sonicated for 3x30s at 30% amplitude (Branson Digital Sonifier) and cleared by centrifugation at 13000rpm for 15min. Supernatants were collected and protein concentration was measured using BCA assay. Around 200mg of proteins were precipitated overnight in 4xVol cold acetone at -20ºC. Precipitated proteins were re-dissolved in denaturing buffer (6M Urea and 2M thiourea in 10mM HEPES at pH 8). Cysteines were reduced with 1mM dithiothreitol for 45min and alkylated with 5.5mM chloroacetamide for 30min in the dark. Proteins were subsequently proteolysed in 1:100 and 1:500 with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) overnight. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters), and dissolved in immunoprecipitation buffer (10mM sodium phosphate and 50mM sodium chloride in 50mM MOPS at pH 7.2). Di-glycine-modified peptides were immuno-enriched using PTMScan® Ubiquitin Branch Motif (K-ε-GG) beads (Cell Signaling Technology). Peptides were incubated for 4hrs at 4°C on a rotation wheel. The beads were washed three times in ice-cold immunoprecipitation buffer followed by three washes in water. Immunoenriched peptides were eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O, fractionated in six fractions using micro- column-based strong-cation exchange chromatography (SCX) and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips as previously described (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns (15cm length, 75µm inner diameter, 1.9µm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2hrs. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300 – 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 88473 human protein sequences human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in December 2013 using Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6ppm in MS mode, 20ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict Lys-C specificity and allowing up to 3 miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation modification of cysteines (mass difference to cysteine carbamidomethylation) and di-glycine-lysine were searched as variable modifications. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm. Peptides with site localization probability above 0.75 were selected. Approximately 100 sites had a localization probability below 0.9. For all functional association analysis sites with localization probability ≥ 0.9 were used. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach. Di-glycine lysine modified peptides with a minimum score of 40 and delta score of 6 are reported and used for the analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin-like molecule NEDD8 controls several biological processes and is a promising target for therapeutic intervention. NEDDylation occurs through specific NEDD8 enzymes (canonical) or enzymes of the ubiquitin system (atypical). Identification of NEDD8 sites on substrates is critical for delineating the processes controlled by NEDDylation. By combining the use of the NEDD8 R74K mutant with anti-di-glycine (anti-diGly) antibodies, we identified 1,101 unique NEDDylation sites in 620 proteins. Bioinformatics analysis reveals that canonical and atypical NEDDylation have distinct proteomes; the spliceosome/mRNA surveillance/DNA replication and ribosome/proteasome, respectively. The data also reveal the formation of poly-NEDD8, hybrid NEDD8-ubiquitin, and NEDD8-SUMO-2 chains as potential molecular signals. In particular, NEDD8-SUMO-2 chains are induced upon proteotoxic stress (atypical) through NEDDylation of K11 in SUMO-2, and conjugates accumulate in previously described nucleolus-related inclusions. The study uncovers a diverse proteome for NEDDylation and is consistent with the concept of extensive cross-talk between ubiquitin and Ubls under proteotoxic stress conditions.

### Keywords
Digly remnants, Proteomics, Nucleolus-related inclusions, Nedd8 polymers, Nedd8, Sumo-2

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


