### Accession
PXD006558

### Title
In-depth quantitative proteomics of signal pathways in BV2 microglial cell activation

### Description
Microglia become activated by disturbances in the homeostasis of their local microenvironment. While there are varying degrees of microglia activation, a pro-inflammatory reactive state induced by exposure to stimuli like LPS and IFN-γ. In this study, we identified a total of 5497 proteins in whole cell proteome and 4938 proteins for secretome of activated BV-2 mouse microglia cell line with LPS or IFN-γ using improved shotgun proteomic approach. From the differentially expressed proteins in stimulated microglia, we were able to classify pathways related immune-inflammatory response or metabolism. Moreover, we performed longitudinal quantification of secreted proteins during the detrimental activation of microglia which releases neurotoxic molecules mediated neuronal cell loss in the brain region.

### Sample Protocol
BV2 mouse microglial cell line was cultured in DMEM including 10% FBS and 1% anti-penicillin and streptomycin. BV2 cells were activated by 1 ug/ml LPS, 10 ng/ml IFN-γ, or 1ug/ml LPS plus 10 ng/ml IFR-γ for 6 hr, 12 hr, 24 hr, and 48 hr in every condition. At each time point, the conditioned media and the pellet were collected by the same procedure as the control sample. Cell pellet lysis was performed at room temperature in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 1mM DTT, 0.1M Tris-Cl, pH7.4). 200 ug proteins were digested using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as described with some modification. Dimethyl tri-plex labeling was performed according to the standard protocol with some modifications. Dimethyl labeled peptides were fractionated according to an established StageTip-based high-pH reverse phase protocol with some modifications. We separated peptides on a Nanoflow Easy-nLC 1000 by 2 column system, trap column. Ionized peptides were analyzed by a quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files of dimethyl labeled quantification were processed in Maxquant software ver. 1.3.0.5  built in peptide identification algorithm to match the spectra against the UniProtKB FASTA database (74,540 entries, version from Jun 2014). MS/MS searches were performed with the following parameters: peptide length of at least six amino acids, fixed carbamidomethylation modification, variable methionine oxidation, and variable N-terminus acetylation modification. Enzyme specificity was set to 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied to all protein and peptide searches. The retention times of all analyzed samples were linearized with the “Match between runs” feature of Maxquant that allows transfer of identified peptides in absence of sequencing with a retention time window of 2 min. Only for dimethyl labeled quantification, three multiplicities were selected with stable isotope dimethyl labeling (control: +28 Da, intermediate: +32 Da, heavy: +36 Da) at lysine and N-terminal. All proteins were filtered for common contaminants such as keratins.

### Publication Abstract
The development of systematic proteomic quantification techniques in systems biology research has enabled one to perform an in-depth analysis of cellular systems. We have developed a systematic proteomic approach that encompasses the spectrum from global to targeted analysis on a single platform. We have applied this technique to an activated microglia cell system to examine changes in the intracellular and extracellular proteomes. Microglia become activated when their homeostatic microenvironment is disrupted. There are varying degrees of microglial activation, and we chose to focus on the proinflammatory reactive state that is induced by exposure to such stimuli as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and interferon-gamma (IFN-&#x3b3;). Using an improved shotgun proteomics approach, we identified 5497 proteins in the whole-cell proteome and 4938 proteins in the secretome that were associated with the activation of BV2 mouse microglia by LPS or IFN-&#x3b3;. Of the differentially expressed proteins in stimulated microglia, we classified pathways that were related to immune-inflammatory responses and metabolism. Our label-free parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) approach made it possible to comprehensively measure the hyper-multiplex quantitative value of each protein by high-resolution mass spectrometry. Over 450 peptides that corresponded to pathway proteins and direct or indirect interactors via the STRING database were quantified by label-free PRM in a single run. Moreover, we performed a longitudinal quantification of secreted proteins during microglial activation, in which neurotoxic molecules that mediate neuronal cell loss in the brain are released. These data suggest that latent pathways that are associated with neurodegenerative diseases can be discovered by constructing and analyzing a pathway network model of proteins. Furthermore, this systematic quantification platform has tremendous potential for applications in large-scale targeted analyses. The proteomics data for discovery and label-free PRM analysis have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with identifiers &lt;PXD006558&gt; and &lt;PXD006556&gt;, respectively.

### Keywords
Dimethylation labeled quantification, Bv2 activation, Quantitative analysis

### Affiliations
Departments of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
The University of North Carolina at Greensboro

### Submitter
Jongmin Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Youngsoo Kim
Departments of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea


