### Accession
PXD023227

### Title
Adverse Effects of Bisphenol A and its substitute compounds on human SGBS preadipocytes

### Description
Bisphenol A (BPA), which is used in a variety of consumer-related plastic products, was reported to cause metabolic disruption. Substitute compounds are increasingly emerging, but are not sufficiently investigated. In this study, we aimed to investigate the mode of action of BPA and four of its substitutes during the differentiation of human preadipocytes. Human preadipocytes were exposed to BPA, BPS, BPB, BPF, and BPAF, as well as the PPARγ-antagonist GW9662. After 12 days of differentiation, global protein profiles were assessed using LC-MS/MS-based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
For bisphenol and the PPARγ inhibitor GW9662 treatments, differentiation media containing rosiglitazone were additionally supplied with 10 nM, 100 nM, 1 µM or 10 µM of the compounds dissolved in sterile DMSO. Differentiation with rosiglitazone and equivalent amounts of vehicle solvent DMSO (0.01%) was used as an untreated control (named Rosi). Treatment without rosiglitazone served as an undifferentiated control (named DMSO). SGBS cells were differentiated under compound treatments for 12 days. Cells were wasched with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Lonza, Swiss), and lysed on day 12 with 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and freshly added protease inhibitor in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Cell lysates were prepared using Sera-Mag SP3 beads, as described previously by Hughes et al. (Hughes et al., 2014). Furthermore, tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeling strategy (TMT-10-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for protein quantification because we previously demonstrated that it enables more robust identification of pathways in a toxicological context (Wang et al., 2020). In brief, for each sample, 2 µL SP3 beads (GE Healthcare) were washed with 200 µL water, placed on a magnetic rack, and incubated for 2 min. The supernatant was then discarded, and this washing procedure was repeated twice. For each sample, 25 µg of proteins were reduced with TCEP (4 mM, 37 °C, 30 min, 550 rpm) and alkylated with IAA (6 mM, 37 °C, 30 min, 550 rpm, darkness). To force protein binding to the SP3 beads, each sample was acidified with FA (pH ~2), and acetonitrile (50%, v/v) was added. Afterward, they were transferred to the washed SP3 beads, incubated for 8 min and then placed on the magnetic rack for an additional 2 minutes incubation. The supernatant was discarded, ethanol (EtOH, 70%, v/v) added, and incubated for 30 s on the magnetic rack. This last step was repeated twice. Afterward, trypsin was added to each sample (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio, 37 °C, overnight, 550 rpm). Subsequently, each sample was labeled according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Acetonitrile (>95%, v/v) was added to each tube to force peptide binding to the beads. The mixture was incubated for 8 min and then placed on the magnetic rack for an additional 2 minutes incubation. The supernatant was discarded, acetonitrile (100%, v/v) added, and incubated for 30 s on the magnetic rack. This last step was repeated twice. Peptides were eluted from the beads using water with DMSO (2%, v/v) and sonication (1 min). The tube was placed on the magnetic rack and incubated for 2 min. The supernatant containing the peptides was collected, dried under vacuum, and reconstituted in FA (0.1%, v/v) for MS analysis. All samples were analyzed on a nano ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled on-line to an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) equipped with a chip-based ESI source (Nanomate, Advion,). Peptides (10 µg) were trapped on a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, nanoViper, 2μm, 75μm×5cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, #164535) and separated on a reversed-phase C18 column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, nanoViper, 3μm, 75μm × 25 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, #164569) by using a non-linear gradient of 180 min.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4.0.350. The database search was performed using the UniprotKB/Swissprot protein database of Homo sapiens (06th of March 2019, only reviewed entries). False discovery rates (FDR) for peptide and proteins were set to 1%. Oxidation (methionine), acetylation (protein N-termini), and deamination (glutamine) were used as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as fixed modification, and a maximum of two tryptic missed cleavages was allowed. Proteins with at least two identified peptides were considered as identified, and proteins were quantified based on the intensities of the top three identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Bisphenol A (BPA), which is used in a variety of consumer-related plastic products, was reported to cause adverse effects, including disruption of adipocyte differentiation, interference with obesity mechanisms, and impairment of insulin- and glucose homeostasis. Substitute compounds are increasingly emerging but are not sufficiently investigated.We aimed to investigate the mode of action of BPA and four of its substitutes during the differentiation of human preadipocytes to adipocytes and their molecular interaction with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor &#x3b3; (PPAR&#x3b3;), a pivotal regulator of adipogenesis.Binding and effective biological activation of PPAR&#x3b3; were investigated by surface plasmon resonance and reporter gene assay, respectively. Human preadipocytes were continuously exposed to BPA, BPS, BPB, BPF, BPAF, and the PPAR&#x3b3;-antagonist GW9662. After 12&#xa0;days of differentiation, lipid production was quantified via Oil Red O staining, and global protein profiles were assessed using LC-MS/MS-based proteomics. All tested bisphenols bound to human PPAR&#x3b3; with similar efficacy as the natural ligand 15d-PGJ2in vitroand provoked an antagonistic effect on PPAR&#x3b3; in the reporter gene assay at non-cytotoxic concentrations. During the differentiation of human preadipocytes, all bisphenols decreased lipid production. Global proteomics displayed a down-regulation of adipogenesis and metabolic pathways, similar to GW9662. Interestingly, pro-inflammatory pathways were up-regulated, MCP1 release was increased, and adiponectin decreased. pAKT/AKT ratios revealed significantly reduced insulin sensitivity by BPA, BPB, and BPS upon insulin stimulation.Thus, our results show that not only BPA but also its substitutes disrupt crucial metabolic functions and insulin signaling in adipocytes under low, environmentally relevant concentrations. This effect, mediated through inhibition of PPAR&#x3b3;, may promote hypertrophy of adipose tissue and increase the risk of developing metabolic syndrome, including insulin resistance.

### Keywords
Human, Bisphenol a, Bpa, Sgbs, Adipocytes

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research

### Submitter
Alexandra Schaffert

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ Leipzig, Germany


