### Accession
PXD012203

### Title
Proteomics of Brain Proteome Revealed Altered Mitochondrial Function in Alzheimer Disease

### Description
A discovery-driven approach with isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) and label-free quantitative proteomics was used to profiled the mitochondrial proteome in human brain tissues of healthy and AD individuals.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen individual brain samples were thawed on ice and equal quantity was pooled in a group-wise manner. The individual clinical details of the patients are listed in Table 1. The brain tissue samples from each patient and control (in equal quantity) were pooled together within the group.  We pooled two brain tissues in early onset AD and their age-matched control while old onset AD and control include five-tissue specimen. The tissue samples were homogenized. in a urea-acetate buffer (8M urea, 100 mM ammonium acetate, pH 6.0) to prevent asparagine deamidation. The cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 5000 x g for 7 min at 4º C. The proteins were purified by acetone precipitation and 200 µg proteins from each group were loaded into 12.5% SDS-PAGE and run at 80V for 45 min. Each sample lane was excised separately, cut into small pieces (approximately 1 mm2 pieces) and washed with 75% acetonitrile (ACN) containing triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, 25 mM). The gel pieces were reduced with Tris 2- carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride (5 mM) and then alkylated with methyl methanethiosulfonate (10 mM). Gel pieces were dehydrated using ACN and subjected to protein digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C. The peptides were extracted using 50% acetonitrile, 5% acetic acid and concentrated using vacuum concentrators (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Acquired data was further processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) v1.4 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, USA) with deisotope in MS/MS. The raw files were directly imported into the PD and further processed using designed workflow.Database search was performed against the UniProt human database.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial dysfunction is a key feature in both aging and neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease (AD), but the molecular signature that distinguishes pathological changes in the AD from healthy aging in the brain mitochondria remain poorly understood. In order to unveil AD specific mitochondrial dysfunctions, this study adopted a discovery-driven approach with isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) and label-free quantitative proteomics, and profiled the mitochondrial proteomes in human brain tissues of healthy and AD individuals. LC-MS/MS-based iTRAQ quantitative proteomics approach revealed differentially altered mitochondriomes that distinguished the AD's pathophysiology-induced from aging-associated changes. Our results showed that dysregulated mitochondrial complexes including electron transport chain (ETC) and ATP-synthase are the potential driver for pathology of the AD. The iTRAQ results were cross-validated with independent label-free quantitative proteomics experiments to confirm that the subunit of electron transport chain complex I, particularly NDUFA4 and NDUFA9 were altered in AD patients, suggesting destabilization of the junction between membrane and matrix arms of mitochondrial complex I impacted the mitochondrial functions in the AD. iTRAQ quantitative proteomics of brain mitochondriomes revealed disparity in healthy aging and age-dependent AD.

### Keywords
Human brain

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Sunil Adav

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Sze S K
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- disease: Non-demented control, Alzheimer's diseasemedial, Alzheimer's disease
- organism part: brain
- organism part.1: medial frontal gyrus
- cell type: not available
- Label: AC=MS:1002624;NT=iTRAQ reagent 114, AC=MS:1002625;NT=iTRAQ reagent 115, AC=MS:1002626;NT=iTRAQ reagent 116, AC=MS:1002627;NT=iTRAQ reagent 117
- instrument: AC=MS:1001911;NT=Q Exactive
- modification parameters: NT=Oxidation;MT=variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35
- modification parameters.1: NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-term;MT=Fixed
- modification parameters.2: NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed

