### Accession
PXD007651

### Title
Identifying protein acetylation

### Description
Five proteins, YdeH, Era, YegE, YeaJ and YihK were mixed and performed the Q Exactive MS analysis to identify the protien acetylation sites.

### Sample Protocol
5 proteins of the DGC pathway, YdeH, Era, YegE, YeaJ and YihK were constructed to Pca24N and purified from E. coli BL21. After analyzed by SDS-PAGE and trypsin-digested, these proteins were mixed and measured by Q Exactive. Briefly, nanoLC−MS/MS-experiments were performed on an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark) connected to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Samples (1 µL) were loaded by an autosampler onto a 2 cm packed pre-column (75 µm ID x 360 µm OD) in 0.1% HCOOH/water (buffer A) at a flow rate of 1 µL/min for 5 min. Analytical separation was performed over a 15 cm packed column (75 µm ID x 360 µm OD) at 300 nL/min with a 60 min gradient of increasing CH3CN (buffer B, 0.1% HCOOH/CH3CN). Both pre-column (5 µm diameter, 200 Å pore size) and analytical column (3 µm diameter, 100 Å pore size) were packed with C18-reversed phase silica (DIKMA-inspire TM) using a pressure bomb. Following sample loading, buffer B was increased rapidly from 3% to 6% over 5min and then shallowly to 22% over 36 min, and then to 35% over 9 min followed by a quick increase to 95% over 3min, and hold at 95% for 7 min.　The total acquisition duration lasted for 60 min. The Q Exactive Plus instrument was operated in the data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 350−1800) were acquired in the Orbitrap with 70 000 resolution (m/z　200) after accumulation of ions to a 3×10 6 target value based on predictive AGC from the previous full scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. The 15 most intense multiply charged ions (z≥2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the octupole collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with affixed injection time of 55 ms and 17 500 resolution for the fast scanning method. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 1.7 kV; heated capillary temperature, 320 °C; normalized HCD collision energy 27%. The MS/MS ion selection threshold was set to 9×10 3 counts. A 1.6 Da isolation width for the samples was chosen.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data was processed using Protein Discovery software (Thermo) to calculated the acetylation sites.

### Publication Abstract
As a ubiquitous bacterial secondary messenger, c-di-GMP plays key regulatory roles in processes such as bacterial motility and transcription regulation. CobB is the Sir2 family protein deacetylase that controls energy metabolism, chemotaxis, and DNA supercoiling in many bacteria. Using an Escherichia coli proteome microarray, we found that c-di-GMP strongly binds to CobB. Further, protein deacetylation assays showed that c-di-GMP inhibits the activity of CobB and thereby modulates the biogenesis of acetyl-CoA. Interestingly, we also found that one of the key enzymes directly involved in c-di-GMP production, DgcZ, is a substrate of CobB. Deacetylation of DgcZ by CobB enhances its activity and thus the production of c-di-GMP. Our work establishes a novel negative feedback loop linking c-di-GMP biogenesis and CobB-mediated protein deacetylation.

### Keywords
Q exactive, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Shanghai Jiaotong University
Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China

### Submitter
Zhaowei Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaowei Xu
Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China


