### Accession
PXD029988

### Title
Subcellular proteomics of murine presomitic mesoderm

### Description
We studied the effects of different stimuli on on the subcellular proteome of primary murine presomitic mesoderm tissue (PSM) in two separate experiments. In the first experiment, tissue was treated ex vivo with either fructose-6-phosphate, fructose-1,6-bisphosphate, or control treatment before subcellular fractionation using a subcellular protein fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific 78840). In the second experiment, PSMs from transgenic and control mice were extracted and subcellularly fractionated as above. Samples were multiplexed using TMT and analyzed on LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and LC-MS/MS. All samples were prepared for MS using a modified SP3 protocol (Hughes2014, pmid 25358341). Briefly, protein samples were precipitated onto Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (GE Healthcare, #45152105050250 and #65152105050250) in the presence of 50% ethanol and 2.5% formic acid (FA) for 15 min at RT, followed by four washes with 70% ethanol on magnets. Proteins were digested on beads with trypsin and Lys-C (5 ng/µl final concentration each) in 90 mM HEPES (pH 8.5), 5 mM chloroacetic acid and 1.25 mM TCEP overnight at room temperature shaking at 500 rpm. Peptides were eluted on magnets using 2% DMSO and dried in a speedvac. Dry peptides were reconstituted in 10 µl water and labelled by adding 4 µl TMT label (20 µg/µl in acetonitrile (ACN)) (TMT10plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific #90110, comparison of FBP and F6P treatment; or TMTsixplex, #1861431, comparison of TG to wt) and incubating for one hour at room temperature. Samples were multiplexed as follows: for comparison of FBP and F6P treatment all conditions (FBP, F6P, untreated) of each biological replicate were run in two separate TMT sets: one set including WCL, CYT and NUC fractions, and the other MEM, CHR and SKEL, for a total of six TMT sets for the experiment. For the comparison of TG and wt, both conditions (Tg, WT) and all replicates (1, 2, 3) were run in a single TMTsixplex experiment for each subcellular fraction (nuclear-skeletal, cytoplasmic, membrane). Labeling was quenched with hydroxylamine (1.1% final concentration), and samples were dried in a speedvac. Each sample was then resuspended using 100 ul LC-MS H2O, and 10% of each sample was taken, pooled to make a full TMT set, and desalted on an OASIS HLB µElution plate (Waters 186001828BA); washing twice with 0.05% FA, eluting with 80% ACN, 0.05% FA, and drying in a speedvac. The resulting sample was run on a 60 min LC-MS/MS gradient (see details below) to estimate relative amounts of protein in each channel. A second TMT set was then pooled using equalized amounts based on the median intensity of each channel from the first run to create an analytical TMT set with approximately equal labelled input protein in each channel. The analytical TMT set peptides were desalted using OASIS as described above and dried in a speedvac. Dried peptides were taken up in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) and prefractionated offline into six (comparison of FBP, F6P to untreated) or 12 (comparison of TG to wt) fractions on an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex) HPLC using high-pH reversed-phase chromatography (running buffer A: 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10; elution buffer B: ACN) on an X-bridge column (2.1 x 10 mm, C18, 3.5 µm, Waters). Prefractionated peptides were vacuum dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA, 4% ACN and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer, using an Acclaim C18 PepMap 100 trapping cartridge (5 µm, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100 Å) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm) analytical column (Waters). Solvent A: aqueous 0.1% FA; Solvent B: 0.1% FA in ACN (all solvents LC-MS grade from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on the trapping cartridge using solvent A for 3 min with a flow of 30 µl/min. Peptides were separated on the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µl/min applying a 120 min gradient of 2–40% of solvent B in A. Peptides were directly analyzed in positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 2.2 kV and a ion transfer tube temperature of 275 °C. Full scan MS spectra with a mass range of 375–1500 m/z were acquired on the orbitrap using a resolution of 120,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Data-dependent acquisition was used with a maximum cycle time of 3 s. Precursors were isolated on the quadrupole with an intensity threshold of 2e5, charge state filter of 2-7, isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Precursors were fragmented using HCD at 38% collision energy, and MS/MS spectra were acquired on the orbitrap with a resolution of 30 000, maximum injection time of 54 ms, normalized AGC target of 200%, with a dynamic exclusion window of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed using IsobarQuant (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26379230/) and peptide and protein identification was obtained with Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) using a reference mouse proteome (uniprot Proteome ID: UP000000589, downloaded 14.5.2016) modified to include known common contaminants and reversed protein sequences. Mascot search parameters were: trypsin; max. 2 missed cleavages; peptide tolerance 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.02 Da; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT10plex (K); variable modifications: Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), TMT10plex (N-term). IsobarQuant output data was analyzed on a protein level in R using in-house data analysis pipelines. In brief, protein data was filtered to remove contaminants, proteins with less than 2 unique quantified peptide matches as well as proteins, which were only detected in a single replicate. Subsequently, protein reporter signal sums were normalized within each TMT set using the vsn package (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12169536/). Significantly changing proteins between the treated and untreated sample were identified by applying a limma analysis (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25605792/) on the vsn-corrected values. Replicates were treated as covariates in the limma analysis for the comparison of FBP to F6P, as biological replicates were run as separate TMT sets. Multiple-testing adjustment of p values was done using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fructose-6-phosphate, Subcellular fractionation, Presomitic mesoderm, Subcellular proteomics, Glycolysis, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, 6-bisphosphate, Fructose-1

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Genome Biology Unit and Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Henrik Hammarén

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Beck
Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany


