### Accession
PXD004185

### Title
An interaction landscape of ubiquitin signaling

### Description
This project paper describes, for the first time, a global, proteome-wide interaction screening for ubiquitin signaling. Our data reveals both cell type dependent and independent diubiquitin interactions. In additon, we show that certain proteins more potently bind to K6 diubiquitin upon induction of DNA damage.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were in-gel or on-bead tryptic digested. Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC connected online to an LTQ-Orbitrap Q-Exactive or Fusion mass spectrometer. Spectra were recorded in CID or HCD mode. A gradient of acetonitrile (5% or 7%-30% or 32%) was applied followed by washes at 50% then 95% acetonitrile for total data collection time (120 min, 140 min or 240 min). For samples measured on Q Exactive, the top 10 most abundant peptides were fragmented for MS/MS. For samples measured on Fusion, scans were collected in data-dependent top speed mode with dynamic exclusion set at 60 seconds

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.5.0.1 was used to analyze the raw files with default settings and searching against the UniProt mouse or human proteome .For SILAC-labelling experiments, additionally Arg10/Lys8 heavy or light labels and match between runs were enabled. For label-free experiments, additionally match between runs and label-free quantification were enabled

### Publication Abstract
Intracellular signaling via the covalent attachment of different ubiquitin linkages to protein substrates is fundamental to many cellular processes. Although linkage-selective ubiquitin interactors have been studied on a case-by-case basis, proteome-wide analyses have not been conducted yet. Here, we present ubiquitin interactor affinity enrichment-mass spectrometry (UbIA-MS), a quantitative interaction proteomics method that makes use of chemically synthesized diubiquitin to enrich and identify ubiquitin linkage interactors from crude cell lysates. UbIA-MS reveals linkage-selective diubiquitin interactions in multiple cell types. For example, we identify TAB2 and TAB3 as novel K6 diubiquitin interactors and characterize UCHL3 as a K27-linkage selective interactor that regulates K27 polyubiquitin chain formation in cells. Additionally, we show a class of monoubiquitin and K6 diubiquitin interactors whose binding is induced by DNA damage. We expect that our proteome-wide diubiquitin interaction landscape and established workflows will have broad applications in the ongoing efforts to decipher the complex language of ubiquitin signaling.

### Keywords
Human, Ubiquitin, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Xiaofei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands


