### Accession
PXD043671

### Title
Native Prohibitin Complex Enrichment

### Description
Folding of newly synthesized proteins poses challenges for a functional proteome. Dedicated protein quality control (PQC) systems promote either the folding of nascent polypeptides at ribosomes or, if this fails, ensure their degradation. While well studied for cytosolic protein biogenesis, it is not understood how these processes work for mitochondrially-encoded proteins, key subunits of the oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS). Here, we identify dedicated hubs in proximity to mitoribosomal tunnel exits coordinating mitochondrial translation, protein import, assembly, and protein turnover. Conserved prohibitin/m-AAA protease supercomplexes and the availability of assembly chaperones determine the fate of newly synthesized proteins by molecular triaging. The localization of these competing activities in vicinity to the mitoribosomal tunnel exit allows for a prompt decision whether newly synthesized proteins are fed into OXPHOS assembly or degraded.   This repository contains the results of the FLAG-based enrichment of the native prohibitin complex. Please note that we measured elution either with LDS sample buffer or using FLAG-peptides. In the published study, the LDS elution buffer was shown.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of native PHB complexes Mitochondria isolated from wild-type yeast strains and Phb2FLAG expressing were subjected to FLAG-resin purification in triplicates. For each sample, 11 mg of isolated mitochondria stored in SH buffer were pelleted, resuspended in 1 mL activation buffer (SH buffer supplemented with amino acids, NTP, alpha-ketoglutarate, creatine phosphate and creatine kinase) and incubated at 30 °C for 30 min at 800 rpm. Activated mitochondria were centrifuged at 4 °C for 10 min at 10,000 rpm followed by resuspension of the pellet in 2 mL lysis buffer (40 mM HEPES, 150 mM KCl, 5 mM ATP, 5 mM Mg acetate, 1 mM PMSF, 5% glycerol, 1% Digitonin; pH = 7.4). Mitochondria were lysed at 4 °C for 30 min with constant tumbling followed by clarification of the lysate at 4 °C for 10 min, 16000 rpm. The supernatant was diluted with 3 mL dilution buffer (40 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM KCl, 5 mM Mg acetate, 1 mM PMSF, 0.1% Digitonin; pH = 7.4) and added to Anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma), pre-equilibrated with dilution buffer. After binding at 4 °C and constant tumbling, the FLAG resin was subjected to three rounds of washes in dilution buffer and one round of FLAG elution by adding 0.3 mL elution buffer (dilution buffer supplemented with FLAG elution peptide at 1X final concentration). The eluate was separated from FLAG beads by centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min at 1000 rpm and mixed with 4x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (ThermoFisher Scientific) for mass-spectrometry analysis.   Protein Digestion (Native PHB complex) FLAG-based enriched eluates were digested using the SP3 digestion technique as described. In brief, washed SP3 beads (Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophobic, GE44152105050250),  Sera-Mag(TM) Magnetic Carboxylate Modified Particles (Hydrophilic, GE24152105050250) from Sigma Aldrich) were mixed equally, and 3 µL of bead slurry were added to each eluate. Acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 50% and washed twice using 70 % ethanol (V=200 µL) on an in-house made magnet. After an additional acetonitrile wash (V=200µL), 5 µL digestion solution (10 mM HEPES pH = 8.5 containing 0.1µg Trypsin (Sigma) and 0.1µg LysC (Wako)) was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were desalted on a magnet using 2 x 200 µL acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted in 10 µL 5% DMSO in LC-MS water (Sigma Aldrich) in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min and further cleaned using the StageTip technique (SDB-RP material, Affinisep, France). Dried peptides were then reconstituted in 2.5% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile directly prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.   Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry (Native PHB complex) Peptides were separated using an in-house column (40cm, 75µm inner diameter, filled with C18 PoroShell 2.7 µm beads). The column temperature was controlled at 50°C using a SON-VARII oven. A binary buffer system (A: 0.1 % formic acid and B: 0.1 % formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) was applied for a total gradient time of 90 min as follows: Linear increase of buffer B from 4% to 27% within 70 min, followed by a linear increase to 45% within 5 min. The buffer B content was further ramped to 65 % within 5 min and then to 95 % within 5 min. 95 % buffer B was kept for a further 5 min to wash the column.  The capillary transfer temperature was set to 280°C and the RF lens was set to 55%. MS1 profile spectra were acquired using a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z) at a mass range of 320-1250 m/z and an AGC target of 1 × 106.  For MS/MS independent spectra acquisition, 48 equally spaced windows were acquired at an isolation m/z range of 15 Th, and the isolation windows overlapped by 1 Th. The fixed first mass was 200 m/z. The isolation center range covered a mass range of 357–1060 m/z. Fragmentation spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z using a maximal injection time of 22 ms and stepped normalized collision energies (NCE) of 26, 28, and 30.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis (Native PHB complex) The acquired data were analyzed using DIA-NN 1.8 The spectral library was created in-silico using the reviewed-only Uniport reference protein (Saccharomyces cerevisiae (strain ATCC 204508 / S288c), 6060 entries, downloaded December 2022) with the ‘Deep learning-based spectra and RTs prediction’ turned on. Protease was set to Trypsin and a maximum of 1 miss cleavage was allowed. N-term M excision was set as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. The option ‘Quantitative matrices’ was enabled. The FDR was set to 1 % and the mass accuracy (MS2 and MS1) as well as the scan window was set to 0 (automatic inference via DIA-NN). Match between runs (MBR) was enabled. The Neuronal network classifier worked in ‘double pass mode’ and protein interference was set to ‘Isoform IDs’. The quantification strategy was set to ‘robust LC (high accuracy)’ and cross-run normalization was defined as ‘RT-dependent’.  To identify significantly enriched protein groups, a two-sided t-test was utilized. To correct the multiple testing problem, the FDR was controlled using a permutation-based approach in the Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Immunoprecipitation, Native complex, Prohibitin

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne


