### Accession
PXD014443

### Title
Interferon stimulated changes in the brain phosphoproteome

### Description
Type I interferons (IFN-Is) are immunoregulatory cytokines that are essential for normal host antiviral responses. The current understanding is that IFN-Is mediate their effects through the expression of several hundred interferon-regulated genes. Here we identified a novel IFN-I response mechanism that relies on widespread changes in protein phosphorylation. IFN-I-induced phosphorylation in primary murine microglia and astrocytes – key IFN-I-responding cells of the central nervous system – was rapid and thus largely independent of gene expression. Based on in silico analysis, this mechanism relies predominantly on a small number of kinase families. Further, functional analysis suggested that this rapid response induces an immediate reactive state in cells and prepares them for the subsequent transcriptomic response. Similar extensive phosphoproteome changes were also present in a mouse model for IFN-I-induced neuroinflammatory diseases. Strikingly, the altered phosphoproteome in these transgenic mice predicted the clinical and pathological outcome of neuroinflammatory disease. These findings demonstrate for the first time a novel mechanism by which IFN-Is mediate cellular responses.

### Sample Protocol
For both cells and cerebellum, protein was extracted in urea lysis buffer (6 M urea (U6504, Sigma-Aldrich, Castle Hill, NSW, Australia), 2 M thiourea (88810, Sigma-Aldrich), 20 U/ml Benzonase (E1014, Sigma-Aldrich) with 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III (539134, Merck Millipore, Bayswater, VIC, Australia) and 1x Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail II (524625, Merck Millipore)) by sonication. For microglia, protein from ten 75 cm2 flasks, and for astrocytes, protein from two 75 cm2 flasks, was pooled by methanol-choloroform precipitation and resuspended in urea lysis buffer, with Cys residues reduced in the presence of 1,4-dithiothreitol and subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide.  Following tryptic digestion, 250µg of peptide was labelled with one of four isobaric tags (iTRAQ, Sciex) with phosphopeptides enriched according to Mohamad et al (2016) and Engholm Keller et al, producing 3 peptide populations (single and multiply phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated). Singly phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated peptides were further fractionated using off-line hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) generating 10 fractions each. Identification and quantification was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap (QE plus, Thermo) mass spectrometer in data dependant mode (DDA). All experiments were performed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.2, Thermo) and searched using an in house MASCOT server against the UniProt Mus musculus database (database version July 2018) with the following parameters: 2 missed cleavages, 20ppm mass error (MS) and 0.2Da mass error (MS/MS); iTRAQ was searched as a fixed modification; variable modifications included phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr), carbamidomethyl (Cys), oxidation (Met), acetylation (protein N-term) and cyclization (Glu and Asp). False discovery rate of 0.01 was applied for non-phosphorylated peptides, which was relaxed to 0.05 for singly and multiply phosphorylated peptides. Normalisation of iTRAQ reporters was calculated using the sum of all intensities approach across all phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated peptide spectral matches (PSM), prior to calculation of ratios using 0min IFN stimulated or WT as denominator. Log2 ratios and population wide mean and standard deviation were calculated for each PSM, with z-Scores calculated using a sliding scale based on MS signal intensity (as a measure of MS/MS data quality). Weighted average was used to compare median z-Score and fold change across experiments for each phosphosite and phosphopeptide (phosphoproteome), as well as peptide and protein (non-phosphorylated only). Significance was defined as a median z-score ≥1.96 or ≤-1.96 for non-phosphorylated proteins and ≥1 or ≤-1 for phosphosites.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Phosphoproteomics, Astrocytes, Lc-ms/ms, Interferon, Microglia

### Affiliations
University of Sydney
Discipline of Pathology, Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Melanie White

### Lab Head
Dr Melanie Yvonne White
Discipline of Pathology, Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, Australia


