### Accession
PXD010160

### Title
Temporal Changes in the Chlamydomonas Proteome in Response to High Light

### Description
Quantitative proteomic analysis of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii exposed to high light. Samples were taken 0h, 1h, 4h and 24h after beginning of the treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures were maintained in ~20 μE m-2 s-1 light in HS medium for 16 h before shifting them to high light (500 µE m-2 s-1). Samples were taken 0h, 2h, 4h and 24h after the shift. Cells were harvested by centrifugation for 5 min at 1,500 g. Supernatants were removed and cell pellets were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were lysed in 4% SDS in 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH8) in the presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (1 mM benzamidine, 1 mM PMSF, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 10 mM β-glycerophosphate). Tryptic digestion was performed according to the FASP protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). After digestion peptides were desalted using Sep-PAK tC18 cartridges (Waters) und dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  Peptides were chromatographically separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific). The sample was loaded on a trap column (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µM x 5 mm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) and desalted for 5 min using 0.05% (v/v) TFA/2% (v/v) acetontrile in ultrapure water at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. Then the trap column was switched in-line with the separation column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 75 µm x 15 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific). The mobile phases for peptide elution consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (A) and 80% acetonitrile/0.08% formic acid in ultrapure water (B). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and employing the following gradient profile: 2.5-18% B over 65 min, 18-35% B over 40 min, 35-99% B over 5 min, 99% B for 20 min.  The LC system was coupled via a nanospray source to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive ion mode. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent manner, dynamically choosing the 12 most abundant precursor ions from the survey scans (scan range m/z 350–1500, resolution 70,000, AGC target value 1e6, maximum injection time 50 ms) for fragmentation (MS/MS) by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD, 27% normalized collision energy. AGC target value for MS/MS was 5e4 at 55 ms maximum injection time. Intensity threshold was 1e4. Singly charged ions, ions with charge state 6 and above as well as ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from fragmentation. Internal lock mass calibration on m/z 445.12003 was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Spectra files were searched in MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) against a database containing protein sequences of the Chlamydomonas v5.5 gene models (Joint Genome Institute) merged with mitochondrial and chloroplast protein sequences from NCBI databases BK000554.2 and NC_001638.1. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main search, respectively. Fragment ion tolerance was 20 ppm. The maximum number of missed cleavages (trypsin) allowed was 2, minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids, and maximum peptide mass was 5,500 Da. The feature ‘match between runs’ was activated with the following settings: 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to satisfy a false discovery rate of 1%. Label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant. The LFQ minimum ratio count was 2 and only unique peptides and were considered for quantification. Protein lists including LFQ intensities were imported into Perseus (version 1.6.0.2, (Tyanova et al., 2016)). Common contaminants were filtered out, followed by log2 transformation of LFQ intensities. Proteins with less than 9 LFQ intensity values across all samples were removed. Remaining missing values were imputed from a normal distribution using default parameters. Multiple sample testing (ANOVA) was performed for all proteins across all timepoints (3 biological replicates each). The false discovery rate was set to 1% using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. After z-scoring of log2 transformed LFQ intensities, proteins were subjected to hierarchical clustering (average linkage, Euclidean distance).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
High light, Algae, Q exactive plus, Label-free quantification, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
IBBP Muenster
WWU Münster Institute for Plant Biology and Biotechnology Schlossplatz 8 48143 Münster

### Submitter
Martin Scholz

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
WWU Münster Institute for Plant Biology and Biotechnology Schlossplatz 8 48143 Münster


