### Accession
PXD033536

### Title
The pivotal and universal role of BGLT3 lncRNA in fetal globin gene expression

### Description
A highly selective and non-genotoxic G9a inhibitor, RK-701 was discovered, which upregulated the mRNA level of γ-globin but not β-globin both in human erythroid cells and in mice. Using RK-701, we examined the induction of the fetal (γ-) globin protein in human erythroid cells; HUDEP-2 and human CD34+ bone marrow and peripheral blood cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein fraction was digested with trypsin/Lys-C mix in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.Resulting peptides were directly applied to LC-MS/MS system.

### Data Protocol
A mgf file was searched against Swiss-Prot database using Mascot software (version 2.7.0) with following parameters: Enzyme:Trypsin, Fixed modifications:Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modifications:Oxidation (M), Peptide mass tolerance: 6 ppm, Fragment mass tolerance: 20 mmu, Max missed cleavages: 1.

### Publication Abstract
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a heritable disorder caused by &#x3b2;-globin gene mutations. Induction of fetal &#x3b3;-globin is an established therapeutic strategy. Recently, epigenetic modulators, including G9a inhibitors, have been proposed as therapeutic agents. However, the molecular mechanisms whereby these small molecules reactivate &#x3b3;-globin remain unclear. Here we report the development of a highly selective and non-genotoxic G9a inhibitor, RK-701. RK-701 treatment induces fetal globin expression both in human erythroid cells and in mice. Using RK-701, we find that BGLT3 long non-coding RNA plays an essential role in &#x3b3;-globin induction. RK-701 selectively upregulates BGLT3 by inhibiting the recruitment of two major &#x3b3;-globin repressors in complex with G9a onto the BGLT3 gene locus through CHD4, a component of the NuRD complex. Remarkably, BGLT3 is indispensable for &#x3b3;-globin induction by not only RK-701 but also hydroxyurea and other inducers. The universal role of BGLT3 in &#x3b3;-globin induction suggests its importance in SCD treatment.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Cultured cell, Hemoglobin subunit

### Affiliations
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences
Support Unit for Bio-Material Analysis, Research Resources Division, RIKEN Center for Brain Science

### Submitter
Masaya Usui

### Lab Head
Dr Akihiro Ito
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences


