### Accession
PXD031243

### Title
From incision to excision: active DNA damage eviction by HLTF stimulates repair

### Description
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) counteracts the onset of cancer and aging by removing helix-distorting DNA lesions via a ‘cut-and-patch’-type reaction. The regulatory mechanisms that drive NER through its successive damage recognition, verification, incision and gap restoration reaction steps remain elusive. Here we show that the RAD5-related translocase HLTF facilitates repair through active eviction of incised damaged DNA together with associated repair proteins. Our data shows a dual incision-dependent recruitment of HLTF to the NER incision complex, mediated by HLTF’s HIRAN domain that binds 3’-OH single-stranded DNA ends. HLTF’s translocase motor subsequently promotes dissociation of incised oligonucleotides together with members of the stably damage-bound incision complex to allow efficient PCNA loading and initiation of repair synthesis. Our findings uncover HLTF as an important NER factor that actively evicts DNA damage, thereby providing an additional quality control by coordinating the transition between the excision and DNA synthesis steps to safeguard genome integrity.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry  SDS-PAGE gel lanes were cut into 2-mm slices and subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoaceta¬mide and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega), as described previously (Schwertman et al., 2012). Alternatively, proteins were directly digested with trypsin while still bound to Chromotek GFP-Trap-A beads, after several washes in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution and subsequent reduction and alkylation with chloroaceta¬mide).  Peptides were washed, eluted from C18 STAGE tips and analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS), performed on an EASY-nLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific) oper¬ating in positive mode. Peptides were separated on a ReproSil-C18 reversed-phase column (Dr Maisch; 15 cm × 50 μm) using a linear gradient of 0–80% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) during 60 or 90 min at a rate of ~200 nL/min. The elution was directly sprayed into the electrospray ionization source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode by HCD.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software suite (Cox et al., 2011) (version 1.5.3.8) as described previously (Schwertman et al., 2012). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids were set. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the UniProt database (taxonomy: Mus musculus, release June 2013) concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da for HCD spectra. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, N‐terminal protein acetylation, and di-glycine-lysine were chosen as variable modifications. Both the PSM and protein FDR were set to 0.01. In case the identified peptides of two proteins were the same or the identified peptides of one protein included all peptides of another protein, these proteins were combined by MaxQuant and reported as one protein group. Before further statistical analysis, known contaminants and reverse hits were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) counteracts the onset of cancer and aging by removing helix-distorting DNA lesions via a "cut-and-patch"-type reaction. The regulatory mechanisms that drive NER through its successive damage recognition, verification, incision, and gap restoration reaction steps remain elusive. Here, we show that the RAD5-related translocase HLTF facilitates repair through active eviction of incised damaged DNA together with associated repair proteins. Our data show a dual-incision-dependent recruitment of HLTF to the NER incision complex, which is mediated by HLTF's HIRAN domain that binds 3'-OH single-stranded DNA ends. HLTF's translocase motor subsequently promotes the dissociation of the stably damage-bound incision complex together with the incised oligonucleotide, allowing for an efficient PCNA loading and initiation of repair synthesis. Our findings uncover HLTF as an important NER factor that actively evicts DNA damage, thereby providing additional quality control by coordinating the transition between the excision and DNA synthesis steps to safeguard genome integrity.

### Keywords
Uv damage response, Damage eviction, Hltf, Genome stability, Post-replication repair, Dna damage, Tfiih, Nucleotide excision repair, Repair synthesis

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam - NL
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam - NL


