### Accession
PXD004011

### Title
LC-MS/MS data of Sulfurospirillum multivorans

### Description
Organohalide respiration is an environmentally important but poorly characterized type of anaerobic respiration. We compared the global proteome of the versatile organohalide-respiring Epsilonproteobacterium Sulfurospirillum multivorans grown with different electron acceptors (fumarate, nitrate, or tetrachloroethene [PCE]).The most significant differences in protein abundance were found for gene products of the organohalide respiration region. This genomic region encodes the corrinoid and FeS cluster containing PCE reductive dehalogenase PceA and other proteins putatively involved in PCE metabolism such as those involved in corrinoid biosynthesis. The latter gene products as well as PceA and a putative quinol dehydrogenase were almost exclusively detected in cells grown with PCE. This finding suggests an electron flow from the electron donor such as formate or pyruvate via the quinone pool and a quinol dehydrogenase to PceA and the terminal electron acceptor PCE. Two putative accessory proteins, an IscU-like protein and a peroxidase-like protein, were detected with PCE only and might be involved in PceA maturation. The proteome of cells grown with pyruvate instead of formate as electron donor indicates a route of electrons from reduced ferredoxin via an Epsilonproteobacterial complex I and the quinone pool to PCE.

### Sample Protocol
S. multivorans (DSMZ 12446) was cultivated under anaerobic conditions at 28°C in a defined mineral medium 4 without vitamin B12 (cyanocobalamin). Pyruvate (40 mM) or formate (40 mM) were used as electron donor and fumarate (40 mM), nitrate (10 mM with formate, 40 mM with pyruvate as electron donor) or PCE as electron acceptor. PCE was added to the medium (10 mM nominal concentration) from a hexadecane stock solution (0.5 M). When the cells were grown with formate, acetate (5 mM) was added as carbon source and the medium contained 0.05% yeast extract to support growth. Titanium(III)-citrate (5.6 µM) was added when S. multivorans was grown with formate and nitrate (10 mM). Cultivation of S. multivorans was performed using the following substrate combinations: pyruvate/fumarate (Py/Fu), pyruvate/PCE (Py/PCE), pyruvate/nitrate (Py/Ni), formate/fumarate (Fo/Fu), formate/PCE (Fo/PCE) and formate/nitrate (Fo/Ni). Pre-cultures were grown in rubber-stoppered 200 mL glass serum bottles and the main cultures in rubber-stoppered 2 L glass bottles. The ratio of aqueous to gas phase was always 1:1. In order to generate S. multivorans cells with down-regulated pceA gene expression12, the organism was cultivated for 60 subcultivation steps (10% inoculum, each) on pyruvate (40 mM) and fumarate (40 mM) plus 0.2% yeast extract. The last culture was used as inoculum for all pre-cultures. The inoculum corresponded to approximately 18 µg/ml cell protein for Py/Fu-grown cells, 12µg/ml for Fo/Fu cells, 6µg/ml for Py/PCE and Py/Ni-grown cells and 3 µg/ml cell protein in the case of Fo/Ni and Fo/PCE cultures. The bacterial growth was monitored photometrically by measuring the optical density at 578 nm. All cultivations were performed in triplicates.  Separation of tryptic peptides was performed using an Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC system (Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). A sample volume of 1 µL was loaded onto a trapping column with 300 µm inner diameter, packed with 5 µm C18 particles (µ-precolumn, Thermo Scientific) and separated via a 15 cm analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 2 µm C18 particles, Thermo Scientific). The column oven temperature was set to 35°C. During the liquid chromatography (LC) run, a constant flow of 300 nL/min (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid) was applied with a linear gradient of 4% to 55% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid) in 90 min. Mass spectrometer (MS) full scans were measured in the Orbitrap mass analyzer within the mass range of 400-1,700 m/z at 60,000 resolution using an automatic gain control target of 4x105 and maximum fill time of 50 ms. The MS analyzed in data-dependent acquisition mode; the highest intense ions with positive charge states between 2 and 7 were selected for MS/MS. An MS/MS isolation window for ions in the quadrupole was set to 1.6 m/z. MS/MS scan were acquired within 3 s of cycle time (Top Speed) using the higher energy dissociation mode at normalized collision induced energy of 35%, activation time of 120 ms, and minimum of ion signal threshold for MS/MS of 5x104 counts. The exclusion time to reject masses from repetitive MS/MS fragmentation was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (v1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched against the data of the S. multivorans database containing 3,191 non-redundant protein-coding sequence entries (downloaded February 17th 2014 from NCBI Genbank accession number CP007201) using the SEQUEST HT and MS Amanda algorithms with the following settings: trypsin as cleavage enzyme, oxidation of methionine as dynamic and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification, up to two missed cleavages, MS mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and MS/MS mass tolerance to 0.05 Da, respectively. False discovery rate for peptides was <0.01. Quantification of proteins was performed using the average of top 3 peptide area. Protein quantification was considered successful for proteins quantified in >50% of biological replicates, otherwise they were classified as identified proteins. After log10 transformation, the protein values were normalized and bioinformatic analysis was applied by principal component analysis and T-test statistics (R).

### Publication Abstract
Organohalide respiration is an environmentally important but poorly characterized type of anaerobic respiration. We compared the global proteome of the versatile organohalide-respiring Epsilonproteobacterium Sulfurospirillum multivorans grown with different electron acceptors (fumarate, nitrate, or tetrachloroethene [PCE]). The most significant differences in protein abundance were found for gene products of the organohalide respiration region. This genomic region encodes the corrinoid and FeS cluster containing PCE reductive dehalogenase PceA and other proteins putatively involved in PCE metabolism such as those involved in corrinoid biosynthesis. The latter gene products as well as PceA and a putative quinol dehydrogenase were almost exclusively detected in cells grown with PCE. This finding suggests an electron flow from the electron donor such as formate or pyruvate via the quinone pool and a quinol dehydrogenase to PceA and the terminal electron acceptor PCE. Two putative accessory proteins, an IscU-like protein and a peroxidase-like protein, were detected with PCE only and might be involved in PceA maturation. The proteome of cells grown with pyruvate instead of formate as electron donor indicates a route of electrons from reduced ferredoxin via an Epsilonproteobacterial complex I and the quinone pool to PCE.

### Keywords
Tetrachloroethene, Organohalide respiration, Proteomics, Epsilonproteobacterium

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstr. 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research – UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstr. 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


