### Accession
PXD025020

### Title
A MALDI-TOF assay identifies nilotinib as an inhibitor of inflammation

### Description
Inflammatory responses are important in cancer, particularly in the context of monocyte-rich aggressive myeloid neoplasm. We developed a label-free cellular phenotypic drug discovery assay to identify anti-inflammatory drugs in human monocytes derived from acute myeloid leukemia (AML), by quantifying several biological features ionizing from only 2,500 cells using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry. A proof-of-concept screening showed that the BCR-ABL inhibitor nilotinib, but not the structurally similar imatinib, blocks inflammatory responses in AML and multiple myeloma. In order to identify the cellular (off-)targets for nilotinib, we performed thermal proteome profiling (TPP) over a range of temperatures and compound concentrations. Unlike imatinib, nilotinib inhibits p38 alpha MAP Kinase (MAPK14) and its downstream signaling pathway. This suppressed the expression of inflammatory cytokines, cell adhesion, and innate immunity markers in activated human monocytes derived from AML. Thus, our study provides a tool for the discovery of new anti-inflammatory drugs, which could potentially contribute to the treatment of inflammation in myeloid neoplasms and other diseases.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 cells were pre-treated with vehicle (DMSO), 5 µM of nilotinib or imatinib for one hour, before exposure to E. coli DH5α at a multiplicity of infection of 2. The THP-1 cells were incubated for 30 minutes to allow for bacteria uptake, and further incubated for 24 hours after removal of extracellular bacteria. Cells were lysed in 5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB and prepared for mass spectrometry using S-Trap micro columns (Protifi) according to the manufacturer recommended protocol. Proteins were reduced using 20 mM TCEP at 37°C for 30 min; and alkylated by 20 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) in the dark for 30 min. A ratio of 1:10 wt:wt Trypsin TPCK Treated (Worthington-Biochem) was used to digest the samples for 2h at 47°C. Eluted peptides were dried down and resuspended in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid).  Peptide samples were injected on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were injected on a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (300 µm x 5 mm, 5 µm particles, 100 Å) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray column (75 µm x 50 cm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å) (Thermo Scientific). Buffer A consisted of water containing 0.1% FA and Buffer B of 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA. Peptides were separated with a linear gradient of 3-35% Buffer B over 180 minutes followed by a step from 35-90% Buffer B in 0.5 min at 250 nL/min and held at 90% for 4 min. The gradient was then decreased to 3% Buffer B in 0.5 minutes at 250 nL/min for 10 min for column equilibration. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent, positive ion mode. Full scan spectra were acquired in the range of 400 m/z to 1,600 m/z, at a resolution of 120,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4E5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The Lumos was operated in “stop speed” to maintain a 3 sec fixed duty cycle. The most intense precursor ions were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter width of 1.6 m/z and higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was performed in one-step collision energy of 30%. Detection of MS2 fragment ions was performed in the linear ion trap in rapid scan mode with an AGC target of 1E4 ions and a maximum injection time of 45 ms. An electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV and capillary temperature of 275°C, with no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, was used.   Cells were treated with 5 µM of nilotinib or imatinib for one hour, then 100 ng/mL LPS was added for 15 min. Cells were washed with PBS supplemented with cOmplete, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), 1.2 mM sodium molybdate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 4 mM sodium tartrate dihydrate, 5 mM glycerophosphate, and 20 mM NEM; then separated into 8 fractions before heating at an increasing temperature range. Fractions were heated at 40, 44, 48, 52, 56, 60, 64 and 68°C for 3 min. Cells were lysed with four freeze-thaw cycles using dry ice and a thermo block at 35°C. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 xg for 2 h at 4°C to separate protein aggregates from soluble proteins. Supernatants were used for mass spcectromtery sample preparation as described above. TMT 16-plex labelling was performed as recommended by the supplier and fractionated using basic-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography on a Gemini C18 column (250 mm × 3 mm, 3 μm, 110 Å; Phenomenex). Forty fractions were collected and concatenated into 12 fractions. TMT-labelled samples were analysed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. The chromatographic setup was as described above except that samples were separated on a linear gradient over 120 min at 250 nl/min. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent, positive ion mode similar as described above. However, the most intense precursor ions were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter width of 0.7 m/z and collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation was performed in one-step collision energy of 30% and 0.25 activation Q. Detection of MS/MS fragments was acquired in the linear ion trap in rapid scan mode with an AGC target of 1E4 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Quantitative analysis of TMT-tagged peptides was performed using MS3 acquisition in the Orbitrap mass analyser at 50,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 4E5 ions and maximum injection time of 86 ms. HCD fragmentation on MS/MS fragments was performed in one-step collision energy of 55% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield. Synchronous-precursor-selection (SPS) was enabled to include 10 MS/MS fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
All discovery proteomics mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) and searched against a SwissProt Homo sapiens database containing isoforms (containing 42,347 database entries with isoforms; downloaded on 21 April 2020). Trypsin/P was set as proteolytic enzyme, N-ethylmaleimide on cysteine was set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation (M) and acetylation of protein N-termini was set as variable modifications. Two missed cleavages were allowed. For TMT analysis, TMT modification on the peptide N‐termini or lysine residues were enabled for the 16-plex TMT reagents. A protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was employed. Reverse hits, contaminants and proteins only identified by site were removed before downstream statistical and bioinformatics analysis. LFQ data analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.2.3). LFQ intensities were transformed (log 2) and filtered to contain at least two unique peptides and at least three valid values in one group for comparisons. Significance testing was carried out using a two-tailed unpaired Student’s t test and multiple hypothesis testing was controlled using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of p-value <0.05. TPP data analysis was performed as previously described (Franken et al. 2015) using the TPP package (https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/TPP.html) in the R statistical programming language, with minor modifications. The thermally stable protein normalization strategy described by Miettinen et al. 2018 was used before curve fitting and TPP data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammatory responses are important in cancer, particularly in the context of monocyte-rich aggressive myeloid neoplasm. We developed a label-free cellular phenotypic drug discovery assay to identify anti-inflammatory drugs in human monocytes derived from acute myeloid leukemia (AML), by tracking several features ionizing from only 2500 cells using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry. A proof-of-concept screen showed that the BCR-ABL inhibitor nilotinib, but not the structurally similar imatinib, blocks inflammatory responses. In order to identify the cellular (off-)targets of nilotinib, we performed thermal proteome profiling (TPP). Unlike imatinib, nilotinib and other later-generation BCR-ABL inhibitors bind to p38&#x3b1; and inhibit the p38&#x3b1;-MK2/3 signaling axis, which suppressed pro-inflammatory cytokine expression, cell adhesion, and innate immunity markers in activated monocytes derived from AML. Thus, our study provides a tool for the discovery of new anti-inflammatory drugs, which could contribute to the treatment of inflammation in myeloid neoplasms and other diseases.

### Keywords
Nilotinib, Maldi-tof, Temperature proteome profiling, Inhibitors of inflammation, Drug discovery

### Affiliations
Newcastle University
Bioscience Institute,Faculty for Medical Sciences at Newcastle University. Newcastle-Upon-Tyne United Kingdom NE24HH

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Matthias Trost
Bioscience Institute,Faculty for Medical Sciences at Newcastle University. Newcastle-Upon-Tyne United Kingdom NE24HH


