### Accession
PXD031053

### Title
Carnosine effect  in scaffold free human dermis spheroids model

### Description
Carnosine is an endogenous β-alanyl-L-histidine dipeptide endowed of antioxidant and carbonyl scavenger properties, able to significantly prevent the visible signs of aging and photoaging. To deeply investigate the mechanism of action of carnosine on human skin proteome, a 3D scaf-fold-free spheroids model of primary dermal fibroblasts from 50-years-old donor, was here adopted in combination with quantitative proteomics

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellets form dermal spheroids were resuspended in the solubilization buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM Tris–HCl, 30 mM NaCl, pH 8.5 and 1% protease inhibitor) and incubated on ice for 5–10 min.10 µg of proteins was diluted in 50 mM NH₄HCO₃ and then were reduced with 5 mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 52°C, then centrifuged at 500 rpm and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 min in the dark at room temperature. The trypsin digestion was performed in 1:20 en-zyme/protein ratio (w/w).Tryptic peptides were analysed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Sunnyvale CA, USA) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Termo Scientifc, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source. Peptide mixtures were pre-concentrated onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 – 100 µm×2 cm C18 and separated on EASY-Spray column, 15 cm×75 µm ID packed with Ter-moScientifc Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 3 µm, 100 Å.

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS raw data from all the technical and biological replicates were analysed by using MaxQuant sofware (version 1.6.2.3). Andromeda search engine was used to identify MS/MS based peptide and proteins in MaxQuant comprises a target-decoy approach with less than 1% of False Discovery Rate (FDR). In the present study we used Uniprot_Homosapiens database.

### Publication Abstract
Carnosine is an endogenous &#x3b2;-alanyl-L-histidine dipeptide endowed with antioxidant and carbonyl scavenger properties, which is able to significantly prevent the visible signs of aging and photoaging. To investigate the mechanism of action of carnosine on human skin proteome, a 3D scaffold-free spheroid model of primary dermal fibroblasts from a 50-year-old donor was adopted in combination with quantitative proteomics for the first time. The label free proteomics approach based on high-resolution mass spectrometry, integrated with network analyses, provided a highly sensitive and selective method to describe the human dermis spheroid model during long-term culture and upon carnosine treatment. Overall, 2171 quantified proteins allowed the in-depth characterization of the 3D dermis phenotype during growth and differentiation, at 14 versus 7 days of culture. A total of 485 proteins were differentially regulated by carnosine at 7 days, an intermediate time of culture. Of the several modulated pathways, most are involved in mitochondrial functionality, such as oxidative phosphorylation, TCA cycle, extracellular matrix reorganization and apoptosis. In long-term culture, functional modules related to oxidative stress were upregulated, inducing the aging process of dermis spheroids, while carnosine treatment prevented this by the downregulation of the same functional modules. The application of quantitative proteomics, coupled to advanced and relevant in vitro scaffold free spheroids, represents a new concrete application for personalized therapies and a novel care approach.

### Keywords
Carnosine, Label free, Spheroids

### Affiliations
Università di Milano
DISFARM, University of Milan, Via Mangiagalli 25, Milano

### Submitter
Alfonsina D'Amato

### Lab Head
Dr Alfonsina D'Amato
DISFARM, University of Milan, Via Mangiagalli 25, Milano


