### Accession
PXD006823

### Title
honeybee brain -  Brain Membrane Proteome and Phosphoproteome Reveal Molecular Basis Associating with Nursing and Foraging Behaviors of Honeybee Workers

### Description
he brain is a vital organ in regulating complex social behaviors of honeybees including learning and memory. Knowledge of how brain membrane proteins and their phosphorylation underlie the age-related behavioral polyethism is still lacking. We presented the first comprehensive profiling and comparison of brain membrane proteome and phosphoproteome across different ages of adult worker bees in two strains of honeybee (Apis mellifera ligustica): Italian bee (ITB) and royal jelly bee (RJB), a line selected for increased RJ outputs over 4 decades.

### Sample Protocol
Filter Aided Protein Digestion; Filter Aided Phosphopeptide Enrichment Using Ti4+-IMAC;The extracted peptide samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in distilled water, and the peptide concentration was quantified using a Bradford assay.39 LC-MS/MS analysis was run on Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded onto a reversed-phase trap column (2 cm long, 100 µm inner diameter fused silica column filing with 5.0 μm Aqua C18 beads, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. Buﬀer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buﬀer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used as mobile phase buffer. Peptides were separated on an analytical column (15 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter fused silica column filing with 3.0 μm Aqua C18 beads, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 350 nl/min using the following gradients: from 3 to 8% buffer B in 5 min, from 8 to 20 % buffer B in 80 min, from 20 to 30% buffer B in 20 min, from 30 to 90% buffer B in 5 min, and remaining at 90% buffer B for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
The RAW MS/MS data were searched against a composite database for protein identification using in-house PEAKS software (version 7.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). The database contained 21,765 protein entries of Apis mellifera (downloaded from NCBI on December, 2015) and the common repository of adventitious proteins (cRAP, from The Global Proteome Machine Organization, released on January 1st, 2012). The search parameters for membrane proteome were conducted with carbamidomethylation (C, +57.02) as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M, +15.99) as a variable modification. For membrane phosphoprotein identifications, carbamidomethylation (C, +57.02) was selected as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M, +15.99) and phosphorylation (S/T/Y, +79.96) as variable modifications. The other parameters used were as follows: parent ion mass tolerance, 15.0 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.05 Da; enzyme, trypsin; max missed cleavages, 2; maximum allowed variable post translational modification (PTM) per peptide, 3. A decoy fusion method, an enhanced strategy for conservative estimate false discovery rate FDR, was used to control FDR at ≤ 1.0% both at protein and peptide levels.

### Publication Abstract
The brain is a vital organ in regulating complex social behaviors of honeybees including learning and memory. Knowledge of how brain membrane proteins and their phosphorylation underlie the age-related behavioral polyethism is still lacking. A hitherto age-resolved brain membrane proteome and phosphoproteome were reported in adult worker bees from two strains of honeybee (Apis mellifera ligustica): Italian bee (ITB) and Royal Jelly bee (RJB), a line selected from ITB for increased RJ outputs over four decades. There were 1079 membrane protein groups identified, and 417 unique phosphosites were located in 179 membrane protein groups mainly phosphorylated by kinase families of MAPKs, CDKs, and CK2. Age-resolved dynamics of brain membrane proteome and phosphoproteome are indicative of their correlation with the neurobiological requirements during the adult life of honeybee workers. To stimulate immature brain cell development in newly emerged bees (NEBs), the enriched functional classes associated with metabolism of carbohydrates, nucleosides, and lipids by the up-regulated proteins suggest their enhanced role in driving cell maturity of the brain. In nurse bees (NBs) and forager bees (FBs), a higher number of membrane proteins and phosphoproteins were expressed as compared with in the young stages, and the enriched signal-transduction-related pathways by the up-regulated proteins suggest their significances in sustaining the intensive information processing during nursing and foraging activities. Notably, RJB has shaped unique membrane proteome and phosphoproteome settings to consolidate nursing and foraging behaviors in response to decades of selection underpinning the elevated RJ yields. In RJB NBs, the enriched pathways of phosphatidylinositol signaling and arachidonic acid metabolism indicate a stronger olfaction sensation in response to larval pheromone stimulation. In RJB FBs, the enriched pathways related to signal processing such as SNARE interactions in vesicular transport, wnt signaling, TGF-beta signaling, and taurine and hypotaurine metabolism suggest an enhanced nerve sensitivity to prime the stronger tendency to pollen collection. Our data gain a novel insight into membrane proteome and phosphoproteome-driven cerebral regulation of honeybee behaviors, which is potentially useful for further neurobiological investigation in both honeybees and other social insects.

### Keywords
Brain, Honeybee, Membrane, Proteome, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Apicultural Research

### Submitter
Bin Han

### Lab Head
Dr Jianke Li
Institute of Apicultural Research


