### Accession
PXD034987

### Title
The proteomic responses of carbapenemase-producing and non-producing carbapenem-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains to subminimal-inhibitory concentrations of meropenem revealed by quantitative tandem mass spectrometry

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a major opportunistic pathogen causing a wide range of infections and one of the most problematic bacteria regarding antibiotic resistance, with an increasing incidence of multidrug and extensively-drug resistant strains, including resistance to last resource antibiotics such as carbapenems. Resistances are often due to complex interplays of naturally and acquired resistance mechanisms which are enhanced by its remarkably large regulatory network. Thus, the use of non-targeted shotgun methodologies such as mass spectrometry-based proteomics is crucial to understand these interplays and to reveal possible strain and species-specific novel mechanisms of antibiotic resistance. The aim of this study was to determine the proteomic response of two carbapenem-resistant and extensively-drug-resistant P. aeruginosa strains to subminimal inhibitory concentrations (sub-MICs) of meropenem. The strains belonged to high-risk clones ST235 and ST395, one carrying a class 1 integron-encoded VIM-4 metallo-β-lactamase and one carrying no acquired antibiotic resistance genes. Each strain was cultivated with three different sub-MICs of meropenem, and a quantitative shotgun proteomic approach was applied, using tandem mass tag (TMT) isobaric labeling followed by nano-liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry, to determine significantly up- or down-regulated proteins and enriched groups of proteins and pathways. Cultivation of both strains with ½ and ¼ of the MIC, resulted in hundreds of differentially regulated proteins, including several β-lactamases, transport-related proteins (including multiple porins and efflux pumps), proteins associated with peptidoglycan metabolism and cell wall organization and dozens of regulatory proteins. Remarkably, all components of the H1 type VI secretion system were up-regulated in one of the strains. Enrichment analyses revealed that multiple metabolic pathways were affected. Additionally, numerous proteins of unknown function were also differentially-regulated in each strain. In conclusion, high subminimal-inhibitory concentrations of meropenem cause massive changes in the proteomes of carbapenem-resistant P. aeruginosa strains, involving a wide range of common and strain-specific mechanisms and proteins, many still uncharacterized which might potentially play a role in the susceptibility of P. aeruginosa to meropenem.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide generation and TMT labeling Bacterial biomasses were harvested by centrifugation at 10,000 x g, for 5 min, and washed with 1 ml of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) three times, by discarding the supernatant, resuspending the pellet and centrifuging at 10,000 x g, for 5 min. Washed cells were resuspended in PBS, diluted until the optical density at a wavelength of 600 nm (OD600) was 1, and split in four tubes (four technical replicates for nano-LC-MS/MS). Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 10,000 x g, for 5 min, resuspended in 150 µl of PBS plus 15 µl of 20% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and transferred to small vials (200 µl) containing acid-washed glass beads of 150 – 212 μm of diameter (G1145, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Subsequently, cells were lysed by bead-beating, using a TissueLyser II (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), at 25 Hz, for 5 min. The cell lysates were frozen at -20°C until analysis. Protein concentrations were determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and a Benchmark Plus Microplate Reader (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) with BSA solutions as standards. Representative references containing equal amounts from each group were made. Aliquots containing 30 μg of protein from each sample and the references were used for trypsin digestion of proteins using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Briefly, samples were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred to 30 kDa MWCO Pall Nanosep® centrifugation filters (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), washed repeatedly with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate [SDC], in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, TEAB) prior to alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in digestion buffer, for 30 min. Digestion was performed in digestion buffer by addition of 0.5 µg of Pierce MS grade Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), at 37°C and incubated overnight. An additional portion of trypsin was added and incubated for other two hours. Peptides were collected by centrifugation at 10,000 x g. Digested peptides were labelled using TMT 11-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were combined into two TMT-sets with two samples from each group and a reference. Sodium deoxycholate was removed by acidification with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The combined sets were pre-fractionated into 20 fractions with basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0 x 150 mm, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% of solvent B over 18 min followed by an increase to 100% of solvent B over 5 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The fractions were concatenated into 10 fractions (1+11, 2+12, …10+20), dried and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid.  Nano-LC-MS/MS The fractions were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 nano-liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 30 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch HPLC, Ammerbuch, Germany) using a linear gradient from 5% to 33% B over 77 min followed by an increase to 100% B for 3 min, and 100% B for 10 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.2% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at 120,000 resolution and MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent multinotch mode where collision‐induced dissociation (CID) spectra of the most intense precursor ions were recorded in ion trap at collision energy setting of 35 for 3 s (‘top speed’ setting). Precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window, charge states 2 to 7 were selected for fragmentation, dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s and 10 ppm. MS3 spectra for reporter ion quantitation were recorded at 50 000 resolution with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at collision energy of 65 using the synchronous precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Data Analysis The data files for each TMT set were merged for identification and relative quantitation using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was against the accessioned protein products annotated on the genome sequences (i.e., FAA format files) of P. aeruginosa strain CCUG 56489 (= PAO1) (RefSeq accession number: NC_002516.2), P. aeruginosa strain CCUG 51971 (RefSeq accession number: NZ_CP043328.1) or P. aeruginosa CCUG 70744 (RefSeq accession number: NZ_CP023255.1), using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) as a search engine and both databases defined in the Protein Marker node. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavage, variable modifications of methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine alkylation, TMT-label modifications of N-terminal and lysine were selected. The reference samples were used as denominator and for calculation of the ratios. Percolator was used for the validation of identified proteins. TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with 3 mmu mass tolerance, and the TMT reporter intensity values for each sample were normalized on the total peptide amount. The quantified proteins were filtered at 1% false discovery rate and grouped by sharing the same sequences to minimize redundancy. Unique and razor peptides for a given protein were considered for quantification of the proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tandem mass tag (tmt), Tandem mass spectrometry, Carbapenem, Quantitative proteomics, Multidrug resistance, Antibiotic resistance, Lc-ms/ms, High-risk clones, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Meropenem, Antimicrobial resistance, Opportunistic pathogen

### Affiliations
Gothenburg University
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Johannes Fuchs

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Karlsson
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden


