### Accession
PXD015469

### Title
Proteomics Analysis of the Mechanism of AMP-17 against Candida albicans

### Description
Candida albicans is the most common human fungal pathogen in immunocompromised individuals. With the emergence of clinical fungal resistance, there is an urgent demand to develop novel antifungal agents. The antibacterial peptide (AMP) is an important component in the innate immune system and has a good therapeutic effect on patients infected with microorganisms. AMP-17, a novel AMP from Musca domestica, has an antifungal effect against C. albicans, but the mechanism of antifungal action remains unclear. In this study, we performed proteomic analysis of C. albicans treated AMP-17 and No drug using a combination of a series of cutting-edge technologies, including TMT labeling, HPLC classification and quantitative proteomics based on mass spectrometry. A total of 3,931 proteins were identified, of which 3,600 contained quantitative information. With a 1.5-fold change threshold and a t-test p-value <0.05 as a standard, 423 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were up-regulated and 180 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were down-regulated in the quantitative AMP_17/con comparison group. In these DEPs, proteins associated with ergosterol biosynthesis, oxidative stress and cell wall were identified as significantly up-regulated, while proteins involved in fatty acid biosynthesis were identified as significantly down-regulated. In addition, using the KEGG enrichment assay, seven significant KEGG pathways were identified, primarily involved in oxidative phosphorylation, propionic acid metabolism, and fatty acid metabolism. These results showed that AMP-17 induces a complex organism response to C. albicans, indicating that AMP-17 can inhibit growth by affecting multiple targets in C. albicans cells.

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Antibacterial peptides AMP-17 is a novel antimicrobial protein identified from the microbial-induced Musca domestica transcriptome database using micro-invasive techniques in the previous study of the research team [8]. In addition, AMP-17 was granted a Chinese patent license in 2019. 2.2 Fungal strains and culture The C. albicans ATCC 10231 was preserved in nutrient broth supplemented with 30% glycerol stocked and stored at −80°C. Single colonies were obtained by streaking on Sabouraud Dextrose Agar (SDA) plates (Solarbio, Beijing, China) at 37 °C when used. A single C. albicans ATCC 10231 colony was inoculated on 5 ml of SDB medium and grown in a rotary shaker (37 °C, 220 rpm) until the OD600 reached 0.6-0.8. 2.3 Protein Extraction  A single actively growing microbial colony was inoculated into 5 mL sterile SDB medium and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The turbidity of the fungal solution was adjusted to 1─5 × 106 colony-forming units (CFU)/ml using a blood cell counting plate. The fungal suspension and the drug were mixed in a ratio of 1:1, and the mixture was placed in a 37 ° C incubator for 12 hours, then taken out for centrifugation (4 °C, 5000 rpm, 5 min) and the precipitate was collected. The pellet was washed three times with PBS buffer. AMP-17 (final concentration of reaction: 40 μg/ml (2-fold MIC)) was used as an experimental group. Sterile water was used as a negative control.  Samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in 4 volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). After centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, the cell debris was removed. Finally, the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit. 2.4 Trypsin Digestion The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56 ° C for 30 minutes and alkylated with a final concentration of 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Thereafter, trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin: protein) and digested overnight at 37 °C. And then trypsin was added again at a mass ratio of 1:100 (trypsin: protein) and continued to digest for 4 h. 2.5 TMT Labeling After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. The peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, the TMT-labeled reagent was thawed and dissolved in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated at room temperature for 2 h and pooled. The TMT-labeled peptides were mixed and desalted by vacuum freeze-drying.

### Data Protocol
2.6 HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 2.7 LC-MS/MS Analysis The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 9% to 26% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 26% to 34% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were separated by an ultra-high performance liquid phase system and injected into an NSI ion source for ionization and then analyzed by Orbitrap FusionTM mass spectrometry. The ion source voltage was set to 2.0 kV, and the peptide precursor and its secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using high-resolution Orbitrap. The primary mass spectrometer scan range was set to 350-1550 m/z and the scan resolution was set to 60,000, the secondary mass spectrometry scan range had a fixed starting point of 100 m/z and the secondary scan resolution was set to 15,000. The data acquisition mode uses a data-dependent scanning (DDA) program. Briefly, the first 20 peptide precursor ions with the highest signal intensity were selected for subsequent introduction into the HCD collision pool after primary mass spectrometry scanning, using 35% fragmentation energy for fragmentation. Secondary mass spectrometry repeated the primary mass spectrometry scanning procedure. In order to improve effective utilization of mass spectrum, automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5E4, signal threshold was set to 5000 ions/s, maximum injection time was set to 100 ms, and dynamic exclusion time of tandem mass spectrum scanning was set to 30 seconds to avoid repeated scanning of parent ions. 2.8 Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were retrieved using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against C. albicans database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The minimum length of the peptide was set to 7 amino acid residues, and the maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 5. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in the Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications and the acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein. The quantitative method was set to TMT-10plex, and the FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Amp-17, Antimicrobial peptides, Proteomic, Tmt- labeling, Mechanism

### Affiliations
Building Wuben,School of Basic Medical Sciences,Guizhou Medical University,College Town,Gui’an New District,Guiyang,550025,China
chool of Basic Medical Sciences, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, 550025, China

### Submitter
guo Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Guo Guo
Building Wuben,School of Basic Medical Sciences,Guizhou Medical University,College Town,Gui’an New District,Guiyang,550025,China


