### Accession
PXD019044

### Title
Effects of Canavanine on Human Glioblastoma Cells under Arginine Deprivation

### Description
We investigated the effect of canavanine (toxic Arg analogue) treatment on U251MG and U87MG cell lines using a variety of methods including proteomics. Since 3rd isotope of unmodified peptide cannot be resolved from canavanine containing peptide even at extremely high resolutions of 480K we incorporated R13C615N4 into peptides to avoid MS1 overlap of Arg signals.

### Sample Protocol
After SILAC labelling cells were taken to differential treatment: condition 1 complete medium with heavy Arg; condition 2. complete medium with light arginine; condition 3 Arg free medium with (50 µM) Canavanine for 24 h; condition 4 Arg free medium with (50 µM) Canavanine for 48 h. Each condition was analysed in 3 biological replicates. The treatments yielded different number of cells, due to differences in cell proliferation and survival rates (1-1.7mln cells). Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS three times and scrapped of the plates in RIPA Buffer (250ul per 1mln cells, see RIPA buffer composition above). The lysate was frozen on dry ice without preclearing. After thawing the lysate was sonicated using QSonica, Q125 sonicator probe homogenizer at 50% energy (1 minute cycle, 15 sec on, 15 sec off). Protein from 320 µL (i.e. from around 1.2mln cells) was precipitated by addition of 1280 µL of ice cold acetone, incubated at -20° C for two hours and pelleted by centrifugation at 20K g for 30 minutes. The protein pellet was resuspended in 60 µL of 8M Urea and quantified by BCA. All samples had the concentration between 1.6-2g/L. The samples were diluted 4 fold and digested at 1:20 of protein:Wako LysC (the protease was added at 1:40 twice with 4 hour interval). The peptides were desalted on Oasis HLB 1 cc Vac Cartridge with 30 mg sorbent as suggested by the manufacturer, speed vaced and 1 µg of material was injected on the column. Samples were analysed using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped and desalted on Symmetry C18 5 μm, 180 μM × 20 mm precolumn (Waters) and desalted at 10 μL/min flow for 2 min with 0.1% TFA. The separation was performed on nanoACQUITY CSH130 C18 1,7µm 75µx250mm at 300 nL/min flow rate with 0.1% formic acid as buffer A and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as buffer B. The gradient was 6-40% B in 75 min; 40-60% in 10 min and 60-100% in 15 min. Eluting peptides were electrosprayed through an etched emitter [PMCID: PMC1769309] and analysed using the Universal Method with 60 sec exclusion time.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer in 2.4.035. Database search was performed with Sequest using human UniProt database (retrieved on June, 06 2019). Methionine oxidation, Arg 13C615N4 and canavanine (user defined) was set as variable modification; Cys carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 3 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively (we observed a large number of false positive canavanine identifications in samples where no canavanine labelling was performed at higher precursor mass tolerance). Peptides were validated by Percolator with a 0.01 posterior error probability (PEP) threshold. Peptide intensities were calculated by Minora Feature Detector node.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastomas are the most frequent and aggressive form of primary brain tumors with no efficient cure. However, they often exhibit specific metabolic shifts that include deficiency in the biosynthesis of and dependence on certain exogenous amino acids. Here, we evaluated, in vitro, a novel combinatory antiglioblastoma approach based on arginine deprivation and canavanine, an arginine analogue of plant origin, using two human glioblastoma cell models, U251MG and U87MG. The combinatory treatment profoundly affected cell viability, morphology, motility and adhesion, destabilizing the cytoskeleton and mitochondrial network, and induced apoptotic cell death. Importantly, the effects were selective toward glioblastoma cells, as they were not pronounced for primary rat glial cells. At the molecular level, canavanine inhibited prosurvival kinases such as FAK, Akt and AMPK. Its effects on protein synthesis and stress response pathways were more complex and dependent on exposure time. We directly observed canavanine incorporation into nascent proteins by using quantitative proteomics. Although canavanine in the absence of arginine readily incorporated into polypeptides, no motif preference for such incorporation was observed. Our findings provide a strong rationale for further developing the proposed modality based on canavanine and arginine deprivation as a potential antiglioblastoma metabolic therapy independent of the blood-brain barrier.

### Keywords
Human, Canavanine, Silac

### Affiliations
Syddansk University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, VILLUM Center for Bioanalytical Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK - 5230 Odense M, Denmark(lab head)

### Submitter
Pavel Shliaha

### Lab Head
Dr Ole N Jensen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, VILLUM Center for Bioanalytical Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, DK - 5230 Odense M, Denmark(lab head)


