### Accession
PXD014362

### Title
Analysis of SdeA modification by SidJ

### Description
Legionella pneumophila is a pathogenic gram-negative bacterium that evades host defense pathways to establish its intracellular replicative niche1. SidE family (SidEs) effectors mediate phosphoribosyl (PR)-dependent ubiquitination of host substrates and promote bacterial infection. Legionella effector, SidJ shares the genetic locus with the SidEs and opposes their toxicity in yeast and mammalian cells through an unknown mechanism. Deletion of SidJ  alone leads to a significant defect in the growth of Legionella in both its natural host amoeba and in murine macrophages. Here, we show that SidJ is a glutamylase that modifies the catalytic residue in the mono-ADPribosyl transferase (mART) domain of SidEs thus blocking their ubiquitin ligase activity. This reaction requires SidJ binding to calmodulin (CaM), which acts as an essential mammalian co-factor for SidJ. Using quantitative proteomics, we also uncovered multiple host proteins as potential targets of SidJ-mediated glutamylation.

### Sample Protocol
For mass-spectrometric analysis, Legionella purified SidJ was separated on a 1D gel, the gel was stained with Coomassie and cut into 4 fractions, which were subjected to in-gel digestion.. eGFP-tagged SdeA was immunopurified with anti-GFP beads (Chromotek), weak binding proteins were removed by 4 washes with 4 M urea buffer. Purified SdeA was denatured by boiling for 5 minutes in 2% sodium deoxycholate, 5 mM TCEP and 20 mM Chloroacetamide in 50 mM Tris pH 8. Afterwards, SdeA was digested on beads either overnight with 0.5 μg Trypsin after dilution of sodium deoxycholate to 1% or for 30 minutes with LysC. The digests were stopped by addition of 4 volumes 1% TFA in isopropanol and the peptides were desalted and enriched by SDB-RPS Stage-Tips. Proteins from in vitro Glutamylation reactions were digested in solution with LysC as described for the IP samples. To obtain quantitative information, peptides were labelled with TMT 6plex reagent (ThermoFisher) and further purified with C18 stagetips. Peptides were separated on an in-house made C18 column (20 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 1.9 μm particle size) by an easy n-LC 1200 (ThermoFisher) and directly injected in a QExactive-HF mass-spectrometer (ThermoFisher) or in a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisher) and analyzed in data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Data-analysis was done with MaxQuant 1.65. In brief, samples were searched against the uniport Legionella pneumophila database (Legionella purified SidJ) or Human Swissprot database supplemented with SdeAs and SidJs sequence (IP and in-vitro samples) and eventually quantified by the TMT 6plex option. Glutamylated peptides were verified by manual spectra interpretation. Quantitative changes were further analyzed by unpaired T-tests in Perseus 1.65.

### Publication Abstract
The family of bacterial SidE enzymes catalyses phosphoribosyl-linked serine ubiquitination and promotes infectivity of Legionella pneumophila, a pathogenic bacteria that causes Legionnaires' disease<sup>1-3</sup>. SidE enzymes share the genetic locus with the Legionella effector SidJ that spatiotemporally opposes the toxicity of these enzymes in yeast and mammalian cells, through a mechanism that is currently unknown<sup>4-6</sup>. Deletion of SidJ leads to a substantial defect in the growth of Legionella in both its natural hosts (amoebae) and in mouse macrophages<sup>4,5</sup>. Here we demonstrate that SidJ is a glutamylase that modifies the catalytic glutamate in the mono-ADP ribosyl transferase domain of the SdeA, thus blocking the ubiquitin ligase activity of SdeA. The glutamylation activity of SidJ requires interaction with the eukaryotic-specific co-factor calmodulin, and can be regulated by intracellular changes in Ca<sup>2+</sup> concentrations. The cryo-electron microscopy structure of SidJ in complex with human apo-calmodulin revealed the architecture of this heterodimeric glutamylase. We show that, in cells infected with L.&#xa0;pneumophila, SidJ mediates the glutamylation of SidE enzymes on the surface of vacuoles that contain Legionella. We used quantitative proteomics to uncover multiple host proteins as putative targets of SidJ-mediated glutamylation. Our study reveals the mechanism by which SidE ligases are inhibited by a SidJ-calmodulin glutamylase, and opens avenues for exploring an understudied protein modification (glutamylation) in eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Legionella pneumophila, Glutamylation

### Affiliations
University of Frankfurt
Institute of Biochemistry 2 and BMLS, University Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Bonn

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Institute of Biochemistry 2 and BMLS, University Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany


