### Accession
PXD025332

### Title
Analysis of the PcrA-RNA polymerase complex reveals a helicase interaction motif and a role for PcrA/UvrD helicase in the suppression of R-loops

### Description
HDX-MS was used to study the binding of PcrA to RNA polymerase

### Sample Protocol
y HDX-MS experiments were performed using an automated robot (LEAP Technologies) coupled to an M-Class Acquity UPLC, HDX manager (Waters Ltd.), and Synapt G2S-i mass spectrometer. For the CTDRNAP experiments, protein samples were prepared containing either or both 5 µM RNAP and 10 µM CTD. For the PcrA-RNAP experiments samples were prepared using 0.5 μM RNAP and/or 2 μM PcrA. 30 μl of the protein solution in sample buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 7.4) was added to 135 μl deuterated buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate buffer in deuterated water, pD 7.4) and incubated at 4ºC for 0.5, 2, 5 and 10 minutes. After labelling, the reaction was terminated by the addition of 50 μl of sample to 100 μl quench buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate, 2 M guanidine- HCl, pH 2.2) resulting in a final pH of approximately 2.5. 50 μl of quenched sample were loaded onto an immobilised ethylene-bridged hybrid (BEH) pepsin column (Waters Ltd.). The resulting peptides were passed through a VanGuard BEH C18 pre- column and a C18 column (Waters Ltd.) and separated by gradient elution of 0–40% MeCN (0.1% v/v formic acid) in H2O (0.3% v/v formic acid). For the CTD-RNAP experiments, quench and pepsin wash buffers were supplemented with 0.05% (w/v) DDM. The UPLC was interfaced to the mass spectrometer via electrospray ionisation. HDMSE and dynamic range extension modes (Data Independent Analysis couple with IMS separation) were used to separate peptides by IMS prior to fragmentation in the transfer cell.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using PLGS and DynamX software provided with the mass spectrometer. The restrictions applied for peptide identification in DynamX were the following: minimum intensity 1000, minimum products per amino acid 0.3, maximum sequence length 25, maximum ppm error 6, replication file threshold 4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms

### Affiliations
University of Bristol

### Submitter
Iñigo Urrutia Irazabal

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Dillingham
University of Bristol


