### Accession
PXD019443

### Title
Deconstructing the regulation of protein, cellular origin and tumour grade-specific N and O-glycosylation associated with prostate cancer progression

### Description
Glycobiology plays a central role in prostate cancer (PCa), as evidenced by the aberrant glycosylation in PCa-derived glycoproteins. Understanding the protein glycosylation changes underling PCa onset and progression may open opportunities for the discovery of novel biomarkers for PCa detection and stratification as well as targets for PCa metastasis. Advances in mass spectrometry-based glycomics and glycoproteomics have opened up exciting avenues for deep characterisation of the immensely, yet poorly understood complex glycoproteome. In this study, we have used integrated glycomics and glycoproteomics to explore the protein, cell and tumour-grade specific N- and O- glycosylation signatures in surgically-removed fresh PCa tissues grouped into five PCa disease grades and tissues from benign prostatic hyperplasia patients (BPH). Porous graphitised carbon–liquid chromatography (PGC–LC)-MS/MS analysis was used to profile the N-and O-glycome, revealing PCa grade specific N and O glycosylation changes, including oligomannosidic and paucimannosidic, bisecting-GlcNAc and highly branched tri- and tetra-antennary fucosylated and sialylated N-glycans as well as sialylated core 1 and 2 type O-glycans. High resolution LC-MS/MS was then employed to capture the micro and macroheterogeneity of 1,085 N-glycosites (>7,400 unique N-glycopeptides) from 540 N-glycoproteins and 360 O-glycosites (>500 unique O-glycopeptides) from 178 O-glycoproteins and reveal protein and cell specific N- and O- glycosylation changes associated with PCa progression. We also showed PCa grade-specific increase in the expression of oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) subunits that correlate with changes in the site occupancy of N-glycoproteins. In conclusion, this study shows that integrated glycomics and glycoproteomics can provide unprecedented insight into key molecular features and site-specific glycan heterogeneity contributing to the highly diverse tumour-microenvironment and allow us to deconstruct the regulation of the protein, cell and tumour-grade-specific glycosylation associated with PCa onset and development.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins (500 µg) were reduced by addition of DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated for 30 min at 30°C. Proteins were alkylated prior to digestion by the addition of IAA to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubated for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. To quench the reaction, DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM. Porcine trypsin (1:50, w/w, sequence-grade, Promega) was added, and the mixture incubated overnight at 37°C. The reaction was stopped with the addition of 1% TFA and the resulting peptides were desalted using hydrophilic − lipophilic-balanced (HLB) solid phase (SPE; Waters) and dried (77). A pool of all digested samples was used as a reference sample for quantitative comparison across multiple TMT-10plex experiments. The samples were randomly combined in six TMT-10plex sets. Each set included at least one sample from each PCa grade and BPH. The reference sample was consistently labelled with the 126 Da reporter ion channel. Fifty-four samples from the PCa cohort were labelled with TMT for quantitative proteomics including five BPH individuals and ten PCa patients for each of the PCa grades 1-4 and nine patients for PCa grade 5. Peptides originating from 25 µg protein extracted from each tissue sample were dissolved in 100 µl 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) and labeled individually with 0.23 mg TMT-10plex mass tags (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After TMT labelling, all peptide samples were mixed 1:1 (w:w) and purified using HLB solid phase (SPE; Waters) and dried. An aliquot of the desalted TMT-labelled peptide mixture from each of the six TMT-10plex experiments were analysed directly by LC-MS/MS generating a non-prefractionated dataset. TMT-labeled peptides (~250 µg) was reconstituted in 50 µl loading and washing buffer containing 80% ACN in 1% aqueous (both v/v) TFA. Peptides were loaded onto a primed custom-made HILIC SPE micro-column packed with ZIC-HILIC™ resin (10 m particle size, 200 Å pore size, Sequant/Merck, Solna, Sweden) onto a supporting C8 disk (Empore) in a p10 pipette tip. The flow-through fraction was collected. The HILIC SPE columns were then washed in 50 µl loading and the wash fraction was collected and combined with the first flow-through fraction for separate downstream analysis. The enriched glycopeptides were eluted with 50 μl 0.1% (v/v) TFA followed by 50 μl 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally 50 μl 50% (v/v) ACN; these three elute fractions were combined.  An aliquot of the ZIC-HILIC SPE enriched glycopeptides was resuspended in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.0 and de-N-glycosylated using 500 U N-glycosidase F (PNGase F) (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) for 12 h at 37°C. After incubation, the de-N-glycosylated peptides were purified on a primed Oligo R3 reversed phase SPE micro-column, dried by vacuum centrifugation. This produced the de-N-glycopeptide fraction.  Enriched glycopeptides after ZIC-HILIC, de-N-glycosylated peptides and non-modified peptides were resuspended in 50 µl 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for high pH pre-fractionation using Oligo R2 reversed phase SPE micro-columns packed on top of supporting C18 discs (Empore) in standard p10 pipette tips. The columns were first washed three times with 50 µl 100% ACN and then equilibrated three times with 50 µl 25 mM aqueous ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were loaded on the columns followed by two washing steps with 50 µl 25 mM aqueous ammonium bicarbonate. The peptides were eluted and collected in three fractions i.e. fraction 1: 10% ACN in 25 mM aqueous ammonium bicarbonate; fraction 2: 20% ACN in 25 mM aqueous ammonium bicarbonate and fraction 3: 60% ACN in 25 mM aqueous ammonium bicarbonate and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides from each of the three fractions were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) aqueous FA for separate LC-MS/MS analysis. TMT-tagged peptides for LC-MS/MS profiling were loaded on a trap column (2 cm x 100 µm inner diameter) custom packed with ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 5 µm resin (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The linear gradient of solvent A increased from 2% to 30% over 100 min, 30-50% over 18 min, 50-95% over 1 min and 9 min at 95% B. The nanoLC was connected to a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion mode and using data-dependent acquisition. The Orbitrap acquired the full MS scan with an automatic gain control target value of 3 x 106 ions and a maximum fill time of 50 ms. Each MS scan was acquired at high-resolution 60,000 full width half maximum at m/z 200 in the Orbitrap with a m/z range of 350-1,800. The 20 most abundant precursor ions were selected from each MS full scan utilising higher-energy collision-induced dissociation fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 35% with the condition that precursors should be at least doubly charged.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of intact N-glycopeptides  Intact glycopeptide HCD-MS/MS fragment spectra from each sample were searched against defined protein and glycan search spaces using the Byonic software v2.6.46 (Protein Metrics, http://www.proteinmetrics.com/) (31). Searches were performed with the following fixed modifications: precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, product ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm, carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.021 Da) and TMT (+229.163 Da) at N-term and K as fixed modification, and strict trypsin specific cleavage with a maximum of two missed cleavages per peptide. Searches were also conducted with the following variable modifications: oxidation of Met (+15.994 Da), and N-glycosylation of sequon-localized Asn with the predefined N-glycan database of 309 mammalian N-glycans plus manually added paucimannose M3F without sodium or O-glycosylation of Thr and Ser with the predefined O-glycan database containing 78 common mammalian O-glycans without sodium available within Byonic. The MSMS spectra were searched against a database composed of the reviewed UniProtKB human protein database (see Supplementary Table S9 for more details). All searches were filtered to <1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level and 0% at the peptide level by using a decoy database of the reversed sequences of the list of proteins used for the original (forward) protein search space (79). Only glycopeptides identified with high score ID were considered (PEP 2D scores < 0.001). Glycopeptides identified with a lower confidence, in the reverse database and contaminant database were excluded. (28, 80).   Protein identification and glycosylation site analysis For protein identification and glycosylation site analysis, LC-MS/MS raw files were imported into MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (81). The database search engine Andromeda (82) was used to search the HCD-MS/MS spectra against a database composed of the reviewed UniProtKB human protein database (release July, 2017; 20,201 entries) with a precursor ion tolerance level of 4.5 ppm and product ion mass accuracy thresholds of 20 ppm. For the reporter fragment ions, the 10-plex TMT was included in the search parameters and enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of Met (+15.994 Da), deamidation of Asn (N) and Gln (Q)  (+0.984 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.010 Da) were selected as variable modifications. Five variable modifications per peptide were allowed. All identifications were filtered in order to achieve 1% PSM and Protein FDR. The quantitation of the identified proteins was determined by reporter ion intensities using at least 1 razor/unique peptide (Supplementary Table S9). After excluding peptides identified as potential contaminants or appearing in the reverse database, we manually filtered the peptides containing the deamidation sites located within the conserved N-glycosylation motif i.e. NxS/T/C where x ≠ P.

### Publication Abstract
The complexity and dynamics of the immensely heterogeneous glycoproteome of the prostate cancer (PCa) tumor microenvironment remain incompletely mapped, a knowledge gap that impedes our molecular-level understanding of the disease. To this end, we have used sensitive glycomics and glycoproteomics to map the protein-, cell-, and tumor grade-specific N- and O-glycosylation in surgically removed PCa tissues spanning five histological grades (n&#xa0;= 10/grade) and tissues from patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (n&#xa0;= 5). Quantitative glycomics revealed PCa grade-specific alterations of the oligomannosidic-, paucimannosidic-, and branched sialylated complex-type N-glycans, and dynamic remodeling of the sialylated core 1- and core 2-type O-glycome. Deep quantitative glycoproteomics identified &#x223c;7400 unique N-glycopeptides from 500 N-glycoproteins and &#x223c;500 unique O-glycopeptides from nearly 200 O-glycoproteins. With reference to a recent Tissue and Blood Atlas, our data indicate that paucimannosidic glycans of the PCa tissues arise mainly from immune cell-derived glycoproteins. Furthermore, the grade-specific PCa glycosylation arises primarily from dynamics in the cellular makeup of the PCa tumor microenvironment across grades involving increased oligomannosylation of prostate-derived glycoproteins and decreased bisecting GlcNAcylation of N-glycans carried by the extracellular matrix proteins. Furthermore, elevated expression of several oligosaccharyltransferase subunits and enhanced N-glycoprotein site occupancy were observed associated with PCa progression. Finally, correlations between the protein-specific glycosylation and PCa progression were observed including increased site-specific core 2-type O-glycosylation of collagen VI. In conclusion, integrated glycomics and glycoproteomics have enabled new insight into the complexity and dynamics of the tissue glycoproteome associated with PCa progression generating an important resource to explore the underpinning disease mechanisms.

### Keywords
Glycoproteome, Glycosylation, Mass spectrometry, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Departamento de Parasitologia, Universidade de São Paulo, USP, São Paulo, Brazil.
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Rebeca Kawahara

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Departamento de Parasitologia, Universidade de São Paulo, USP, São Paulo, Brazil.


