### Accession
PXD002726

### Title
Optimized data analysis avoiding trypsin artefacts

### Description
Most bottom-up proteomics experiments share two features: The use of trypsin to digest proteins for mass spectrometry and the statistic driven matching of the measured peptide fragment spectra against protein database derived in silico generated spectra. While this extremely powerful approach in combination with latest generation mass spectrometers facilitates very deep proteome coverage, the assumptions made have to be met to generate meaningful results. One of these assumptions is that the measured spectra indeed have a match in the search space, since the search engine will always report the best match. However, one of the most abundant proteins in the sample, the protease, is often not represented in the employed database. It is therefore widely accepted in the community to include the protease and other common contaminants in the database to avoid false positive matches. Although this approach accounts for unmodified trypsin peptides, the most widely employed trypsin preparations are chemically modified to prevent autolysis and premature activity loss of the protease. In this study we observed numerous spectra of modified trypsin derived peptides in samples from our laboratory as well as in datasets downloaded from public repositories. In many cases the spectra were assigned to other proteins, often with good statistical significance. We therefore designed a new database search strategy employing an artificial amino acid which accounts for these peptides with a minimal increase in search space and the concomitant loss of statistical significance. Moreover, this approach can be easily implemented into existing workflows for many widely used search engines.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from an in-gel digest of S.cerevisiae lysate were identified using LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using Mascot Ver. 2.4.1. Data were searched against S. cerevisiae Swissprot database. For the identification of dimethylated trypsin, modified trypsin was added to the database (where all lysines were replaced by dimethylated lysines (J) ). For false discovery rate estimation a decoy database search was used. Peptides were matched using trypsin as a digestion enzyme. Peptides mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm (or 100ppm for dataset 5) and fragment mass tolerance to 0.8 Da. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. In order to detect peptides containing the artificial amino acid J, the cleavage specificity for trypsin was changed to J, K and R, not after P. Furthermore to detect mixed peptides (i.e. peptides including dimethylated and unmodified lysine) we added loss of dimethylation of lysines (i.e. only J) as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Chemically modified trypsin is a standard reagent in proteomics experiments but is usually not considered in database searches. Modification of trypsin is supposed to protect the protease against autolysis and the resulting loss of activity. Here, we show that modified trypsin is still subject to self-digestion, and, as a result, modified trypsin-derived peptides are present in standard digests. We depict that these peptides commonly lead to false-positive assignments even if native trypsin is considered in the database. Moreover, we present an easily implementable method to include modified trypsin in the database search with a minimal increase in search time and search space while efficiently avoiding these false-positive hits.

### Keywords
Data base search, Autolysis protected trypsin

### Affiliations
Medical University of Graz
Omics Center Graz Research Unit "Functional Proteomics and Metabolic Pathways" Institute of Pathology Medical University Graz, Austria

### Submitter
Katarina Fritz

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Omics Center Graz Research Unit "Functional Proteomics and Metabolic Pathways" Institute of Pathology Medical University Graz, Austria


