### Accession
PXD008607

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Daboia russelli venom samples from Burdwan and Nadia districts of West Bengal, eastern India

### Description
Russell’s viper (Daboia russelii) (RV), a category I medically important snake as well as a member of the “Big Four”, is responsible for a heavy toll of snake bite mortality and morbidity in Indian sub-continent. Epidemiological studies suggest highest incidence of RV envenomation in eastern India (EI). In this study the RV venom proteomes from Burdwan and Nadia, the two districts of West Bengal, eastern India was deciphered for the first time using tandem mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilized RVV B and RVV N (45 mg dry weight) were dissolved in 1.0 ml of 25 mM HEPES buffer containing 50 mM NaCl, pH 7.0 for 4 h at 4 °C and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The clear supernatant was passed through 0.2 µm membrane syringe filter, its protein content was estimated and then it was fractionated on a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 75 pg column (1.6 x 60 cm) coupled to an AKTA purifier 10 Fast Protein Liquid Chromatography (FPLC) system (Wipro GE Healthcare, Sweden). The elution of protein at a flow rate of 16 ml/h was monitored at 280 nm, and 2 ml fractions were collected in each tube. The protein content of crude venom and the fractions were determined by the method of Lowry et al. (1951). From a standard curve of BSA, the concentration of unknown protein was determined at 660 nm. Forty µg of protein from each gel filtration peak was subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion (13 ng/μL in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10% acetonitrile) at an enzyme: substrate ratio of 1:30 at 37 °C for 16 h following manufacturer’s (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) protocol.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic fragments were separated on a Zorbax 300SB-C18 analytical column (75 μm x 150 mm, 3.5 μm, Agilent) coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phase gradient used for separation of the peptides were set as: 11% B for 5 min, 11 to 25% B in 20 min, 25 to 53% B in 16 min, 53 to 100% B in 5 min, 100% B for 4 min, and then 11% B for 4 min. Solvent A and B were 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid, respectively. The eluted peptides were then analysed on an LTQ Orbitrap Discovery hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced in-line via a Nanomate Triversa (Advion BioSciences, Ithaca, NY). The ionization voltage was set at 1.7 kV. The raw data was acquired and processed in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 1 MS survey scan in the FT mode (resolution of 30, 000 full width at half-maximum) was followed by 5 MS/MS scans in the range of m/z 300−2000 with lock mass set to 445.12 corresponding to polysiloxane. MS/MS fragmentation was collision-induced dissociation (CID) in linear mode with triggering conditions set to minimum signal intensity, 10,000; charge state, +2, +3; maximum injection time for MS/MS, 500 ms; and isolation width, 2 amu The raw LC-MS/MS data were searched and analyzed using PEAKS 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Ontario, Canada). Target database was NCBI with taxonomy set to Viperidae (taxid: 8689 with 56,958 protein entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine residues were set as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. To improve the RVV protein identification and sequence coverage, non-specific cleavage at one end (semi-tryptic peptides) was also considered. A contaminant database with 115 protein entries (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta) was also included in database search to exclude common contaminating proteins from identification. The initial criteria for protein identification were: (a) proteins and peptides with a -10logP value ≥ 30 and 20, respectively, and (b) presence of atleast one unique peptide. The false discovery rate (FDR) was kept very stringent (0.1%).

### Publication Abstract
The proteomes of Russell's viper venom (RVV) from Burdwan (RVV B) and Nadia (RVV N), the two districts of West Bengal, eastern India (EI), were investigated by gel-filtration chromatography (GFC) followed by tandem mass spectrometry of tryptic fragments of the fractions. A total of 73 and 69 proteins belonging to 15 snake venom protein families were identified in RVV B and RVV N, respectively, by MS/MS search against Viperidae (taxid 8689) protein entries of the nonredundant NCBI database. The minor differences in venom composition of both the EI RV were established unequivocally by their biochemical and pharmacological properties and by SDS-PAGE, gel filtration chromatography, and LC-MS/MS analyses. The composition of EI RVVs was well correlated with published reports on the pathophysiology of RV-envenomed patients from this part of the country. Venom-antivenom cross-reactivity determined by ELISA, Western blotting, and antivenomics approaches demonstrated poor recognition of low molecular mass (&lt;20 kDa) RVV proteins by commercial polyvalent antivenoms, which was substantiated by neutralization of RVV enzymes by antivenom.

### Keywords
Snake venom, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, India
Tezpur University

### Submitter
Bhargab Kalita

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ashis Kumar Mukherjee
Professor, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tezpur University, India


