### Accession
PXD020284

### Title
Quantitative analysis of tyrosine phosphorylation from FFPE tissues reveals patient specific signaling networks

### Description
The aim of this study was to characterize tyrosine phosphorylation from FFPE tissues. Global phosphoproteomics, global proteomics and tyrosine phosphorylation were measured using quantitative LC-MS/MS based on TMT labeling.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE tissues were deparaffinized in xylene followed by lysis in 50% TFE at 90 °C. Frozen tumor tissues were homogenized in 8M urea, followed by reduction with DTT and alkylation with iodoacetamide. Proteins were desalted and digested using sera-mag speed beads based sample processing.  Peptides were labeled with TMT10plex or TMTpro16plex reagents. Phosphopeptides were enriched by immunoprecipitation and Fe-NTA based spin columns. Phosphopeptides were directly loaded onto an in-house made analytical capillary column, separated onto Agilent 1200 LC system and analyzed in data dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the human SwissProt database using Mascot version 2.4 (Matrix Science). Spectra were searched with mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 20 mmu for fragment ions. TMT reporter quantification was extracted and isotope corrected in Proteome Discoverer. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, TMT labeled lysine and TMT labeled peptide N termini were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were searched as dynamic modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Human tissue samples commonly preserved as formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues after diagnostic or surgical procedures in the clinic represent an invaluable source of clinical specimens for in-depth characterization of signaling networks to assess therapeutic options. Tyrosine phosphorylation (pTyr) plays a fundamental role in cellular processes and is commonly dysregulated in cancer but has not been studied to date in FFPE samples. In addition, pTyr analysis that may otherwise inform therapeutic interventions for patients has been limited by the requirement for large amounts of frozen tissue. Here we describe a method for highly sensitive, quantitative analysis of pTyr signaling networks, with hundreds of sites quantified from one to two 10-&#x3bc;m sections of FFPE tissue specimens. A combination of optimized magnetic bead-based sample processing, optimized pTyr enrichment strategies, and tandem mass tag multiplexing enabled in-depth coverage of pTyr signaling networks from small amounts of input material. Phosphotyrosine profiles of flash-frozen and FFPE tissues derived from the same tumors suggested that FFPE tissues preserve pTyr signaling characteristics in patient-derived xenografts and archived clinical specimens. pTyr analysis of FFPE tissue sections from breast cancer tumors as well as lung cancer tumors highlighted patient-specific oncogenic driving kinases, indicating potential targeted therapies for each patient. These data suggest the capability for direct translational insight from pTyr analysis of small amounts of FFPE tumor tissue specimens. SIGNIFICANCE: This study reports a highly sensitive method utilizing FFPE tissues to identify dysregulated signaling networks in patient tumors, opening the door for direct translational insights from FFPE tumor tissue banks in hospitals.

### Keywords
Ffpe, Afatinib, Phosphotyrosine, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Engineering and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States
 Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 

### Submitter
Ishwar Kohale

### Lab Head
Dr Forest Michael White
Department of Biological Engineering and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States


