### Accession
PXD034820

### Title
Non-canonical splicing junctions between exons and transposable elements represent a source of immunogenic recurrent neo-antigens in cancer patients

### Description
ost characterized tumor antigens are ‘genomic’, i.e. encoded by canonical, non-canonical or somatically mutated genomic sequences. We investigate here the presentation and immunogenicity of tumor antigens derived from non-canonical mRNA splicing events between coding exons and transposable elements (TEs). Comparing non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), an immunogenic tumor type, and diverse non-tumor tissues, we identify several thousand splicing junctions between exons and diverse TE classes. A subset of these junctions is both tumor-specific and shared across patients. HLA-I peptidomic identifies peptides encoded by tumor-specific junctions in primary NSCLC samples and lung tumor cell lines. Recurrent junction-encoded peptides are immunogenic in vitro and CD8+ T cells specific for junction-encoded epitopes are present in tumors and tumor-draining lymph nodes from NSCLC patients. We conclude that non-canonical splicing junctions between exons and TEs represent a source of recurrent, immunogenic tumor-specific antigens in NSCLC cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
H1650 or H1395 cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1x Complete protease inhibitor (Roche), 5 mM EDTA, 1% n-Dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (ThermoFisher, Ref. 89902)) and sonicated twice. Samples were centrifuged 12 min at 5500g to remove nuclei and organelles. After overnight incubation at 4ºC, non-solubilized membranes were pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 55000 g for 1h at 4ºC. This protocol was adapted from Heyder et al.  Solubilized samples were incubated overnight with CNBr-activated Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) coupled to anti-HLA-ABC W6/32 antibody (BioXcell) at a final concentration of 1mg/mL total protein. W6/32-Sepharose beads were washed 3x with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 % n-Dodecyl-β-D-maltoside and 3x with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150mM NaCl. A high salt concentration wash (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 0.5M NaCl) was then done to remove nonspecific interactions. After washing 3x with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and 1 with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, peptide-HLA-ABC complexes were eluted with 0.25% TFA. H1650 sample before injecting all the sample in first used a Q-exactive HF-X.  Samples were analyzed by HR-LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) (H1650 sample for pJET discovery) or by a Evopep One (EV-1000, Evosep) coupled to a Orbitrap Eclipse Tribid (Thermo Scientific) (H1650 and H1395 samples for discovery and heavy labelled validation). For the first discovery analysis of sample H1650, the sample was cleaned by a C18 StageTip. Eluted peptides were trapped onto a C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) and separation was performed on a 50 cm x 75 µm C18 column (nanoViper C18, Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 2 % to 35 % at a flow rate of 300 nL / min over 91 min. MS full scans were performed in the ultrahigh-field Orbitrap mass analyzer in ranges m/z 375–1500 with a resolution of 120 000 at m/z 200.  The top 20 intense ions were subjected to Orbitrap for further fragmentation via high energy collision dissociation (HCD) activation and a resolution of 15 000 Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at 27 and the dynamic exclusion was 15s.   For the second experiment with H1650 and H1395 samples (discovery and targeted validation), SCX fractionation was conducted first. Then, a Ecotip C-18 (EV-2001, Evosep) was used as trap column. Peptides were analyzed in a EV1106 column (150 μm x 150 mm, 1.9 μm, Evosep) with the standard gradient of 88 min (A: H2O 0.1% formic acid. B: CH3CN 0.1% formic acid) at 500 nL/min. MS full scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer in the range m/z 350–900 with a resolution of 30 000. For discovery, the top intense ions were selected for further fragmentation via CID activation (35% collision energy) using an isolation window of 0.7 and a resolution of 30 000. For targeted, isotope-labelled peptides (GeneCust) were spiked in at 100 fM. The monitored ions were subjected to Orbitrap fragmentation in the same conditions as the discovery analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher) with the following parameters: no-enzyme, precursor mass tolerance 20ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da. Methionine and N-acetylation were enabled as variable modifications. Using Percolator, a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied at peptide level and no FDR was used at protein level. MS/MS spectra were searched against the human proteome from Uniprot/SwissProt with isoforms (updated 06.03.2020) and concatenated with generated JET_db.

### Publication Abstract
Although most characterized tumor antigens are encoded by canonical transcripts (such as differentiation or tumor-testis antigens) or mutations (both driver and passenger mutations), recent results have shown that noncanonical transcripts including long noncoding RNAs and transposable elements (TEs) can also encode tumor-specific neo-antigens. Here, we investigate the presentation and immunogenicity of tumor antigens derived from noncanonical mRNA splicing events between coding exons and TEs. Comparing human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and diverse healthy tissues, we identified a subset of splicing junctions that is both tumor specific and shared across patients. We used HLA-I peptidomics to identify peptides encoded by tumor-specific junctions in primary NSCLC samples and lung tumor cell lines. Recurrent junction-encoded peptides were immunogenic in vitro, and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells specific for junction-encoded epitopes were present in tumors and tumor-draining lymph nodes from patients with NSCLC. We conclude that noncanonical splicing junctions between exons and TEs represent a source of recurrent, immunogenic tumor-specific antigens in patients with NSCLC.

### Keywords
Human, Immunopeptidomics, Non-canonical splicing, Transposable element, Neoantigen

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Institut Curie, Université Paris Sciences et Lettres, INSERM U932, 75005 Paris, France.

### Submitter
Yago Arribas

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Amigorena
Institut Curie, Université Paris Sciences et Lettres, INSERM U932, 75005 Paris, France.


