### Accession
PXD014300

### Title
Chr18 Consortium MS-data for missing proteins mining

### Description
Despite direct or indirect efforts of proteomic community, the fraction of blind spots on the protein map is still significant. Almost 10% (?) of human master protein has no experimental validation up to now. Apparently, proteomics has reached the stage where all easy scores are achieved (?), and every next identification requires more intension and curiosity in expansion of unusual types of biomaterial and/or conditions. In this article we discuss the current state of missing proteins search conducted by eclectic Russian Consortium in frame of C-HPP. We accumulated various data, obtained by Russian Proteomic Consortium.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis in-solution digestion was used. CVF proteins were reduced with 0.1 М DTT in 8 M Urea (pH 8.5); alkylated with 0.55M iodoacetamide, precipitated in acetone with TFA and digested with trypsin. Tryptic peptide mixtures were separated on a nano-HPLC Agilent 1100 system (Agilent Technologies, SantaClara, CA, USA) using a self-packed capillary column (Fused-silica PicoTip emitters id 75 μm length 12cm nominal tip id 15 μm, filled with Reprosil-Pur Basic C18, 3 μm, 100 Ǻ; Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch- Entringen, Germany). The separation was carried out by a 95-min gradient (Solvent A – LC grade Water (H2O) containing 0.1 % of formic acid / Solvent B – LC grade Acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% of formic acid) from 3% to 35% of solvent B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. After pre-equilibration with 3% (v/v) solvent B, a 30 min linear gradient from 3% to 50% was applied, followed by a 5 min gradient from 50% to 90% and then a 10 min isocratic elution with 90% solvent B. Mass-spectrometry analysis was carried out on a 7T LTQFT Ultra (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) instrument using a nanospray ion source (positive ion mode, 2.3 kV). MS and MS/MS data were obtained in data-dependent mode using Xcalibur (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, USA) software. The precursor ion scan MS spectra (m/z range 300–1600) were acquired in the FTICR with resolution R = 50000 at m/z 400 (number of accumulated ions: 5*10e6). Dynamic exclusion was used with a 30 s duration period. Five most intensive ions from each parent scan were isolated and fragmented in the LTQ by collision induced dissociation (CID) using 3*10e4 accumulated ions.

### Data Protocol
Data files obtained after data-dependent shotgun LC-MS/MS analysis were converted in peak list format and used for proteins identification.  The search was conducted using SearchGUI version 2.3.1711. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy neXtProt database (neXtProt, rel. 2019-01-01). All common contaminants were included into the database. The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: trypsin as a specific protease, with a maximum of 1 missed cleavages, ±5 ppm as MS1 level and ±0.05 Da as MS2 level tolerances; variable modifications: oxidation of M (+15.994915 u), deamination of N (+0.984016 u), deamination of Q (+0.984016 u), carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 u). Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using Peptide Shaker version 1.16.15 13. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution.

### Publication Abstract
Despite direct or indirect efforts of the proteomic community, the fraction of blind spots on the protein map is still significant. Almost 11% of human genes encode missing proteins; the existence of which proteins is still in doubt. Apparently, proteomics has reached a stage when more attention and curiosity need to be exerted in the identification of every novel protein in order to expand the unusual types of biomaterials and/or conditions. It seems that we have exhausted the current conventional approaches to the discovery of missing proteins and may need to investigate alternatives. Here, we present an approach to deciphering missing proteins based on the use of non-standard methodological solutions and encompassing diverse MS/MS data, obtained for rare types of biological samples by members of the Russian Proteomic community in the last five years. These data were re-analyzed in a uniform manner by three search engines, which are part of the SearchGUI package. The study resulted in the identification of two missing and five uncertain proteins detected with two peptides. Moreover, 149 proteins were detected with a single proteotypic peptide. Finally, we analyzed the gene expression levels to suggest feasible targets for further validation of missing and uncertain protein observations, which will fully meet the requirements of the international consortium. The MS data are available on the ProteomeXchange platform (PXD014300).

### Keywords
Proteotypic peptide, Missing proteins, Nextprot, Human proteome, Mass-spectrometry, Uncertain proteins, Chromosome-centric human proteome project (с-hpp)

### Affiliations
IBMC

### Submitter
Ekaterina Ilgisonis

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Alexandrovna Ponomarenko
IBMC


