### Accession
PXD006262

### Title
S. cerevisiae proteome response to heat stress - 240 min time course. C4PR_LIV

### Description
In this project, we follow the temporal proteome dynamics during heat stress response in a model organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Using label-free quantification we determine changes in the yeast proteome at different times after mild temperature shift, from 30˚C to 37˚C. The time points measured were 0 min (30˚C, no stress) and then at 10 min, 30 min, 60 min, 120 min and 240 min after cells were transferred to 37 °C. For each time point, four biological replicates were collected for the haploid wild type (BY4742, Mat ALPHA, his3Δ1; leu2Δ0; lys2Δ0; ura3Δ0; YJL088w::kanMX4) strain and a haploid strain with a chaperone Ssb1p deletion (ssb1Δ).

### Sample Protocol
S. cerevisiae strains used in this study were purchased from Thermo Yeast Knockout (YKO) Collection. Batch cultures (strain BY4742, Mat ALPHA, his3Δ1; leu2Δ0; lys2Δ0; ura3Δ0; YJL088w::kanMX4) were grown in Yeast Nitrogen Base medium (supplemented with 10 g/L of glucose, 10 ml/L Arg, 20 ml/L Leu, 10 ml/L Ura, 3 ml/L His and 10 ml/L Lys) in biological quadruplicates. Proteins from a volume equivalent to 25 million cells (~100 - 150 µg protein) were denatured with RapiGest™ detergent (10 μL of 1% (w/v), 80oC for 10 minutes), reduced using 60 mM dithiothreitol (10 μL, 60oC, 400 rpm shaking for 10 minutes), cooled on ice and alkylated 180 mM iodoacetamide (10 μL, incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes). Digestion was performed by addition of sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega, UK) in a 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio (10 μL of 0.2 μg/μL trypsin), incubation for 4.5 h followed by further trypsin addition (10 μL of 0.2 μg/μL trypsin), and overnight incubation at 37˚C. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the reaction mixture (1% (v/v) final concentration) to stop the digestion and hydrolyse RapiGest™ detergent. To aid peptide solubilisation, 2.5 μL acetonitrile:water (2:1) was also added and samples were incubated at 4oC for at least 2 hours. The digests were analysed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC™ system (WATERS) coupled to LTQ Orbitrap Velos (linear trap quadrupole with an Orbitrap mass analyser; Thermo). Peptides were resolved on an analytical C18 column (nanoACQUITY UPLC™ HSS T3 C18 75 µm x 150 mm, 1.7 µm particle size, Waters, Manchester, UK) with a linear gradient of solution B (acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) from 3% to 35% over 210 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, followed by a ramp to 90% solution B, column wash and 15 minute re-equilibration. The total run time was 240 minutes. A 30 min blank injection was also performed between each tryptic sample to wash the columns and minimise carry-over between samples.  The LTQ Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent mode: the survey scan was acquired over the range m/z 350-2000 at a resolution of 30,000 (m/z 400) in the Orbitrap analyser and the fragmentation was performed in the LTQ ion trap with the normalised collision energy of 35.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using MaxQuant software. Protein identification was performed with the built-in Andromeda search engine. MS/MS spectra were searched against the S. cerevisiae canonical and isoform protein database (UniProt, 6721 entries, accessed April 2015) appended with 124 common laboratory contaminants. The parameters were as follows; digest reagent: trypsin, max missed cleavages: 2, max protein mass: 250 kDa, fixed modifications: cysteine carboxymethylation, variable modifications: protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation and serine, threonine and tyrosine (STY) phosphorylation. The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for MS1 and MS/MS to 0.5 Da. The initial MS1 mass calibration was performed within MQ with a 20 ppm tolerance. The false discovery rate (FDR) for accepted peptide spectrum matches and protein matches was set to 1%. Further statistical analysis was performed using MSstats package and the R environment.

### Publication Abstract
Temperature fluctuation is a common environmental stress that elicits a molecular response in order to maintain intracellular protein levels. Here, for the first time, we report a comprehensive temporal and quantitative study of the proteome during a 240 minute heat stress, using label-free mass spectrometry. We report temporal expression changes of the hallmark heat stress proteins, including many molecular chaperones, tightly coupled to their protein clients. A notable lag of 30 to 120 minutes was evident between transcriptome and proteome levels for differentially expressed genes. This targeted molecular response buffers the global proteome; fewer than 15% of proteins display significant abundance change. Additionally, a parallel study in a Hsp70 chaperone mutant (ssb1&#x394;) demonstrated a significantly attenuated response, at odds with the modest phenotypic effects that are observed on growth rate. We cast the global changes in temporal protein expression into protein interaction and functional networks, to afford a unique, time-resolved and quantitative description of the heat shock response in an important model organism.

### Keywords
Environmental stress response, Label free quantification, Hsp70 chaperone

### Affiliations
Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT
EBI

### Submitter
Andrew Jarnuczak

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Simon Hubbard
Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT


