### Accession
PXD027160

### Title
Identification of new interaction partners of D. discoideum UBXD9-GFP and GFP-UBXD9

### Description
The largest family of p97 cofactors is the UBXD protein family, whose members all carry an Ubiquitin Regulatory X (UBX) domain that enables binding to p97. We analysed one member of this family, the largely uncharacterised UBXD9 protein. To shed a light on the UBXD9 interactome, we used independent approaches to identify new interacting proteins. As a result, we confirmed p97 (also known as valosin-containing protein, VCP) as an interaction partner of UBXD9 and identified new interaction partners.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments for the identification of new UBXD9 interaction partners were performed with log phase AX2 cells (2–4 x 106 cells/ml) ectopically expressing UBXD9 GFP, GFP UBXD9, or GFP (negative control). 1 x 10^8 cells were harvested (500 x g, 5 min), washed twice with Soerensen phosphate buffer (14.6 mM KH2PO4, 2.0 mM KH2PO4, pH 6.0) and the cell pellet shock frozen with liquid nitrogen. Cells were resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 20 mM MgCl2, 5% Glycerin, 1 mM Benzamidin, 10 µg/ml Aprotinin/Leupeptin, 1:50 Proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1:100 PEFA block) followed by centrifugation at 20,000x g for 10 min. The supernatant, containing soluble proteins, was incubated with GFP-trap beads (Chromotek) for 2 h at 4°C. Beads were washed four times with wash buffer I (50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 0.2% NP-40) and twice with wash buffer II (50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT). Samples were prepared by the in-solution digestion of proteins and StageTip purification of peptides according to the protocol of the facility (http://proteomics.cecad-labs.uni-koeln.de/Protocols.955.0.html).

### Data Protocol
The samples were analysed using an EASY nLC 1000 UPLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm I.D., packed with 2.7 μm C18 Poroshell beads, Agilent) and were chromatographically separated. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, where the Orbitrap acquired full MS scans (300-1750 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 with an automated gain control (AGC) target of 3x106 ions collected with 20 ms. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20 s. The 10 most intense peaks were subjected to HCD fragmentation. All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) and its implemented Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Two-sample two-tailed Student’s t-test were performed in Perseus (version 1.6.5) for pairwise comparisons.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubxd9, D. discoideum

### Affiliations
Center for Biochemistry- University Hospital Cologne
center for biochemistry, University of cologne

### Submitter
Jana Riehl

### Lab Head
Dr Ludwig Eichinger
center for biochemistry, University of cologne


