### Accession
PXD038002

### Title
Characterization of bovine uterine fluid extracellular vesicles proteomic profiles at follicular and luteal phases of the oestrous cycle

### Description
Bovine uterine fluid extracellular vesicles proteomic profile at luteal and follicular phases of the oestrous cycle

### Sample Protocol
Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and sodium deoxycholate (DOC) protocol was used for protein precipitation of the samples. Briefly, 5 µL of 100% TCA-DOC solution was added to 20 µL of EV sample and incubated 20 min at 4°C. The sample was then centrifuged for 15 min at 17000 g on RT and the supernatant was discarded. Then 60 µL of 100% acetone was added on the pellet, incubated for 10 min at RT and finally centrifuged for 15 min at 17000 g on RT. After the supernatant was discarded the washing step was repeated. The precipitate was air-dried on ice under the hood for 10 min. For the analysis 1 µg of protein was injected to an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The sample was eluted from the trap at 250 nL/min to 75 µm ID x 50 cm emitter-column (New Objective, Littleton, MA, USA) packed with C18 material (3µm, 300 Å particles, Dr Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The separating gradient used were 2 - 35% A 60 min and 40 - 100% B 5 min (A: 0.1% formic acid (FA), B: 80% ACN + 0.1% FA). Next, the eluted peptides were transferred to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer using nano-electrospray ionization at 2.4 kV, which was applied through liquid-junction. The machine was operated with a top-5 data-dependent acquisition strategy. Briefly, at a resolution setting of R = 70000 at 200 m/z one 350-1400 m/z MS scan was followed by five higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 26) of 5 most intense ions (z: +2 to +6) at R = 17500. The target values of MS and MS/MS were 3x106 and 5x104 with 50 ms injection time. The dynamic exclusion was limited to 40 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software package using versions 1.6.15.0 and 2.0.3.0. The variable modifications were set for methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation, while cysteine carbomidomethylation was defined as fixed modification. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled using LFQ and protein minimum ratio count at 1. Search was performed against reference proteomes of Homo sapiens and Bos taurus using the tryptic digestion rule. Target-decoy approach was used to keep peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) below 1%. All other parameters for the analysis were used in their default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EV) have been identified in uterine fluid (UF), however the bovine UF-EV profile during different phases of the oestrous cycle has not yet been established. Therefore, we compared the UF-EV, and their protein profile at follicular and luteal phases of the oestrous cycle. UF samples were collected from healthy uteri of six live and six slaughtered cows at follicular or luteal phases. Isolation of EV was performed using tangential flow filtration followed by size exclusion chromatography. EV were characterized by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), fluorescence NTA, zeta potential, and transmission electron microscopy. Mass-spectrometry was used to evaluate EV protein profile from live cows. Particle concentrations (mean&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;SD) were higher (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) at follicular than at luteal phase in both live (1.01&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>8</sup>&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.66&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>7</sup> vs 7.56&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>7</sup>&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.80&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>7</sup>, respectively) and slaughtered cows (1.17&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>8</sup>&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.34&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>7</sup> vs 9.12&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>7</sup>&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9.77&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>6</sup>, respectively). The proportion of fluorescently labelled EV varied significantly between follicular and luteal phases across live (28.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.9% vs 19.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.8%, respectively) and slaughtered cows (26.5&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;6.3% vs 27.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2 .7%, respectively). In total, 41 EV proteins were differentially expressed between the phases. Some of the proteins were involved in reproductive processes, cell adhesion and proliferation, and cellular metabolic processes. The results indicated differences in bovine UF-EV concentration and protein profile at follicular and luteal phases, which would suggest that EV modulate uterine microenvironment across the oestrous cycle. Further research is needed to understand the effect of EV changes throughout the oestrous cycle.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Bos taurus

### Affiliations
Estonian University of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Johanna Piibor

### Lab Head
Dr Johanna Piibor
Estonian University of Life Sciences


