### Accession
PXD010074

### Title
Proteogenomic characterization of microbial communities fueled by metal-sulfide oxidation of inactive hydrothermal chimneys

### Description
Iron-sulfur minerals such as pyrite are found in many marine benthic habitats. At deep-sea hydrothermal vent sites they occur as massive sulfide chimneys. Hydrothermal chimneys formed by mineral precipitation from reduced vent fluids upon mixing with cold oxygenated sea water. While microorganisms inhabiting actively venting chimneys and utilizing reduced compounds dissolved in the fluids for energy generation are well studied, only little is known about the microorganisms inhabiting inactive sulfide chimneys. We performed a comprehensive meta-proteogenomic analysis combined with radiometric dating to investigate the diversity and function of microbial communities found on inactive sulfide chimneys of different ages from the Manus Basin (SW Pacific). Our study sheds light on potential lifestyles and ecological niches of yet poorly described bacterial clades dominating inactive chimney communities.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed as recently described by Pjevac et al. (2018)*, i.e., from 7 g of chimney material according to a Tri Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and chloroform-based extraction protocol published in Stokke et al. (2012). Extracted protein was re-suspended in 40 µl of SDS-containing sample buffer (0.1 M Tris HCl pH 6.8, 10% SDS, 20% glycerol, 5% β-mercaptoethanol; see Teeling et al., 2012) and denatured for 10 min at 90°C. After addition of 1 µl bromophenol blue, the denatured protein extract was loaded on two separate lanes (i.e. technical duplicates) of a precast 4-20% gradient polyacrylamide SDS mini gel and separated at 150 V for 1 h. The gel was Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB)-stained, entire gel lanes were excised and cut into 10 equal pieces each, washed three times (200 mM NH4HCO3, 30% acetonitrile) and vacuum-dried before subsequent protein digestion with 2 µg ml-1 trypsin solution (Promega, USA) at 37°C overnight (Eymann et al., 2004). After purification of digested protein with µ-C18 ZipTips (Millipore, USA), the peptide mix was separated by Nano HPLC (Easy-nLCII HPLC system, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and subjected to MS/MS analysis in an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) as described in detail by Elsholz et al. (2012). * Pjevac et al. (2018): Metaproteogenomic Profiling of Microbial Communities Colonizing Actively Venting Hydrothermal Chimneys. Front Microbiol. 2018 9:680

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted and analyzed using the Sorcerer-Sequest software (Sorcerer v3.5, Sage-N Research; Sequest version v.27, rev. 11, Thermo-Finnigan, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). A combined target-decoy database containing the metagenomic information of both samples, 42 common laboratory contaminants, and reversed amino acid sequences of all protein-coding genes (decoys) was searched for protein identification (total number of ORFs: 431.924). Search parameters: peptide tolerance: 10 ppm; tolerance for fragment ions: 1 amu; band y-ion series; variable modification: oxidation of methionine, 15.99 Da, max. three modifications per peptide). Evaluation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications was performed with Scaffold version 4.0.4 (http://www.proteomesoftware.com). The following filter settings were applied: Parent mass tolerance: 10 ppm; Xcorr for doubly charged peptides 2.2, for triply charged peptides 3.3 and for quadruply charged peptides 3.75; Cn score 0.1. Using these settings, peptide false discovery rates (peptide FDRs, based on the number of decoy identifications) were between 0.0 and 0.1 %, and protein FDRs were between 0.3 and 0.5 % throughout all experiments. Only proteins or protein groups that had at least two unique peptides assigned were considered identified. For semi-quantitative analysis and comparison of relative protein abundances in both metagenome samples, normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAFs) were calculated (Zybailov et al., 2006) using total spectrum counts. For each protein or protein group, spectral count values were normalized to protein size (molecular weight in kDa) and to the sum of all spectral counts in the same sample.

### Publication Abstract
Metal-sulfides are wide-spread in marine benthic habitats. At deep-sea hydrothermal vents, they occur as massive sulfide chimneys formed by mineral precipitation upon mixing of reduced vent fluids with cold oxygenated sea water. Although microorganisms inhabiting actively venting chimneys and utilizing compounds supplied by the venting fluids are well studied, only little is known about microorganisms inhabiting inactive chimneys. In this study, we combined 16S rRNA gene-based community profiling of sulfide chimneys from the Manus Basin (SW Pacific) with radiometric dating, metagenome (n = 4) and metaproteome (n = 1) analyses. Our results shed light on potential lifestyles of yet poorly characterized bacterial clades colonizing inactive chimneys. These include sulfate-reducing Nitrospirae and sulfide-oxidizing Gammaproteobacteria dominating most of the inactive chimney communities. Our phylogenetic analysis attributed the gammaproteobacterial clades to the recently described Woeseiaceae family and the SSr-clade found in marine sediments around the world. Metaproteomic data identified these Gammaproteobacteria as autotrophic sulfide-oxidizers potentially facilitating metal-sulfide dissolution via extracellular electron transfer. Considering the wide distribution of these gammaproteobacterial clades in marine environments such as hydrothermal vents and sediments, microbially accelerated neutrophilic mineral oxidation might be a globally relevant process in benthic element cycling and a considerable energy source for carbon fixation in marine benthic habitats.

### Keywords
Hydrothermal vents, Lc-msms, Metaproteome, Chimneys

### Affiliations
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Stephanie Markert

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Markert
Universität Greifswald Institut für Pharmazie, AG Pharmazeutische Biotechnologie Greifswald, Germany


