### Accession
PXD005422

### Title
Methylated-antibody affinity purification to improve proteomic identification of plant RNA polymerase Pol V complex and the interacting proteins

### Description
Affinity purification followed by enzymatic digestion and mass spectrometry has been widely utilized for the sensitive detection of interacting proteins and protein complexes in various organisms. In plants, the method is technically challenging due to the low abundance proteins, non-specific binding and difficulties of eluting interacting proteins from antibody beads. In this report, we describe a strategy to modify antibodies by reductive methylation of lysines without affecting their binding properties, followed by on-bead digestion of bound proteins with endoproteinase Lys-C. By this method, the antibody remains intact and does not interfere with the downstream identification of interacting proteins. Non-specific binding proteins were excluded using 14N/15N-metabolic labeling of wild-type and the transgenic plant counterparts. The method was employed to identify 12 co-immunoprecipitated protein subunits in Pol V complex and to discover 17 potential interacting protein targets in Arabidopsis. Our results demonstrated that the modification of antibodies by reductive dimethylation can improve the reliability and sensitivity of identifying low-abundance proteins through on-bead digestion and mass spectrometry. We also show that coupling this technique with chemical crosslinking enables in-depth characterization of endogenous protein complexes and the protein-protein interaction networks including mapping the surface topology and post-translational modifications of interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials. Seeds of Arabidopsis thaliana ecotypes Columbia-0 (Col-0) and NRPE1-FLAG transgenic plants were surface-sterilized by 0.5% sodium hypochlorite solution, and then mixed with 0.1 % (w/v) agar solution and sown on the agar growth media containing half-strength Murashige & Skoog (1/2 MS) medium, 1 % (w/v) sucrose and 0.7 % (w/v) agar at pH 5.7. After incubation at the dark for 2 days at 4 °C, the seedlings were then transferred to the plant growth chamber at 22 oC under long-day conditions (16 h light, 8 h dark) for 14 days. The materials were collected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until use.   In vivo 15N-isotope metabolic labeling of proteins in Arabidopsis. Metabolic labeling of proteins in wild-type Arabidopsis (Col-0) and NRPE1-FLAG transgenic plants was performed using the light (14N) and heavy nitrogen (15N) stable isotopes, respectively, as described previously. In the 15N-incorporated medium, the heavy labeling reagents of 15NH415NO3 and K15NO3 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Andover, MA) were used to replace those containing 14N-isotope.   Dimethylation of antibody beads. Anti-FLAG M2 affinity gels (Sigma, St. Louis) were chemically modified by dimethylation according to the protocol reported previously. Briefly, 3 μl of 1 M amine-borane complexes (Sigma, St. Louis) and 6 μl of 1 M formaldehyde were added into 50 μl of suspended antibody beads in 100 μl of ice-cold 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.5) containing 150 mM NaCl. The steps were repeated twice for 20 minutes. After reductive methylation, the antibody beads were washed with the HEPES buffer for 3 times and immediately used for affinity purification of proteins.  Affinity purification and on-beads digestion. Approximately 3 g of seedling were ground to fine powder with a mortar and pestle in liquid nitrogen and suspended in 9 ml of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 % glycerol, 0.1 % NP-40, 0.5 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, and protease inhibitor cocktails). The lysate was centrifuged for 15 min at 14,000 g, and 50 μl of anti-Flag antibody beads were added to the supernatant. After incubation at 4 °C with rotation for 3 h, the beads were washed with 2 ml of lysis buffer for 4 times and then 1 ml of 50 mM NH4HCO3 twice. The bound proteins were digested on-beads with the addition of 100 μl of 100 mM NH4HCO3 containing 1 μg of Lys-C (Promega, Madison, WI) overnight at 37 °C.  The beads were discarded by centrifugation. The supernatant were diluted by water to 50 mM NH4HCO3 and continued the digestion with 2 μg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) for 7 h at 37 °C. All peptides were purified by StageTips before LC MS/MS analysis. The concentration of peptides was determined using the BCA assay.  On-bead chemical cross-linking following affinity purification. Following dimethylated antibody affinity purification, the beads were washed two times with 1 M NaCl lysis buffer, and then twice with 30 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.5) containing 150 mM NaCl. Chemical cross-linking reaction was performed on the resuspending beads in 30 mM HEPES buffer containing 150 mM NaCl and 5 mM BS3 (Sulfo-DSS, Thermo Scientific) for 1 h at room temperature in dark. The reaction was quenched by removing HEPES buffer followed by centrifugation. The cross-linked proteins were eluted and reduced from beads by the elution buffer (4 % SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl, 0.1M DTT, pH 7.6) at 95 ℃ for 5 min, and then alkylation with iodoacetamide and digestion by trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method on a centrifugal filter unit (10 kDa MWCO). The resulting peptides were acidified with 0.1% formic acid (FA) before mass spectrometry analysis.  LC MS/MS analysis of the enzymatic digests. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1 % FA and subsequently analyzed by nanoAcquity ultra performance LC (Waters, Milford, MA) and Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Watham, MA). The peptides were trapped by a 2G-V/MT Trap symmetry C18 column (5 μm particles, 180 μm ID × 20 mm length) at the flow rate of 3 μl min-1 for 5 min, and separated on a BEH130 C18 analytical column (1.7 μm particles, 100 μm ID × 100 mm length) at 350 nl min-1. Peptides were eluted using mobile phases consisting of solvent A (0.1 % FA) and solvent B (ACN/0.1 % FA) through a linear gradient from 8 % to 35 %, and then 50 % of solvent B at a duration of 95 min. Data-dependent MS/MS acquisition was performed following a full MS survey scan by Orbitrap at a resolution of 60 000 over the m/z range of 350-1800, and MS/MS measurements of the top 20 most intense precursor ions by HCD scans. The target values of automatic gain controls (AGC) were set up to 200,000 for Orbitrap MS and 10,000 for ion-trap MS/MS detection. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification. The MS raw data from the LC-MS/MS analyses were converted to MGF files using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Watham, MA) and then searched against the database of The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR10; downloaded on 6 January 2014; 35 386 sequences) using Mascot Daemon 2.5 (Matrix Science, London, UK). The search parameter for tryptic digestion was restricted to two missed cleavages of proteins. Deamidation of Asn or Gln, and oxidation of Met were considered as variable modifications. Mass tolerances were set up to 10 ppm for Orbitrap MS ions, and 0.8 Da for ion-trap MS/MS fragments. Peptide assignments were filtered by an ion score cut off of 15 and false discovery rate (FDR) of peptides was set up to less than 1%. The accurate quantification of proteins by 15N-metabolic labeling and Mascot Distiller quantitation was performed according to the protocol reported previously. The inter-crosslinked peptides were analyzed by MS-bridge (ProteinProspector, University of California, San Francisco). The MGF data was searched against the in-house database containing the sequences of 12 subunits of the Pol V complex and 17 potential interacting proteins identified by relative quantification of proteins with 15N-metabolic labeling. The BS3 cross-linked peptides hitting to the decoy protein sequences and less than 6 amino acids were excluded, and only those with the score difference greater than 5 and the ion score greater than 30 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Affinity purification followed by enzymatic digestion and mass spectrometry has been widely utilized for the sensitive detection of interacting proteins and protein complexes in various organisms. In plants, the method is technically challenging due to the low abundance proteins, non-specific binding and difficulties of eluting interacting proteins from antibody beads. In this report, we describe a strategy to modify antibodies by reductive methylation of lysines without affecting their binding properties, followed by on-bead digestion of bound proteins with endoproteinase Lys-C. By this method, the antibody remains intact and does not interfere with the downstream identification of interacting proteins. Non-specific binding proteins were excluded using <sup>14</sup>N/<sup>15</sup>N-metabolic labeling of wild-type and the transgenic plant counterparts. The method was employed to identify 12 co-immunoprecipitated protein subunits in Pol V complex and to discover 17 potential interacting protein targets in Arabidopsis. Our results demonstrated that the modification of antibodies by reductive dimethylation can improve the reliability and sensitivity of identifying low-abundance proteins through on-bead digestion and mass spectrometry. We also show that coupling this technique with chemical crosslinking enables in-depth characterization of endogenous protein complexes and the protein-protein interaction networks including mapping the surface topology and post-translational modifications of interacting proteins.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-link, Ap-ms, Reductive methylation, Pol v complex, On-bead digestion

### Affiliations
Chinese academy of sciences
Shanghai center for plant stress biology, Shanghai institutes for biological sciences, Chinese academy of sciences.

### Submitter
Guochen Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Yi-Min She
Shanghai center for plant stress biology, Shanghai institutes for biological sciences, Chinese academy of sciences.


