### Accession
PXD023801

### Title
Fractionation of Naja ashei venom with Size-exclusion chromatography and identification of proteins in obtained fractions

### Description
The study aimed to fractionate Naja ashei venom with Size-exclusion chromatography to obtain fractions with significantly lower complexity than crude venom. MS analysis allowed to estimate the percentage of different protein groups in each fraction, thus providing information about the extent of homogeneity in each collected sample. High purity fractions can be used to study the effects of particular proteins on different biological targets. Samples with greater complexity can be further purified using different analytical methods.

### Sample Protocol
The venom sample was a pooled mix of venoms acquired from two adult Naja ashei specimens (male and female) captured in Kenya. The samples were frozen to −20 °C immediately after milking (transport temperature) and then stored at −80 °C until use. The amount corresponding to 100 mg of venom proteins was diluted to a final volume of 3 ml with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 0.1 M NaCl, 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0). Size-exclusion chromatography was performed on a 1.6x100cm glass column filled with Sephadex G75 Superfine bed using NGC Chromatography System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). A constant flow rate of PBS at 0.1 mL/min was applied to maintain protein elution. During the process, fractions of 2 ml were manually collected. After chromatographic separation, the composition of each sample was monitored using SDS-PAGE on 13% resolving gels (with 5% stacking gels) according to the standard procedure. Fractions that shared the same protein band patterns and originated from the same peak, were combined and concentrated on the centrifuge filters Vivaspin 2 with membrane 3,000 MWCO PES (Sartorius Stedim Lab Ltd, Stonehouse, UK).  Prior to digestion, proteins in fractions were precipitated with six volumes of acetone for 1 h at -20 °C, and then reconstituted in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8. Protein concentration in each fraction was measured with Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. For proteolysis, each sample contained 4.3 μg of proteins in 25 uL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8. Protein reduction was carried out with DTT (final concentration: 7 mM) for 5 min at 95°C, while the alkylation process was maintained by the sample incubation with IAA (final concentration: 10 mM) for 20 min in the dark. The samples were digested with 0.2 μg trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 18 h at 37°C .0.86 μg of digested peptides from each sample was used for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (ver. 1.6.7.0) was used for qualitative and quantitative analysis of the raw MS/MS files of each fractions. Acquired peak lists were search against UniProtKB Serpentes database (release 9/2019). The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin, Specific, max. 2 missed cleavages; Mass tolerances: 20 ppm for initial and 4.5 ppm for main MS search, 20 ppm for MS/MS search; Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation (C); Variable modifications: oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term). False Discovery Rate (FDR) of PSM and proteins was set to 1%. Hits that were identified only by site, found in decoy or contaminant lists, and were identified with less than 2 peptides, were subsequently filtered out. All hits were manually revised for proteins that were unlikely to be the components of snake venoms and filtered out.Peptides quantification relied on iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) values. Razor and unique peptides were used to estimate the amount of particular protein in the sample. iBAQ values of identified proteins belonging to the same protein group was summed and divided by iBAQ values of all identified proteins, thus determining the percentage of specific protein groups in fractions.

### Publication Abstract
Three-finger toxins are naturally occurring proteins in Elapidae snake venoms. Nowadays, they are gaining popularity because of their therapeutic potential. On the other hand, these proteins may cause undesirable reactions inside the body's cells. A full assessment of the safety of <i>Naja ashei</i> venom components for human cell application is still unknown. The aim of the study was to determine the effect of the exogenous application of three-finger toxins on the cells of monocytes (U-937) and promyelocytes (HL-60), with particular emphasis on the modification of their membranes under the influence of various doses of 3FTx protein fraction (0-120 ng/mL). The fraction exhibiting the highest proportion of 3FTx proteins after size exclusion chromatography (SEC) separation was used in the experiments. The structural response of cell membranes was described on the basis of single-component and multi-component Langmuir monolayers that mimicked the native membranes. The results show that the mechanism of protein-lipid interactions depends on both the presence of lipid polar parts (especially zwitterionic type of lipids) and the degree of membrane saturation (the greatest-for unsaturated lipids). The biochemical indicators reflecting the tested cells (MDA, LDH, cell survival, induction of inflammation, LD50) proved the results that were obtained for the model.

### Keywords
Venom, Shotgun lc-ms/ms, Size-exclusion chromatography, Naja ashei

### Affiliations
Rzeszow University of Technology
Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow University of Technology, Powstańców Warszawy 6, 35-959 Rzeszów, Poland

### Submitter
Konrad Hus

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Bocian
Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow University of Technology, Powstańców Warszawy 6, 35-959 Rzeszów, Poland


### SDRF
- organism: Naja ashei
- organism part: venom
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Q Exactive
- modification parameters: NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed
- modification parameters.1: NT=Oxidation;MT=Variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35
- modification parameters.2: NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:1;PP=Protein N-term;MT=variable

