### Accession
PXD003743

### Title
Proteome of silenced minichromosome maintenance protein 2 with siRNA on non-small cell lung cancer H1299 cells

### Description
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality. The two main lung cancer types are small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and non-SCLC (NSCLC), where NSCLC comprises about 80-85% of all lung cancer. Despite the introduction of improved treatments, the overall survival rate of lung cancer patients remains low. Further elucidation of the regulatory network perturbations between cancer-related genes and proteins is one promising route to alter this mortality trend. The deregulation of the DNA replication, cell cycle, proliferation and migration are the common factors that are involved in cancer development and progression, and therefore logical targets for analysis.  Minichromosome maintenance 2(MCM2) is a DNA replication licensing factor, which belongs to the heterohexameric MCM2-7 complex. MCM2 has been proposed as an excellent proliferation marker in many types of cancer. Our study will establish a global functional distribution of identified proteins in silenced-MCM2 in H1299 NSCLC by the means of iTRAQ. Understanding the molecular basis of MCM2 in lung cancer cells enables us to discover alternative target for lung cancer therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Human lung epithelial cells H1299 (ATCC, CRL-5803) were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco Laboratories). Three commercially available small interfering RNA (siRNA) molecules were against MCM2 (Cat# SR302835, Origene, Rockville, MD, USA) to generate silencing of MCM2 using Lipofectamine 3000. Briefly, 5000 H1299 cells were seeded 24 h before transfection in a 6-well plate. At 48 h post-transfection, cells were harvested for proteomic analysis. Silencing efficiency was evaluated by western blotting. Protein extraction by homogenized on ice using an ultrasonic homogenizer, cell lysate was centrifuged at 16000g.  Protein extract was reduced with 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, WAKO) at 37C for 30 mins, and alkylated with S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 30 min followed by gel-assisted (acrylamide/bis(acrylamide) (40%, v/v, 37.5:1), 10% (w/w) ammonium persulfate, and tetramethylenediamine) trypsin (1:10 w/w) digestion was applied overnight at 37C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified with TFA to a pH <3, washed with 25 mM TEABC and 25mM TEABC/50% (v/v) acetonitrile and extracted by 100% ACN, desalted using stage tips with SDB-XC empore disk membranes (3M, Neuss) and eluted in a buffer containing 0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile. Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling were performed for proteomic analysis. 100 ug of protein from the silenced-RNA control and silenced-MCM2 treatment was adjusted to a final concentration 1.5 ug/ul. Each iTRAQ label required 100 ug of peptides. Peptides from the silenced-RNA control were labeled with iTRAQ reagent 114 and 115; peptides from the silenced-MCM2 treatment were labeled with iTRAQ reagent 116 and 117.  The labeling process was performed at room temperature using a continuous gentle vortex for 1 h.  The labeled peptides were dissolved in 2 mL of buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4 and 25% (v/v) ACN, pH 3) and fractionated using a PolySULFOETHYL A column (200 × 2.1 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å, Poly LC, Columbia, MD, USA). The peptides were fractionated using a flow rate of 200 μL/min and a sequential gradient of 0− 25% buffer B (5 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCl and 25% (v/v) ACN, pH 3) for 30 min, 25−100% buffer B for 20 min, 100% buffer B for 10 min, 100−0% buffer B for 5 min, and 100% buffer A for 10 min. The eluent was monitored by measuring the absorbance of the peptide bond at 214 nm. Eluents were collected every minute and dried using a centrifugal evaporator. The MS analyses were conducted by Academia Sinica Common Mass Spectrometry Facilities. NanoLC−MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity system (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanospray interface (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 75 μm i.d., 25 cm length C18 BEH column (Waters, Milford, MA) packed with 1.7 μm particles with a pore with of 130 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 90 min from 5% to 40% solvent B (ACN with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 35 °C. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. The LTQ-Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode. The MS survey scan for all experiments was performed in the FT cell recording a window between 350 and 1600 m/z. The resolution was set to 60 000 at m/z 400, and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1 × 106 ions. The m/z values triggering MS/MS were put on an exclusion list for 90 s. In all cases, one microscan was recorded. For higher energy collisional dissociation, the applied acquisition method consisted of a survey scan to detect the peptide ions followed by a maximum of three MS/MS experiments of the three most intense signals exceeding a minimum signal of 5000 in survey scans. For MS/MS, we used a resolution of 7500, an isolation window of 3 m/z, and a target value of 1 × 105 ions, with maximum accumulation times of 500 ms. Fragmentation was performed with normalized collision energy of 45% and an activation time of 30 ms.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectral information was submitted to Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific), the software for Mascot search and data files were combined and searched against the Swiss-Prot human database allowing a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 50 mmu to prevent precursor interference. Dynamic modifications were set as carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), iTRAQ4plex (K), and iTRAQ4plex (N-term). The strict target false discovery rate (FDR) of the decoy database search was set at 0.01, and the relaxed target FDR was set at 0.05. The intensity of peptide assigned by corresponding iTRAQ reporter ions (m/z = 114, 115, 116, and 117), was extracted using Proteome Discoverer. Only peptides satisfying the following criteria were considered as qualified peptides and subjected to further analyses: (1) the peptide is labeled with iTRAQ tags and (2) the peptide is considered as confidently identified (FDR < 0.05).  The raw quantitation values of each iTRAQ tag all peptides were exported from Proteome Discoverer and analyzed with R language (http://www.r-project.org). The normalization was performed according to the assumption that the abundances of peptides labeled with different iTRAQ were equal and all log ratios of the peptides between silenced MCM2 and control were normally distributed. For peptides labeled with iTRAQ tag X, the peptide abundances were multiplied by normalization factor NX, which is expressed as −MX NX = 2 where MX denotes the median of all log2 transformed iTRAQ ratios, which represents the relative peak intensity of the iTRAQ tag X signature ion m/z 114, 115, 116, or 117 to the iTRAQ signature ion m/z 114. Normalized peptide iTRAQ signals were used for calculating protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
DNA replication control is vital for maintaining genome stability and the cell cycle, perhaps most notably during cell division. Malignancies often exhibit defective minichromosome maintenance protein 2 (MCM2), a cancer proliferation biomarker that serves as a licensing factor in the initiation of DNA replication. MCM2 is also known to be one of the ATPase active sites that facilitates conformational changes and drives DNA unwinding at the origin of DNA replication. However, the biological networks of MCM2 in lung cancer cells via protein phosphorylation remain unmapped. The RNA-seq datasets from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) revealed that MCM2 overexpression is correlated with poor survival rate in lung cancer patients. To uncover MCM2-regulated functional networks in lung cancer, we performed multi-dimensional proteomic approach by integrating analysis of the phosphoproteome and proteome, and identified a total of 2361 phosphorylation sites on 753 phosphoproteins, and 4672 proteins. We found that the deregulation of MCM2 is involved in lung cancer cell proliferation, the cell cycle, and migration. Furthermore, HMGA1<sup>S99</sup> phosphorylation was found to be differentially expressed under MCM2 perturbation in opposite directions, and plays an important role in regulating lung cancer cell proliferation. This study therefore enhances our capacity to therapeutically target cancer-specific phosphoproteins.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Rna interference, Proteome, Itraq, Non small cell lung cancer h1299 cells, Minichromosome maintenance protein 2

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular & Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
national taiwan university


### Submitter
Chantal Hoi Yin  Cheung

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Institute of Molecular & Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, Taiwan


