### Accession
PXD035823

### Title
Salvia chinensia Benth induces autophagy in esophageal cancer cells via AMPK/ULK1 signaling pathway

### Description
Salvia chinensia Benth. (Shijianchuan in Chinese, SJC) has been used as a traditional anti-cancer herb. SJC showed good anti-esophageal cancer efficacy based on our clinical application. However, the current research on SJC is minimal, and its anti-cancer effect lacks scientific certification. This study aims to clarify the inhibitory effect of SJC on esophageal cancer and explore its underlying mechanism. Q-Orbitrap high-resolution LC/MS was used to identify the primary chemical constituents in SJC. Cell proliferation and colony formation assays showed that SJC could effectively inhibit the growth of esophageal tumor cells in vitro. To clarify its mechanism of action, proteomic and bioinformatic analyses were carried out by combining tandem mass labeling and two-dimensional liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). The results indicated that SJC could activate AMPK signaling pathway and effectively promote autophagy in esophageal cancer cells. Therefore, we further used WB to confirm that SJC activated autophagy in esophageal cancer cells through the AMPK / ULK1 signaling pathway. The results showed that P-AMPK and P-ULK1 were significantly up-regulated after the treatment with SJC. The ratio of autophagosomes marker proteins LC3II/I was significantly increased.  In addition, the expression of the autophagy substrate protein P62 decreased with the degradation of autophagosomes. Using lentiviral transfection of fluorescent label SensGFP-StubRFP-LC3 protein and revalidation of LC3 expression before and after administration by laser confocal microscopy. Compared with the control group, the fluorescence expression of the SJC group was significantly enhanced, indicating that it promoted autophagy in esophageal cancer cells. Cell morphology and the formation of autophagosomes were observed by transmission electron microscopy. Our study shows that the tumor suppressor effect of SJC is related to promoting autophagy in esophageal tumor cells via the AMPK/ULK1 signaling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
KYSE-150 cells in the logarithmic growth stage were inoculated into a T25 culture flask at a density of 1×106 cells per bottle and incubated at 37℃ for 24 h with 5% CO2. After the cells adhered to the flask, the medium was discarded, and normal medium, 250 μg/mL and 500 μg/mL of SJC were successively added. Cell proteins were extracted after 48 h culture. After determining the cell protein concentration by the BCA method, 50 µg protein extract was removed for each group, and 100 mM DTT and 500 mM IAM were added for reductive alkylation. The samples of each group were combined with glacial acetone and placed in the refrigerator at -20℃ overnight to precipitate proteins. Lys-c enzyme and trypsin were successively added to the precipitated proteins for enzyme digestion. A tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling kit was used for isotope labeling of peptide samples in the control group, the low concentration group, and the high concentration group. The mixed labeled peptides were fractionated on a BEH C18 column using the Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC system.   And then the peptides were separated in a home-made C18 column packed in 75 µm ⅹ 20 cm fused silica of Phenomenex chromatographic material (Aqua C18 120 Å, 3 µm) with buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (ACN, 0.1% FA) at gradient elution in 90 min delivered at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient was as follows: 4% B from 0 to 2 min, 4-25% B from 2 to 67 min, 25-60% B from 67 to 80 min, 60-95% B from 80 to 81 min, and 95% B from 81 to 90 min. The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode for the MS2 data acquisition. For the MS1, a full scan was acquired in the range of 350-1,950 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Ion filtering for MS2 was isolated by the quadrupole with an isolation window of 1 m/z. HCD (High energy collisional dissociation) fragmentation was performed with 38% normalized collision energy, followed by analysis of fragment ions in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. The duty cycle was fixed at 3 s. The automatic gain control (AGC) settings were 2 × e5 and 1 × e5 ions, and maximal ion injection times of 60 and 100 ms were setting for MS1 and MS2 scans, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with SEQUEST HT in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific, USA) against Homo species proteome database. Default settings were configured with an exception of allowing 2 missed cleavages; a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da were set; and a false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff value of 1% was applied at peptide and protein levels. Carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) was selected as a fixed modification. TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysines and N termini, oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da) were selected as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Salvia chinensia</i> Benth (Shijianchuan in Chinese, SJC) has been used as a traditional anti-cancer herb. SJC showed good anti-esophageal cancer efficacy based on our clinical application. However, the current research on SJC is minimal, and its anti-cancer effect lacks scientific certification. This study aims to clarify the inhibitory effect of SJC on esophageal cancer and explore its underlying mechanism. Q-Orbitrap high-resolution LC/MS was used to identify the primary chemical constituents in SJC. Cell proliferation and colony formation assays showed that SJC could effectively inhibit the growth of esophageal tumor cells <i>in vitro</i>. To clarify its mechanism of action, proteomic and bioinformatic analyses were carried out by combining tandem mass labeling and two-dimensional liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD035823. The results indicated that SJC could activate AMPK signaling pathway and effectively promote autophagy in esophageal cancer cells. Therefore, we further used western blotting to confirm that SJC activated autophagy in esophageal cancer cells through the AMPK/ULK1 signaling pathway. The results showed that P-AMPK and P-ULK1 were significantly up-regulated after the treatment with SJC. The ratio of autophagosomes marker proteins LC3II/I was significantly increased. In addition, the expression of the autophagy substrate protein P62 decreased with the degradation of autophagosomes. Using lentiviral transfection of fluorescent label SensGFP-StubRFP-LC3 protein and revalidation of LC3 expression before and after administration by laser confocal microscopy. Compared with the control group, the fluorescence expression of the SJC group was significantly enhanced, indicating that it promoted autophagy in esophageal cancer cells. Cell morphology and the formation of autophagosomes were observed by transmission electron microscopy. Our study shows that the tumor suppressor effect of SJC is related to promoting autophagy in esophageal tumor cells <i>via</i> the AMPK/ULK1 signaling pathway.

### Keywords
Salvia chinensia benth.; herbal medicine; esophageal cancer; autophagy; proteomics; ampk/ulk1 pathway; sensgfp-stubrfp-lc3

### Affiliations
Hebei Medical University
College of integrated traditional Chinese and Western medicine, Hebei Medical University,Shijiazhuang,China

### Submitter
Lei Jia

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Li
College of integrated traditional Chinese and Western medicine, Hebei Medical University,Shijiazhuang,China


