### Accession
PXD038200

### Title
The large GTPase Sey1/atlastin mediates lipid droplet- and FadL-dependent intracellular fatty acid metabolism of Legionella pneumophila

### Description
The facultative intracellular bacterium Legionella pneumophila employs the Icm/Dot type IV secretion system (T4SS) to replicate in a unique membrane-bound compartment, the Legionella-containing vacuole (LCV). The ER-resident large fusion GTPase Sey1/atlastin-3 promotes remodeling and expansion of LCVs, and the GTPase is also implicated in the formation of ER-derived lipid droplets (LDs). Here we reveal that LCVs intimately interact with palmitate-induced LDs in Dictyostelium discoideum amoeba. Comparative proteomics of LDs isolated from the D. discoideum parental strain Ax3 or sey1 revealed 192 differentially produced proteins, of which 7 or 22 were exclusively detected in LDs isolated from strain Ax3 or sey1, respectively. Using dually fluorescence-labeled amoeba producing the LCV marker P4C-GFP or AmtA-GFP and the LD marker mCherry-perilipin, we show that Sey1 and the L. pneumophila Icm/Dot T4SS as well as the effector LegG1 promote LCV-LD interactions. In vitro reconstitution of the LCV-LD interactions using purified LCVs and LDs from D. discoideum Ax3 or sey1 revealed that Sey1 and GTP promote this process. The LCV-LD interactions were impaired forsey1-derived LDs, suggesting that Sey1 regulates LD traits. Palmitate promoted the growth of L. pneumophila in D. discoideum Ax3 but not in sey1 and of wild-type but not mutant bacteria lacking a homologue of the E. coli fatty acid transporter FadL. Finally, isotopologue profiling indicated that intracellular L. pneumophila metabolizes 13C-palmitate, and its catabolism was reduced in D. discoideum sey1 and L. pneumophila fadL. Taken together, our results reveal that Sey1 mediates LD- and FadL-dependent fatty acid metabolism of intracellular L. pneumophila

### Sample Protocol
StrataClean beads for protein precipitation were incubated in 37% HCl for 6 h at 100°C, centrifuged (3’500 g, 5 min, RT) and washed twice to remove residual HCl. To extract LDs-bound proteins, LDs purified by density gradient centrifugation were lysed by freeze/thawing and by sonication (50% power, 3 s pulse for 2 min, 4°C). Extracted LDs protein sample solutions were then incubated with StrataClean beads in an over-head shaker for 2 h at 4°C. Following incubation, the beads were centrifuged (10’000 g, 45 min, 4°C) and the resulting pellet was washed once in distilled water (16’229 g, 10 min, 4°C). After supernatant removal, the bead pellet was dried in a vacuum centrifuge for 30 min and stored at 4°C. StrataClean-bound LDs proteins were resolved by 1D-SDS-PAGE, the gel lanes were excised in ten equidistant pieces and subjected to trypsin digestion (Bonn et al., 2014). For the subsequent LC-MS/MS measurements, the digests were separated by reversed phase column chromatography using an EASY nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) with self-packed columns (OD 360 μm, ID 100 μm, length 20 cm) filled with 3 µm diameter C18 particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in a one-column setup. Following loading/ desalting in 0.1% acetic acid in water, the peptides were separated by applying a binary non-linear gradient from 5-53% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid over 82 min. The LC was coupled online to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with a spray voltage of 2.5 kV. After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (r = 60’000), MS/MS data were recorded for the twenty most intensive precursor ions in the linear ion trap. Singly charged ions were not considered for MS/MS analysis. The lock mass option was enabled throughout all analyzes

### Data Protocol
After mass spectrometric measurement, database search against a database of D. discoideum downloaded from dictyBase (http://dictybase.org/) on 29/04/2022 (12,321 entries) as well as label-free quantification (LFQ and iBAQ) was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Common laboratory contaminants and reversed sequences were included by MaxQuant. Search parameters were set as follows: trypsin/P specific digestion with up to two missed cleavages, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification, match between runs with default parameters enabled. The FDRs (false discovery rates) of protein and PSM (peptide spectrum match) levels were set to 0.01. Two identified unique peptides were required for protein identification. LFQ was performed using the following settings: LFQ minimum ratio count 2 considering only unique for quantification

### Publication Abstract
The amoeba-resistant bacterium <i>Legionella pneumophila</i> causes Legionnaires' disease and employs a type IV secretion system (T4SS) to replicate in the unique, ER-associated <i>Legionella</i>-containing vacuole (LCV). The large fusion GTPase Sey1/atlastin is implicated in ER dynamics, ER-derived lipid droplet (LD) formation, and LCV maturation. Here, we employ cryo-electron tomography, confocal microscopy, proteomics, and isotopologue profiling to analyze LCV-LD interactions in the genetically tractable amoeba <i>Dictyostelium discoideum</i>. Dually fluorescence-labeled <i>D. discoideum</i> producing LCV and LD markers revealed that Sey1 as well as the <i>L. pneumophila</i> T4SS and the Ran GTPase activator LegG1 promote LCV-LD interactions. In vitro reconstitution using purified LCVs and LDs from parental or &#x394;<i>sey1</i> mutant <i>D. discoideum</i> indicated that Sey1 and GTP promote this process. Sey1 and the <i>L. pneumophila</i> fatty acid transporter FadL were implicated in palmitate catabolism and palmitate-dependent intracellular growth. Taken together, our results reveal that Sey1 and LegG1 mediate LD- and FadL-dependent fatty acid metabolism of intracellular <i>L. pneumophila</i>.

### Keywords
Legionnaires’ disease, Dictyostelium discoideum, Pathogen vacuole, Fatty acid transport, Lipid droplet, Legionella pneumophila, Atlastin, Large fusion gtpase, Host-pathogen interaction, Amoeba

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Strasse 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Strasse 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


