### Accession
PXD021540

### Title
tRNA 3' shortening by LCCR4 as a response to stress in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Sensing of environmental cues is crucial for cell survival. To adapt to changes in their surroundings cells need to tightly control the repertoire of genes expressed at any time. Regulation of translation is key, especially in organisms in which transcription is hardly controlled, like Trypanosoma brucei. In this study we describe the shortening of the bulk of the cellular tRNAs during stress at the expense of the conserved 3’ CCA-tail. This tRNA shortening is specific for nutritional stress and renders tRNAs unsuitable substrates for translation. We uncovered the nuclease LCCR4 (Tb927.4.2430), a homologue of the conserved deadenylase Ccr4, as being responsible for tRNA trimming. Once optimal growth conditions are restored tRNAs are rapidly repaired by the trypanosome tRNA nucleotidyltransferase thus rendering the recycled tRNAs amenable for translation. This mechanism represents a fast and efficient way to repress translation during stress, allowing quick reactivation with a low energy input.

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins interacting with LCCR4 a stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based approach was followed (23). Briefly, cells were grown in a defined media containing 5.55 mM glucose as well as arginine and lysine either in their light (unlabeled) or heavy (13C615N4-l-arginine; 13C615N2-lysine) versions (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). All cultures were grown in the presence of 10–15% (vol/vol) dialyzed FCS (BioConcept) for 4 days to ensure complete labeling of proteins. Then cells were stressed for 2h in PBS and samples collected from uninduced cultures and from cultures that had been induced with tetracycline for expression of LCCR4-HA for 4 days. Cell extracts were prepared and LCCR4-HA immunoprecipitated (IP) as described before. The same procedure was applied to cell extracts obtained from uninduced cells. Extra washes with 1M NaCl were included at the end of the IP to decrease non-specific binding (LCCR4 remained active after these washes). After IP proteins were eluted by boiling in 1x Laemmli buffer, the eluates from both purifications were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and separated in a 10% SDS-PAGE. The procedure was done in duplicate.  Proteins were in-gel digested as described elsewhere [Kapila Gunasekera, Daniel Wuethrich, Sophie Braga-Lagache, Manfred Heller and Torsten Ochsenreiter (2012) Proteome remodeling during development from blood to insect form Trypanosoma brucei parasites quantified by SILAC and mass spectrometry. BMC Genomics, 13:556 doi:10.1186/1471-2164-13-556].Digests were loaded onto a pre-column (C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 100A, 300µm i.d. x 5mm length) at a flow rate of 50µL/min with solvent C (0.05% TFA in water/acetonitrile 98:2). After loading, peptides were eluted in back flush mode onto the analytical Nano-column (C18, 5µm, 300A, 0.075 mm i.d. x 150mm length) using an acetonitrile gradient of 5% to 40% solvent B (0.1% Formic Acid in water/acetonitrile 4,9:95) in 60min at a flow rate of 400nL/min. The column effluent was directly coupled to a Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer, Bremen; Germany) via a nano-spray ESI source. Data acquisition was made in data dependent mode with precursor ion scans recorded in the orbitrap with resolution of 120’000 (at m/z=250) parallel to top speed fragment spectra of the most intense precursor ions in the Linear trap for a cycle time of 3 seconds maximum.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was processed by MaxQuant software and set parameters are available in supplemental table. Parameter Value Version 1.6.1.0 PSM FDR 0.01 XPSM FDR 0.01 Protein FDR 0.01 Site FDR 0.01 Use Normalized Ratios For Occupancy TRUE Min. peptide Length 7 Min. score for unmodified peptides 0 Min. score for modified peptides 40 Min. delta score for unmodified peptides 0 Min. delta score for modified peptides 6 Min. unique peptides 0 Min. razor peptides 2 Min. peptides 2 Use only unmodified peptides and FALSE Peptides used for protein quantification Razor Discard unmodified counterpart peptides TRUE Label min. ratio count 2 Use delta score FALSE iBAQ TRUE iBAQ log fit TRUE Match between runs TRUE Matching time window [min] 0.7 Alignment time window [min] 20 Find dependent peptides FALSE Fasta file C:\Databases\TriTrypDB-43_TbruceiTREU927_AnnotatedProteins.fasta Decoy mode revert Include contaminants TRUE Fixed modification Carbamidomethylation of Cys Variable modifications Oxidation on Met; Acetyl on protein N-term Advanced ratios TRUE Second peptides TRUE Stabilize large LFQ ratios TRUE Separate LFQ in parameter groups FALSE Require MS/MS for LFQ comparisons TRUE Calculate peak properties FALSE Main search max. combinations 200 Advanced site intensities FALSE LFQ norm for sites and peptides TRUE Write msScans table FALSE Write msmsScans table FALSE Write ms3Scans table FALSE Write allPeptides table FALSE Write mzRange table FALSE Write pasefMsmsScans table FALSE Write accumulatedPasefMsmsScans table FALSE Max. peptide mass [Da] 5000 Min. peptide length for unspecific search 8 Max. peptide length for unspecific search 25 Razor protein FDR TRUE Disable MD5 TRUE Max mods in site table 3 Match unidentified features FALSE MS/MS tol. (FTMS) 20 ppm Top MS/MS peaks per Da interval. (FTMS) 12 Da interval. (FTMS) 100 MS/MS deisotoping (FTMS) TRUE MS/MS deisotoping tolerance (FTMS) 7 MS/MS deisotoping tolerance unit (FTMS) ppm MS/MS higher charges (FTMS) TRUE MS/MS water loss (FTMS) TRUE MS/MS ammonia loss (FTMS) TRUE MS/MS dependent losses (FTMS) TRUE MS/MS recalibration (FTMS) FALSE MS/MS tol. (ITMS) 0.4 Da Top MS/MS peaks per Da interval. (ITMS) 12 Da interval. (ITMS) 100 MS/MS deisotoping (ITMS) FALSE MS/MS deisotoping tolerance (ITMS) 0.15 MS/MS deisotoping tolerance unit (ITMS) Da MS/MS higher charges (ITMS) TRUE MS/MS water loss (ITMS) TRUE MS/MS ammonia loss (ITMS) TRUE MS/MS dependent losses (ITMS) TRUE MS/MS recalibration (ITMS) FALSE MS/MS deisotoping (Unknown) FALSE MS/MS deisotoping tolerance (Unknown) 0.15 MS/MS deisotoping tolerance unit (Unknown) Da MS/MS higher charges (Unknown) TRUE MS/MS water loss (Unknown) TRUE MS/MS ammonia loss (Unknown) TRUE MS/MS dependent losses (Unknown) TRUE MS/MS recalibration (Unknown) FALSE

### Publication Abstract
Sensing of environmental cues is crucial for cell survival. To adapt to changes in their surroundings cells need to tightly control the repertoire of genes expressed at any time. Regulation of translation is key, especially in organisms in which transcription is hardly controlled, like Trypanosoma brucei. In this study, we describe the shortening of the bulk of the cellular tRNAs during stress at the expense of the conserved 3' CCA-tail. This tRNA shortening is specific for nutritional stress and renders tRNAs unsuitable substrates for translation. We uncovered the nuclease LCCR4 (Tb927.4.2430), a homologue of the conserved deadenylase Ccr4, as being responsible for tRNA trimming. Once optimal growth conditions are restored tRNAs are rapidly repaired by the trypanosome tRNA nucleotidyltransferase thus rendering the recycled tRNAs amenable for translation. This mechanism represents a fast and efficient way to repress translation during stress, allowing quick reactivation with a low energy input.

### Keywords
Translation, Trna, Ccr4, Stress, Brucei

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
University of Bern
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry University of Bern Switzerland

### Submitter
Marina Cristodero

### Lab Head
Dr Norbert Polacek
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry University of Bern Switzerland


