### Accession
PXD037460

### Title
NLRP6 controls PTEN stability by promoting autophagic degradation of p85α to drive tumorigenesis

### Description
To identify NLRP6-associated proteins in living cells, we applied an APEX2-based labelling method combined with mass spectrometry. In brief, APEX2 was genetically fused to NLRP6. In the presence of hydrogen peroxide, APEX2 catalysed biotin-phenol to become a biotin-phenol radical that covalently bound to NLRP6 neighbouring proteins (<20 nm). The biotinylated proteins were enriched and collected by streptavidin beads. One-dimensional SDS–PAGE followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (GeLC–MS/MS) was performed to identify the proteins. To detect ubiquitinated p85α, a Flag-tagged p85α plasmid was transfected into cells. The cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag and separated on a 6% SDS–PAGE gel. After in-gel digestion, the resulting peptides were extracted for GeLC–MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 20 µg of proteins for each sample were mixed with 5X loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. After one-dimensional SDS–PAGE, protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. Gel pieces were cut from SDS PAGE, destained with 30% ACN/100 mM NH4HCO3 until the gels were destained. The gels were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. The in-gel proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM DTT/ 100 mM NH4HCO3) for 30 min at 56° C, then alkylated with iodoacetamide (200 mM IAA/100 mM NH4HCO3) in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Gel pieces were briefly rinsed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and ACN, respectively. Gel pieces were digested overnight in 12.5 ng/μl trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3. The peptides were extracted three times with 60% ACN/0.1% TFA. The extracts were pooled and dried completely by a vacuum centrifuge. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 65 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top20 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 20.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z.. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
For identifying NLRP6-associated proteins part, the raw data were processed with MaxQuant software (Version 1.5.3.30), and the mass spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database. The ubiquitinated peptides and cites were identified with the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; Version 2.2) embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron, CA, USA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Sun Yat-sen University
Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University

### Submitter
Bowen Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Cui
Sun Yat-sen University


