### Accession
PXD007650

### Title
ATP MODIFIES THE PROTEOME OF EXTRACELLULAR VESICLES RELEASED BY MICROGLIA AND INFLUENCES THEIR ACTION ON ASTROCYTES

### Description
Extracellular ATP is among molecules promoting microglia activation and inducing the release of extracellular vesicles (EVs), which are potent mediators of intercellular communication between microglia and the microenvironment. We previously showed that EVs produced under ATP stimulation (ATP-EVs) propagate a robust inflammatory reaction among astrocytes and microglia in vitro and in mice with subclinical neuroinflammation. However, the proteome of EVs released upon ATP stimulation has not yet been elucidated. In this study we applied a label free proteomic approach to characterize the proteome of EVs released constitutively and during microglia activation with ATP. We show that ATP drives sorting in EVs of a set of proteins implicated in cell adhesion/extracellular matrix organization, autophagy-lysosomal pathway and cellular metabolism, that may influence the response of recipient astrocytes to EVs. These data provide new clues to molecular mechanisms involved in microglia response to ATP and in microglia signalling to the environment via EVs.

### Sample Protocol
EVs released from 15X106 microglia constitutively or upon exposure to 1 mM ATP in MEM for 1h were centrifuged as above and frozen at -80°C. Dried samples were reconstituted with 20 µL of 50 mM bicarbonate buffer containing 50 mM DTT and 4% SDS. The samples were then loaded on 12% polyacrylamide gel and separated at 70 V for 15 min and then 120 V until the dye front entered in the separating gel at a distance of 1 cm. The gel was cut into pieces of 1mm3. Pieces were washed with 300 µl of distilled deionized water for 15 min, 300 µl of acetonitrile (ACN) for 15 min, and 300 µl of NH4HCO3 100 mM (pH 8) for 15 min. Then a mix of 300 µl of NH4HCO3/ACN (1:1, v/v) for 15 min and 300 µl of ACN for 5 min. Band pieces were dried in a Speedvac for 5 min. The reduction of cysteine residues was made with 50 µl of 10 mM of DTT in NH4HCO3 100 mM (pH 8). Pieces were incubated at 56°C for 1 h. Alkylation of cysteines was made with 50 µl of 50 mM of 3-indole acetic acid (IAA) in NH4HCO3 100 mM (pH 8). Pieces were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Band pieces were washed a second time with 300 µl of NH4HCO3 100 mM (pH 8) for 15 min. Then a mix of 300 µl of NH4HCO3/ACN (1:1, v/v) for 15 min and 300 µl of ACN for 5 min. Band pieces were dried in a Speedvac for 5 min. A digestion of band pieces was made with trypsin (12.5 µg/ml) in NH4HCO3 20 mM (pH 8), enough to cover pieces. Pieces were incubated at 37°C overnight. Peptides were extracted on shaking platform with 50 µl of formic acid (FA) 1% two times for 20 min, then 150 µl of ACN for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred in new tube and dried with Speedvac. The trypsin-digested protein extracts were reconstituted with 20 μl of  5% ACN/0.1% FA and injected on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 75 μm × 2 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column with nanoViper fittings and a 50 μm ID × 150 mm Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (C18, particle size 2 μm, pore size 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were eluted using a 2 h gradient of ACN starting from 5% to 30% over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive instrument was set to acquire top 10 MS2. The survey scans were taken at 70,000 FWHM (at m/z 400) resolving power in positive mode and using a target of 3E6 and default charge state of +2. Unassigned and +1 charge states were rejected and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 20 s. The scan range was set to 300–1600 m/z. For the MS2, 1 microscan was obtained at 17,500 FWHM, isolation window of 4.0 m/z and a normalized collision energy (NCE) = 30 using a scan range between 200 and 2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein tandem MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were identified by using the Sequest search engine, where target-decoy searches were performed against the Rattus norvegicus UniProt database (accessed March 4, 2014, 33,675 entries) combined with the 262 commonly detected contaminant databases. The parent and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The enzyme used was trypsin, and the maximum allowable cleavages were set to 2. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine was set as variable modifications. False discovery rates (FDR) for the peptide and protein levels were both set at 0.01. Proteins were clustered in categories depending on their known main biological function using two different open source bioinformatics resources: DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery) Bioinformatics Resource 6.8 (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov) and PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships) database (http://www.pantherdb.org). In both cases, the whole Rattus norvegicus genome was employed as background list. The analysis of cellular components and biological processes was performed in DAVID and selecting the Gene Ontology (GO) terms for Cellular Component (GOTERM_CC_FAT) and for Biological Process (GOTERM_BP DIRECT). Molecular Function analysis was performed with AgBase Bioinformatics Resource 2.00 (http://www.agbase.msstate.edu) using the AgBase GO slim viewer Molecular Function. Pathway overrepresentation analysis was performed using DAVID bioinformatics resource (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov) and comparing the representation of the different Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG, http://www.genome.jp/kegg) terms (KEGG_PATHWAY) to the expected pathway representation in rat. This analysis was coupled to the pathway enrichment analysis performed with PANTHER using the PANTHER Pathway keywords and exported as bar chart of representation percentages.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular ATP is among molecules promoting microglia activation and inducing the release of extracellular vesicles (EVs), which are potent mediators of intercellular communication between microglia and the microenvironment. We previously showed that EVs produced under ATP stimulation (ATP-EVs) propagate a robust inflammatory reaction among astrocytes and microglia <i>in vitro</i> and in mice with subclinical neuroinflammation (Verderio et al., 2012). However, the proteome of EVs released upon ATP stimulation has not yet been elucidated. In this study we applied a label free proteomic approach to characterize the proteome of EVs released constitutively and during microglia activation with ATP. We show that ATP drives sorting in EVs of a set of proteins implicated in cell adhesion/extracellular matrix organization, autophagy-lysosomal pathway and cellular metabolism, that may influence the response of recipient astrocytes to EVs. These data provide new clues to molecular mechanisms involved in microglia response to ATP and in microglia signaling to the environment via EVs.

### Keywords
Astrocyte activation, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Atp, Microglia

### Affiliations
PRISM-INSERM U1192
Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM) Inserm U1192, Université de Lille Sciences et Technologies, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

### Submitter
Julien Franck

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Fournier
Laboratoire Protéomique, Réponse Inflammatoire et Spectrométrie de Masse (PRISM) Inserm U1192, Université de Lille Sciences et Technologies, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.


