### Accession
PXD019088

### Title
Plasma exosomal proteomic pattern in Hemophagocyticlymphohistiocytosis of a twin boy

### Description
Background: Secondary HLH is closely related to EBV infection, protein changes in plasma exosomes may be related to the pathogenesis of HLH patient. In recent years quantitative proteomic has been used to clarify the relationship between basic medicine and clinical medicine. Methods: Exosomes were isolated from plasma samples of a HLH patient and his twin brother. Plasma samples were classified into three groups according to the clinical presentation, namely T1 (the acute HLH), T2 (during pharmacological treatments), Ctr (the healthy control). Herein, we used TMT-based LC-MS/MS platform to identified and characterized HLH signatures before and during pharmacological treatments. Results: Exosomes’ marker proteins- CD63, TSG101, HSP70 were identified by western blotting. Through GO analysis and KEGG analysis, we found that the signaling pathways and functions enriched by differentially expressed genes are very different. We focus on describing? the significantly up-regulated proteins-MSN, HSPA8, CD163, and the significantly down-regulated proteins- PLG, FGG, F2. The significant changes of these factors are related to the deterioration of the disease Conclusion: Our exploratory study shows that the clinical symptoms and pathophysiological changes of HLH driven by EBV might be reflected in patients’ plasma exosomes. Plasma exosome proteomics provides new highlightinsights for into exploring the diagnostic and therapeutic biomarkers of HLH.

### Sample Protocol
Exosome isolation For preparation of patients’ plasma exosomes, mix the plasma and ExoQuickexosome precipitation solution (SBI) in appropriate proportions. After standing at 4 ° C for 30 minutes or even longer, supernatant was deserted by centrifugation at 1500 x g for 30min at 4 ° C. The final pellets are exosomes. Protein Extraction，total protein quantification Samples were added to 4 volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor and 2 mM EDTA) for sonication. Centrifuge at 12000 g for 15 min at 4 °C to remove cell debris, transfer the supernatant to a new centrifuge tube, and measure the protein concentration using the BCA kit （Auragene biotech）. Protein digestion Take the same amount of protein for digestion，the dithiothreitol was added into the protein solution at a final concentration of 5 mM, exosomes proteins were reduced for 30 min in a water bath at 56 ° C. Iodoacetamide was then added and quantified to a final concentration of 11 mM, stored at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. Dilute high concentration urea in the above protein solution to less than 2M with 100 mM TEAB. Trypsin was added according to the amount of protein to trypsin mass ratio of 1:50, the first digestion in a 37 ° C water bath overnight. And the second digestion is a water bath at a ratio of 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass for 4 hours. TMT Labeling After trypsin digestion, the peptide was transferred to a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex), desalted using 100% ACNA and 0.1% FA, and the peptides were collected for freeze vacuum drying. Using 0.5M TEAB to reconstitute the peptide, then labeling peptides according to the manufacturer's TMT kit protocol. Briefly, balance TMT labeling reagents to room temperature and reconstituted in 100%ACN. The TMT and peptide were incubated for 1 h at room temperature and then quenched with 5% hydroxylamine, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis and database search Normally, two different buffers needed to be prepared, one is solvent A (0.1% formic acid (FA)) and the other is solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% acetonitrile(ACN)).The samples were resolved in solvent A and then injected into an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. An Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length) was used for separation over a 40-min gradient at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min(0~24 min，10%-28% B；24~32 min，28%-38% B；32~36 min，38%-80% B；36~40 min，80% B). Data Acquisition Mode uses a Data Dependent Scan (DDA) program. For full scan MS spectra (from m/z 350 to 1800), the resolution R = 70,000 (at m/z 200), the NCE was set to 28, meaning normalized collision energy is 28%.And automatic gain control (AGC) target of 5E4，max injection time was 200 ms, 20 MS / MS scans with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The raw mass spectrometry data files were retrieved using Maxquant (v1.5.2.8). Retrieve parameter settings: the database is SwissProt Human (20317 sequences). The cysteine alkylation was set to a fixed modification. The variable modification was the oxidation of methionine and the acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein. First search and Main search have primary mass ion tolerance tolerances of 20 ppm and 5 ppm, respectively, and secondary fragment ions have a mass tolerance tolerance of 0.02 Da. The quantitative method was set to TMT-6plex, and the FDR for protein identification and PSM identification was set to 1%. Statistical analysis Gene Ontology (GO) annotations on the proteomics level are derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www.http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). First, the system converts the protein ID to a UniProt ID, then uses the UniProt ID to match the GO ID and retrieves the information from the UniProt-GOA database based on the GO ID. If there is no protein information in the UniProt-GOA database, then a protein sequence-based algorithm software- InterProScan-is used to predict the GO function of the protein. The protein is then classified according to cellular composition (CC), molecular function (MF) or biological process (BP). We used the KEGG pathway database to annotate the protein pathway: first, the submitted protein was annotated using the KEGG online service tool KAAS, and the annotated protein was then matched into the corresponding pathway in the database via the KEGG mapper. We performed subcellular localization annotation of the submitted protein using a software-wolfpsort- that predicts subcellular localization.

### Publication Abstract
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (EBV-HLH) is a life-threatening syndrome, which is caused by EBV infection that is usually refractory to treatment and shows relapse. The development of new biomarkers for the early diagnosis and clinical treatment of EBV-HLH is urgently needed. Exosomes have been shown to mediate various biological processes and are ideal non-invasive biomarkers. Here, we present the differential plasma exosomal proteome of a patient with EBV-HLH before vs. during treatment and with that of his healthy twin brother. A tandem mass tag-labeled LC-MS technique was employed for proteomic detection. Gene Ontology and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analyses indicated that differential proteomic profiles were related to virus infection, coagulopathy, nervous system dysfunction, imbalance of immune response, and abnormal liver function. The candidate biomarkers were first identified in the patient's plasma exosomes at different treatment and follow-up time points. Then, 14 additional EBV-HLH exosome samples were used to verify six differentially expressed proteins. The upregulation of C-reactive protein, moesin, galectin three-binding protein, and heat shock cognate 71 kDa protein and the downregulation of plasminogen and fibronectin 1 could serve as potential biomarkers of EBV-HLH. This plasma exosomal proteomic analysis provides new insights into the diagnostic and therapeutic biomarkers of EBV-HLH.

### Keywords
Hemophagocyticlymphohistiocytosis； twins；exosomes；proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Central South University
1Department of Hematology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410080, China 2NHC Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis, Department of Microbiology, School of Basic Medical Science, Central South University, Changsha 410078, China

### Submitter
Yan Xie

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Xie
1Department of Hematology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410080, China 2NHC Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis, Department of Microbiology, School of Basic Medical Science, Central South University, Changsha 410078, China


