### Accession
PXD019701

### Title
DIPG harbour alterations targetable by MEK inhibitors, with acquired resistance mechanisms overcome by combinatorial inhibition

### Description
The survival of children with DIPG remains dismal, with new treatments desperately needed. In the era of precision medicine, targeted therapies represent an exciting treatment opportunity, yet resistance can rapidly emerge, playing an important role in treatment failure. In a prospective biopsy-stratified clinical trial, we combined detailed molecular profiling (methylation BeadArray, exome, RNAseq, phospho-proteomics) linked to drug screening in newly-established patient-derived models of DIPG in vitro and in vivo. We identified a high degree of in vitro sensitivity to the MEK inhibitor trametinib in samples which harboured genetic alterations targeting the MAPK pathway, including the non-canonical BRAFG469V mutation, and those affecting PIK3R1 and NF1. However, treatment of PDX models and the patient with trametinib at relapse failed to elicit a significant response. We generated trametinib-resistant clones in the BRAF_G469V model through continuous drug exposure, and identified acquired mutations in MEK1/2 (MEK1_K57N, MEK1_I141S and MEK2_I115N) with sustained pathway up-regulation. These cells showed the hallmarks of mesenchymal transition, and expression signatures overlapping with inherently trametinib-insensitive primary patient-derived cells that predicted a confirmed sensitivity to dasatinib. Combinations of trametinib with dasatinib and the downstream ERK inhibitor ulixertinib showed highly synergistic effects in vitro. These data highlight the MAPK pathway as a therapeutic target in DIPG, and show the importance of parallel resistance modelling and rational combinatorial treatments likely to be required for meaningful clinical translation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in 5% SDS/100 mM TEAB buffer with probe sonication and heating at 95⁰C for 10 min, and protein concentration measured by Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay. 300 µg protein were reduced with TCEP (tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine, Sigma) and alkylated by iodoacetamide, and then purified by methanol/chloroform precipitation. Trypsin (MS grade, Thermo) was added at 1:30 ratio (trypsin:proteins) for 18 hours digestion at 37⁰C. 150 µg of peptides per sample were tandem mass tagged (TMT) labelled as instructed by the manufacturer (Thermo Scientific). The TMT labelled peptide mixture was fractionated on a BEH Xbridge C18 column (2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm, Waters) with a 35 min gradient from 5 – 35% CH3CN/NH4OH at pH 10. Fractions were collected at every 42 sec and pooled to 28 fractions. Phospho-peptide enrichment used the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (ThermoFisher). The enriched phosphopeptides (16 fractions per set) and the immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) flow through (28 fractions, used for whole proteome analysis) were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System. Samples were loaded on a nanotrap (100 µm id x 2 cm) (PepMap C18, 5 µ) at 10 µl/min with 0.1% formic acid and then separated on an analytical column (75 µm id x 50 cm) (PepMap C18, 2µ) over at 300 nl/min. LC-MS instrumentation and columns were all from ThermoFisher. The gradient was a 120 min of 6.4 – 28% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid/150 min cycle time per fraction for phosphopeptides analysis and 90 min gradient of 5 – 30.4% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid/120 min cycle time per fraction for full proteome analysis. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated in the Top Speed mode at 3 sec per cycle. The survey scans (m/z 375-1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120 K (AGC 4x105 and maximum injection time 50 ms). For the phosphopeptides analysis, the multiply charged ions above 2x104 counts were subjected to HCD fragmentation with a collision energy at 38% and isolation width 0.7 Th, and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (AGC 1x105 and maximum injection time 86 ms) with 50,000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion width was set at ± 10 ppm for 40 s. For the full proteome analysis, the data acquisition used MS3-SPS5 method, i.e. the MS2 fragmentation was in CID at 35% collision energy for multiple charged ions above 5x103 counts. Following each MS2, the 5-notch MS3 was performed on the top 5 most abundant fragments isolated by Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS), by HCD at 65% CE then detected in Orbitrap at m/z 100-500 with 50,000 resolution for peptide quantification. The AGC was set 1.5x105 with maximum injection time at 86 ms.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (phosphoproteome) or 2.4 (full proteome) (Thermo Fisher) using the Sequest HT search engine. Spectra were searched against fasta files of reviewed UniprotKB Homo sapiens entries (November 2019) and an in-house contaminate database. Search parameters for phosphoproteome were: trypsin with 2 maximum miss-cleavage sites, mass tolerances at 20 ppm for Precursor, and 0.02 Da for fragment ions, dynamic modifications of Deamidated (N, Q), Oxidation (M) and Phospho (S, T, Y), and static modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex (Peptide N-terminus and K). For full proteome, it was 0.5 Da for fragmentations, dynamic modification of Oxidation (M) and acetylation (Protein N-terminus), and static modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex (Peptide N-terminus and K). Peptides were validated by Percolator with q-value set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). Phosphorylation site localization probabilities were computed by the ptmRS node. The TMT10plex reporter ion quantifier included 20 ppm integration tolerance on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. The co-Isolation threshold was set at 100%. Peptides with average reported S/N>3 were used for protein quantification, and the SPS mass matches threshold was set at 55%. Only master proteins were reported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Clinical, Tmt, Dipg

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
The Institute of Cancer Research, London

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research, London


