### Accession
PXD039417

### Title
Inactivation of Exosc10 in the oocyte impairs oocyte development and maturation, leading to a depletion of the ovarian reserve in mice.

### Description
EXOSC10 is a catalytic subunit of the nuclear RNA exosome with an exoribonuclease activity. The enzyme processes and degrades different classes of RNAs. To delineate the role of EXOSC10 during oocyte growth, specific Exosc10 inactivation was performed in the oocytes from the primordial follicle stage onward using the Gdf9-iCre; Exosc10f/- mouse model (Exosc10cKO(Gdf9)). Exosc10cKO(Gdf9) female mice are infertile. The onset of puberty and the estrus cycle in mutants are initially normal and ovaries contain all follicle classes. By the age of eight weeks, vaginal smears reveal irregular estrus cycles and mutant ovaries display a complete depletion of follicles. Mutant oocytes retrieved from the oviduct are degenerated, sometimes showing an enlarged polar body which may reflect a defective first meiotic division. Under fertilization conditions, the mutant oocytes do not enter into an embryonic development process.  Furthermore, we conducted a comparative proteome analysis of wild type and Exosc10 knockout mouse ovaries and identified EXOSC10-dependent proteins involved in many biological processes, such as meiotic cell cycle progression and oocyte maturation. Our results unambiguously demonstrate an essential role for EXOSC10 in oogenesis and may serve as a model for primary ovarian insufficiency in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Ovaries were collected from 8- to 10-week-old Exosc10+/f (at PGD1, n=5) and Exosc10cKO(Gdf9) (randomly, n=4) mice and conserved at -80°C until protein extractions. Ovaries were ground to fine powder in liquid nitrogen and lysed in 30 mM Tris buffer pH 7.4 containing 8 M urea, 4% CHAPS, protease inhibitors (1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM 4-(2-Aminoethyl)benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride (AEBSF), and 10 μM l-trans-Epoxysuccinyl-leucylamido(4-guanidino)butane (E64)), using an ultrasonic processor (Bioblock Scientific, Illkirch, France) 6 times for 10 sec, with a 30 sec stop between each step, with a microtip setting power level at 40% pulse duration. After centrifugation (15,000 g for 15 min at 4°C) to remove cellular debris and ultracentrifugation at 105,000 g for 1 h at 4°C to remove subcellular particles, cytosoluble proteins were stored at −80°C until further analysis. Total protein concentration in each sample was determined using the Bradford Protein Assay Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad, Marnes-la-Coquette, France). Proteins (2 µg) were in-gel digested with 12.5 ng/μL sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Charbonnières-les-Bains, France) after concentration on one band using a 4-12% Bis-Tris precast gel (NuPAGE™) as previously described (DOI: 10.1186/s12864-021-07606-1). The resulting peptide mixtures were injected onto a TimsTOF Pro instrument (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a NanoElute HPLC System equipped with on a 75 µm  250 mm IonOpticks Aurora 2 C18 column (Ion Opticks Pty Ltd, Fitzroy, Australia) and LC-MS/MS data were acquired using the PASEF method as previously described (DOI: 10.3390/ijms21020466).

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed with the Data Analysis 5.1 software and peptide and protein identification were performed using the Mascot (Mascot server v2.5.01; http://www.matrixscience.com) database search engine and its automatic decoy database search to calculate a false discovery rate (FDR). MS/MS spectra were queried against the Mus musculus UniProt KB proteome database (release UP000000589; 21959 sequences) and a common contaminant database such as trypsin, keratins, BSA, from the Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, available in Mascot (247 sequences). Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 15 ppm and 0.05 Da. The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with one miscleavage allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionine. Identification results from Mascot (.dat files) were imported into the Proline Studio software ( DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa118). This software was then used to validate protein identification with a peptide rank = 1, a peptide score > 30 and a 1% FDR at the peptide spectrum matches level. Proline Studio software was also used to the spectral count comparison of the identified proteins in each sample as previously described (DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2021.645134.

### Publication Abstract
EXOSC10 is a catalytic subunit of the nuclear RNA exosome, and possesses a 3'-5' exoribonuclease activity. The enzyme processes and degrades different classes of RNAs. To delineate the role of EXOSC10 during oocyte growth, specific <i>Exosc10</i> inactivation was performed in oocytes from the primordial follicle stage onward using the <i>Gdf9</i>-iCre; <i>Exosc10</i> <sup>f/-</sup> mouse model (<i>Exosc10</i> <sup>cKO(Gdf9)</sup>). <i>Exosc10</i> <sup>cKO(Gdf9)</sup> female mice are infertile. The onset of puberty and the estrus cycle in mutants are initially normal and ovaries contain all follicle classes. By the age of eight weeks, vaginal smears reveal irregular estrus cycles and mutant ovaries are completely depleted of follicles. Mutant oocytes retrieved from the oviduct are degenerated, and occasionally show an enlarged polar body, which may reflect a defective first meiotic division. Under fertilization conditions, the mutant oocytes do not enter into an embryonic development process. Furthermore, we conducted a comparative proteome analysis of wild type and <i>Exosc10</i> knockout mouse ovaries, and identified EXOSC10-dependent proteins involved in many biological processes, such as meiotic cell cycle progression and oocyte maturation. Our results unambiguously demonstrate an essential role for EXOSC10 in oogenesis and may serve as a model for primary ovarian insufficiency in humans. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD039417.

### Keywords
Oogenesis, Ovary, Follicular development, Exosc10

### Affiliations
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085
Protim Core Facility - Irset Inserm U1085 - UAR Biosit CNRS 3480 - INSERM 018

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim Core Facility - Irset Inserm U1085 - UAR Biosit CNRS 3480 - INSERM 018


