### Accession
PXD023249

### Title
Chitin degradation machinery and secondary metabolite profiles in the marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas rubra S4059

### Description
Genome mining of pigmented Pseudoalteromonas has revealed a large potential for production of bioactive compounds, both hydrolytic enzymes and secondary metabolites and the purpose of the present study was to explore this bioactivity potential in a potent antibiotic and enzyme producer, Pseudoalteromonas rubra strain S4059. Proteomic analyses indicated that a highly efficient chitin degradation machinery was present in the red-pigmented P. rubra S4059 when grown on chitin. Four GH18 chitinases and two GH20 hexosaminidases were significantly upregulated by chitin. GH19 chitinase which is not common in bacteria is consistently found in pigmented Pseudoalteromonas and in S4059 it was only detected when the bacterium was grown on chitin. To explore the possible role of GH19 in pigmented Pseudoalteromonas, we deleted the GH19 chitinase and compared a range of phenotypes in the mutant and wild type. Neither, the chitin degrading ability or the biofilm forming capacity was affected by GH19 deletion. In some Vibrionaceae, the secondary metabolome is significantly affected by growth on chitin as compared to simpler carbon sources. The secondary metabolites produced by S4059 and the GH19 mutant were xxx start by chitin/mannose – then the mutant. not altered by the absence of the gene, indicating that chitin utilization may not directly influence the production of secondary metabolites as has been observed in some Vibrionaceae. Metabolome analysis reveal that growth on chitin XX. In summary,

### Sample Protocol
MS Sample Preparation Cells were lysed using 20 ul of lysis buffer (consisting of 6 M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 50 mM HEPES pH8.5). Samples were boiled at 95C for 5 minutes, after which they were sonicated on high for 3x 10 seconds in a Bioruptor sonication water bath (Diagenode) at 4oC. After determining protein concentration with Bradford (Sigma), 50ug was taken forward for digestion. Samples were diluted 1:3 with 10% Acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, LysC (MS grade, Wako) was added in a 1:50 (enzyme to protein) ratio, and samples were incubated at 37oC for 4hrs. Samples were further diluted to 1:10 with 10% Acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, trypsin (MS grade, Promega) was added in a 1:100 (enzyme to protein) ratio and samples were incubated overnight at 37oC. Enzyme activity was quenched by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were desalted on SOLAu C18 plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each sample, 2 discs of C18 material (3M Empore) were packed in a 200ul tip, and the C18 material activated with 40ul of 100% Methanol (HPLC grade, Sigma), then 40ul of 80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The tips were subsequently equilibrated 2x with 40ul of 1%TFA, 3% Acetonitrile, after which the samples were loaded using centrifugation at 4,000x rpm. After washing the tips twice with 100ul of 0.1% formic acid, the peptides were eluted into clean 500ul Eppendorf tubes using 40% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The eluted peptides were concentrated in an Eppendorf Speedvac, and re-constituted in 1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile for Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis.  MS data acquisition  For each sample, peptides were loaded onto a 2cm C18 trap column (ThermoFisher 164705), connected in-line to a 50cm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Thermo EasySpray ES803) using 100% Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in water) at 750bar, using the Thermo EasyLC 1000 HPLC system, and the column oven operating at 45°C. Peptides were eluted over a 200 minute gradient ranging from 6 to 60% of 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at 250 nl/min, and the Q-Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was run in a DD-MS2 top10 method. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 70,000, with an AGC target of 3×106 or maximum injection time of 20 ms and a scan range of 300–1750 m/z. The MS2 spectra were obtained at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target value of 1×106 or maximum injection time of 60 ms, a normalised collision energy of 25 and an intensity threshold of 1.7e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s, and ions with a charge state <2 or unknown were excluded.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was enabled in the processing and consensus steps, and spectra were matched against the P. rubra S4059 database obtained from Uniprot (UniProt ID: UP000305729). Dynamic modifications were set as Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N,Q) and Acetyl on protein N-termini. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification. All results were filtered to a 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Genome mining of pigmented <i>Pseudoalteromonas</i> has revealed a large potential for the production of bioactive compounds and hydrolytic enzymes. The purpose of the present study was to explore this bioactivity potential in a potent antibiotic and enzyme producer, <i>Pseudoalteromonas rubra</i> strain S4059. Proteomic analyses (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD023249) indicated that a highly efficient chitin degradation machinery was present in the red-pigmented <i>P. rubra</i> S4059 when grown on chitin. Four GH18 chitinases and two GH20 hexosaminidases were significantly upregulated under these conditions. GH19 chitinases, which are not common in bacteria, are consistently found in pigmented <i>Pseudoalteromonas,</i> and in S4059, GH19 was only detected when the bacterium was grown on chitin. To explore the possible role of GH19 in pigmented <i>Pseudoalteromonas</i>, we developed a protocol for genetic manipulation of S4059 and deleted the GH19 chitinase, and compared phenotypes of the mutant and wild type. However, none of the chitin degrading ability, secondary metabolite profile, or biofilm-forming capacity was affected by GH19 deletion. In conclusion, we developed a genetic manipulation protocol that can be used to unravel the bioactive potential of pigmented pseudoalteromonads. An efficient chitinolytic enzyme cocktail was identified in S4059, suggesting that this strain could be a candidate with industrial potential.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Proteome, Secretome, Marine bacteria

### Affiliations
Department of Bioengineering, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark;
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr Lone Gram
Department of Bioengineering, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark;


