### Accession
PXD002944

### Title
Proteome analysis of testis from infertile protein C inhibitor deficient mice reveals predominant changes in serpin processing and prostaglandin metabolism

### Description
Serine protease inhibitors have therapeutic potential in a variety of pathogenic processes, ranging from thrombosis, altered immune response to liver cirrhosis. To investigate the physiological effects of protein C inhibitor (PCI, serpinA5) this gene was inactivated in a mouse model with the resulting phenotype of male infertility. In the actual report 2D-DIGE analysis was utilized to investigate the molecular mechanisms for PCI in male reproduction. Comparing the testes proteome of three PCI knockout-mice with the three wild-types- demonstrated similar pattern with the exception of a massive upregulation of prostaglandin reductase 1 (10-fold; P < 0.002) and complete shifts in the molecular weights of serpinA1C and serpinA3K. All these PCI-dependent proteome changes were immunologically verified. Unbiased proteome analysis indicated that the inactivation of serpinA5 strongly influenced both the protein species pattern of other A-clade serpins as well as the prostaglandin metabolism in the testes.

### Sample Protocol
The testes of 10 week old mice were resolubilized in 2D sample buffer (7M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 20mM TRIS–HCl; pH=8.5). The protein content was quantified using a Coomassie based assay (Pierce). The same amount of protein of each sample was pooled for the internal standard (IS) and labelled with Cy2 (GE Healthcare). Electrophoretic separation of CyDye-labeled proteins were made in the first dimension on 24 cm IPG Strips (GE Healthcare; 30 kVh) and the SDS PAGE on 25.5 x 20.5 cm gels, as previously described [13]. For 1D Western blotting (WB) 20 µg and for 2D WB 50 µg of testes proteins were analyzed. Proteins were blotted on PVDF membranes activated by methanol treatment. Antibody binding was detected by chemiluminescence. Antibodies used: polyclonal goat anti-SerpinA3K Y-12 (Santa Cruz), polyclonal goat anti-SerpinA1C (R&D Systems), polyclonal rabbit anti-PGTR1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), polyclonal rabbit anti-PCI (produced in-house) and polyclonal rabbit anti-acrosin (Santa Cruz). Tryptic peptides were re-dissolved in 40 µl of 0.1% aqueous TFA, and 20 µl of the peptide solution was diluted with 30µl 0.1% TFA. Out of this solution 40 µl were injected onto the nano separation column. The nano HPLC separation system was an UltiMate nano HPLC (LC Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) consisting of Famos autosampler, Switchos column switching unit, and the UltiMate nano pump and the UV detector. The Acclaim C18 trap column (300 µm ID x 5mm) was operated at the ambient temperature, and the Acclaim C18 nano separation column (75 µm ID x 250 mm) separation column was mounted in the column oven and operated at 45°C. Samples were loaded onto the trap column using 0.1% TFA at 30 µl/min, and the separation column was operated in gradient mode at 300 nl/min. User Defined Injection Program (UDP) was used for sample injection and additional injector and trap column wash.

### Data Protocol
For spots 2295 and 2725, MS2 spectra were searched against a NCBInr mouse database via SEQUEST, Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.1, ThermoScientific). Database search criteria were set as follows: enzyme, trypsin; maximum miss cleavage sites, 2; precursor tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.8 Da. The variable modifications considered were carbamidomethylation (+57.021) at Cys and oxidation (+15.995) at Met. All data were filtered to satisfy a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% or better.  All other samples were analysed using IPI_mouse database with search criteria with Mascot V2.5.1.1 were set as follows: enzyme, trypsin; maximum miss cleavage sites, 2; precursor tolerance, 0.8 Da; fragment mass tolerance, 0.5 Da. The variable modifications considered were carbamidomethylation (+57.021) at Cys and oxidation (+15.995) at Met.

### Publication Abstract
Serine protease inhibitors (serpin) have therapeutic potential in a variety of pathogenic processes, ranging from thrombosis and altered immune response to liver cirrhosis. To investigate the physiological effects of protein C inhibitor (PCI, serpinA5), its gene was inactivated in a mouse model, resulting in male infertility. In the present report, 2D differential gel electrophoresis was utilized to investigate the molecular mechanisms for PCI involvement in male reproduction. Comparing the testes proteomes of three PCI-knockout mice with three wild types demonstrated similar patterns with the exception of a massive upregulation of prostaglandin reductase 1 (tenfold; p &lt; 0.002) and the complete shifts in the molecular weights of serpinA1C and serpinA3K. All these PCI-dependent proteome changes were immunologically verified. Unbiased proteome analysis indicated that inactivation of serpinA5 strongly influenced both the protein species pattern of other A-clade serpins as well as prostaglandin metabolism in the testes.

### Keywords
Serpin, Mouse, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Maria Zellner, Institute of Physiology, Center of Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Schwarzspanierstrasse 17, 1090 Vienna, Austria
Medizinische Universität Wien

### Submitter
Goran Mitulović

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Zellner
Maria Zellner, Institute of Physiology, Center of Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Schwarzspanierstrasse 17, 1090 Vienna, Austria


