### Accession
PXD047706

### Title
Itaconate stabilizes CPT1a to enhance lipid utilization during inflammation

### Description
One primary metabolic manifestation of inflammation is the diversion of cis-aconitate within the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle to synthesize the immunometabolite itaconate. Itaconate is well established to possess immunomodulatory and metabolic effects within myeloid cells and lymphocytes, however, its effects in other organ systems during sepsis remain less clear. Utilizing Irg1 knockout mice that are deficient in synthesizing itaconate, we aimed at understanding the metabolic role of itaconate in the liver and systemically during sepsis. We find itaconate aids in lipid metabolism during sepsis. Specifically, Irg1 KO mice develop a heightened level of hepatic steatosis when induced with polymicrobial sepsis. Proteomics analysis reveal enhanced expression of enzymes involved in fatty acid oxidation in following 4-ocytl itaconate (4-OI) treatment in vitro. Downstream analysis reveals itaconate stabilizes the expression of the mitochondrial fatty acid uptake enzyme CPT1a, mediated by its hypoubiquitination. Chemoproteomic analysis revealed itaconate interacts with proteins involved in protein ubiquitination as a potential mechanism underlying its stabilizing effect on CPT1a. From a systemic perspective, we find itaconate deficiency triggers a hypothermic response following endotoxin stimulation, potentially mediated by brown adipose tissue (BAT) dysfunction. Finally, by use of metabolic cage studies, we demonstrate Irg1 KO mice rely more heavily on carbohydrates versus fatty acid sources for systemic fuel utilization in response to endotoxin treatment. Our data reveal a novel metabolic role of itaconate in modulating fatty acid oxidation during polymicrobial sepsis.

### Sample Protocol
AML12 cells were treated with 100 µM Itaconate-alkyne (iTalk, MedChemExpress, HY 133870) for 4 hours. Cells were then lysed and clicked to either rhodamine azide (Click Chemistry Tools) for in-gel fluorescence, or agarose azide for enrichment. Enriched proteins were eluted for mass spectrometry analysis according to the Click-&-GoTM Dde Protein Enrichment Kit (Click Chemistry Tools, 1153). Samples were analyzed on a LC-MS/MS system consisting of an Orbitrap Eclipse Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and a Vanquish Neo nano-UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were separated on a DNV PepMap Neo (1500 bar, 75 μm x 500 mm) column for 120min employing linear gradient elution consisting of water (A) and 80% acetonitrile (B) both of which contained 0.1% formic acid. Data were acquired by top speed data-dependent mode where maximum MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle time of 3 seconds between adjacent survey spectra. MS2 scans were repeated with precursor ion subsets isolated by ion mobility using the FAIMS which compensation voltage was set to -45 eV, -55 eV, and -65 eV sequentially. Dynamic exclusion option was enabled where duration was set to 120 seconds.

### Data Protocol
To identify proteins, spectra were searched against the UniProt mouse protein FASTA database (20,309 annotated entries, Jun 2021) using the Sequest HT search engine with the Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Search parameters were as follows: FT-trap instrument; parent mass error tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance, 0.6 Da (monoisotopic); enzyme, trypsin (full); # maximum missed cleavages, 2; variable modifications, +15.995 Da (oxidation) on 22 methionine; static modification (only for soluble part), +57.021 Da (carbamidomethyl) on cysteine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Itaconate, Thermogenesis, Fatty acid metabolism, Liver, Sepsis

### Affiliations
Wake Forest Baptist Health
Department of Pathology, Section on Comparative Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, United States

### Submitter
Jingyun Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew A. Quinn
Department of Pathology, Section on Comparative Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, United States


