### Accession
PXD023935

### Title
Exploring the glycosylation state of the Cryptosporidium parvum CpTSP protein family-FAIMS proteome

### Description
Cryptosporidium parvum is a zoonotic apicomplexan parasite and a common cause of diarrheal disease worldwide. The development of vaccines to prevent or limit infection remains an important goal for tackling these diarrheal diseases, which are a significant cause of infant morbidity in the developing world. The only approved vaccine against an apicomplexan parasite targets conserved adhesins possessing a thrombospondin repeat (TSR) domains. Orthologous TSR domain-containing proteins are commonplace in the apicomplexa and C. parvum possess 12 such proteins. Here, we explore the molecular evolution and conservation of these proteins and examine their abundance in C. parvum oocysts to assess the likelihood that they may be useful as vaccine candidates. We go onto examine the glycosylation states of these proteins using antibody-enabled and ZIC-HILIC enrichment techniques, which revealed that these proteins are modified with C-linked Hex and N-linked Hex5-6HexNAc2 glycans.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets were resuspended in 100 µl denaturation buffer (20 mM NH4HCO3, 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea) with vortexing and the protein concentration re-determined by BCA assay. DTT (1 µl, 1 M) was added and the sample nutated for 60 min at 22 °C to complete peptide dissolution. 2-Chloroacetamide (50 µl, 100 mM) was added and the sample nutated with the exclusion of light for 60 min at 22 °C. The alkylation reaction was quenched with more DTT (4 µl, 1 M) and nutated for 10 min at 22 °C. The sample was diluted with 465 µl of 100 mM NH4HCO3 before the addition of 20 µg trypsin (Promega) and incubation for 16 h at 25 °C and 500 rpm. The sample was acidified by the addition of 20 µl HCO2H, centrifuged (10,000×g, 10 min, 22 °C) and the supernatant applied to a 50 mg tC18 Sep-Pak column (Waters) conditioned in Buffer A (0.1% TFA, 2% MeCN, 97.9% H2O). The column was washed with Buffer A (3×800 µl), eluted with 800 µl Buffer B (0.1% TFA, 80% MeCN, 19.9% H2O) and the eluate dried on a SpeedVac system (ThermoFisher) then stored at -20 °C until further use.   To enable deep proteomic analysis FAIMs based fractionation was undertaken. 20μg of C. parvum proteome samples were resuspend in Buffer A* (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) and 2μg of peptide used for each FAIMS CV. Peptide samples were separated using a two-column chromatography set up composed of a PepMap100 C18 20 mm x 75 μm trap and a PepMap C18 500 mm x 75 μm analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 μL/min for 5 minutes with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface at 300 nl/minute via the analytical column using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 125-minute analytical runs were undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 23% B over 95 minutes, then from 23% B to 40% B over 10 minutes, then from 40% B to 80% B over 7 minutes. The composition was held at 80% B for 3 minutes, and then dropped to 2% B over 1 minutes before being held at 2% B for another 9 minutes. The Lumos™ Mass Spectrometer was operated in a static FAIMS data-dependent mode automatically switching between the acquisition of a single Orbitrap MS scan (120,000 resolution) every 3 seconds and HCD MS2 events (FTMS, 15K resolution, maximum fill time 80 ms, normalize collision energy 30, AGC of 250%). A total of seven FAIMS CV were acquired; -20, -30, -40, -50, -60, -70, -80 and -90. oxonium ions (204.0867; 138.0545 and 366.1396 m/z) product-dependent MS/MS analysis (38) was used to trigger three additional scans of potential glycopeptides; a Orbitrap EThcD scan (NCE 15%, maximal injection time of 250 ms, AGC 2*105 with a resolution of 30k and using the extended mass range setting to improve the detection of high mass glycopeptide fragment ions {Caval, 2019, Simply Extending the Mass Range in Electron Transfer Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation Increases Confidence in N-Glycopeptide Identification}]); a ion trap CID scan (NCE 35%, maximal injection time of 40 ms, AGC 5*104) and a stepped collision energy HCD scan (using NCE 35% with 8% Stepping, maximal injection time of 150 ms, AGC 2*105 with a resolution of 30k).

### Data Protocol
FAIM fractionated proteome samples were analyzed using MaxQuant (v1.6.3.4)1. Searches were performed against two C. parvum IOWA strain databases (UniProt Accession: UP000006726 and CryptoDB version 48) with carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification and the variable modifications oxidation of methionine (M) and acetylation of the N-termini was used. Searches were performed with trypsin cleavage specificity allowing 2 missed cleavage events. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 10 ppm for the main search, with a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1.0% set for protein and peptide identifications. To enable the assessment of relative protein abundance the iBAQ option was enabled for the analysis of for FAIMS fractionated samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cryptosporidium, Thrombospondin repeat, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.


