### Accession
PXD043836

### Title
Species-specific metabolic reprogramming in human and mouse microglia during  inflammatory pathway induction

### Description
Metabolic reprogramming is a hallmark of the immune cells in response to inflammatory stimuli. This metabolic process involves a switch from oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)to glycolysis, or alterations in other metabolic pathways. However, most of the experimental findings have been acquired in murine immune cells and little is known about the metabolic reprogramming of human microglia. In this study, we investigated the transcriptomic and metabolic profiles of mouse and iPSC-derived human microglia challenged with the TLR4 agonist LPS. We found that both species displayed a metabolic shift and an overall increased glycolytic gene signature in response to LPS treatment. The metabolic reprogramming was characterized by the upregulation of hexokinases in mouse microglia and phosphofructokinases in human microglia. This study provides the first direct comparison of energy metabolism between mouse and human microglia, highlighting the species-specific pathways involved in immunometabolism and the importance of considering these differences in translational research.

### Sample Protocol
Primary Microglia Culture  Microglia cultures were prepared as previously described (PMID:23002008). Briefly, brains were removed from 1- to 3-day-old C57Bl/6 pups, minced, dissociated for 25 min in 0.25% Trypsin, 1xDNAse, and then cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle containing (DMEM, Gibco, 42430025), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Hyclone, SV30160),1 mM Sodium Pyruvate (ThermoFisher, 15070063), and 100 U/mL pen/strep (ThermoFisher, 11360070) in the incubator at 37°C and 5% CO2. After 2 days of in vitro cultivation, the growth medium was completely replaced by fresh medium. After 10–14 days, flasks were mechanically shaken for 60 min, 150 rpm to yield microglia in the supernatant, which were sub-cultured into uncoated well plates according to the experiment. They were kept in 50% astrocyte conditioned medium and 50% fresh DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/mL pen/strep. For all experiments, primary microglial cells were used only for the first and second passage.  Microglia differentiation protocol from iPSCs  Microglia differentiation from iPSCs was based on modified protocols(PMID: 33424025). Day 0 of differentiation was started when the cells reached 70 to 80% confluency. Cells were detached with accutase (Sigma Aldrich, A6964) and incubated at 37°C for 5 minutes. Detached cells were transferred to a Falcon tube and centrifuged for 5 minutes 300rcf. Cells were resuspended in differentiation medium mTers1 supplemented with fresh cytokines with 50 ng/mL BMP-4, 50 ng/mL VEGF, 20 ng/mL SCF (differentiation medium 1) and 10 μM Rock Inhibitor. 10.000-15.000 cells per well were seeded in a 96-well U-bottom ultra-low adherence plate (Corning, 7007) and the plate was centrifuged at 100 rcf for 5 minutes to ensure clustering of the cells at the bottom of the well. The plate was incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2. From day 1 to day 3, 75% of medium was changed using differentiation medium 1. At day 4, all the embryoid bodies (EBs) were collected and medium was removed. The EBs were resuspended in differentiation medium 2 (XVIVO 15 medium + 2mM Glutamax, 100 U/mL Pen-Strep and 0.055 mM 2-mercaptoethanol with 50 ng/mL SCF, 50 ng/mL M-CSF, 50 ng/mL IL3, 50 ng/mL FLT3 and 5 ng/mL TPO). Approximately 20 EBs were plated per well of a 6-well plate. At day 8, medium was changed by removing all the medium in the wells and adding new differentiation medium 2. At day 11, the old medium was removed and the EBs were resuspended in 20 mL of differentiation medium 3 (XVIVO 15 + 2mM Glutamax, 100 U/mL Pen-Strep and 0.055 mM 2--mercaptoethanol with 50 ng/mL FLT-3, 50 ng/mL M-CSF and 25 ng/mL of GM-CSF). At day 18, the supernatant was collected and passed through a 37 μm cell strainer and spun down at 300 rcf for 5 min. Microglial progenitors were resuspended in maturation medium (Advanced DMEM/F12 supplemented with 5 μg/mL N-acetylcysteine, 400 μM 1-Thioglycerol, 1 μg/mL heparan sulfate, 1% Glutamax, 1% NEAA, 1% Pen-Strep, 2% B27, and 0.5% N2. Growth factors: 100 ng/mL interleukin-34, 25 ng/mL M-CSF, 25 ng/mL CX3CR1, 25 ng/mL TGF-β-1 and 50 ng/mL CD200) and used for experiments and termed throughout the manuscript as iPSC-derived microglia-like (iMGL) cells.  LPS stimulation  Mouse microglia and hiMGLs microglia were treated with LPS (250ng/m) for different time points (as indicated in the figure legends). We have demonstrated that LPS concentrations from 10-1000ng/mL present similar robust microglial responses in terms of Normalized Cell Index with and without FBS in murine microglia.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation  Primary microglia lysates were mixed with LDS loading buffer (NuPAGE) and 10 μg total protein/the total provided samples volume was loaded on the gel. The sample was run briefly into a precast 4-12% Bis-Tris gels (Thermo Scientific, ran for maximally 5 min at 100 V). The gel was stained with Biosafe Coomassie G-250 stain (Biorad) and after de-staining with milliQ-H2O, the band containing all proteins was excised from gel. The gel band was sliced into small pieces, washed subsequently with 30% and 50% v/v acetonitrile in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (dissolved in milliQ-H2O), each incubated at RT for 30 min while mixing (500 rpm) and lastly with 100% acetonitrile for 5 min, before drying the gel pieces in an oven at 37 °C. The proteins were reduced with 30 μL 10 mM dithiothreitol (in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate dissolved in milliQ-H2O, 30 min, 55 °C) and alkylated with 30 μL 55 mM iodoacetamide (in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate dissolved in milliQ-H20, 30 min, in the dark at RT). The gel pieces were washed with 100% acetonitrile for 30 min while mixing (500 rpm) and dried in an oven at 37 °C) before overnight digestion with 30 μL trypsin (1:100 g/g, sequencing grade modified trypsin V5111, Promega) at 37 °C. The next day, the peptides were eluted from the gel pieces with 50 μL 75% v/v acetonitrile plus 5% v/v formic acid (incubation 20 min at RT, mixing 500 rpm). The eluted fractions were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 0.1% v/v formic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 μg/μL total protein in the starting material.  Discovery-based proteomics analyses  Discovery mass spectrometric analyses applying label free quantification (LFQ) were performed on a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed by liquid chromatography (LC) on an Evosep system (Evosep One,Evosep) using a nano-LC column (EV1137 Performance column 15 cm x 150 μm, 1.5 μm,Evosep; buffer A: 0.1% v/v formic acid, dissolved in milliQ-H2O, buffer B: 0.1% v/v formic acid, dissolved in acetonitrile). The peptide digests were injected in the LC-MS with an equivalent 1 μg total protein starting material and the peptides were separated using the 30SPD workflow (Evosep). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and data-independent acquisition mode (DIA) using isolation windows of 16 m/z with a precursor mass range of 400-1000, switching the FAIMS between CV-45V and -60V with three scheduled MS1 scans during each screening of the precursor mass range. LC-MS raw data were processed with Spectronaut (version 16.0220606) (Biognosys) using the standard settings of the directDIA workflow except that quantification was performed on MS1, with a human or mouse SwissProt database (www.uniprot.org, 20350 entries for the human samples and 17021 entries for the mouse samples).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mouse, Lps treatment, Microglia

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Pediatrics, Section Systems Medicine of Metabolism and Signaling, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen,the Netherlands
UMCG

### Submitter
Justina Clarinda Wolters

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Justina Clarinda Wolters
Laboratory of Pediatrics, Section Systems Medicine of Metabolism and Signaling, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen,the Netherlands


