### Accession
PXD029351

### Title
Deficiency of Parkinson´s related protein DJ-1 alters Cdk5 signaling and induces neuronal death by aberrant cell cycle re-entry.

### Description
Global proteome analysis between mouse neurons wild type and knockout for dj1 protein

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were cleaned-up in 10% 1D SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with Coomassie Blue and protein bands were cut off, diced and kept in water until digestion. Gel dices were firstly distained, and protein resuspended and reduced by addition of 20mM dithiothreitol. The mixture was cooled down to room temperature and alkylatated by addition of 40mM iodoacetamide. Proteolytic digestion was performed by addition of Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) and stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid, the digested samples were finally Speedvac dried. Nano-LC was performed in a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (v1.5.7.0)[41] and Perseus (v1.5.6.0)[42] software were used to analyse the different MSe runs in triplicate. Proteins were identified by searching raw data against the mouse UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot protein database (February 2018 version). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation (ST) (Y) as variable modifications, were set for the study. Cleavage specificity was by trypsin, allowing for a maximum of one missed cleavage, a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursors and 0.01 Da for fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off for protein identification was 1%. Enabling the “match between runs” option allowed for identification transfer between samples. Similar proteins were grouped, and only unique peptides were used for quantification. Identified from reverse database or contaminant hit proteins were removed prior to further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
DJ-1 is a multifunctional protein involved in Parkinson disease (PD) that can act as antioxidant, molecular chaperone, protease, glyoxalase, and transcriptional regulator. However, the exact mechanism by which DJ-1 dysfunction contributes to development of Parkinson's disease remains elusive. Here, using a comparative proteomic analysis between wild-type cortical neurons and neurons lacking DJ-1 (data available via ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD029351), we show that this protein is involved in cell cycle checkpoints disruption. We detect increased amount of p-tau and &#x3b1;-synuclein proteins, altered phosphoinositide-3-kinase/protein kinase B (PI3K/AKT) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling pathways, and deregulation of cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5). Cdk5 is normally involved in dendritic growth, axon formation, and the establishment of synapses, but can also contribute to cell cycle progression in pathological conditions. In addition, we observed a decrease in proteasomal activity, probably due to tau phosphorylation that can also lead to activation of mitogenic signalling pathways. Taken together, our findings indicate, for the first time, that aborted cell cycle re-entry could be at the onset of DJ-1-associated PD. Therefore, new approaches targeting cell cycle re-entry can be envisaged to improve current therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Dj1 knockouts, Neurons, Lcmsms, Mice

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Córdoba Maimónides Institute for Biomedical Research (IMIBIC), University of Córdoba
Córdoba University

### Submitter
Raquel Requejo-Aguilar

### Lab Head
Dr José Antonio Bárcena Ruiz
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Córdoba Maimónides Institute for Biomedical Research (IMIBIC), University of Córdoba


