### Accession
PXD039854

### Title
Identification of TTC29 protein partners in mouse testis

### Description
We previously identified gene variants in TTC29 that induce human male infertility due to asthenozoospermia and MMAF phenotype (Lores et al. Am J hum genet 2019).  By means of CRISPR/Cas9 mutagenesis we demonstrated that the orthologous TTC29 protein in mouse also constitute a flagellar protein that is required for proper beating of the flagella, indicating an evolutionary-conserved function of TTC29. In here, we took advantage of the mutant mouse model to further decipher the protein complexes associated with TTC29 function within the flagella. We performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments on testis protein extracts from wild-type mice using TTC29 specific antibodies and performed comparative mass spectrometry analyses with two TTC29 KO mouse lines we previously generated and shown to lack TTC29 protein (Ttc29-/- L5 and L7) (Lores et al. Am J hum genet 2019. Mass spectrometry analyses were performed on four independent experimental replicates for each mouse line.

### Sample Protocol
We used the Ttc29-/-  mouse strain produced and fully described in our previous work (Lorès et al. Am J Huma genet 2019). Testes from wild type and Ttc29-/- L5 and L7 mice were dissected in cold PBS; the albuginea was removed and the seminiferous tubules were dissociated and spined down by brief centrifugation. Proteins from the pellets were extracted in 1 ml of lysis buffer: 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM, MgCl2, 0.5% NP40 and Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied science). Immunoprecipitation was performed on the whole lysate protein using 1g of rabbit polyclonal TTC29 antibody (HPA061473, Sigma-Aldrich) and 15 l of Protein A/G magnetics beads (Bio-Ademtec) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The experiment was performed with four mice for each genotype. The total immunoprecipitated proteins were solubilized in 25 µl 100 mM Tris/HCl pH8.5 containing 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and 1% sodium deoxycholate, sonicated 3 times and incubated for 5 minutes at 95°C. 20µg of protein lysate were diluted (1:1) in Tris 25mM pH 8.5 in 10% Acetonitrile (ACN) and subjected to trypsin digestion with 0.4 µg of sequencing-grade bovine trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. NanoflowHPLC and MS analyses were performed at the 3P5 proteomics facility (University de Paris) using an U3000 RSLC system hyphenated to an Orbitrap fusion MS (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). All mobile phases are made with milliQ-grade H2O produced with a milliQ integral-3 (from Merck-Millipore). Peptides were solubilized in 10 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 10% acetonitrile (ACN). 1 µl was loaded, concentrated, and washed for 3 min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, from Thermo Fisher Scientific) with loading solvent containing 0.1% TFA and 2% ACN. Peptides were separated on a Aurora C18 reverse phase resin (1.6 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75μm inner diameter, 25cm length) with a 35min effective gradient starting from 99% of solvent A (containing 0.1% formic acid) and 1% of solvent B (containing 80% ACN, 0.085% formic acid) to 10% of solvent B in 11min, then to 20% of solvent B in 11min, finally to 40% of solvent B in 13min. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired with the Orbitrap, followed by as many MS/MS ion trap HCD spectra 5 seconds can fit (data-dependent acquisition with top speed mode: 5-s cycle) using the following settings for full MS: automatic gain control (AGC) target value: 2.10e5, maximum ion injection time (MIIT): 60 ms, resolution: 6.10e4, m/z range 350–1500. For HCD MS/MS: Quadrupole filtering, Normalised Collision Energy: 30. Ion trap rapid detection: isolation width: 1.6 Th, minimum signal threshold: 5000, AGC: 2.10e4, MIIT: 100 ms, resolution: 3.10e4. Peptides with undefined charge state or charge state of 1 or over 7 were excluded from fragmentation, a dynamic exclusion time was set at 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Identifications were performed by comparison of experimental peak lists with a database of theoretical sequences using Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science, London, UK), databases used were Swissprot released in Febuary 2020. Database searches were performed on tryptic peptides only, with variable modifications oxidation on methionine and as fixed modification carbamidomethylation on cysteine. Precursor and fragment error tolerances were set respectively to 4 ppm and 0.55Da. Up to one missed tryptic cleavages was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crispr mouse model, Co-immunoprecipitation, Male infertility, Asthenozoospermia, Ttc29

### Affiliations
Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, U1016, INSERM, CNRS, Paris, France.
Proteom’IC facility, Université Paris Cité, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Cochin, F-75014 PARIS

### Submitter
Johanna BRUCE

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick LORES
Université de Paris, Institut Cochin, U1016, INSERM, CNRS, Paris, France.


