### Accession
PXD042600

### Title
Cordycepin Delays Postovulatory Aging of Mammalian Oocytes through Inhibition of Maternal mRNAs Degradation via DCP1A Polyadenylation Suppression

### Description
Postovulatory aging leads to the decline in oocyte quality and subsequent impairment of embryonic development, thereby reducing the success rates of assisted reproductive technology (ART). Nevertheless, potential preventative strategies to improve aging oocytes quality and the associated underlying mechanisms warrant further investigation. In this study, we identify cordycepin, an natural nucleoside analogue, as having the potential to restore the postovulatory aging-induced decline in oocyte quality, including aspects such as oocyte fragmentation, embryonic developmental competence, spindle/chromosomes morphology and mitochondrial function. Proteomic and RNA sequencing analyses revealed that cordycepin inhibited the degradation of several crucial maternal proteins and mRNAs caused by aging. Mechanistically, cordycepin was found to suppress the elevation of DCP1A protein levels by inhibiting polyadenylation during postovulatory aging, consequently impeding the decapping of maternal mRNAs. In humans, the increased degradation of DCP1A and total mRNA during aging was also inhibited by cordycepin. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that cordycepin may prevent postovulatory aging of mammalian oocytes by inhibition of maternal mRNAs degradation via DCP1A polyadenylation suppression, thereby promoting the successful rates of ART procedure.

### Sample Protocol
Female mice were injected intraperitoneally with 10 IU of pregnant mare serum gonadotropin (PMSG; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). 48 h after PMSG injection, the female mice were further injected intraperitoneally with 10 IU of human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG; Sigma-Aldrich). The superovulated mice were killed 13-15 h after hCG injection and cumulus oocytes were collected from the oviduct ampulla, placed in 37 ℃ M2 (M7167, Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) medium, then cumulus cells were removed by 0.3% hyaluronidase (H4272, Sigma-Aldrich) in M2 medium. The MII oocytes with the first polar body were used for the next experiments. They were placed in CZB (M1650, Nanjing Aibei, China) medium under mineral oil (Vitrolife, Göteborg, Sweden) at 37 °C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 for in vitro aging. The fresh oocytes without any treatment were used as control in the study.In human, immature GV was either processed immediately cultured in vitro in 50 μL of G1-PLUS (Vitrolife) medium in a humidified atmosphere of 6% CO2 at 37 °C for 16 h, when they were checked again for polar body presence and processed. Then, the MII oocytes were cultured in G1-PLUS for 24h to simulate the postovulatory aging.

### Data Protocol
The database search was carried out with Trypsin digestion specificity, and the presence of Alkylation on cysteine was taken into account as a fixed modification in the database searching. For protein quantification, a labeling method was utilized.

### Publication Abstract
Postovulatory aging leads to the decline in oocyte quality and subsequent impairment of embryonic development, thereby reducing the success rate of assisted reproductive technology (ART). Potential preventative strategies preventing oocytes from aging and the associated underlying mechanisms warrant investigation. In this study, we identified that cordycepin, a natural nucleoside analogue, promoted the quality of oocytes aging in vitro, as indicated by reduced oocyte fragmentation, improved spindle/chromosomes morphology and mitochondrial function, as well as increased embryonic developmental competence. Proteomic and RNA sequencing analyses revealed that cordycepin inhibited the degradation of several crucial maternal proteins and mRNAs caused by aging. Strikingly, cordycepin was found to suppress the elevation of DCP1A protein by inhibiting polyadenylation during postovulatory aging, consequently impeding the decapping of maternal mRNAs. In humans, the increased degradation of DCP1A and total mRNA during postovulatory aging was also inhibited by cordycepin. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that cordycepin prevents postovulatory aging of mammalian oocytes by inhibition of maternal mRNAs degradation via suppressing polyadenylation of DCP1A mRNA, thereby promoting oocyte developmental competence.

### Keywords
Aging oocytes, Cordycepin

### Affiliations
 Chongqing Health Center for Women and Children
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Human Embryo Engineering

### Submitter
Ling Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Jingyu Li
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Human Embryo Engineering


