### Accession
PXD022029

### Title
Rhizobium leguminosarum glutathione peroxidase is essential for oxidative stress resistance and efficient nodulation

### Description
Glutathione plays a tremendous role in regulating the homeostasis of redox state, and appears to be essential for proper development of the root nodules. Glutathione peroxidase catalyzes the reduction of peroxides by oxidation of GSH to oxidized GSH (GSSG), which can in turn be reduced by glutathione reductase (GR). However, it has not been determined whether the R. leguminosarum Gpx or GR is required during symbiotic interactions with pea. To characterise the role of glutathione-dependent enzymes in the symbiotic process, single and double mutants were made in gpxA and gorA genes. All the mutations did not affect the growth of R. leguminosarum, but they increased the sensitivity of R. leguminosarum strains to H2O2. The gorA mutant can induce the formation of normal nodules, while the gpxA single and double mutants exhibited an abnormal nodulation phenotype coupled to more than 50% reduction in nitrogen-fifixing capacity, this defect in nodulation was characterized by the formation of undeveloped and ineffective nodules. In addition, the gorA and gpxA double mutant was severely impaired in rhizosphere colonization. LC-MS/MS analysis quantitative proteomics techniques were employed to compare differential gpxA mutant root bacteroids in response to the wild type infection. Sixty differentially expressed proteins were identified including seven up-regulated and twenty down-regulated proteins. By sorting the down-regulated proteins according to metabolic function, eight proteins were transporter protein, seven proteins were  dehydrogenases and deoxygenases. Moreover, three down-regulation proteins are directly involved in nodule process.

### Sample Protocol
The 4-week-nodule samples were grinded into cell powder in liquid nitrogen. The cell powder was transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. 4 volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was then added to the cell powder, and the slurry was sonicated for 3 times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was collected and the protein content was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockland, IL). The resulting proteins were reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min, and then alkylated in 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Each protein sample was then diluted by 100 mM tetraethyl ammonium bromide (TEAB) to obtain a urea concentration of less than 2 and  1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second digestion of 4 h. Following trypsin digestion, the peptides then were desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column and vacuum-dried. The peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according the manufacturer’s instructions of the TMT kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, USA). Concisely, one unit of tandem mass tag (TMT) reagent was dissolved and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated at room temperature for 2 h and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in dissolved in solvent A ( 0.1% formic acid in aqueous solution) and loaded directly onto a  reversed phase analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 15 cm length). The loaded material was eluted from this column in a linear gradient of 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile ) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min, climbing to 80% in 3 min and holding at 80% for 3 min with a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The MS proteomics data were deposited to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) by using a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the  ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC). The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV. For the full scan mode, the m/z scan range was from 350 to 1800. The intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected to run MS/MS analysis using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were measured using a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap. The MS analysis alternated between MS and data-dependent tandem MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to accumulate 5×104 ions with the Fixed first mass of 100 m/z. Experiments were conducted in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed and prepared for database search using the MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox et al., 2008).  The resulting tandem mass spectra were searched against the Rhizobium leguminosarum genome database concatenated with reverse decoy database (Young et al., 2006). Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to four missing cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search, and the tolerance of the ions was set to  0.02 Da for fragment ion matches. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was considered as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was specified, and the minimal peptide score for modified peptides was set to 40. Protein expression was analyzed statistically using Student’s t tests (p<0.05). Upregulated and downregulated proteins were defined as having fold changes (FC) > 1.2 and <0.83, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rhizobium leguminosarum; glutathione peroxidase; antioxidant function; symbiotic nitrogen fixation; quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, South-Central University for Nationalities

### Submitter
Guojun Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Guojun Cheng
College of Life Sciences, South-Central University for Nationalities


