### Accession
PXD005844

### Title
REPARATION:  Ribosome Profiling Assisted (Re-) Annotation of Bacterial genomes

### Description
Prokaryotic genome annotation is highly dependent on automated methods, as manual curation cannot keep up with the exponential growth of sequenced genomes. Current automated techniques depend heavily on sequence context and often underestimate the complexity of the proteome. We developed REPARATION (RibosomeE Profiling Assisted (Re-)AnnotaTION), a de novo algorithm that takes advantage of experimental evidence from ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq) to delineate translated open reading frames (ORFs) in bacteria, independent of genome annotation. Ribo-seq next generation sequencing technique that provides a genome-wide snapshot of the position translating ribosome along an mRNA at the time of the experiment. REPARATION evaluates all possible ORFs in the genome and estimates minimum thresholds to screen for spurious ORFs based on a growth curve model. We applied REPARATION to three annotated bacterial species to obtain a more comprehensive mapping of their translation landscape in support of experimental data. In all cases, we identified hundreds of novel ORFs including variants of previously annotated and novel small ORFs (<71 codons). Our predictions were supported by matching mass spectrometry (MS) proteomics data and sequence conservation analysis. REPARATION is unique in that it makes use of experimental Ribo-seq data to perform de novo ORF delineation in bacterial genomes, and thus can identify putative coding ORFs irrespective of the sequence context of the reading frame.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight stationary cultures of wild type S. Typhimurium (Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium - strain SL1344) grown in LB media at 37 °C with agitation (200 rpm) were diluted at 1:200 in LB and grown until they reached and OD600 of 0.5 (i.e., logarithmic (Log) phase grown cells). Bacterial cells were collected by centrifugation (6000 × g, 5 min) at 4 °C, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and cryogenically pulverized using a liquid nitrogen cooled pestle and mortar. The frozen pellet of a 50 ml culture was re-suspended and thawed in 1 ml ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mm NH4HCO3 (pH 7.9) and subjected to mechanical disruption by 3 repetitive freeze-thaw and sonication cycles (i.e. 2 minutes of sonication on ice for 20-s bursts at output level 4 with a 40% duty cycle (Branson Sonifier 250; Ultrasonic Convertor)). The lysate was cleared by centrifugation for 15 min at 16,000 × g and the protein concentration measured using the DC Protein Assay Kit from Bio-Rad (Munich, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions.  For all proteome analyses performed, 1 mg of protein material (corresponding to about 300 µl of lysate) was subjected to shotgun proteome analysis as described previously (Koch et al. 2014). More specifically, 3 different proteome digestions were performed at 37°C and mixing at 550 rpm using mass spectrometry grade trypsin (enzyme/substrate of 1/100, w/w; Promega, Madison, United States), chymotrypsin (1/60, w/w; Promega, Madison, United States) or endoproteinase Glu-C (1/75, w/w; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A final set of 24 samples per proteome digest was vacuum dried, re-dissolved in 20 µl of 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) in 2% acetonitrile and analysed by LC-MS/MS. The Salmonella shotgun samples were separated by nano-LC and analyzed with a Q Exactive instrument (Thermo Scientific) operating in MS/MS mode.

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS peak lists were searched with Mascot using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science).  Searches were performed using 6-FT database of S. typhimurium (Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium - strain SL1344) genome with combined with the Ensembl Salmonella SL1344 protein sequence database assembly AMS21085v2 version 86.1. The Mascot search parameters were set as follows; methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide was set as fixed modifications. Variable modifications were formylation, acetylation (both at peptide level) and pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm on the precursor ion (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and to 20 mmu on fragment ions. Peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put to ESI-QUAD. Enzyme settings were set to ‘no enzyme’ in the case of the Chymo and Glu-C digested proteome samples and endoproteinase Trypsin/P (Trypsin specificity with Arg/Lys-Pro cleavage allowed) was set as enzyme in the case of the tryptic samples, only in case of the latter allowing for one missed cleavage.

### Publication Abstract
Prokaryotic genome annotation is highly dependent on automated methods, as manual curation cannot keep up with the exponential growth of sequenced genomes. Current automated methods depend heavily on sequence composition and often underestimate the complexity of the proteome. We developed RibosomeE Profiling Assisted (re-)AnnotaTION (REPARATION), a de novo machine learning algorithm that takes advantage of experimental protein synthesis evidence from ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq) to delineate translated open reading frames (ORFs) in bacteria, independent of genome annotation (https://github.com/Biobix/REPARATION). REPARATION evaluates all possible ORFs in the genome and estimates minimum thresholds based on a growth curve model to screen for spurious ORFs. We applied REPARATION to three annotated bacterial species to obtain a more comprehensive mapping of their translation landscape in support of experimental data. In all cases, we identified hundreds of novel (small) ORFs including variants of previously annotated ORFs and &gt;70% of all (variants of) annotated protein coding ORFs were predicted by REPARATION to be translated. Our predictions are supported by matching mass spectrometry proteomics data, sequence composition and conservation analysis. REPARATION is unique in that it makes use of experimental translation evidence to intrinsically perform a de novo ORF delineation in bacterial genomes irrespective of the sequence features linked to open reading frames.

### Keywords
Salmonella typhimurium sl1344, Shotgun, Bacteria

### Affiliations
VIB Midical Biotechnology Center, University of Gent, Belgium
University of Ghent

### Submitter
Petra Van Damme

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
VIB Midical Biotechnology Center, University of Gent, Belgium


