### Accession
PXD010029

### Title
RPL12 phosphorylation regulates translation during mitosis - pSILAC B cell PRM -

### Description
project_description Emerging evidence indicates that heterogeneity in ribosome composition can give rise to specialized functions. Until now, research mainly focused on differences in core ribosomal proteins and associated factors. The impact of posttranslational modifications has not yet been studied systematically. Analyzing ribosome heterogeneity is challenging since individual proteins can be part of different subcomplexes (40S, 60S, 80S and polysomes). Here, we develop polysome proteome profiling (3P) to obtain unbiased proteomic maps across ribosomal subcomplexes. 3P combines extensive fractionation by sucrose gradient centrifugation with quantitative mass spectrometry. The high resolution of the profiles allows us to assign proteins to specific subcomplexes. Phosphoproteomics on 3P fractions reveals that phosphorylation of serine 38 in RPL12 -- a known mitotic CDK1 substrate -- is strongly depleted in polysomes. Follow-up experiments confirm that RPL12 phosphorylation regulates translation of specific subsets of mRNAs during mitosis. Together, our results show that posttranslational modification of ribosomal proteins can regulate translation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 µL of 8 M urea and 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 30 min and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 30 min in the dark room. Proteins were first digested by lysyl endopeptidase (LysC) (Wako) at a protein-to-LysC ratio of 100:1 (w/w) at room temperature for 3 hr. Then, the sample solution was diluted to final concentration of 2 M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Trypsin (Promega) digestion was performed at a protein-to-trypsin ratio of 100:1 (w/w) under constant agitation at room temperature for 16 hr. Peptides were desalted with C18 Stage tips and further cleaned up with SCX (strong cation exchange chromatography) Stage tips and desalted again with C18 Stage tips prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
PRM and Top3 data was analyzed seperately. The MaxQuant workflow was as follows: All raw data were analyzed and processed by MaxQuant (v1.5.1.2) (Cox and Mann 2008). Default settings were kept. Search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, cysteine carbamidomethyl fixed modification, and variable modifications including methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. The peptide mass tolerance was 6 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 20 ppm. Database search was performed with Andromeda (Cox and Mann 2008; Cox et al. 2011) against UniProt/Swiss-Prot human or mouse database (downloaded on 2014-11) with common serum contaminants and enzyme sequences. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and at protein level. The PRM data was analyzed seperately: Traces of all fragments from precursors in the spectral library (as exported from picky) were extracted from all rawfiles using the Thermo MSFileReader software and the MSFileReader.py bindings written by Francois Allen.  Experimental Design: e1: 8h A11 - H; D2B2 - M e2: 8h D2B2 - H; A11 - M e3: 16h A11 - H; D2B2 - M e4: 16h D2B2 - H; A11 - M  - included are two technical replicates: r1 and r2.

### Publication Abstract
Emerging evidence indicates that heterogeneity in ribosome composition can give rise to specialized functions. Until now, research mainly focused on differences in core ribosomal proteins and associated factors. The effect of posttranslational modifications has not been studied systematically. Analyzing ribosome heterogeneity is challenging because individual proteins can be part of different subcomplexes (40S, 60S, 80S, and polysomes). Here we develop polysome proteome profiling to obtain unbiased proteomic maps across ribosomal subcomplexes. Our method combines extensive fractionation by sucrose gradient centrifugation with quantitative mass spectrometry. The high resolution of the profiles allows us to assign proteins to specific subcomplexes. Phosphoproteomics on the fractions reveals that phosphorylation of serine 38 in RPL12/uL11, a known mitotic CDK1 substrate, is strongly depleted in polysomes. Follow-up experiments confirm that RPL12/uL11 phosphorylation regulates the translation of specific subsets of mRNAs during mitosis. Together, our results show that posttranslational modification of ribosomal proteins can regulate translation.

### Keywords
B cell, Mouse, Polysome proteome profiling, Prm

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin-Buch
Proteome Dynamics MDC Berlin-Buch; Germany

### Submitter
Henrik Zauber

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Proteome Dynamics MDC Berlin-Buch; Germany


