### Accession
PXD007768

### Title
SILAC-based proteomic approach to delineate molecular alterations associated with erlotinib resistance in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
Although Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is overexpressed in 90% of Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients. Clinical trials with EGFR-targeted small molecule inhibitors such as erlotinib have shown a modest activity in recurrent or advanced HNSCC. To investigate the acquired mechanisms of erlotinib resistance we employed SILAC-based total proteomic analysis of an isogenic pair of erlotinib sensitive (SCC-S) and resistant (SCC-R) HNSCC cell line. This resulted in the identification of 5,427 proteins of which 532 proteins were overexpressed and 527 proteins were downregulated in SCC-R cells as compared to SCC-S cells (≥2 fold). Several proteins known to mediate erlotinib resistance in HNSCC and lung cancer were found to be dysregulated. Bioinformatics analysis of differentially expressed proteins showed enrichment of proteins involved in focal adhesion kinase (FAK) pathway downstream of EGFR. We identified CUB-domain containing protein 1 (CDCP1) and  integrin β1 as upstream regulators of FAK signalling pathway to be overexpressed. We further demonstrated that CDCP1 and FAK can be targeted in combination as an alternative to erlotinib in HNSCC.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labelling: Isogenic human oral cancer cell line SCC-R (resistant to erlotinib) and SCC-S (sensitive to erlotinib) derived from UMSCC1 were used for the study. For SILAC-based proteomics experiments SCC-S cells were adapted to DMEM-SILAC media supplemented with L‐lysine‐2HCL (13C6, 15N2, 98% isotopic purity) and L –arginine‐HCL (13C6, 98% isotopic purity). SCC-R cells were maintained in regular media. Sample processing: For total proteomics experiment both SCC-S and SCC-R cells we grown to a confluency of 70% and were maintained in serum free media for 12 hours prior to harvesting in urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM phosphoglycerophosphate). Protein concentration was determined using BCA assays and normalized using SDS-PAGE gel and 10mg equivalent of lysate from each of the conditions were mixed. The mixture was reduced with 45mM dithiothreitol at 60oC for 30 mins and alkylated using 100mM iodoacetamide for 10 mins at room temperature. Concentration of urea was brought to 2M using HEPES buffer and digested overnight at 37oC using modified trypsin (Promega). Basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) The labelled peptides were subjected to bRPLC fractionation. Briefly, 1ml of bRPLC solvent A (10 mMTEABC pH 8.4, Sigma Aldrich) was used to resuspend of lyophilized peptides mixture. This mixture was fractionated by bRPLC chromatography on a XBridge C18, 5 μm, 250 × 4.6 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) on an Agilent 1100 LC system with a flow rate of 1 mL/min by employing an increasing gradient of bRPLC solvent B (10mM TEABC in 90% acetonitrile, pH 8.4)for a total run-time of 60 mins. A total of 96 fractions were initially collected. The fractions were then concatenated to 24 fractions for proteomic analysis. All fractions were dried using speed vac and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid before subjecting to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bermen, Germany) interfaced with Proxeon Easy nLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for LC-MS/MS analysis. Precursor MS scan (m/z 350–1800) and MS/MS (m/z 350–1800) was acquired with a mass resolution of 120K and 30K at 200 m/z in the orbitrap mass analyzer. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 500K for MS and 50K for MS/MS and maximum ion injection time was set to 60ms for MS and 200ms for MS/MS scan events, respectively. In each duty cycle 10 most intense peaks were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) mode at 32% normalized collision energy and isolation width was set to 2.0 m/z. Singly charged and unassigned charge precursor were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was set for 45 seconds with a 10 ppm mass window. The lock mass option was enabled using polysiloxane ion (m/z= 445.12002) from ambient air for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS/MS analysis was searched against Human RefSeq database (Version 65 and known contaminants) using SequestHT and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with maximum two missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine, Protein N-term acetylation, and SILAC labels 13C6, 15C2-Lysine (K8); 13C6-Arginine (R6) were set as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as static modification. The mass error of parent ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. The data was also searched against a decoy database and PSM identifications of 1% false discovery rate (FDR) score threshold was considered for further analysis. Precursor ion quantifier node with a mass precision of 3ppm was used for peptide and protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) targeted therapies have shown limited efficacy in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients despite its overexpression. Identifying molecular mechanisms associated with acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs such as erlotinib remains an unmet need and a therapeutic challenge. In this study, we employed an integrated multi-omics approach to delineate mechanisms associated with acquired resistance to erlotinib by carrying out whole exome sequencing, quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling. We observed amplification of several genes including AXL kinase and transcription factor YAP1 resulting in protein overexpression. We also observed expression of constitutively active mutant MAP2K1 (p.K57E) in erlotinib resistant SCC-R cells. An integrated analysis of genomic, proteomic and phosphoproteomic data revealed alterations in MAPK pathway and its downstream targets in SCC-R cells. We demonstrate that erlotinib-resistant cells are sensitive to MAPK pathway inhibition. This study revealed multiple genetic, proteomic and phosphoproteomic alterations associated with erlotinib resistant SCC-R cells. Our data indicates that therapeutic targeting of MAPK pathway is an effective strategy for treating erlotinib-resistant HNSCC tumors.

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Quantitative proteomics, Head and neck cancer, Mass spectrometry, Egfr-tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance

### Affiliations
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute
Institute of Bioinformatics , International Technology Park, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Harsha Gowda

### Lab Head
Dr Harsha Gowda
Institute of Bioinformatics , International Technology Park, Bangalore, India


