### Accession
PXD001624

### Title
Response to phosphate limitation of Pseudovibrio sp. FO-BEG1, ICPL-LC-MS/MS, Cytoplasmatic proteome

### Description
In this study we investigated the response of Pseudovibrio sp. FO-BEG1 to phosphate limitation. We compared the protein expression of strain FO-BEG1 under phosphate limited and phosphate surplus conditions. This dataset refers to the proteome analysis conducted on the cytoplasmatic proteins. An additional dataset for the extracellular and the membrane proteome is available. These two proteomes and the cytoplasmatic proteome were obtained from indipendent cultivation experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were recovered via centrifugation and cells were lysed on ice by means of sonication. Samples were then shaken to improve protein solubilization and  after centrifugation, performed to remove the cellular debris, the supernatant was transferred into a low binding tube for subsequent ICPL labeling. Proteins were labeled at the free amino groups with one of the four isotopic forms of nicotinoyloxysuccinamide (light, medium, heavy, super-heavy). The complexity of the samples was then reduced via SDS‑PAGE. The gel was sliced into five pieces and the proteins were then digested into peptides using trypsin and Glu-C MS grade. The peptide mixtures were then analyzed via nanoLC‑ESI‑MS/MS. Mass spectrometry was performed on a linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo LTQ, Thermo Scientific) operating in positive polarity mode online coupled to a nano‑LC. MS method consisted of a cycle combining one full MS scan (Mass range: 300-2,000 m/z) with data dependent MS/MS events (CID; 35% collision energy). The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 secs.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were converted to mzXML format using the software Trans-Proteomic Pipeline. Then the peak detection, deconvolution, deisotoping, and quantification were done using ICPL‑ESIQuant. Quadruplets detection was first performed for each run separately. Subsequently, the detected quadruplets of the reference runs were used to search for incomplete quadruplets in the biological samples. In this way complete and incomplete quadruplets were identified. Only peptides with a Mascot score above 20, defined as the 95% confidence level, were considered. The Glu-C cleavage specificity was set for Glu. A specific database was built using the genome of the strain. For each LC‑ESI‑MS/MS run separate database queries were always done using one of the ICPL labels as second fixed modification. For database searches a mass tolerance of 50 ppm in the MS mode and 0.5 Da in MS/MS mode with two missed cleavages were set. For the reference runs the data were normalized by the median of all peptide abundance ratios, a procedure that was not applied to the samples due to the regulation of their protein expression. Peptides were assigned to proteins using the Mascot suits.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorus is a vital nutrient for living organisms and is obtained by bacteria primarily via phosphate uptake. However, phosphate is often scarcely accessible in nature, and there is evidence that in many areas of the ocean, its concentration limits bacterial growth. Surprisingly, the phosphate starvation response has been extensively investigated in different model organisms (e.g., Escherichia coli), but there is a dearth of studies on heterotrophic marine bacteria. In this work, we describe the response of Pseudovibrio sp. strain FO-BEG1, a metabolically versatile alphaproteobacterium and potential symbiont of marine sponges, to phosphate limitation. We compared the physiology, protein expression, and secondary metabolite production under phosphate-limited conditions to those under phosphate surplus conditions. We observed that phosphate limitation had a pleiotropic effect on the physiology of the strain, triggering cell elongation, the accumulation of polyhydroxyalkanoate, the degradation of polyphosphate, and the exchange of membrane lipids in favor of phosphorus-free lipids such as sulfoquinovosyl diacylglycerols. Many proteins involved in the uptake and degradation of phospho-organic compounds were upregulated, together with subunits of the ABC transport system for phosphate. Under conditions of phosphate limitation, FO-BEG1 secreted compounds into the medium that conferred an intense yellow coloration to the cultures. Among these compounds, we identified the potent antibiotic tropodithietic acid. Finally, toxin-like proteins and other proteins likely involved in the interaction with the eukaryotic host were also upregulated. Altogether, our data suggest that phosphate limitation leads to a pronounced reorganization of FO-BEG1 physiology, involving phosphorus, carbon, and sulfur metabolism; cell morphology; secondary metabolite production; and the expression of virulence-related genes.

### Keywords
Phosphate limitation, Icpl, Lc-ms/ms, Bacteria, Pseudovibrio

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Ostseeforschung
Biomerit Research center, UCC, Cork, Ireland

### Submitter
Stefano Romano

### Lab Head
Dr Heide Schulz-Vogt
Leibniz-Institut für Ostseeforschung


