### Accession
PXD040932

### Title
Mapping the castor bean endosperm proteome revealed a metabolic interaction between plastid, mitochondria, and peroxisomes to optimize seedling growth

### Description
The aim of the project was to elucidate the inter-organellar interplay of plastids, mitochondria, and peroxisomes during storage reserve mobilization in the endosperm to supply the growing seedling with nutrients upon germination. Organelles from endosperm of etiolated castor bean seedlings were isolated and subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. The data were used to build a comprehensive metabolic model for plastids, mitochondria, and peroxisomes.

### Sample Protocol
The organelles were isolated from 30 g endosperm tissue of 5-day-old etiolated castor bean seedlings using a sucrose-density gradient centrifugation approach. From each collected organellar fractions, membranes were enriched by high-speed centrifugation Protein samples of the total and membrane fractions were loaded on an SDS-polyacrylamide gel and digested with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and subjected to LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification the acquired MS spectra were analyzed using the MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 (MPI for Biochemistry, Planegg, Germany) with default parameters. Quantification was performed using the unlabeled quantification option of MaxQuant. The identified spectra were matched against the Ricinus proteome using the peptide search engine Andromeda. Only proteins containing at least two unique peptides and a minimum of three valid values in at least one group were quantified.

### Publication Abstract
In this work, we studied castor-oil plant <i>Ricinus communis</i> as a classical system for endosperm reserve breakdown. The seeds of castor beans consist of a centrally located embryo with the two thin cotyledons surrounded by the endosperm. The endosperm functions as major storage tissue and is packed with nutritional reserves, such as oil, proteins, and starch. Upon germination, mobilization of the storage reserves requires inter-organellar interplay of plastids, mitochondria, and peroxisomes to optimize growth for the developing seedling. To understand their metabolic interactions, we performed a large-scale organellar proteomic study on castor bean endosperm. Organelles from endosperm of etiolated seedlings were isolated and subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Computer-assisted deconvolution algorithms were applied to reliably assign the identified proteins to their correct subcellular localization and to determine the abundance of the different organelles in the heterogeneous protein samples. The data obtained were used to build a comprehensive metabolic model for plastids, mitochondria, and peroxisomes during storage reserve mobilization in castor bean endosperm.

### Keywords
Metabolic network, Inter-organellar interplay, Proteomic study, Storage reserve mobilization, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, BMFZ, Universitätsklinikum, Düsseldorf, Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Anja Stefanski

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, BMFZ, Universitätsklinikum, Düsseldorf, Germany


