### Accession
PXD006913

### Title
Staphylococcus aureus RN4220 wild-type extracellular vesicle proteome

### Description
Bacteria actively secrete extracellular vesicles (EVs), spherical nano-sized proteolipids into the extracellular milieu. Bacterial EVs have gained wide interests as non-living complex vaccines or delivery vehicles. However, no studies have used bacterial EVs in treating cancer so far. Our results showed remarkable capability of EVs derived from Staphylococcus aureus RN4220 wild-type to effectively induce long-term anti-tumor immune responses that can fully eradicate established tumors without notable adverse effects. This anti-tumor effect was IFN-γ-dependent, and we present a comprehensive proteome of S. aureus RN4220 wild-type EVs to investigate which vesicular components induce the anti-tumor effects.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were purified from culture supernatants of S. aureus RN4220 wild-type, as described previously with some modifications (Choi et al., 2011, Kim et al., 2013). S. aureus was cultured overnight in lysogeny broth at 37oC with shaking (150 rpm) until A600 reached 1.5. Bacterial cells were removed by centrifugation and filtration. Then, the filtrate was concentrated using a QuixStand Benchtop system with a 100 kDa hollow-fiber filter membrane. The concentrate was filtered again, and was pelleted by ultracentrifugation. The pellet was suspended in 50% iodixanol, and was subjected to iodixanol density gradient ultracentrifugation. The fraction containing bacterial EVs were collected from the third fraction from the top layer, and finally filtered to avoid any bacterial or cell debris contamination. In-solution digestion was performed with filter-aided sample preparation (Wisniewski et al., 2009). The vesicular proteins were solubilized in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1% NP-40, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and protease inhibitor cocktail), and then denatured with 6 M guanidine-HCl. The denatured proteins were reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, and were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. After alkylation, vesicular proteins were concentrated by methanol/chloroform precipitation. The precipitated proteins were digested using trypsin (the ratio of trypsin to protein should be 1:100) for 16 hours at 37ºC. The tryptic peptides were loaded on Amicon Ultra 10K filters and collected by centrifugation. The sample were lyophilized and desalted with PepClean C18 spin columns for MS analysis. The desalted tryptic peptides were analyzed with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer combined with EASY-nLC II. The tryptic peptides were separated using a lab-made microcapillary column (75 μm x 12 cm) packed with C18 resin. The sample was separated using a linear 60 min gradient of a mixture of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acentonitrile) to 40% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acentonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The separated peptides were electrosparyed with the electrospray voltage of 2.6 kV. All MS/MS spectra were obtained in data-dependent scans for fragmentation of the ten most abundant spectra from full scans. We used the following dynamic exclusion conditions to increase the size of proteome to be detected: repeat count for dynamic exclusion = 1, repeat duration = 30 s, dynamic exclusion duration = 180 s, exclusion mass width = 1.5 Da, and the list size of dynamic exclusion = 50. [1] Choi DS, Kim DK, Choi SJ, Lee J et al. Proteomic analysis of outer membrane vesicles derived from Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Proteomics. 11:3424-3429, 2011. [2] Kim OY, Hong BS, Park KS, Yoon YJ et al., Immunization with Escherichia coli outer membrane vesicles protects against bacteria-induced lethality via Th1 and Th17 cell responses. J Immunol. 190:4092-4102, 2013. [3] Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods. 6:359-362, 2009.

### Data Protocol
Nine technical replicates of LC-MS/MS data were analysed using the X!Tandem packaged with Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (version 4.8.0). Each RAW data file was converted to mzXML files using MSConverter and the mzXML files were searched against S. aureus NCTC8325 database from UniProt database (release 2017_04, 2,889 entries) using X!Tandem. The tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions, and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Enzyme specificity for trypsin was used and the number of missed cleavage sites was set to two. Four variable modification options were used: oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da), carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da), deamination of N-terminal glutamine (-17.027 Da), and dehydration of N-terminal glutamic acid (-18.011 Da). Trans-Proteomic Pipeline was performed to statistically identify peptides by PeptideProphet (PeptideProphet ≥ 0.90) and proteins by ProteinProphet (ProteinProphet ≥ 0.90).

### Publication Abstract
Gram-negative bacteria actively secrete outer membrane vesicles, spherical nano-meter-sized proteolipids enriched with outer membrane proteins, to the surroundings. Outer membrane vesicles have gained wide interests as non-living complex vaccines or delivery vehicles. However, no study has used outer membrane vesicles in treating cancer thus far. Here we investigate the potential of bacterial outer membrane vesicles as therapeutic agents to treat cancer via immunotherapy. Our results show remarkable capability of bacterial outer membrane vesicles to effectively induce long-term antitumor immune responses that can fully eradicate established tumors without notable adverse effects. Moreover, systematically administered bacterial outer membrane vesicles specifically target and accumulate in the tumor tissue, and subsequently induce the production of antitumor cytokines CXCL10 and interferon-&#x3b3;. This antitumor effect is interferon-&#x3b3; dependent, as interferon-&#x3b3;-deficient mice could not induce such outer membrane vesicle-mediated immune response. Together, our results herein demonstrate the potential of bacterial outer membrane vesicles as effective immunotherapeutic agent that can treat various cancers without apparent adverse effects.Bacterial outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) contain immunogens but no study has yet examined their potential in treating cancer. Here, the authors demonstrate that OMVs can suppress established tumours and prevent tumour metastasis by an interferon-&#x3b3; mediated antitumor response.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Membrane vesicles, Bacteria, Exosomes, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Republic of Korea
Department of Life Science

### Submitter
Yong Song Gho

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Song Gho
Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, Republic of Korea


