### Accession
PXD033759

### Title
Bone marrow-derived mast cells +- IL-33 48h

### Description
Mast cells are tissue resident granulocytes which are most abundant at the interface between tissues and the external environment, such as around blood vessels, in the skin or mucosal surfaces in the lungs and gut. Pathologically they are involved in allergic reactions and anaphylaxis, however they may also play protective roles in responses to some infections, particularly to pathogenic helminths. Mast cells also express high levels of the IL-33 receptor, which like TLRs, activates Myd88 dependent signalling pathways to drive de novo cytokine production in mast cells.IL-33 is a member of the IL-1 family known to stimulate a number of immune cell types including mast cells. IL-33 is a strong activator of de novo cytokine production in mast cells without inducing degranulation, although it has also been shown to synergise with other signals to promote degranulation. Bone Marrow-Derived Mast cells (BMMCs) were cultured as described previously [27]. Briefly, bone marrow was flushed in PBS and the cells pelleted by centrifugation. Cells were cultured at 1 million cells per ml in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FBS (Biosera/Labtech), 5 mM l‐Glutamine (GIBCO Life Technologies), 100 U/ml Penicillin (GIBCO Life Technologies), 100 μg/ml Streptomycin (GIBCO Life Technologies), 25 mM HEPES (Lonza), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Lonza), 1X nonessential amino acids (Lonza), 50 μM 2‐mercaptoethanol and 30 ng/ml IL‐3 (PeproTech). Cells were passaged twice per week and used between passage 12 and 16. 4 independent BMMC cultures were either stimulated with 10 ng/ml IL-33 for 48 hours or left unstimulated, followed by single shot LC-MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation   Following treatments, cells were centrifuged at 340 g for 5 minutes at 40oC, resuspended in Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS; Gibco) and transferred to 2 ml Protein Lo-Bind microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf). Cells were then washed twice in HBSS by pelleting with centrifugation at 9000 g, 4oC for 20 seconds. Cells were resuspended in 400 µl lysis buffer (4% SDS, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5) and incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature with shaking. Samples were then heated for 5 minutes at 95oC with shaking on a ThermoMixer, followed by sonication with a BioRuptor (15 cycles of 30 seconds on/30 seconds off). Protein concentration was determined using the EZQ Protein Quantitation Kit (Invitrogen) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were alkylated with 20 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark at room temperature for 1 h. 200 µg SP3 beads were added to each sample, followed by 550 µl of 90% acetonitrile : 10% formic acid and samples incubation for 8 minutes at room temperature with shaking. Samples were placed on a magnetic rack and incubated for 2 minutes to facilitate binding of the beads. Supernatant was removed, and beads were washed twice in 70% EtOH, and once in 100% acetonitrile. Beads were then air dried for 15 seconds before being resuspended in 65 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Lys-C was added to samples at a 1:100 ratio, and samples were incubated overnight at 37oC with gentle agitation. Trypsin was then added to samples at a 1:100 ratio, and samples were incubated overnight at 37oC with gentle agitation. Beads were then resuspended in 1425 µl acetonitrile and incubated for 8 minutes at room temperature with shaking. Samples were then placed on a magnetic rack and incubated for 2 minutes. Supernatant was removed, beads were washed once in 500 µl acetonitrile and beads were air dried for 15 seconds. 189 µl 2% DMSO was added to each sample, followed by sonication with a BioRuptor (5 cycles of 30 s on/30 s off). Samples were centrifuged, placed on a magnetic rack and incubated for 2 minutes before transferring the supernatant containing peptides to fresh 1.5 ml Protein Lo-Bind microcentrifuge tubes. Samples were then clarified by centrifugation at 20000 g for 10 minutes, followed by addition of formic acid to give a final concentration of 5% formic acid. Peptide quantitation was performed using a CBQCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   Single shot LC-MS analysis  Analysis of peptides was performed on a Q-exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The following LC buffers were used: buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and . Aliquots of 15 µl of each sample were loaded at 10 µl/minute onto a trap column (100 µm 2 cm, Acclaim PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in loading buffer (0.1% formic acid). The trap column was washed for 5 minutes at the same flow rate, then the trap column was switched in-line with a resolving C18 column (75 µm 50 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/minute with a linear gradient from 5% to 35% HPLC buffer (80 % acetonitrile and 0.08 % formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) in 120 minutes, and then to 98% HPLC buffer by 122 minutes. The column was then washed with 98% HPLC buffer for 15 minutes and re-equilibrated in 2% HPLC buffer for 17 minutes. The Q-exactive HFX was used in data-dependent mode. A scan cycle comprised MS1 scan (m/z range from 335 to 1800, with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms, a resolution of 60000 and AGC value of 3 x 10^6) followed by 40 sequential dependant MS2 scans (with an isolation window set to 1.4 Da, resolution at 7500, maximum ion injection time at 50 ms and AGC value of 1 x 10^5).

### Data Protocol
The data were processed, searched and quantified with the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.10.43). Proteins and peptides were identified using the Uniprot mouse reference proteome database release 2020 06 (SwissProt and Trembl) and the contaminants database integrated in MaxQuant using the andromeda search engine with the following search parameters: Trypsin and LysC were selected as the proteolytic enzymes with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages permitted, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and the following variable modifications were selected: oxidation of methionine, glutamine to pyroglutamate, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for positive identification of proteins and peptides with the help of the reversed mouse Uniprot database in a decoy approach. Estimates of copy numbers and cellular protein concentration were calculated using the histone ruler method.

### Publication Abstract
Granzymes comprise a group of proteases involved in the killing of infected or cancerous cells by the immune system. Although best studied in T cells and natural killer (NK) cells, they are also expressed in some innate immune cells. Granzymes B and C are encoded in the mouse chymase locus that also encodes a number of mast cell-specific proteases. In line with this, mast cells can express granzyme B, although how this is regulated and their ability to express other granzymes is less well studied. We therefore examined how IL-33, a cytokine able to activate mast cells but not induce degranulation, regulated granzyme B and C levels in mast cells. Granzyme C, but not B, mRNA was strongly up-regulated in bone marrow-derived mast cells following IL-33 stimulation and there was a corresponding increase in granzyme C protein. These increases in both granzyme C mRNA and protein were blocked by a combination of the p38&#x3b1;/&#x3b2; MAPK inhibitor VX745 and the MEK1/2 inhibitor PD184352, which blocks the activation of ERK1/2. ERK1/2 and p38&#x3b1; activate the downstream kinases, mitogen and stress-activated kinases (MSK) 1 and 2, and IL-33 stimulated the phosphorylation of MSK1 and its substrate CREB in an ERK1/2 and p38-dependent manner. The promoter for granzyme C contains a potential CREB-binding site. Bone marrow-derived mast cells from either MSK1/2 double knockout or CREB Ser133Ala knockin mice were unable to up-regulate granzyme C. Together these results indicate that IL-33-induced granzyme C expression in mast cells is regulated by an MSK1/2-CREB-dependent pathway.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mouse, Granulocyte, Mast cell, Il-33

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Iain Phair

### Lab Head
Dr J. Simon C. Arthur
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, UK


