### Accession
PXD013520

### Title
IL-7 priming in human primary T cells

### Description
Characterize the proteome and phosphoproteome changes in primary human T cells upon IL-7 priming

### Sample Protocol
Both the total and the phosphoproteome samples of T cells primed or not with IL-7 for 24h were analysed in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer, coupled to a nanoLC. Samples were trapped on a 100 μm × 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 trapping column in μL-pickup injection mode at 15 μL/min flow rate for 10 minutes. Samples were then loaded on a Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography, 75 μm × 50 cm nanoViper C18 3 μm 100 column at 50 oC retrofitted to an EASY-Spray source with a flow rate of 300 nL/min (buffer A, HPLC H2O, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B, 100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid; 0–15 min: at 2% buffer B, 15–215 min: linear gradient 2% to 40% buffer B, 215-215.3 min: 40% to 90% buffer B, 215.3-225 min: at 90% buffer B, 225-225.3 min: 90% to 2% buffer B, 225.3-240 min: at 2% buffer B). Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode applying data acquisition using synchronous precursor selection MS3 (SPS-MS3) acquisition mode (McAlister, Nusinow et al. 2014). Each MS scan in the Orbitrap analyzer (mass range = m/z 380 –1500, resolution = 120,000) The most intense ions above a threshold of 2 x 104 were selected for collision induced dissociation (CID)-MS2 fragmentation, with an AGC target and maximum accumulation time of 1 x 104 and 50 ms. Mass filtering was performed by the quadrupole with 0.7 m/z transmission window, followed by CID fragmentation in the linear ion trap with 35% normalized collision energy. SPS was applied to co-select 10 fragment ions for HCD-MS3 analysis. SPS ions were all selected within the 400–1,200 m/z range, and were set to preclude selection of the precursor ion and TMT ion series. AGC targets and maximum accumulation times were set to 1 x 105 and 120 ms. Co-selected precursors for SPS-MS3 underwent HCD fragmentation with 65% normalized collision energy, and were analysed in the Orbitrap with nominal resolution of 5 x 104. The number of SPS-MS3 spectra acquired between full scans was restricted to a duty cycle of 3 s. Selected fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 70 s.  The analysis of SPPLATed samples was also performed in the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled to a nanoLC Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC. Samples were trapped on a 100 μm × 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 trapping column. Samples were then loaded on a Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography, 75 μm × 50 cm nanoViper C18 3 μm 100 column (Acclaim, PepMap) at 50 oC retrofitted to an EASY-Spray source with a flow rate of 300 nL/min (buffer A, HPLC H2O, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B, 100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid; 0–15 min: at 2% buffer B, 15–215 min: linear gradient 2% to 40% buffer B, 215-215.3 min: 40% to 90% buffer B, 215.3-225 min: at 90% buffer B, 225-225.3 min: 90% to 2% buffer B, 225.3-240 min: at 2% buffer B). Mass spectra were acquired using CHarge Ordered Parallel Ion aNalysis (CHOPIN) acquisition in positive ion mode as previously reported (Davis, Charles et al. 2017). MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 between 400 and 1500 m/z and an AGC target of 4 x 105. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap (rapid scan mode) after collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation at a collision energy of 35% and an AGC target of 4 x 103 for up to 250 ms, employing a maximal duty cycle of 3 s, prioritizing the most intense ions and injecting ions for all available parallelizable time. Selected precursor masses were excluded for 60 s. For precursor selection, we prioritized the least abundant signals. Doubly charged ions were scheduled for CID/ion trap analysis with the same parameters applied as above. Charge states 3–7 with precursor intensity >500 000, however, were scheduled for analysis by a fast HCD/Orbitrap scan of maximal 40 ms (15 000 resolution). The remaining charge-state 3–7 ions with intensity <500 000 were scheduled for analysis by CID/ion trap, as described above.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were viewed in Xcalibur v.2.1 (Thermo Scientific), and data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer v.2.1 (Thermo Scientific). The Raw files were submitted to a database search using Proteome Discoverer with SequestHF algorithm against the Homo sapiens database, downloaded in January 2016 containing human protein sequences from UniProt/Swiss-Prot and UniProt/ TrEMBL. Common contaminant proteins (several types of human keratins, BSA, and porcine trypsin) were also added to the database, and all contaminant proteins identified were removed from the result lists prior to statistical analysis. The spectra identification were performed with the following parameters: MS accuracy, 10 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 0.5 Da; up to two missed cleavage sites allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT6plex tagging of lysine and peptide N-terminus as a fixed modification; and oxidation of methionine and deamidated asparagine and glutamine as variable modifications. For phospho-enriched fractions, phosphorylation of S, T, and Y residues were also added as variable modifications. For SPPLATed samples, argine-6 and lysine-6 were also set as variable modification and no TMT tagging or phosphorylations were searched.  Percolator node was used for false discovery rate estimation and only peptide identifications of high confidence (FDR<1%) were accepted. A minimum of two high confidence peptides per protein was accepted for identification using Proteome Discoverer. The identification lists repeated protein groups were removed and only Master Proteins where considered for biological interpretation of the results. For phosphopeptide identifications, only high confidence phosphopeptides with phosphorylation site probability scores (pRS) above 75% were accepted. Peptide lists filtered for abovementioned stringencies were exported and further processed using RStudio software. Due to low amount in SPPLATed samples, Master Proteins with one high confidence and unique peptide identifications where considered. Also only proteins identified with higher abundance in “light” sample than in “heavy” SILAC Jurkat spike-in control were accepted.   Statistical/bioinformatic data analysis of TMT-labelled samples Statistical analysis of TMT labelled samples was performed with RStudio software. The data from T cells primed or not with IL-7 for 24 h consisted of a single multiplex comprised of five biological replicates of the two conditions. PSMs from peptides or phosphopeptides containing any missing condition were removed. The intensity values of each sample and each TMT label were log2-transformed and median-normalized. Multiple measurements of the same peptide were merged using the RRollup function of the DanteR package (Taverner, Karpievitch et al. 2012); we allowed only one peptide measurement and chose the “mean” instead of the “median” option. The values of non-phosphorylated peptides were converted into protein quantitation (Rrollup, “mean”), requiring a minimum of one peptide per protein for total proteome quantitation. Phosphorylated peptides were filtered for pRS>75% and the correspondent phospho-sites were assigned to the due residue in the sequence before all PSMs from same sequences and high-confidence phosphorylation site were averaged using the same Rrollup function. All proteins and phosphorylations that were not detected in at least two biological replicates were then removed prior to statistical analysis.  Statistically significant regulations require more sophisticated tools than just application of the standard t test. Limma (Smyth 2005) and rank products (Breitling, Armengaud et al. 2004) provide sufficient power to deal with low replicate numbers and additional missing values (Schwammle, Leon et al. 2013). We therefore carried out both statistical tests on all phosphopeptides and protein ratios against condition 1 (non-stimulated sample) and corrected them for multiple testing (Storey 2002). All phosphopeptides/proteins with smaller q-values (from both tests) below 0.05 (5% false discovery rate) against either condition 1 (NS) were considered regulated.  For SPPLATed samples, only Master Proteins, which were detected/identified from/with the “light” SILAC label and Light/Heavy SILAC ratio above 1 were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
The ability of the cellular immune system to discriminate self from foreign antigens depends on the appropriate calibration of the T cell receptor (TCR) signalling threshold. The lymphocyte homeostatic cytokine interleukin 7 (IL-7) is known to affect TCR thresholding, but the molecular mechanism is not fully elucidated. A better understanding of this process is highly relevant in the context of autoimmune disease therapy and cancer immunotherapy. We sought to characterise the early signalling events attributable to IL-7 priming; in particular, the altered phosphorylation of signal transduction proteins and their molecular localisation to the TCR. By integrating high-resolution proximity- phospho-proteomic and imaging approaches using primary T cells, rather than engineered cell lines or an in vitro expanded T cell population, we uncovered transduction events previously not linked to IL-7. We show that IL-7 leads to dephosphorylation of cytohesin interacting protein (CYTIP) at a hitherto undescribed phosphorylation site (pThr280) and alters the co-localisation of cytohesin-1 with the TCR and LFA-1 integrin. These results show that IL-7, acting via CYTIP and cytohesin-1, may impact TCR activation thresholds by enhancing the co-clustering of TCR and LFA-1 integrin.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteome, T cells, Il-7

### Affiliations
Respiratory, Inflamatory and Autoimmunity, MedImmune, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Rayner Queiroz

### Lab Head
Dr Donna Finch
Respiratory, Inflamatory and Autoimmunity, MedImmune, UK


