### Accession
PXD031256

### Title
Characterisation of a highly diverged putative mitochondrial ATP synthase peripheral stalk subunit b in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
The mitochondrial F1Fo ATP synthase of Trypanosoma brucei has been studied in detail. Whereas its F1 moiety is relatively highly conserved in structure and composition, the same is not the case for the Fo part and the peripheral stalk. A core subunit of the latter, the normally conserved subunit b, could not be identified in trypanosomes suggesting that it might be absent. Here we have identified a 17 kDa mitochondrial protein of the inner membrane that is essential for normal growth, efficient oxidative phosphorylation and membrane potential maintenance. Pulldown experiments and native PAGE analysis indicate that the protein is associated with the F1Fo ATP synthase. Its knockdown reduces the levels of Fo subunits, but not those of F1, and disturbs the cell cycle. HHpred analysis showed that the protein has structural similarities to subunit b of other species, indicating that the Fo part of the trypanosomal ATP synthase does contain a highly diverged subunit b. Thus, the Fo part of the trypanosomal ATPase synthase may be more widely conserved than initially thought.

### Sample Protocol
LC/MS sample preparation: Cells expressing myc-tagged Tb927.8.3070 were grown in SDM-80 containing 5.55 mM glucose, either light (12C6/14Nχ) or heavy (13C6/15Nχ) isotopes of arginine (1.1 mM) and lysine (0.4 mM) (Euroisotop), and 10% dialysed FCS (BioConcept, Switzerland). To guarantee complete labelling of all proteins with heavy amino acids, the cells were cultured in SILAC medium for 6–10 doubling times.  For Tb927.8.3070 SILAC-IP experiments, cells were induced with tetracycline for 1 day. 10E8 uninduced and 10E8 induced cells, differentially labeled with light and heavy SILAC amino acids, were harvested, mixed and subjected to co-immuniprecipitation according to the following protocol: cells were solubilised for 15 min on ice in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0.1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 25 mM KCl containing 1% (w/v) digitonin and 1x Protease Inhibitor mix (Roche, EDTA-free). After centrifugation (15 min, 20,000 g, 4°C), the lysate was transferred to 50 μl of bead slurry, which had been previously equilibrated with lysis buffer. The bead slurries used were c-myc-conjugated (EZview red rabbit anti-c-myc affinity gel, Sigma). Following incubation at 4°C for 2 h, the supernatant containing the unbound proteins was removed, the bead slurry was washed three times with lysis buffer and the bound proteins were eluted by boiling the resin for 10 min in 2% SDS/60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8. Pull down of the bait was confirmed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting. Eluates were analyzed by LC-MS. Tb927.8.3070 SILAC-IP experiments were performed in three biological replicates including a label-switch. LC/MS analysis: Eluates of Tb927.8.3070 SILAC-IP experiments were loaded onto an SDS gel and electrophoresis was performed until the proteins had migrated into the gel for approximately 1 cm. Proteins were visualised using colloidal Coomassie Blue, protein-containing parts of the gel were excised en bloc and cut into smaller cubes, followed by reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues and tryptic in-gel digestion as described before by Peikert et al. 2017 (Nature Communications 10.1038/ncomms15272). LC-MS analyses of tryptic peptide mixtures were performed using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Peptides were loaded and concentrated on nanoEase™ M/Z Symmetry C18 precolumns (20 mm x 0.18 mm; flow rate, 10 µl/min; Waters) and separated using a nanoEase™ M/Z HSS C18 T3 analytical column (250 mm x 75 µm; particle size, 1.8 µm; packing density, 100 Å; flowrate, 300 nl/min; Waters). A binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 30% acetonitrile/50% methanol/0.1% formic acid (solvent B) was used. Peptides were loaded and concentrated for 5 min at 7% B, followed by peptide elution applying the following gradient: 7   50% B in 105 min, 50   95% B in 45 min and 5 min at 95% B. Mass spectrometric data were acquired in data-dependent mode applying the following parameters: mass range of m/z 370 to 1,700, resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400, target value of 1 x 106 ions, and maximum injection time of 200 ms for MS survey scans. A TOP25 method was used for low energy collision-induced dissociation of multiply charged peptides in the linear ion trap at a normalized collision energy of 35%, an activation q of 0.25, an activation time of 10 ms, a target value of 5,000 ions, a maximum injection time of 150 ms, and a dynamic exclusion time of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: MaxQuant/Andromeda (version 1.6.5.0) was used for protein identification and SILAC-based relative quantification. Database searches were performed using the proteome of T. brucei TREU927 downloaded from the TriTryp database (https://tritrypdb.org; version 8.1, containing 11,067 entries) and MaxQuant default settings with the exception that one unique peptide was sufficient for protein identification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were considered as variable modifications, and Arg10 and Lys8 were set as heavy labels. The options 'requantify' and 'match between runs' were enabled. SILAC ratios were calculated based on unique peptides and at least one ratio count.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial F<sub>1</sub>F<sub>o</sub> ATP synthase of the parasite Trypanosoma brucei has been previously studied in detail. This unusual enzyme switches direction in functionality during the life cycle of the parasite, acting as an ATP synthase in the insect stages, and as an ATPase to generate mitochondrial membrane potential in the mammalian bloodstream stages. Whereas the trypanosome F<sub>1</sub> moiety is relatively highly conserved in structure and composition, the F<sub>o</sub> subcomplex and the peripheral stalk have been shown to be more variable. Interestingly, a core subunit of the latter, the normally conserved subunit b, has been resistant to identification by sequence alignment or biochemical methods. Here, we identified a 17&#xa0;kDa mitochondrial protein of the inner membrane, Tb927.8.3070, that is essential for normal growth, efficient oxidative phosphorylation, and membrane potential maintenance. Pull-down experiments and native PAGE analysis indicated that the protein is both associated with the F<sub>1</sub>F<sub>o</sub> ATP synthase and integral to its assembly. In addition, its knockdown reduced the levels of F<sub>o</sub> subunits, but not those of F<sub>1</sub>, and disturbed the cell cycle. Finally, analysis of structural homology using the HHpred algorithm showed that this protein has structural similarities to F<sub>o</sub> subunit b of other species, indicating that this subunit may be a highly diverged form of the elusive subunit b.

### Keywords
Co-immunoprecipitation, Quantitative proteomics, Silac, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

University of Freiburg, Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
University of Freiburg, Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics


