### Accession
PXD025362

### Title
To the islands their own: Venomics of the enigmatic Andaman cobra (N. sagittifera) and the preclinical failure of Indian antivenoms in Andaman and Nicobar Islands

### Description
In this study, we unveil the venom composition, biochemistry, pharmacological activity, and potency of the Andaman cobra (N. sagittifera).

### Sample Protocol
Naja naja and Naja sagittifera venom HPLC fractions (40 µg each) were dissolved in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to mass spectrometric analyses. A final concentration of 10 mM was achieved by adding 100 mM of DTT (dithiothreitol), and the mixture was incubated at 37o C for 30 mins. Following the incubation period, iodoacetamide (100 mM) was added to the solution, and the mixture was subjected to another round of incubation in the dark (37o C for 30 minutes). The pH of the solution was adjusted to 8 using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by overnight digestion of the sample with trypsin (0.2 µg/ml; 1:50) at 37o C. The reaction was stopped using 0.1% formic acid, and the sample was desalted with ZipTip containing acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were then separated using Thermo EASY nLC 1200 series system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) with a 50 cm x 75 µm, C18 (3 µm, 100 Å) nano-LC column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Here, the mobile phase was constituted by 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water (buffer A) and elution buffer of 0.1% formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile (buffer B). The concentration of the buffer was altered as follows: 10-45% over 98 min, 45-95% over 4 min and 95% over 18 min.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were acquired with an online Thermo Orbitrap FusionTM Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) that was coupled with the Thermo EASY nLC 1200 series system. MS scans were performed in an Orbitrap detector using the following parameters: positive ion polarity, resolution 120000, scan range (m/z) of 375-1700, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The ion trap detector was used for MS/MS scans with successive parameters: high collision energy fragmentation (30%), scan range (m/z) of 100-2000 and maximum injection time of 35 ms. PEAKS Studio X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., ON, Canada) was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the UniProt/SwissProt and NCBI-NR Serpentes databases (taxid: 8570; November 2020) with peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, and False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.1. Hits with at least one unique matching peptide were considered for downstream analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The Andaman and Nicobar Islands are an abode to a diversity of flora and fauna, including the many endemic species of snakes, such as the elusive Andaman cobra (<i>Naja sagittifera</i>). However, the ecology and evolution of venomous snakes inhabiting these islands have remained entirely uninvestigated. This study aims to bridge this knowledge gap by investigating the evolutionary history of <i>N. sagittifera</i> and its venom proteomic, biochemical and toxicity profile. Phylogenetic reconstructions confirmed the close relationship between <i>N. sagittifera</i> and the Southeast Asian monocellate cobra (<i>N. kaouthia</i>). Overlooking this evolutionary history, a polyvalent antivenom manufactured using the venom of the spectacled cobra (<i>N. naja</i>) from mainland India is used for treating <i>N. sagittifera</i> envenomations. Comparative evaluation of venoms of these congeners revealed significant differences in their composition, functions and potencies. Given the close phylogenetic relatedness between <i>N. sagittifera</i> and <i>N. kaouthia</i>, we further assessed the cross-neutralising efficacy of Thai monovalent <i>N. kaouthia</i> antivenom against <i>N. sagittifera</i> venoms. Our findings revealed the inadequate preclinical performance of the Indian polyvalent and Thai monovalent antivenoms in neutralising <i>N. sagittifera</i> venoms. Moreover, the poor efficacy of the polyvalent antivenom against <i>N. naja</i> venom from southern India further revealed the critical need to manufacture region-specific Indian antivenoms.

### Keywords
Naja sagittifera, Proteomics, Naja naja, Indian antivenoms

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, Karnataka, India.
Assistant Professor, Evolutionary Venomics Lab, Center for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Kartik Sunagar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Kartik Sunagar
Assistant Professor, Evolutionary Venomics Lab, Center for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India


