### Accession
PXD035658

### Title
Prioritization of antimicrobial targets by CRISPR-based oligo recombineering

### Description
Nucleophilic amino acids are important in covalent drug development yet underutilized as antimicrobial targets. Over recent years, several chemoproteomic technologies have been developed to mine chemically-accessible residues via their intrinsic reactivity toward electrophilic probes. However, these approaches cannot discern which reactive sites contribute to protein function and should therefore be prioritized for drug discovery. To address this, we have developed a CRISPR-based Oligo Recombineering (CORe) platform to systematically prioritize reactive amino acids according to their contribution to protein function. Our approach directly couples protein sequence and function with biological fitness. Here, we profile the reactivity of >1,000 cysteines on ~700 proteins in the eukaryotic pathogen Toxoplasma gondii and prioritize functional sites using CORe. We competitively compared the fitness effect of 370 codon switches at 74 cysteines and identify functional sites in a diverse range of proteins. In our proof of concept, CORe performed >800 times faster than a standard genetic workflow. Reactive cysteines decorating the ribosome were found to be critical for parasite growth, with subsequent target-based screening validating the apicomplexan translation machinery as a target for covalent ligand development. CORe is system-agnostic, and supports expedient identification, functional prioritization, and rational targeting of reactive sites in a wide range of organisms and diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome samples diluted to 2 mg/ml were treated with 10 or 100 µM IA-alkyne (from 1 mM and 10 mM stocks in DMSO, respectively) and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with rotation. The labelled proteins were then subject to click chemistry by addition of 100 µM Azo-L or Azo-H, 1 mM TCEP, 100 µM TBTA, and 1 mM CuSO4. Click reactions were incubated for 1 hour at room temperature with shaking. The Azo-L/H-labelled protein samples were then precipitated by adding trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to 10% (v/v) concentration. After overnight storage at -80°C, precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (15,000 rpm, 10 min), washed 3× with chilled MeOH and resolubilized in 1.2% SDS in PBS by gentle sonication and heating (80°C, 10 min).Labelled proteome samples were diluted to 0.2% SDS with PBS. The resulting samples were then added to 100 µl of streptavidin beaded agarose resin and incubated overnight at 4°C followed by a further 2 hours at room temperature. Protein-bound beads were washed with 1× 0.2% SDS in PBS, 3× PBS and 3× H2O before resuspending in 6 M urea in PBS +10 mM DTT and incubating at 65°C for 15 min. Reduced samples were then alkylated by adding iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubating for 30 min at 37°C with rotation. Samples were diluted 3-fold with PBS and centrifuged (1400 × g, 2 min) to pellet the beads. The beads were resuspended in a mixture of 200 µl of 2 M urea in PBS, 1 mM CaCl2 and 2 µg trypsin and incubated overnight at 37°C. The beads were separated from the digest by centrifugation and washed 3× with PBS and 3× H2O. Azo-labelled peptides were then cleaved by adding 50 mM sodium hydrosulfite and rotating at room temperature for 1 hour. Eluted peptides were then collected from the supernatant, and Na2S2O4 cleavage was repeated twice more to fractionate the sample. Between each cleavage, the beads were washed with 2× H2O and combined with the previous elution. Formic acid was added to the sample to 20% (v/v) concentration before storing at -20°C until mass spectrometry analysis. LC/LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Agilent 1200 Series HPLC. Azo digests were pressure loaded onto 250 µm fused silica desalting columns (Agilent) packed with 4 cm Aqua C18 reverse phase resin. Peptides were then eluted onto a biphasic column consisting of 100 µm fused silica packed with 10 cm C18 and 4 cm PartiSphere SCX resin following a five-step multidimensional LC/LC-MS/MS protocol (MudPIT). Each step used a salt push (0%, 50%, 80%, 100%, 100%) followed by an elution gradient of 5-100% Buffer B in Buffer A (Buffer A: 95% H2O, 5% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 20% H2O, 80% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Eluted peptides were injected into the mass spectrometer by electrospray ionization (spray voltage set at 2.75 kV). For every MS1 survey scan (400-1800 m/z), 8 data-dependent scans were run for the nth most intense ions with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
The generated tandem MS data were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm16 against the T. gondii database (GT1 proteome), ToxoDB (http://toxodb.org/). A static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was specified to account for alkylation with iodoacetamide. Variable modifications of +456.2849 and +462.2987 were further assigned on cysteine to account for the probe modification with the isotopically light (Azo-L) and heavy (Azo-H) variant of the IA-alkyne-Azo adduct, respectively. Output files from SEQUEST were filtered using DTASelect 2.0. Quantification of isotopic light:heavy ratios was performed using the CIMAGE quantification package. Overlapping tryptic peptides containing the same labelled cysteine (but different charge states or tryptic termini) were grouped and the median reported as the final light:heavy ratio (R). R values were averaged across biological replicates and peptides with relative standard deviations of the ≥ 50% R value were removed. Functional annotation of reactive cysteine proteins was carried out using BLASTP, Gene Ontology (GO) and InterPro searches within Blast2GO 5 PRO software. Consensus protein sequences were BLASTP searched against the non-redundant (nr) NCBI protein database using an E-value cut-off of 10-6. GO terms (molecular function, biological process and subcellular localization) were then mapped from the top 20 hits and merged with annotations derived from the InterPro database (www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro). Assignments were further optimized using Annex augmentation19. Enrichment of annotations was assessed using a Fisher’s exact test against the T. gondii proteome (strain GT1; UniProt Taxonomy ID 507601) at < 0.05 FDR. For conservation analyses of reactive cysteines, orthologues of the associated protein were identified from orthologue groups classified on OrthoMC20. Conservation of a given residue was assessed following BLASTP alignment of the orthologous protein sequence against the T. gondii template sequence. Scores were assigned to each alignment based on the presence or absence of a matched cysteine; a score of 3 was assigned to conserved cysteines, 1 for no conservation, and 0 if no protein was identified in the orthologue group for a given species. Conservation scores were determined for each cysteine by summing of the scores across the analyzed species.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleophilic amino acids are important in covalent drug development yet underutilized as anti-microbial targets. Chemoproteomic technologies have been developed to mine chemically accessible residues via their intrinsic reactivity towards electrophilic probes but cannot discern which chemically reactive sites contribute to protein function and should therefore be prioritized for drug discovery. To address this, we have developed a CRISPR-based oligo recombineering (CORe) platform to support the rapid identification, functional prioritization and rational targeting of chemically reactive sites in haploid systems. Our approach couples protein sequence and function with biological fitness of live cells. Here we profile the electrophile sensitivity of proteinogenic cysteines in the eukaryotic pathogen Toxoplasma gondii and prioritize functional sites using CORe. Electrophile-sensitive cysteines decorating the ribosome were found to be critical for parasite growth, with target-based screening identifying a parasite-selective anti-malarial lead molecule and validating the apicomplexan translation machinery as a target for ongoing covalent ligand development.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Proteomics, Oligo recombineering

### Affiliations
Weerpana Lab Boston College Chemistry Department Chestnut Hill, MA, USA
Boston College

### Submitter
Julia Falco

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Weerpana Lab Boston College Chemistry Department Chestnut Hill, MA, USA


