### Accession
PXD008450

### Title
Tissue Microfibril Comparison -  Structural and compositional diversity of fibrillin microfibrils in human tissues

### Description
Fibrillin microfibrils are large supramolecular ECM assemblies which play different functional roles in different tissues. We aim to compare the ultrastructure and biological composition of fibrillin microfibrils purified from human eye, skin and cultured dermal fibroblasts. This will allow us to understand whether these their structure and compositions have evolved to suit the functions they play in different tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Fibrillin microfibrils were isolated and purified from human eye, skin and cultured dermal fibroblasts (N=3) using size exclusion chromatography, dialysed in ultrapure water and freeze dried. Half of the samples were were denatured in 8M urea, reduced in 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at room temperature and alkylated using 50mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 30 minutes at room temperature, in darkness. After dilution to 2M urea elastase was added at a 2:1 enzyme to substrate ratio. This was incubated at 37°C for 4 hours. Elastase activity was then quenched with 5% formic acid in ultrapure water. The other half of the freeze-dried samples were re-suspended in ultrapure water and directly digested for 75 minutes using a SMART Digest™ kit (Thermo Scientific, as per the manufacturer’s instructions. All samples were then desalted using POROS R3 (Life Technologies; Paisley, UK) beads and vacuum dried prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were extracted using extract_msn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) correlated against the Uniprot human database using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science; London, UK). Search parameters were: species - Homo sapiens; enzyme – trypsin for SMART Digested samples and non-specific for elastase digested samples; max missed cleavages – 1; fixed modifications - carbamidomethyl, mass – 57.02, AA – C; variable modification – oxidation, mass – 15.99, AA – M; peptide tolerance - 10 ppm (monoisotopic); fragment tolerance - 0.6 Da (monoisotopic); searched database: the SwissProt_2016_04 database (152,544 protein entries). Data generated was validated using Scaffold (Proteome Software; Portland, OR, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Elastic fibers comprising fibrillin microfibrils and elastin are present in many tissues, including the skin, lungs, and arteries, where they confer elasticity and resilience. Although fibrillin microfibrils play distinct and tissue-specific functional roles, it is unclear whether their ultrastructure and composition differ between elastin-rich (skin) and elastin-poor (ciliary body and zonule) organs or after <i>in vitro</i> synthesis by cultured cells. Here, we used atomic force microscopy, which revealed that the bead morphology of fibrillin microfibrils isolated from the human eye differs from those isolated from the skin. Using newly developed pre-MS preparation methods and LC-MS/MS, we detected tissue-specific regions of the fibrillin-1 primary structure that were differentially susceptible to proteolytic extraction. Comparing tissue- and culture-derived microfibrils, we found that dermis- and dermal fibroblast-derived fibrillin microfibrils differ in both bead morphology and periodicity and also exhibit regional differences in fibrillin-1 proteolytic susceptibility. In contrast, collagen VI microfibrils from the same dermal or fibroblast samples were invariant in ultrastructure (periodicity) and protease susceptibility. Finally, we observed that skin- and eye-derived microfibril suspensions were enriched in elastic fiber- and basement membrane-associated proteins, respectively. LC-MS/MS also identified proteins (such as calreticulin and protein-disulfide isomerase) that are potentially fundamental to fibrillin microfibril biology, regardless of their tissue source. Fibrillin microfibrils synthesized in cell culture lacked some of these key proteins (MFAP2 and -4 and fibrillin-2). These results showcase the structural diversity of these key extracellular matrix assemblies, which may relate to their distinct roles in the tissues where they reside.

### Keywords
Human, Collagen, Microfibril, Lc-ms/ms, Afm, Fibrillin

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

### Submitter
Alexander Eckersley

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Sherratt
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK


