### Accession
PXD018369

### Title
Exploration of human cerebrospinal fluid:  A large proteome dataset revealed by trapped ion mobility time-of-flight mass spectrometry

### Description
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a biofluid in direct contact with the brain and as such constitutes a sample of choice in the study of neurological disorders, including neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer or Parkinson. Human CSF has still been less studied using proteomic technologies compared to other biological fluids such as blood plasma or serum. In this work, a pool of “normal” human CSF samples was analysed using a shotgun proteomic workflow that combined removal of highly abundant proteins by immunoaffinity depletion and isoelectric focussing electrophoresis fractionation of tryptic peptides to alleviate the complexity of the biofluid. The resulting 24 fractions were analysed using liquid chromatography coupled to a high-resolution and high-accuracy timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry instrument. This state-of-the-art protocol allowed the identification of 3’174 proteins in CSF.

### Sample Protocol
96 aliquots of 400 μL of the commercial pooled CSF sample were evaporated with a vacuum centrifuge. The dried samples were diluted in depletion Buffer A containing 9,65 µg/mL of β-lactoglobulin from bovine milk.  Abundant CSF proteins were removed using MARS columns and HPLC systems equipped with an HTC-PAL (CTC Analytics AG) fraction collector. Buffer exchange was performed with Strata-X 33u polymeric reversed-phase (RP) (30 mg/1 mL) cartridges mounted on a 96-hole holder and a vacuum manifold. Samples were subsequently evaporated and subjected to reduction, alkylation, digestion, tandem mass tag (TMT) 6-plex labeling, pooling and purification using a 4-channels Microlab Star liquid handler workstation in a 96-well-plate format. All samples were resuspended in 200 μL of H2O/CH3CN/formic acid 96.9/3/0.1; 75 μL of the 16 resulting pooled samples were mixed together (to get enough material), dried, and dissolved in 3232.8 µL H2O with 345.6 µL glycerol 50% and 21.6 µL of IPG buffer pH 3-10. The sample was separated in 24 fractions with isoelectric focusing, using the 3100 OFFGEL Fractionator and Immobiline DryStryp pH 3-10 (24 cm). The 24 fractions were dissolved in 50 µl H2O/CH3CN/FA 96,9/3/0,1%. 3 µl of each of the fractions were then diluted with 7 µl of H2O/FA 99,9/0,1% and only 2 µl of each diluted fraction were injected for analysis on nanoElute LC system, coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Ion mobility resolved mass spectra, nested ion mobility vs m/z distributions, as well as summed fragment ion intensities were extracted from the raw data file with DataAnalysis 5.1. Protein identification was performed against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (2020/02 release) comprising 20’367 protein sequences in total. Mascot was used as search engine. Variable amino acid modifications were: oxidized methionine, deamidated asparagine/glutamine, and 6-plex TMT-labeled peptide amino terminus; 6-plex TMT-labeled lysine was set as fixed modifications as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of two potential missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment ion tolerance were set to 15 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. All Mascot result files were loaded into Scaffold Q+S 4.8.4 to be further searched with X! Tandem. The FDR in Scaffold was set up to 1% at protein and peptide level, with a one unique peptide criterion to report protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a biofluid in direct contact with the brain and as such constitutes a sample of choice in neurological disorder research, including neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer or Parkinson. Human CSF has still been less studied using proteomic technologies compared to other biological fluids such as blood plasma or serum. In this work, a pool of "normal" human CSF samples was analysed using a shotgun proteomic workflow that combined removal of highly abundant proteins by immunoaffinity depletion and isoelectric focussing fractionation of tryptic peptides to alleviate the complexity of the biofluid. The resulting 24 fractions were analysed using liquid chromatography coupled to a high-resolution and high-accuracy timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer. This state-of-the-art mass spectrometry-based proteomic workflow allowed the identification of 3'174 proteins in CSF. The dataset reported herein completes the pool of the most comprehensive human CSF proteomes obtained so far. An overview of the identified proteins is provided based on gene ontology annotation. Mass and tandem mass spectra are made available as a possible starting point for further studies exploring the human CSF proteome.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Cerebrospinal fluid, Large-scale proteome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research
Proteomics group leader, Nestlé Institute for Food Safety & Analytical Sciences, Nestlé Research, Switzerland

### Submitter
Charlotte Macron

### Lab Head
Dr Affolter Michael
Proteomics group leader, Nestlé Institute for Food Safety & Analytical Sciences, Nestlé Research, Switzerland


