### Accession
PXD029824

### Title
Proteomic consequences of TDA1 deficiency in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Hexokinase 2 (Hxk2) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a dual function hexokinase, acting as a glycolytic enzyme and being involved in the transcriptional regulation of glucose-repressible genes. Relief from glucose repression is accompanied by phosphorylation of Hxk2 at serine 15, which has been attributed to the protein kinase Tda1. To explore the role of Tda1 beyond Hxk2 phosphorylation, the proteomic consequences of TDA1 deficiency were investigated by difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) comparing a wild type and a Δtda1 deletion mutant. To additionally address possible consequences of glucose repression/derepression, both were grown at 2 % and 0.1 % (w/v) glucose. A total of eight protein spots exhibiting a minimum 2-fold enhanced or reduced fluorescence upon TDA1 deficiency was detected and identified by mass spectrometry. Among the spot identities are – besides the expected Hxk2 – two proteoforms of hexokinase 1 (Hxk1). Targeted proteomics analyses in conjunction with 2D-DIGE demonstrated that TDA1 is indispensable for Hxk2 and Hxk1 phosphorylation at serine 15. Thirty-six glucose-concentration-dependent protein spots were identified. A simple method to improve spot quantification, approximating spots as rotationally symmetric solids, is presented along with new data on the quantities of Hxk1 and Hxk2 and their serine 15 phosphorylated forms at high and low glucose growth conditions. The Δtda1 deletion mutant exhibited no altered growth under high or low glucose conditions or on alternative carbon sources. Also, invertase activity, serving as a reporter for glucose derepression, was not significantly altered. Instead, an involvement of Tda1 in oxidative stress response is suggested.

### Sample Protocol
Excised spot samples from preparative 2D-gels, loaded with 1 mg of internal standard and stained using colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250, were destained in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (1/1, v/v) buffer and further dehydrated by addition of MS-grade acetonitrile (100 %). Disulfide bonds were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 55°C and further alkylated in iodoacetamide 50 mM for 30 min at 25 °C in the dark. Samples were digested overnight with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) at 37 °C. After digestion the peptides were extracted from the gel spots by successive incubations in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate/ acetonitrile (1/1, v/v), 5 % formic acid and 5 % formic acid/acetonitrile (1/1, v/v) buffers. Samples were finally vacuum dried and dissolved in 30 μl of 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid and 1 % (v/v) acetonitrile in water. The LCMS setup consisted of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) configured in column switching mode. The mobile phases A and B consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in water and 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. The loading phase consisted of 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid and 1% acetonitrile in water. The LC system was operated with a Waters BEH C18 (1.7 μm particles) 100 μm×10 cm analytical column (Waters, Milford, USA). The loading column consisted of Waters Symmetry C18 5 μm 180×20 mm (Waters, Milford, USA). Samples were separated by a gradient ranging from 10 % (v/v) B to 40 % B in 7 min. Data acquisition was performed by a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) operated in parallel reaction monitoring mode (PRM). The peptide K13GSMADVPK21 and its serine 15 phosphorylated form were targeted as well as the oxidized methionine versions of these peptides. Targeted peptides were selected by the quadrupole with an isolation window of 1 m/z, fragmented in the HCD cell with a normalized collision energy of 25, and the fragments ions were analyzed by the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. 

### Data Protocol
The recorded data was integrated for each of the transitions. MS data were processed by Skyline software and the signal of all the relevant b and y fragment ions was extracted, including the neutral losses of the phosphorylation (H3PO4) and the methanesulfenic acid group (CH3SOH) related to the loss of the oxidation from methionine.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prm, Hexokinase

### Affiliations
LIH
Department of infection and immunity Luxembourg institute of health 1a Rue Thomas Edison 1445 Strassen Luxembourg

### Submitter
Gunnar Dittmar

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar Dittmar
Department of infection and immunity Luxembourg institute of health 1a Rue Thomas Edison 1445 Strassen Luxembourg


