### Accession
PXD017293

### Title
Eudiplozoon nipponicum secretome analysis

### Description
Ectoparasitic flatworms from the family Diplozoidae (Platyhelminthes: Monogenea) represent serious hematophagous fish pathogens. Information related to the biochemical and molecular nature of the physiological processes is rather sporadic, as well as the knowledge of the molecules produced by monogeneans and their role in host-parasite interaction. Therefore, we performed a complex secretomic analysis of monogenean representative Eudiplozoon nipponicum for the purpose to identify functionally important protein molecules involved in these host-parasite interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Excretion-secretion products (ESP) were collected from 100 adult washed worms incubated in 10 mM PBS, pH 7.2, for 3 hours at room temperature. ESP were purified and concentrated 20 times by centrifugation using an Amicon Ultra 3kDa column (Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA). Sample was digested with filter aided sample preparation (FASP) as described elswhere (Wisniewski et al 2009), using 1ug of trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega). Resulting peptides were used for LC-MS/MS analyses. For peptide separation prior the MS analysis was used UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation was achieved using capillary column filled with non-polar stationary phase (500 mm x 75 µm, C18 anchors, 3 µm particles, Acclaim PepMap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) during 135 min gradient elution (0.5 µl/min). Mobile phase consisted of polar (0.1% formic acid (FA)) and non-polar phase (80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0,1% FA). Eluted peptides were ionized with nanospray (PicoView 550 nano source) and analyzed in mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Elite, Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data were acquired in a data-dependent mode, selecting up to top 10 precursors based on precursor abundance in the survey scan (resolution 60,000 in range 350-2000 m/z). The maximum accumulation time for MS/MS spectra acquisition was 500 ms (resolution 15 000 at 400m/z) and the isolation window for fragmentation was set to 2 m/z. Resulting MS data were recalibrated (using 445.120028 signal from first 10min) and used for identification of proteins.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA; version 1.4) with in-house Mascot (Matrixscience, London, UK; version 2.5.1.3) search engine utilisation. Searches have been done against relevant databases: combined E. nipponicum transcriptome and carp (C. carpio) database (142,294 sequences, prepared 2017-01) and cRAP contaminants (110 sequences, prepared 2017-01). Modifications for all database searches were set as follows: oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), and acetylation (Protein N-term) as variable modifications, with carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was semitryptic with one allowed miscleavage. Percolator was used for post-processing of the search results. Peptides with q-value <0.05, rank 1 and with at least 6 amino acids were considered only.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptidase, Monogenea, Nipponicum, Eudiplozoon, Lc-msms, Parasite, Inhibitor, Orbitrap, Esp. secretome

### Affiliations
Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 753/5, 62500 Brno, Czech Republic National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 753/5, 62500 Brno, Czech Republic
Masaryk University

### Submitter
Pavel Roudnický

### Lab Head
Dr Zbyněk Zdráhal
Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 753/5, 62500 Brno, Czech Republic National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 753/5, 62500 Brno, Czech Republic


