### Accession
PXD022001

### Title
Proteome-Wide Analyses Reveal Diverse Functions of Acylation Proteins in Neurospora crassa

### Description
Quantitative acetyl-proteomics, a newly identified post-translational modification, is known to regulate transcriptional activity in different organisms. Neurospora crassa is a model ascomycete fungus maintained for biochemistry and molecular biology research; however, extensive studies of the functions of its acylation proteins have yet to be performed. In this study, using LC-MS/MS qualitative proteomics strategies, we identified 1909 modification sites on 940 proteins in N. crassa and analysed the functions of these proteins using GO enrichment, KEGG pathway, and subcellular location experiments. We classified the acetylation protein involvement in diverse pathways, and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis further demonstrated that these proteins participate in diverse biological processes. In summary, our study comprehensively profiles the crosstalk of modified sites, and PPI among these proteins may form a complex network with both similar and distinct regulatory mechanisms, providing improved understanding of their biological functions in N. crassa.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein extraction N. crassa samples were first ground by liquid nitrogen, and the powder was subsequently transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (including 1% Triton X-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 50 μM PR-619, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added, and the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4°C, 10 min, 5 000 g), the upper phenol phase was transferred into a new centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulphate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20°C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4°C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed once with ice-cold methanol, followed by ice-cold acetone three times. Protein was redissolved in 8 M urea, and protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2. Trypsin digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to a urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight followed by 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. 3. iTRAQ labelling  After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum dried. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol in the iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of iTRAQ reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. 4. HPLC fractionation and pan antibody based PTM enrichment Tryptic peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, peptides were combined into acetylation fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. To enrich for acetylation-modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were subsequently washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. Bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 5. LC-MS/MS analysis and database search Tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% over 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min, then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. Peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. A 2.0 kV electrospray voltage was applied. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for a full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using an NCE setting of 28, and fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan was used followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against acetylation databases concatenated with reverse decoy databases. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics methods The Gene Ontology (GO) annotated proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). First, identified protein IDs were converted to UniProt IDs and then mapped to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt GOA database, the InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) software was used to annotate the protein’s GO function based on the protein sequence alignment method. Proteins were then classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathways. First, we used KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. The annotation results were then mapped on the KEGG pathway database using the KEGG online service tool KEGG mapper. Acetylated proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment, and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test enrichment of the identified modified protein against all proteins of the species database. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. For enrichment pathway analysis, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to examine enrichment of the identified modified protein against all proteins of the species database. A pathway with a corrected p-value <0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. Subcellular localization We used a subcellular localization predication software (wolfpsort), an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. Special for protokaryon species, the subcellular localization prediction software CELLO was used. Protein-protein interaction network All acetylated proteins were searched against the STRING database version 10.5 for protein-protein interactions. We constructed a system-wide network of interactions between proteins found in the global proteome and acetylation proteome of N. crassa via prediction of functional interactions between the identified proteins using the STRING database [42, 43]. The STRING database integrates and reassesses available experimental data from other curated databases, as well as information on structure, domain, function and similarity of proteins to predict functional protein–protein interactions or associations. While predicting interactions between N. crassa proteins using STRING database, we set the confidence score to be greater than 0.9 and the maximum of additional interactions to 10. Cytoscape was used for visualization of the PPI network [44]. Supplementary Datasheet S1 lists the modified proteins used to construct the PPI networks.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative acetyl-proteomics, a newly identified post-translational modification, is known to regulate transcriptional activity in different organisms. Neurospora crassa is a model ascomycete fungus maintained for biochemistry and molecular biology research; however, extensive studies of the functions of its acylation proteins have yet to be performed. In this study, using LC-MS/MS qualitative proteomics strategies, we identified 1909 modification sites on 940 proteins in N. crassa and analysed the functions of these proteins using GO enrichment, KEGG pathway, and subcellular location experiments. We classified the acetylation protein involvement in diverse pathways, and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis further demonstrated that these proteins participate in diverse biological processes. In summary, our study comprehensively profiles the crosstalk of modified sites, and PPI among these proteins may form a complex network with both similar and distinct regulatory mechanisms, providing improved understanding of their biological functions in N. crassa.

### Keywords
Neurospora crassa; quantitative acetyl-proteomics; acetylated proteins; protein-protein interaction

### Affiliations
Yangzhou University

### Submitter
Zhen He

### Lab Head
Dr Zhen He
Yangzhou University


