### Accession
PXD004289

### Title
Site-specific glycosylation of donkey milk lactoferrin investigated  by High Resolution Mass Spectrometry

### Description
A comprehensive glycosylation profile of donkey lactoferrin, isolated by ion exchange chromatography from an individual milk sample, was obtained by means of chymotryptic digestion, TiO2 and HILIC enrichment, reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography, electrospray mass spectrometry,  and high collision dissociation fragmentation. The results obtained allowed the identification of 26 different glycan structures, including high mannose, complex and hybrid N-glycans, linked to the protein backbone via an amide bond to asparagine residues located at the positions 137, 281 and 476. Altogether, the N-glycan structures determined revealed that in donkey milk lactoferrin most of the N-glycans identified are neutral complex/hybrid. Actually, 10 neutral non-fucosylated complex/hybrid N-glycans and 4 neutral fucosylated complex/hybrid N-glycans were found. In addition, 2 high mannose N-glycans, 4 sialylated fucosylated complex/hybrid N-glycans and 6 sialylated non-fucosylatedN-glycans, one of which containing N-glycolylneuramin acid (Neu5Gc), were found. A comparison of the glycosylation profile of donkey milk lactoferrin with respect to that of human, bovine and goat milk lactoferrin is reported.

### Sample Protocol
In order to obtain low molecular mass glycopeptides, the chromatographic fraction corresponding to donkey LF was reduced, alkylated and digested using α-chymotrypsin. The enzyme was dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.3, added at a molar enzyme/substrate ratio 1:50 and the solution was incubated at 37°C overnight. The digestion reaction was stopped by cooling in liquid nitrogen. The digested mixture, containing non-glycosylated peptides and glycopeptides, was dried down and diluted in 100 μL of loading buffer (80% ACN, 5% TFA and 1 M glycolic acid) and added to 0.3 mg TiO2-beads. After stirring, TiO2-beads, which interact selectivity with sialylated glycopeptides (Larsen et al. 2007), were separated by centrifugation. The supernatant, containing only neutral glycopeptides and non-glycosylated peptides, was removed and stored. The beads were washed first with 50 μL of loading buffer, second with 50 μL of washing buffer 1 (80% ACN, 1% TFA), third with 50 μL of washing buffer 2 (10% ACN, 0.5% TFA). In each step the supernatant was stored. Then the beads with sialylated glycopeptides were dried and the sialylated glycopeptides eluted from the beads with 50 μL of elution buffer (60 μL ammonia solution (28%) in 940 μL H2O, pH 11.3). To enrich for neutral glycopeptides, a home-made column packed with polyhydroxyethyl A 3µm as stationary phase was used (Hagglund et al. 2004). In brief, a D10 pipette tip (Gilson) was plugged with a C18 empore disc in the bottom and the HILIC material in ACN was then applied on the top. The previous supernatant stored from TiO2 enrichment, containing only neutral glycopeptides and non-glycosylated peptides, was dried down, re-suspended in 20 µl of 80% ACN and 2% aqueous FA, loaded in the home-made column. The flow-through contained only non-glycosylated peptides, whereas the neutral glycopeptides, trapped on the column were eluted with 2% aqueous FA.  Mass spectrometry data were acquired on a Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Liquid chromatography was carried out using a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Five µL of the reconstituted samples in 0.1% FA were loaded onto a home-made μ-pre-column (100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µm ReproSil-Pur C18). After flowing the trapping column with solvent A (0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min for 5 min, the eluent was switched from the trapping column onto a home-made reversed phase C18 column (75µm x 17 cm, 3µm ReproSil-Pur C18). Peptides were separated by elution at a flow rate of 250 nL/min at room temperature with a linear gradient of solvent B (ACN + 0.1% FA) in A from 1% to 35% in 35 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by the Thermo Scientific Nanospray Ion Source using a source voltage of 2.5 kV and introduced into the mass spectrometer through a heated ion transfer tube (275 °C). The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode acquisition as follows: i) survey scans of peptide precursors from 700 to 2000 m/z, performed at 70K resolution (@ 200 m/z); ii) MS/MS analysis, in the m/z range of 200-2000, of the eight most intense ions. Automatic gain control (AGC) target for full MS acquisitions was set to 1×106 with a maximum ion injection time of 120 msec. Micro scans were set to 1 for both the MS and MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s. Peptides of two and higher charges were fragmented in the HCD collision cell using a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 20. Subsequent MS/MS were acquired using an AGC target value of 2×104, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a resolution of 17,5 K. MS data acquisition was performed using the Xcalibur v. 3.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptides were identified with MassAI, a freely available, in-house developed software tool (www.massai.dk). The software compares the fragmentation patterns of ms/ms scans (mgf format), against a protein database and a flexible library of glycans (Haiying et al. 2015). The N-glycans in the library were composed of hexoses (Hex), N-acetylhexoseamine (HexNAc), Fuc, Neu5Ac and Neu5Gc. The search was performed with the August 2015 version of MassAI, using default settings. This includes: chymotryptic digest with three missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification, oxidation of Met and deamidation of Gln as variable modifications, mass tolerance of 10 ppm at precursor level and 0.1Da tolerance at ms/ms peak level.

### Publication Abstract
A comprehensive monosaccharide composition of the N-glycans of donkey milk lactoferrin, isolated by ion exchange chromatography from an individual milk sample, was obtained by means of chymotryptic digestion, TiO<sub>2</sub> and HILIC enrichment, reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography, electrospray mass spectrometry, and high collision dissociation fragmentation. The results obtained allowed identifying 26 different glycan structures, including high mannose, complex and hybrid N-glycans, linked to the protein backbone via an amide bond to asparagine residues located at the positions 137, 281 and 476. Altogether, the N-glycan structures determined revealed that most of the N-glycans identified in donkey milk lactoferrin are neutral complex/hybrid. Indeed, 10 neutral non-fucosylated complex/hybrid N-glycans and 4 neutral fucosylated complex/hybrid N-glycans were found. In addition, two high mannose N-glycans, four sialylated fucosylated complex N-glycans and six sialylated non-fucosylated complex N-glycans, one of which containing N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc), were found. A comparison of the monosaccharide composition of the N-glycans of donkey milk lactoferrin with respect to that of human, bovine and goat milk lactoferrin is reported. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004289.

### Keywords
Lactoferrin glycosylation · donkey milk · n-glycan structures · tio2 and hilic enrichment · mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Catania
Organic Mass Spectrometry Laboratory,  Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania, Viale A. Doria 6, I-95125 Catania, Italy

### Submitter
Salvatore Foti

### Lab Head
Dr Salvatore Foti
Organic Mass Spectrometry Laboratory,  Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania, Viale A. Doria 6, I-95125 Catania, Italy


