### Accession
PXD009527

### Title
Malus x domestica chloroplast LC-MS/MS

### Description
Characterization of Malus x domestica chloroplast proteome

### Sample Protocol
Chloroplasts lysed with 4% SDS-0.1 M Tris buffer, FASP digestion, 120 min gradient nano-lc MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Peak processing Bruker Data Analysis 4.1 Database search Bruker Proteinscape 3.1 + Mascot 2.5

### Publication Abstract
Temperature stress is one of the most common external factors that plants have to adapt to. Accordingly, plants have developed several adaptation mechanisms to deal with temperature stress. Chloroplasts are one of the organelles that are responsible for the sensing of the temperature signal and triggering a response. Here, chloroplasts are purified from low temperature (4&#xb0; C), control (22&#xb0; C) and high temperature (30&#xb0; C) grown Malus x domestica microshoots. The purity of the chloroplast fractions is evaluated by marker proteins, as well as by using in silico subcellular localization predictions. The proteins are digested using filter-aided sample processing and analyzed using nano-LC MS/MS. 733 proteins are observed corresponding to published Malus x domestica gene models and 16 chloroplast genome -encoded proteins in the chloroplast preparates. In ANOVA, 56 proteins are found to be significantly differentially abundant (p &lt; 0.01) between chloroplasts isolated from plants grown in different conditions. The differentially abundant proteins are involved in protein digestion, cytoskeleton structure, cellular redox state and photosynthesis, or have protective functions. Additionally, a putative chloroplastic aquaporin is observed. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014212.

### Keywords
Malus x domestica, Chloroplast, Low temperature

### Affiliations
Institute of Horticulture, Lithuanian Research Centre for Agriculture and Forestry
Lithuanian center for agriculture and forestry

### Submitter
Perttu Haimi

### Lab Head
Dr Perttu Haimi
Lithuanian center for agriculture and forestry


