### Accession
PXD018122

### Title
TOMM70 ImportOmics analysis of human mitochondria

### Description
The overall aim of the project is the definition and characterization of the mitochondrial proteome of human cells, referred to as MitoCoP. To this end, we combined complementary strengths of subtractive proteomics, ImportOmics and subcellular protein profiling in a global multidimensional classification approach (see dataset 'Definition and characterization of the mitochondrial proteome of human cells (MitoCoP)'). TOMM70 ImportOmics experiments were performed to complement the data obtained in TOMM40 ImportOmics experiments.

### Sample Protocol
LC/MS sample preparation: HeLa cells carrying a doxycycline (DOX)-inducible shRNA directed against TOMM70 cloned into the pLV-THM vector (referred to as TOMM70-shRNA cells) (Kozjak-Pavlovic et al., EMBO Reports 8, 2007) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with GlutaMAX and containing 10% (v/v) FCS, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 0.22 mM L-uridine, minimum essential medium non-essential amino acids, 1 mg/l p-aminobenzoic acid and 0.2 mg/l D-(+) biotin. For induction of TOMM70 knockdown, cells were treated with DOX (dissolved in DMSO; 1 µg/ml final concentration) for 9 days. Cells mock-treated with DMSO were used as control. Cultures were incubated in a humidified atmosphere at 37°C and 5% CO2. Equal amounts of differentially SILAC-labeled TOMM70-shRNA cells treated with DOX and mock-treated control cells were mixed and gradient-purified mitochondria were prepared. To reduce and alkylate cysteine residues, proteins were incubated in 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (dissolved in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate [ABC]; 30 min at 37°C) followed by incubation in 55 mM iodoacetamide/10 mM ABC (45 min at RT in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding DTT to a final concentration of 25 mM. Subsequently, samples were diluted by adding 50 mM ABC to a final concentration of 1 M urea for digestion with trypsin (37°C; overnight). To stop the proteolytic reaction, samples were acidified by adding TFA to a final concentration of 1% (v/v). Peptide mixtures were fractionated using StageTips (Rappsilber et al., Nat. Protocols 2, 2007). To this end, methanol-conditioned C18 material was equilibrated with 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN)/0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, washed with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, and peptides were eluted with 0%, 2.7%, 5.4%, 9%, 11.7%, 14.4%, 22.5% and 64.8% (v/v) ACN in 10 mM NH4OH (20 µl each). Fractionated peptides were dried in vacuo and stored at -80°C. Prior to LC-MS analysis, peptides were resuspended in 45 µl/10 µg protein of 0.1% (v/v) TFA, of which 20 µl were used for LC-MS analysis.  LC/MS analysis: Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed at an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were washed and preconcentrated using PepMap C18 precolumns (length, 5 mm; inner diameter, 0.3 mm) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. Peptide separation was performed using a C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (Acclaim PepMap; length, 500 mm; inner diameter, 75 µm; particle size, 2 µm; packing density, 100 Å) at 43°C and a flowrate of 250 nl/min. Peptides were separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 4% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent A) and 30% (v/v) ACN/48% (v/v) methanol/4% (v/v) DMSO/0.1% (v/v) FA (solvent B). The gradient was as follows: 3-70% B in 50 min, 70-95% B in 5 min, 3 min at 95% B. Peptides eluting from the LC column were transferred to a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Scientific) for electrospray ionization using a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunction adaptor (Thermo Scientific) and applying a spray voltage of 1.8 kV and a capillary temperature of 200°C. Mass spectrometric data were acquired in data-dependent mode with a mass range of m/z 370 to 1,700, a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400, a target value of 1 x 10E06, and a maximum injection time of 200 ms for MS survey scans. The 12 most intense precursor ions with a charge ≥ +2 were selected for low energy collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap with the following parameters: normalized collision energy, 35%; activation q, 0.25; activation time, 10 ms; target value, 5,000; maximum injection time, 150 ms; dynamic exclusion time, 45 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: Mass spectrometric raw data were processed using MaxQuant v.1.6.0.1 (Cox und Mann, Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 2008). For protein identification, mass spectra were correlated with the Uniprot human proteome set including isoforms (retrieved 08/2018; 95,106 entries) and a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant using Andromeda (Cox et al., J. Proteome Res. 10, 2011). Database searches were performed with a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Arg10 and Lys8 were selected as heavy labels, multiplicity was set to 2, Trypsin/P was selected as enzymatic specificity, a maximum of 3 missed cleavages was allowed, and the options 'requantify' and 'match between runs' were enabled. Proteins were identified based on ≥ 1 unique peptide with a length of ≥ 6 amino acids. A peptide spectrum match false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied using the decoy mode 'Revert'. An FDR of 1% was further applied to the list of proteins identified. Relative protein quantification in SILAC was based on unique peptides and a minimum ratio count of 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Importomics, Mitochondria, Proteomics, Rnai-mediated protein knockdown, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


