### Accession
PXD008485

### Title
Comparative proteomic analyses of normal human retina, gliotic PVR retina and human Müller glia

### Description
This study has applied proteomic methodologies to compare protein expression profiles of gliotic and normal human retina as well as established human Müller stem cell lines. It is hoped that this investigation may provide insight into mechanisms of gliosis and also aid studies focusing on endogenous regeneration of the retina following disease or injury

### Sample Protocol
Freeze-dried samples were reconstituted in homogenisation buffer (and run on a 1D gel (BioRad Mini Protean Precast gels, BioRad, UK). Ten gel bands of each sample lane, excised according to molecular weight, were subject to trypsin digestion and peptide extraction. Digests were reconstituted and yeast enolase added as an internal standard. Samples were analysed using a QToF Premier™ mass spectrometer coupled to a NanoAquity Nano-LC system (Waters Corp, UK).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) 2.4 (Waters, UK) with a downloaded Uniprot reference proteome for homo sapiens with porcine trypsin (Accession: P00761) and yeast enolase (Accession:P00924) added. Proteins identified by 2 or more peptides were exported to Progenesis LC-MS (Non-linear Dynamics) for comparative analysis.

### Publication Abstract
M&#xfc;ller glia are responsible for the neural retina regeneration observed in fish and amphibians throughout life. Despite the presence of these cells in the adult human retina, there is no evidence of regeneration occurring in humans following disease or injury. It may be possible that factors present in the degenerated retina could prevent human M&#xfc;ller glia from proliferating and neurally differentiating within the diseased retina. On this basis, investigations into the proteomic profile of these cells and the abundance of key proteins associated to M&#xfc;ller glia in the gliotic PVR retina, may assist in the identification of factors with the potential to control M&#xfc;ller proliferation and neural differentiation in vivo. Label free mass spectrometry identified 1527 proteins in M&#xfc;ller glial cell preparations, 1631 proteins in normal retina and 1074 in gliotic PVR retina. Compared to normal retina, 28 proteins were upregulated and 196 proteins downregulated by 2-fold or more in the gliotic PVR retina. As determined by comparative proteomic analyses, of the proteins highly upregulated in the gliotic PVR retina, the most highly abundant proteins in M&#xfc;ller cell lysates included vimentin, GFAP, polyubiquitin and HSP90a. The observations that proteins highly upregulated in the gliotic retina constitute major proteins expressed by M&#xfc;ller glia provide the basis for further studies into mechanisms that regulate their production. In addition investigations aimed at controlling the expression of these proteins may aid in the identification of factors that could potentially promote endogenous regeneration of the adult human retina after disease or injury.

### Keywords
Muller glia, Gliosis, Human retina

### Affiliations
NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at Moorfields Eye Hospital and UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK
University College London

### Submitter
Karen Eastlake

### Lab Head
Dr G. Astrid Limb
NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at Moorfields Eye Hospital and UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK


