### Accession
PXD021818

### Title
Ubiquitinated proteome of E15.5 murine cortical neurons

### Description
TRIM9 and TRIM67 are neuronally-enriched E3 ubiquitin ligases essential for neuronal morphogenesis and responses to the axon guidance cue netrin-1. Deletion of either gene in the mouse results in subtle neuroanatomical anomalies yet overt deficits in spatial learning and memory. The identify of few TRIM9 or TRIM67 substrates are known. Here we performed ubiquitin remnant profiling approach (Xu et al., 2010)in cultured cortical neurons from murine wildtype, Trim9-/-, Trim67-/-, and Trim9-/-:Trim67-/- embryos cultured with or without netrin-1 supplementation to attempt to identify proteins with altered ubiquitination. Although batch variability hindered our ability to identify differential protein ubiquitination, the results delineate the neuronal ubiquitionome during neurite outgrowth, axon specification, and axon branching.

### Sample Protocol
Primary cortical neurons from Trim9+/+/Trim67+/+ (wildtype,WT), Trim9-/-/Trim67+/+ (Trim9 null), Trim9+/+/Trim67-/- (Trim67 null), Trim9-/-/Trim67-/- (Trim9/Trim67 double knockout, 2KO) murine E15.5 litters were dissociated and cultured on Poly-D-Lysine (Sigma) treated dishes. Approximately 56 hrs post-plating, cells were treated with 100 nM Bortezomib and 5 µM PR-619 for 4 hrs. 40 min prior to collecting cells, half of all plated cells were treated with 600 ng/ml of Netrin. Cells were harvested and stored at -80°C until dissociated neurons from 20-25 pups per genotype per condition were collected. The harvested cells were lysed for 30 min on ice in 1000 µl of freshly prepared buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 µg/ml apoprotinin, 10 µg/ml leupeptin, 1 mM PMSF, 50 µM PR-619 and 1 mM Iodoacetamide). Lysates were sonicated 3x 30 s cycle at 10% output, and clarified at 21.1k g at 4˚C for 15 min. Clarified lysates were then reduced with 5 mM DTT at room temperature for 45 min followed by alkylation for 30 min at room temperature using 10 mM chloroacetamide. The reduced and alkylated protein lysates were diluted using 50 mM Tris-Cl to obtain a final concentration of 2 M urea in solution followed by overnight digestion with trypsin (1:1000)(Promega). Peptides were then desalted using c-18 Sep-Pack columns (Waters). Eluted peptides are lyophilized following which immunoaffinity purification was performed using the PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-GG) Kit. The affinity purified peptides were desalted using C18 columns (Pierce).    Mass spectrometry and data analysis   Reverse-phase nano-high-performance liquid chromatography (nano-HPLC) coupled with a nanoACQUITY ultraperformance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters Corporation; Milford, MA) was used to separate trypsinized peptides. Trapping and separation of peptides were performed in a 2 cm column (Pepmap 100; 3-m particle size and 100-Å pore size), and a 25-cm EASYspray analytical column (75-m inside diameter [i.d.], 2.0-m C18 particle size, and 100-Å pore size) at 300 nL/min and 35°C, respectively. Analysis of a 150-min. gradient of 2% to 25% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The ion source was operated at 2.4kV and the ion transfer tube was set to 300°C. Full MS scans (350-2000 m/z) were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 and 1e6 AGC target. The MS2 spectra were collected using a 1.6 m/z isolation width and were analyzed either by the Orbitrap or the linear ion trap depending on peak charge and intensity using a 3 s TopSpeed CHOPIN method. Orbitrap MS2 scans were acquired at 7500 resolution, with a 5e4 AGC, and 22 ms maximum injection time after HCD fragmentation with a normalized energy of 30%. Rapid linear ion trap MS2 scans were acquired using an 4e3 AGC, 250 ms maximum injection time after CID 30 fragmentation. Precursor ions were chosen based on intensity thresholds (>1e3) from the full scan as well as on charge states (2-7) with a 30-s dynamic exclusion window. Polysiloxane 371.10124 was used as the lock mass.

### Data Protocol
For the data analysis all raw mass spectrometry data were searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.7.4. Search parameters were as follows: UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot mouse canonical sequence database (downloaded 1 Feb 2017), static carbamidomethyl cysteine modification, specific trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavages, variable protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation, digly variable modification (+114.043), match between runs, and label-free quantification (LFQ) with a minimum ratio count of 2. Digly peptide intensities were log2 transformed and median normalized between experiments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryonic cortical neurons, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Ubiquitinate proteome

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA

### Submitter
Stephanie Gupton

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie L. Gupton
Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA


