### Accession
PXD016842

### Title
Data in support of Mass spectrometric analysis of the in vitro secretome from equine bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells

### Description
Osteoarthritis (OA) including joint inflammation and cartilage degradation is one of the leading causes of lameness in horses, but there is still no cure to prevent the progressive degradation of the joint tissue or restore normal joint anatomy. Therefore, the goals for the treatments used for decades has been to slow the progression of the disease, minimize pain, and increase the function of the joint. The aim of this study was to investigate differences in the in vitro secreted protein profile between naïve and chondrogenic differentiating BM-derived MSCs when exposed to an inflammatory (IL-1) environment.

### Sample Protocol
Processing of conditioned medium Samples were thawed on ice and the proteins concentrated by use of a 3 kDa cut-off spin filter (Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal filter unit) (Merck Millipore, Burlington, Massachusetts, US) followed by acetone precipitation (6x acetone (v/v), 1 h, -20 °C). The proteins were resuspended in 0.5 mL 0.5% sodium-deoxycylate (SDC) (XXX) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, US) and the total protein measured on a spectrophotometer (DeNovix DS 11Fx) (Denovix, Wilmington, Delaware, US) in duplicates. A volume corresponding to 200 µg protein was transferred to a 10 kDa cut-off spin filter (Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal filter unit) (Merck Millipore, Burlington, Massachusetts, US) and 100 µL 0.5% SDC in 50 mM TEAB buffer was added. The proteins were reduced with 1:50 (v/v) 0.5 M tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, US), alkylated with 1:10 (v/v) 0.5 M chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, US) and incubated 30 min at 37 °C followed by centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 g. The buffer was exchanged with 200 µL 0.5% SDC in 50 mM TEAB followed by centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 g, and the flow-through was discarded. Trypsin (1 µg/100 µg protein) was added, and the proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C. The digested samples were centrifuged 15 min at 14,000 g, the filter washed by centrifugation with 100 µL 50 mM TEAB for 15 min at 14,000 g, and the flow-through used for further processing. The SDC was removed from the sample with phase extraction by the use of 3:1 (v/v) ethyl acetate and acidification by trifluoroacetic acid (pH < 2). After thorough vortexing and centrifugation for 1 min at 14,000 g, the upper phase was discarded and the lower phase containing the digested proteins was dried down by vacuum centrifugation. The samples were stored at -20 °C.  LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were resuspended in resuspension buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoracetic acid (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, US), 0.1 % formic acid in MilliQ water) and a volume corresponding to ~1 µg peptide was analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC) coupled in-line to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. The peptide separation was accomplished using a precolumn setup (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 2 cm 100 µm precolumn; 75 µm 75 cm main column) (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, US) and a 35 min gradient? from 10 % buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile) to 35% buffer B and the buffer A being 99.1% MilliQ with 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire MS1 data from m/z 375-1500 at R=60k and MS2 at R=30k allowing up to 20 precursor ions per MS1 scan.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched against the Equus caballus reference sequence database from Uniprot (UP000002281; May 16, 2017; 22698 proteins) using MaxQuant search engines (MaxQuant v.1.6.0.1 and Perseus v.1.6.0.2). Only proteins with at least two unique peptide sequences, FDR<1%, and identified in all technical replicates were included. Label free quantification (LFQ) was based on total ion chromatogram normalization [17]. A difference in intensity of the same protein in the different conditions >3x was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oa, Horse, Secretome

### Affiliations
Aalborg University; Translational biomarkers
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Aalborg University; Translational biomarkers


