### Accession
PXD021835

### Title
Translation proteomics of OSCC CD44/CD36 sorted subpopulations

### Description
Metabolic flexibility is a common hallmark of aggressive and metastatic cancers. Here, we reveal that dynamic changes in mitochondrial translation rates drive the switch between glycolytic and mitochondrial energy production required for metastasis. We find that loss of 5-methylcytosine (m5C) in mitochondrial tRNAMet is sufficient to repress mitochondrial translation and trigger the switch from oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) to glycolysis. Glycolytic tumour cells form primary tumours but fail to metastasize in an orthotopic mouse model of human oral cancer. Instead, a small subpopulation of non-dividing tumour cells requires high OXPHOS levels for invasion and metastasis. Although this metastasis-initiating metabolic switch is highly dynamic and reversible, we identify a mitochondria-driven gene signature predictive for lymph node metastasis and disease progression. Finally, we demonstrate that pharmacological inhibition of mitochondrial translation blocks metastasis in orthotopic transplants. Together, our results indicate that metastasis-initiating cells can be eradicated by blocking mitochondrial translation.

### Sample Protocol
Multiplexed enhanced protein dynamics (mePROD) proteomics followed by mass spectrometry was performed as previously described (Klann et al., 2020). Briefly, cell pellets from sorted cell populations or bulk were lysed in 2% SDS, 150mM NaCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloracetamide, 100 mM Tris pH 8. Lysates were incubated at 95°C, followed by sonification and additional incubation at 95°C for 10 minutes. Proteins were isolated using methanol-chloroform precipitation and resuspended in 8 M Urea, 10 mM EPPS pH 8.2. Digests were performed overnight after dilution to 1 M Urea, 10 mM EPPS pH 8.2 with 1:50 wt/wt LysC (Wako) and 1:100 wt/wt Trypsin (Promega). Peptides were isolated using tC18 SepPak columns (50 mg, Waters) and subsequently dried. For TMT labelling, peptides were resuspended in 200mM EPPS pH 8.2, 10% acetonitrile and mixed 1:2 (wt/wt) with TMT reagents. For mePROD baseline and boost, completely light and heavy digests were used as described previously. Peptides were fractionated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 analytical HPLC. Pooled and purified TMT-labelled samples were resuspended in 10 mM ammonium-bicarbonate (ABC), 5% ACN, and separated on a 250 mm long C18 column (X-Bridge, 4.6 mm ID, 3.5 µm particle size; Waters) using a multistep gradient from 100% Solvent A (5% ACN, 10 mM ABC in water) to 60% Solvent B (90% ACN, 10 mM ABC in water) over 70 minutes. Eluting peptides were collected every 45 seconds into a total of 96 fractions, which were cross-concatenated into 24 fractions and dried for further processing. Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.11% TFA and separated on an Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 35 cm long, 75 µm ID fused-silica column, which had been packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5-38% acetonitrile over 120 min and directly sprayed into a QExactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106. Up to 20 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 35). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 86 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Ions with charge states of 1 and > 6 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimize repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Homo Sapiens SwissProt database (2018-11-21) and FASTA files of common contaminants (`contaminants.fasta` provided with MaxQuant) for quality control. Fixed modifications were set as TMT6 at the N-terminus and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. One search node was set up to search with TMT6 (K) and methionine oxidation as static modifications to search for light peptides and one search node was set up with TMT6+K8 (K, +237.177), Arg10 (R, +10.008) and methionine oxidation as static modifications to identify heavy peptides. For both nodes Acetyl (+42.011), Met-loss (-131.040) and Met-loss + Acteyl (-89.030) were set as dynamic modifications at the protein terminus. Searches were performed using Sequest HT. After search, posterior error probabilities were calculated and PSMs filtered using Percolator using default settings. Consensus Workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings, except the minimal signal-to-noise ratio was set to 5. Results were then exported to Excel files for further processing by in-house python pipeline (Klann and Munch, 2020; Klann et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
Aggressive and metastatic cancers show enhanced metabolic plasticity<sup>1</sup>, but the precise underlying mechanisms of this remain unclear. Here we show how two NOP2/Sun RNA methyltransferase 3 (NSUN3)-dependent RNA modifications-5-methylcytosine (m<sup>5</sup>C) and its derivative 5-formylcytosine (f<sup>5</sup>C) (refs.<sup>2-4</sup>)-drive the translation of mitochondrial mRNA to power metastasis. Translation of mitochondrially encoded subunits of the oxidative phosphorylation complex depends on the formation of m<sup>5</sup>C at position 34 in mitochondrial tRNA<sup>Met</sup>. m<sup>5</sup>C-deficient human oral cancer cells exhibit increased levels of glycolysis and changes in their mitochondrial function that do not affect cell viability or primary tumour growth in vivo; however, metabolic plasticity is severely impaired as mitochondrial m<sup>5</sup>C-deficient tumours do not metastasize efficiently. We discovered that CD36-dependent non-dividing, metastasis-initiating tumour cells require mitochondrial m<sup>5</sup>C to activate invasion and dissemination. Moreover, a mitochondria-driven gene signature in patients with head and neck cancer is predictive for metastasis and disease progression. Finally, we confirm that this metabolic switch that allows the metastasis of tumour cells can be pharmacologically targeted through the inhibition of mitochondrial mRNA translation in vivo. Together, our results reveal that site-specific mitochondrial RNA modifications could be therapeutic targets to combat metastasis.

### Keywords
Oscc, Translation, Meprod, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt am Main
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
Kevin Klann

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt am Main


