### Accession
PXD017106

### Title
miR-29a/b1 regulates the pituitary gland luteinizing hormone secretion and affects mouse ovulation

### Description
miR-29a/b1 was reported to be involved in the regulation of reproductive function in female mice, but the underlying molecular mechanisms were not clear. In this study, female mice lacking miR-29a/b1 showed a delay in vaginal opening, irregular estrus cycles, ovulation disorder and infertility. However, the development of egg was normal in mutant mice and the ovulation disorder could be rescued by the superovulation treatment. The plasma level of luteinizing hormone (LH) was significantly lower in the mutant mice. Using iTRAQ coupled with LC-MS/MS, we found that the deficiency of miR-29a/b1 in mice resulted in an abnormal expression of a number of proteins involved in vesicular transport and secretion in the pituitary gland. The miR-29a/b1 targeting gene Dnmt3a and Hdac4 were up-regulated in the pituitary of miR-29a/b1 knockout mice suggesting that these two epigenetic writers may be the upstream causes for these phenotype changes due to miR-29a/b1 deficiency. These findings demonstrated that miR-29a/b1 is indispensable for the function of the reproductive axis through regulating LH secretion in the pituitary gland.

### Sample Protocol
The protein of pituitary (P) from wild-type and miR-29a KO females (8 weeks, n=3) were isolated, concentrated and enzymolys,  labeled peptide with the iTRAQ reagents 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120 or 121, respectively, then the mixture performed High-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography，High-pH-RPLC, and the coleected data analyzed by  Liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry，LC−MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer（version1.4) MASCOT（version 2.3.2）was used to analyzed for raw data. The parameters are: Database is Swissprot ;Taxonomy is Mus musculus; Enzyme is Trypsin; Fixed modifications is Carbamidomethyl (C)， iTRAQ 8plex(N-term), iTRAQ 8plex(K); Variable modifications is Oxidation(M) ; Max Missed Cleavages is 2; Peptide Charge State is 2+,3+,4+; Peptide mass tolerance is 10ppm; MS/MS tolerance is ±0.05 Da； Target FDR (Strict) or (Relaxed) is 0.01 or 0.05; Validation based on q value.

### Publication Abstract
<i>miR-29a/b<sub>1</sub></i> was reportedly involved in the regulation of the reproductive function in female mice, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are not clear. In this study, female mice lacking <i>miR-29a/b<sub>1</sub></i> showed a delay in vaginal opening, irregular estrous cycles, ovulation disorder and subfertility. The level of luteinizing hormone (LH) was significantly lower in plasma but higher in pituitary of mutant mice. However, egg development was normal in mutant mice and the ovulation disorder could be rescued by the superovulation treatment. These results suggested that the LH secretion was impaired in mutant mice. Further studies showed that deficiency of <i>miR-29a/b<sub>1</sub></i> in mice resulted in an abnormal expression of a number of proteins involved in vesicular transport and exocytosis in the pituitary, indicating the mutant mice had insufficient LH secretion. However, the detailed mechanism needs more research.

### Keywords
Reproduction, Mir-29a/b1, Lh, Ovulation, Knockout

### Affiliations
Tongji University

### Submitter
Yang Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Yang Guo
Tongji University


