### Accession
PXD008723

### Title
Proteomic alterations in early stage cervical cancer

### Description
Cervical cancer is characterized by a well-defined pre-malignant phase, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). Identification of high grade CIN lesions by population-based screening programs and their subsequent treatment has led to a significant reduction of the incidence and mortality of cervical cancer. Cytology-based testing of cervical smears is the most widely used cervical cancer screening method, but is not ideal, as the sensitivity for detection of CIN2 and higher (CIN2+) is only ~55%. Therefore, more sensitive and specific biomarkers for cervical cancer and its precancerous stages are needed.

### Sample Protocol
We compared an equivalent of 8000 tumor, normal epithelium and stroma cells of frozen cervical tissue from 22 patients with cervical squamous cell cancer (early- and late stage, each stage 11 samples) and 13 healthy subjects obtained by laser capture microdissection. The proteins were enzymatically digested into peptides and measured by high-resolution mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Identical numbers of the tissue samples were measured by PRM to quantify MCM3, CEACAM5, S100P and ICAM1 in digests of whole tissue lysates using stable isotope-labeled (SIL) peptides purchased from Pepscan BV (Lelystad, the Netherlands). Measurements were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument according to our previous work (Guzel et al, 2017, doi: 10.1002/prca.201700107).

### Data Protocol
Identified proteins were visualized by Scaffold Proteome software and the Bonferroni correction was applied to adjust the p-value for multiple testing within the different groups. Results were loaded into the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to assign proteins to different network interactions. The PRM signals were integrated using Skyline-daily software (version 4.1.1.11725) tool and the MCM3, CEACAM5, S100P and ICAM1 concentration of tissue samples were determined by peak area ratios of endogenous:SIL peptides (calculated by the software).

### Publication Abstract
Laser capture microdissection (LCM) allows the capture of cell types or well-defined structures in tissue. We compared in a semi-quantitative way the proteomes from an equivalent of 8,000 tumor cells from patients with squamous cell cervical cancer (SCC, <i>n</i> = 22) with healthy epithelial and stromal cells obtained from normal cervical tissue (<i>n</i> = 13). Proteins were enzymatically digested into peptides which were measured by high-resolution mass spectrometry and analyzed by "all-or-nothing" analysis, Bonferroni, and Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing. By comparing LCM cell type preparations, 31 proteins were exclusively found in early stage cervical cancer (<i>n</i> = 11) when compared with healthy epithelium and stroma, based on criteria that address specificity in a restrictive "all-or-nothing" way. By Bonferroni correction for multiple testing, 30 proteins were significantly up-regulated between early stage cervical cancer and healthy control, including six members of the MCM protein family. MCM proteins are involved in DNA repair and expected to be participating in the early stage of cancer. After a less stringent Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing, we found that the abundances of 319 proteins were significantly different between early stage cervical cancer and healthy controls. Four proteins were confirmed in digests of whole tissue lysates by Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis using correction for multiple testing by permutation resulted in two networks that were differentially regulated in early stage cervical cancer compared with healthy tissue. From these networks, we learned that specific tumor mechanisms become effective during the early stage of cervical cancer.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Proteomics, Lcm, Prm, Cervical cancer

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology,  Clinical & Cancer Proteomics

### Submitter
Coskun Guzel

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology,  Clinical & Cancer Proteomics


