### Accession
PXD040087

### Title
XL-MS of 5S RNP preribosomal complexes

### Description
The 5S RNP is assembled from its three components (5S rRNA, Rpl5/uL18, and Rpl11/uL5) before being incorporated into the pre-60S subunit. However, when ribosome synthesis is disturbed, a free 5S RNP can enter the MDM2–p53 pathway to regulate cell cycle and apoptotic signaling. Here we reconstitute and determine the cryo-EM structure of the conserved hexameric 5S RNP with fungal or human factors. This reveals how the nascent 5S rRNA associates with the initial nuclear import complex Syo1–uL18–uL5, and upon further recruitment of two nucleolar factors Rpf2–Rrs1 develops into the 5S RNP precursor that can assemble into the pre-ribosome. In addition, we elucidate the structure of another 5S RNP intermediate, carrying the human ubiquitin ligase Mdm2, which unraveled how this enzyme can be sequestered from its target substrate p53. Our data provide molecular insight into how the 5S RNP can mediate between ribosome biogenesis and cell proliferation.

### Sample Protocol
Crosslinking-MS of the 5S RNP complexes. Purified 5S RNPs were crosslinked with isotopically coded disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS-H12/D12, Creative Molecules) in 0.5 mM increments to a final DSS concentration of 4 mM. The resulting crosslinked proteins were digested, and crosslinked peptides were enriched by gel filtration as previously described (Sadian, Y. et al. The EMBO Journal 36, 2698–2709 (2017)). Peptides were analyzed by LC–MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo) using a top-10 strategy with MS1 scans on the Orbitrap (R = 120,000; m/z range 375–1600), followed by fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID; isolation window, m/z 0.8; collision energy: 35%; activation time: 10 ms; activation Q: 0.25) and MS2 detection on the ion trap of ions with charge states of 3–7.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed and false-discovery rates were estimated using xQuest and xProphet against a sequence database containing the included 5S RNP proteins and Mdm2 where applicable. Only first-ranked crosslinks with a false-discovery rate of ≤0.05 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
The 5S ribonucleoprotein (RNP) is assembled from its three components (5S rRNA, Rpl5/uL18 and Rpl11/uL5) before being incorporated into the pre-60S subunit. However, when ribosome synthesis is disturbed, a free 5S RNP can enter the MDM2-p53 pathway to regulate cell cycle and apoptotic signaling. Here we reconstitute and determine the cryo-electron microscopy structure of the conserved hexameric 5S RNP with fungal or human factors. This reveals how the nascent 5S rRNA associates with the initial nuclear import complex Syo1-uL18-uL5 and, upon further recruitment of the nucleolar factors Rpf2 and Rrs1, develops into the 5S RNP precursor that can assemble into the pre-ribosome. In addition, we elucidate the structure of another 5S RNP intermediate, carrying the human ubiquitin ligase Mdm2, which unravels how this enzyme can be sequestered from its target substrate p53. Our data provide molecular insight into how the 5S RNP can mediate between ribosome biogenesis and cell proliferation.

### Keywords
Cryo-em, 5s rnp, Mdm2

### Affiliations
Genome Biology Unit and Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany
European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Henrik Hammarén

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Beck
European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany


