### Accession
PXD018713

### Title
Honeybee brain neuropeptides LC-MSMS

### Description
To explore brain neuropeptidic functions in behavioral regulation, a label-free quantitative strategy was employed to compare neuropeptidomic variations between behavioral phenotypes (nurse bees, nectar foragers, and pollen foragers) and the two honeybee species (Apis mellifera ligustica and Apis cerana cerana).

### Sample Protocol
The brain samples were homogenized at 4 °C by using a 90:9:1 solution of methanol, H2O, and acetic acid. Afterwards, the supernatant with neuropeptides was collected and dried. The extracted neuropeptide samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in distilled water, and the peptide concentration was quantified using a Nanodrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). LC-MS/MS analysis was run on Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buﬀer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buﬀer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used as mobile phase buffer. Neuropeptides were separated using the following gradients: from 3 to 8% buffer B in 5 min, from 8 to 20 % buffer B in 80 min, from 20 to 30% buffer B in 20 min, from 30 to 90% buffer B in 5 min, and remaining at 90% buffer B for 10 min. The eluted neuropeptides were injected into the mass spectrometer via nano-ESI source. Ion signals were collected in a data-dependent mode and run with the following settings: full scan resolution at 70,000, automatic gain control (AGC) target: 3 × 106, maximum inject time (MIT): 20 ms, scan range: m/z 300-1,800; MS/MS scans resolution at 17,500, AGC target: 1 × 105, MIT: 60 ms, isolation window: 2 m/z, normalized collision energy: 27, loop count 10, and dynamic exclusion: charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8; peptide match: preferred; exclude isotopes: on; dynamic exclusion: 30 s. Raw data were retrieved using Xcalibur 3.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The extracted MS/MS spectra were searched against a composite database of Apis mellifera (23,491 protein sequences, released on July, 2018) or Apis cerana (20,934 protein sequences, released on July, 2018) using in-house PEAKS 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Canada). Amidation (A, -0.98) and pyro-glu from Q (P, -17.03) were selected as variable modifications. The other parameters used were the following: parent ion mass tolerance, 20.0 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.05 Da; enzyme, trypsin; allowing a nonspecific cleavage at both ends of the peptide; maximum missed cleavages per peptide, 2; maximum allowed variable PTM per peptide, 2. A fusion target-decoy approach was used to the estimation of the false discovery rate (FDR) and controlled at ≤1.0% (−10 log P ≥ 20.0) both at protein and peptide levels. Neuropeptide identifications were only used if ≥2 spectra were identified in at least two of the three repeats of each sample. Quantitative comparison of brain neuropeptidomes was performed by the label-free approach in PEAKS Q module. Feature detection was performed separately on each sample by using the expectation-maximization algorithm. The features of the same peptide from different samples were reliably aligned together using a high-performance retention time alignment algorithm.39 The identification results were chosen to attach as the last step of the label-free quantification. Peptide features were considered significantly changed between different brain samples using statistical p value < 0.01, a fold change ≥ 2.

### Publication Abstract
Behavioral specialization is key to the success of social insects and leads to division of labor among colony members. Response thresholds to task-specific stimuli are thought to proximally regulate behavioral specialization, but their neurobiological regulation is complex and not well understood. Here, we show that response thresholds to task-relevant stimuli correspond to the specialization of three behavioral phenotypes of honeybee workers in the well-studied and important <i>Apis mellifera</i> and <i>Apis cerana</i>. Quantitative neuropeptidome comparisons suggest two tachykinin-related peptides (TRP2 and TRP3) as candidates for the modification of these response thresholds. Based on our characterization of their receptor binding and downstream signaling, we confirm a functional role of tachykinin signaling in regulating specific responsiveness of honeybee workers: TRP2 injection and RNAi-mediated downregulation cause consistent, opposite effects on responsiveness to task-specific stimuli of each behaviorally specialized phenotype but not to stimuli that are unrelated to their tasks. Thus, our study demonstrates that TRP signaling regulates the degree of task-specific responsiveness of specialized honeybee workers and may control the context specificity of behavior in animals more generally.

### Keywords
Neruopeptide, Brain, Honeybee, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Institute of Apicultural Research
Institute of Apicultural Research/Key Laboratory of Pollinating Insect Biology, Ministry of Agriculture, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Bin Han

### Lab Head
Dr Bin Han
Institute of Apicultural Research/Key Laboratory of Pollinating Insect Biology, Ministry of Agriculture, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science, Beijing, China


