### Accession
PXD036646

### Title
Epidermal Stratification Requires Retromer-Mediated Desmoglein-1 Recycling

### Description
Sorting transmembrane cargo is essential for tissue development and homeostasis. However, mechanisms of intracellular trafficking in stratified epidermis are poorly understood. Here we identify an interaction between the retromer endosomal trafficking component, VPS35, and the desmosomal cadherin, Desmoglein-1 (Dsg1). Dsg1 is specifically expressed in stratified epidermis and when properly localized on the plasma membrane of basal keratinocytes, promotes stratification. We show that the retromer drives Dsg1 recycling from the endo-lysosomal system to the plasma membrane to support stratification. The retromer-enhancing chaperone, R55, promotes the membrane localization of Dsg1 and a trafficking-deficient mutant associated with a severe inflammatory skin disorder, enhancing its ability to promote stratification. In the absence of Dsg1, retromer association with and expression of the glucose transporter GLUT1 increases, exposing a potential link between Dsg1 deficiency and epidermal metabolism. Our work provides the first evidence for retromer function in epidermal regeneration, identifying it as a potential therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
Preliminary BioID screens for Dsg1-BirA* and E-cadherin-BirA* expressing keratinocytes were performed as previously described for EphA2-BirA* (Perez White et al., 2017). Briefly, confluent keratinocytes were differentiated with 1.2mM CaCl2 media for 24hrs before incubating the cells in the presence of 50µM biotin for 24hrs. Biotinylated proteins were pulled down with Streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific) and underwent on-bead trypsin digestion before being sent to Northwestern University Proteomics Center of Excellence for mass spectrometry analysis using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS instrumentation (Thermo Scientific)

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed using MaxQuant v2.1.3.0 with built-in search engine Andromeda against Human Uniprot proteome UP000005640 database with isoforms, downloaded 07112022. (Cox and Mann, 2008). The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.05. A protein was considered a “hit” the number of spectra was 1.5 fold higher compared to control or the presence of at least two unique peptides and no spectra in control. Hits were also filtered using Crapome 2.0 database (Mellacheruvu et al., 2013), a repository for negative control MS data, with the requirement of being present in less than 40% of negative control experiments.  Table S1: Dsg1 and E-cadherin BioID screen. Excel document includes gene name, spectra count, number of unique peptides, q-value, score, peptide sequence, which are output from MaxQuant/Andromeda search. Fold change of Dsg1 and E-cadherin sample spectra compared to control spectra is included. In the absence of spectra in the control sample, the number of unique peptides for the Dsg1/E-cadherin samples were listed. Proteins were considered potential protein interactors (“Hits”) if there is a 1.5 fold increase over control or there is an absence in spectra in the control with >2 unique peptides. Potential hits were further filtered for their % appearance in the Crapome. Hits with a Crapome % less than 40% were listed in Figure S1A.

### Publication Abstract
Sorting transmembrane cargo is essential for tissue development and homeostasis. However, mechanisms of intracellular trafficking in stratified epidermis are poorly understood. Here, we identify an interaction between the retromer endosomal trafficking component, VPS35, and the desmosomal cadherin, desmoglein-1 (Dsg1). Dsg1 is specifically expressed in stratified epidermis and, when properly localized on the plasma membrane of basal keratinocytes, promotes stratification. We show that the retromer drives Dsg1 recycling from the endo-lysosomal system to the plasma membrane to support human keratinocyte stratification. The retromer-enhancing chaperone, R55, promotes the membrane localization of Dsg1 and a trafficking-deficient mutant associated with a severe inflammatory skin disorder, enhancing its ability to promote stratification. In the absence of Dsg1, retromer association with and expression of the glucose transporter GLUT1 increases, exposing a potential link between Dsg1 deficiency and epidermal metabolism. Our work provides evidence for retromer function in epidermal regeneration, identifying it as a potential therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Desmosome; keratinocyte; epidermal differentiation; skin disease; endosomal trafficking; retromer chaperone; vps35; sam syndrome; cadherin; dsg1; glut1; bioid

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
1) Department of Pathology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA 2) Department of Dermatology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA 3) Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Kathleen J. Green
1) Department of Pathology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA 2) Department of Dermatology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA 3) Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA


