### Accession
PXD014847

### Title
Isoform-resolved Correlation Analysis Between mRNA Abundance Dynamics and Protein Level Degradation

### Description
We employed an optimized, sensitive DIA-MS method on a high-resolution Orbitrap platform and re-measured the proteomic samples used in a previous study, in which the heterogeneity of HeLa cells across different research labs was analyzed by a multi-omic approach. Using the same MS sample sets of all HeLa strains we achieved higher sensitivity compared to our previous SWATH-MS results that were acquired on a TripleTOF instrument (5600 model). To benefit from the significantly improved sensitivity of this single-shot DIA-MS for both proteomic and protein turnover analysis, we analyzed the samples originating from six HeLa Kyoto strains and six HeLa CCL2 strains to profile both total protein-level abundances and the proxy protein turnover rates (Kloss, by pulsed SILAC labeling) across cell lines. Our results emphasized the importance of relative mRNA-protein turnover rate correlation analysis. The dataset demonstrate that specific biological processes, cellular organelles, subunits of organelles, and individual protein isoforms may have distinctive degradation rate and the corresponding buffering or concerting protein turnover control across cancer cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, a uniform protocol following a routine cell culture guideline was used at each site to prepare the cells for shipment to the central lab, cultured in 5% CO2, 37 °C; Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM, Gibco, 41965-039). Both total proteomic and pulse-chase SILAC proteomic samples were prepared for the purpose of measuring the protein abundance and turnover rate. The twelve cell lines represented six HeLa cells variants subtype CCL2 (2, 6, 7, 12, 13, and 14) and six HeLa cells variants subtype Kyoto (1, 3, 4, 8, 9, and 10), presenting a balance comparison between HeLa Kyoto and CCL2 strains. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a nanoelectrospray ion source (NanoFlex, Thermo Scientific) was used to as the liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) system for performing both Data dependent acquisition (DDA) and Data independent acquisition (DIA). Peptide separation was carried out on EASY-nLC 1200 systems (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using a self-packed analytical PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) (75 μm × 30 cm length) using C18 material of ReproSil-Pur 120A C18-Q 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B was composed of 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. To separate the HeLa peptide mixtures for both DDA and DIA measurements, a 2-hour gradient with buffer B from 5 to 37% at a flow rate of 300 nL/min was conducted. For DDA-based proteomics, the MS1 scan range setting was from 350 to 1650 m/z with the RF lens. The MS1 resolution was kept at 120,000 at m/z 200. The AGC value was 5.5E5 and the maximum injection time was 40 ms for MS1. For MS2, the top speed (cycle time 3 s) was used, meaning that the numbers of data dependent scans were maximized in each cycle time if the desired resolution and AGC were achieved. HCD collision energy was 28%. The dynamic exclusion parameters were set to ensure that the already sequenced precursors were excluded once from reselection for 30 seconds. The isolation window was 1.2 m/z and the MS2 resolution was 15,000. The AGC value and the maximum MS2 injection time were set to 5e4 and 35 ms, respectively. All the data were collected with the 2-hour gradient LC method as described above. For DIA-based proteomics, our DIA‐MS method was configured to consist one MS1 survey scan and 40 MS2 scans of variable windows (Li et al, 2019; Mehnert et al, 2019). The MS1 scan range is 350–1650 m/z and the MS1 resolution is 120,000 at m/z 200. The MS1 full scan AGC target value was set to be 2.0E5 and the maximum injection time was 100 ms. The MS2 resolution was set to 30 000 at m/z 200 and normalized HCD collision energy was 28%. The MS2 AGC was set to be 5.0E5 and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The default peptide charge state was set to 2. Both of MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
All DIA-MS data analyses were performed using a specific version of Spectronaut Professional+; all the features are now available in Spectronaut v13. First, a hybrid assay library was generated including all protein expression samples measured in technical triplicates using both DDA and DIA-MS method (84 raw files). Furthermore, we included raw files that were generated from fractionated HeLa samples to make an ultra-comprehensive spectral library (provided with the raw mass spectrometry datasets) for our single-shot DIA measurements (122 raw files in total, 163,333 precursors corresponding to 11,847 proteins in total). For the library generation, we applied the default BGS Factory Settings for both Pulsar Search and Library Generation and used the fasta file we generated as described above. The targeted data extraction was performed using the default BGS Factory Settings. Briefly, full tryptic allowing two missed cleavages, set carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification on all cysteines, set oxidation of methionines, and protein N‐terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Both precursor and protein FDR were controlled at 1%. For quantification, “Qvalue” workflow was used for filtering; mean precursor quantity was used for peptide quantification (TOP 3); peptides were grouped based on stripped sequences. Cross Run Normalization was performed using “Global Normalization” on “Median” normalization strategy. Interference correction was enabled with min 3 MS2 precursors to keep. Other parameters are kept as default unless specified.  For pSILAC data analysis, we generated an additional heavy-labeled hybrid library. To do so, we used the fasta file and search archives from the label-free (i.e., “light”) library generation as described above and further combined these with pSILAC DIA-MS raw files. For the pSILAC DIA data extraction, the default BGS Factory Settings for Pulsar search was used with modification in the Labeling setting. “Labelling Applied” option was enabled, and SILAC labels (“Arg10” and “Lys8”) were specified in the second channel. For the library generation step, the default BGS Factory settings for library generation was used with two important modifications. First, a complete labeling of the whole library was ensured by selecting the “In-Silico Generate Missing Channels” option in the Workflow settings. Secondly, we completely excluded b-ions from the library in the Spectral Library Filters for the analysis of the data presented in the study to completely avoid the potential interference and ratio distortion caused by b-ions not carrying the heavy labels. In total, 164 raw files were used for the pSILAC library generation, and the final library contained 159,963 peptide precursors corresponding to 11,623 proteins. All precursors in the library were present in both light and heavy versions with TOP 6 corresponding light and heavy fragments enabled for targeted data analysis. The retention time drift is handled by using iRT space and a method for high‐precision prediction of RT in targeted DIA analysis in Spectronaut.  To perform pSILAC data identification and quantification, the Inverted Spike-In workflow was used. In the Workflow settings, the “Spike-In” workflow was selected in Multi-Channel Workflow Definition. Importantly, both “Inverted” and “Reference based Identification” options were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Profiling of biological relationships between different molecular layers dissects regulatory mechanisms that ultimately determine cellular function. To thoroughly assess the role of protein post-translational turnover, we devised a strategy combining pulse stable isotope-labeled amino acids in cells (pSILAC), data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS), and a novel data analysis framework that resolves protein degradation rate on the level of mRNA alternative splicing isoforms and isoform groups. We demonstrated our approach by the genome-wide correlation analysis between mRNA amounts and protein degradation across different strains of HeLa cells that harbor a high grade of gene dosage variation. The dataset revealed that specific biological processes, cellular organelles, spatial compartments of organelles, and individual protein isoforms of the same genes could have distinctive degradation rate. The protein degradation diversity thus dissects the corresponding buffering or concerting protein turnover control across cancer cell lines. The data further indicate that specific mRNA splicing events such as intron retention significantly impact the protein abundance levels. Our findings support the tight association between transcriptome variability and proteostasis and provide a methodological foundation for studying functional protein degradation.

### Keywords
Alternative splicing, Correlation analysis, Dia mass spectrometry, Pulsed silac, Protein turnover, Protein isoform

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences
Yale Cancer Biology Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT, 06516, USA

### Submitter
Barbora Salovska

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale Cancer Biology Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT, 06516, USA


