### Accession
PXD028416

### Title
ProMetIS: deep phenotyping of mouse models by proteomics and metabolomics.

### Description
We develop new tools enabling high-throughput and combined proteomics and metabolomics data analysis. The tools are validated on two knockout mice models (LAT (Linker For Activation Of T-Cells) and Mx2 KO mice) generated and phenotyped by the PHENOMIN infrastructure.

### Sample Protocol
Mice liver proteins were extracted in Laemmli buffer using quick sonication on ice to ensure complete solubilization. Samples were centrifuged to remove possible cell debris. Protein concentrations in the supernatant were determined and 50 µg of sample were loaded on an in-house 4% acrylamide SDS-PAGE stacking gel. Proteins were fixed and then stained using colloidal Coomassie blue. The stacking bands were manually excised, destained, reduced and alkylated. Overnight digestion was then performed using Trypsin / Lys-C Mix. Peptides were extracted with acetonitrile. Organic solvent was eliminated using a vacuum centrifuge and peptides were re-suspended in acidified water.  Before LC-MS analysis, a set of reference peptides (iRT kit; Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was added to all samples. For quality control of the mass spectrometry analysis sequence, a standard was constituted by pooling 1 µl of each sample. Samples were stored at 4°C and analyzed within a week.   NanoLC-MS/MS analyses of the tryptic peptides obtained from liver proteins were performed on a nano-UPLC system (nanoAcquityUPLC, Waters, USA) coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Briefly, 320 ng of each sample was concentrated/desalted on a trap column (Symmetry C18, 180 μm x 20 mm, 5 µm; Waters) using 99 % of solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water)/1 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 3 minutes. Afterwards, peptides were eluted from the separation column (BEH130 C18, 75 μm x 250 mm, 1.7 μm; Waters) maintained at 60°C using a 79 min gradient from 1-35% of B at a flow rate of 450 nL/min. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in positive ion mode with source temperature set to 250°C and spray voltage to 1.8 kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, and spectra were acquired through automatic switching between full MS and MS/MS scans. Full scan MS spectra (300-1800 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 with an automatic gain control (AGC) value set to 3 x 106 ions, a maximum injection time set to 50 ms, and the lock-mass option enabled (polysiloxane, 445.12002  m/z). Up to 10 most intense multi-charged precursors per full MS scan were isolated using a 2 m/z window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalised collision energy of 27 eV).  MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,000 at m/z 200 with an AGC value set to 1 x 105, a maximum injection time set to 100 ms, and the peptide match selection option was turned on. Dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursors was set to 60 seconds. The system was fully controlled by Xcalibur software (v3.1.66.10; Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data were saved in .raw file format (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using XCalibur.  All sample analyses were randomly ordered (taking into account the genotype, sex and weight of the mice). Standard pools were injected every 5 samples. To minimize carry-over, one solvent blank injection was included between each sample.

### Data Protocol
searches (version 2.5.1, MatrixScience, London, UK) against a murine protein sequences database downloaded from the UniProtKB/SwissProt website (2018_08_20), common contaminants, IRT and decoy sequences were added. The concatenated database contains 2 x 17 111 protein entries. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm in MS mode and 0.07 Da in MS/MS mode. Two trypsin missed cleavages were tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein n-termini were set as variable modifications. Identification results were imported into Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/; Bouyssié et al., 2020) for validation. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSM) with pretty rank equal to one were retained. False Discovery Rate was then optimized to be below 1% at PSM level using Mascot Adjusted E-value and below 1% at Protein Level using Mascot Mudpit score. Label Free Quantification: Peptides Abundances were extracted thanks to Proline software version 1.6 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/; Bouyssié et al., 2020) using a m/z tolerance of 5 ppm. Alignment of the LC-MS runs was performed using Loess smoothing. Cross assignment of peptide ions abundances was performed among the samples and controls using a m/z tolerance of 5 ppm and a retention time tolerance of 42 s. Protein Abundances were computed using the median ratio fitting of the unique peptides abundances normalized at the peptide level using median.  Protein Abundances were loaded into Prostar software version 1.16 (http://www.prostar-proteomics.org/, Wieczorek et al., 2017) and associated to their conditions (WT, LAT or MX2). Proteins with at least 80% of present values in at least one condition of the one vs one comparison were kept for further statistical analysis. Contaminants were filtered out. Residual missing values were imputed according to their nature (Lazar et al., 2016): partially observed values were imputed according to the measured values (SLSA algorithm), whereas values missing in the entire condition were imputed in a conservative way (approximation of the lower limit of quantification by the 2.5% lower quantile of each replicate intensity distribution).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver, Lc-ms/ms, Mice

### Affiliations
IPHC-UMR7178-CNRS-UDS-LSMBO
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC UMR 7178, Strasbourg, France.

### Submitter
Magali Rompais

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianferani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC UMR 7178, Strasbourg, France.


