### Accession
PXD025315

### Title
N471D WASH complex subunit strumpellin knock-in mice display BPTF and KLHL11 dysregulation in brain tissue

### Description
We investigated brain tissue from N471D WASH complex subunit strumpellin knock-in mice as a genetic model for hereditary spastic paraplegia type 8. While WASHC5-related protein interaction partners and complexes showed no change in abundancies, the proteomic analysis depicted consistent upregulation of BPTF and downregulation of KLHL11 in heterozygous and homozygous knock-in mice. This finding suggests mechanistic links for hereditary spastic paraplegia type 8 through the roles of BPTF and KLHL11 in neurodegeneration and protein quality control, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Brain hemispheres from 23 male mice at 25 month of age, 8x heterozygous and 7x homozygous N471D Wasc5 knock-in mice and 8x wild-type siblings, were dissected and liquid nitrogen snap-frozen; the genotype of all mice used for tissue preparation was verified by PCR analysis. Frozen brain samples were homogenized with an Ultra Turrax device (IKA) in extraction buffer (10% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.8; 1 ml buffer per 100 mg tissue). Preclearing of samples was done by 10 min centrifugation at 10,000 xg. Supernatants were used for protein quantitation (DC Protein Assay from BioRad). From each sample, 150 µg of protein were diluted in 4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 M DTT, mixed with 200 µl 8 M Urea, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, and loaded onto spin filters with a 30 kDa cut off (Microcon) according to the filter aided sample preparation protocol [1]. Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin/LysC (sequencing grade, Promega). Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing C18 discs followed by fractionation on strong cationic exchange chromatography (SCX)-StageTips [2]. All fractions of each sample were eluted in wells of microtiter plates. Peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus device equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm long, New Objectives) using an gradient from eluent A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 30% eluent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 60 min followed by a second gradient to 60% B for 30 min. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition Top10 method selecting the most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for HCD fragmentation. The full MS scan range was 350 to 2,000 m/z with resolution of 70,000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 80 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17,500, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 80 ms. Fullscan data were acquired in profile and fragments in centroid mode by Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
The obtained proteomics data were searched against a mouse protein sequence database (UniProtKB, TrEMBL, 05/2018) using the Andromeda search engine within the MaxQuant software (v. 1.6.1.0) [3], thereby SCX fractions were defined as fractions of the respective sample. For cysteine, a fixed modification by carbamidomethylation was set; variable modifications were methionine S-oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. All FDR rates were set to 0.01 to filter for most confident protein identifications. For protein quantitation, the label-free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm within MaxQuant was enabled. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus (vs 1.6.10.50) using the LFQ intensity columns. All protein entries were filtered for at least 3 values in any of the groups resulting in 5842 protein entries. Missing values were replaced from a standard deviation (downshift 1.8, width 0.3) prior to subjecting to 2 sample testing. P-values were corrected by the inbuilt permutation-based FDR calculation.  [1] Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, et al. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods 2009;6:359-62. [2] Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nature protocols 2007;2:1896-906. [3] Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 2008,26:1367-72.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Strumpellin; wash complex subunit 5; n451d strumpellin knock-in mice; spg8; hereditary spastic paraplegia; bptf; nurf; klhl11

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Center for Molecular Medicine and Excellence Cluster "Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases" (CECAD), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Schmidt
Center for Molecular Medicine and Excellence Cluster "Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases" (CECAD), University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany


