### Accession
PXD005020

### Title
In vitro infection of AGS cell line with Helicobacter pylori oipA “on” and “off” clinical strains revealed that Outer Inflammatory Protein A (OipA) suppresses apoptosis

### Description
Background: Helicobacter pylori is an important human pathogen that infects the human gastric mucosa leading to chronic inflammation which is responsible for severe gastroduodenal diseases. The Outer Inflammatory Protein A (OipA) of H. pylori is an important virulence factor. However, the role of OipA in gastric cancer and ulcer development is still not well-established. Phase variation within a CT dinucleotide repeat motif of oipA switches its expression “on” and “off”. This study aims to elucidate the role of OipA in H. pylori infection using oipA “on” and “off” clinical strains and oipA deletion mutant. Methods: Proteomics analysis was performed on AGS human gastric epithelial cell line post-infection with oipA “on” and “off” H. pylori using liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS). In addition, AGS apoptosis and cell cycle assays were performed. To confirm the findings, oipA deletion mutant (ΔoipA) was generated and expression of VacA was detected using Western blotting. Result: Expression of AGS proteins involve in human disease was suppressed / down-regulated post-infection with oipA “off” strains, as well as oipA mutant, compared to oipA “on” strains. Furthermore, oipA “off” strains and oipA mutant resulted in a higher level of apoptosis and G0/G1 cell-cycle arrest in AGS cells than oipA “on” strains. Interestingly, deletion of oipA was found to increase VacA production by the bacterium.  Discussion: The capability of oipA “off” strains to induce apoptosis and suppress proteins having roles in human disease may suggest that these H. pylori may be less virulent or may even be protective against carcinogenesis compared to its oipA “on” counterparts. This may potentially explain the higher incidence of gastric cancer among East Asian which oipA “on” strains predominates. Conclusions: Data from this study strengthened our understanding of the role of H. pylori OipA as a virulence factor in chronic inflammation, metastasis and carcinogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/Q-TOF MS) LC/MS analysis protocol was described previously with minor modifications [20]. For analysis, 2 ml of tryptic digested peptides (200 ng/ml) were separated using the Agilent HPLC-Chip II: Polaris-HR-chip-3C18 (G4240-62030) which incorporates a 360 nL enrichment column and a 75 µM x 150 mm analytical column and analyzed on the 1260 Infinity HPLC-Chip System coupled with 6540 UHD Accurate-Mass Quadrupole Time-of-Flight (Q-TOF) LC/MS system (Agilent, USA). For mobile phases A and B, HPLC-grade water with 0·1% formic acid (Sigma, USA) and acetonitrile (Friendemann Schmidt, Australia) with 0·1% formic acid was used respectively. The nanopump flow rate: 0·3 uL/min. The Nanoflow gradient used was: 3 % B initial to 25 % B at 90 min, 40 % B at 120 min, 90 % B at 125 minutes for 5 min, and 3 % B at 130 min. The capillary pump flow: 2·5 uL/min. Capillary pump gradient: 3% B. The parameters for the MS instrument were following: operated in positive ion mode, drying gas (N2) flow: 5 L/min; drying gas temperature: 250°C; fragmenter: 175 V; skimmer: 65 V; capillary voltage: 1800 V; acquisition mode: auto MS/MS; scan range: 275–1,700 m/z (MS), 50–1,700 m/z (MS/MS); acquisition rate: 10 spectra/s (MS), 3 spectra/s (MS/MS); isolation width (MS/MS): narrow (∼1·3 m/z); collision energy: slope of 3·1 and intercept 1. Data dependent acquisition: 20 precursors per cycle was used and active exclusion after one spectrum for 0·5 min.  Precursor charge-state selection and preference (sorted by abundance) were set to: 2, 3 and >3. Mass correction was done for each spectrum using internal reference mass: (methyl stearate m/z: 299·294457 and HP-1221 m/z: 1221·990637). Agilent MassHunter LC/MS Data Acquisition software (version B.05.01) was used for instrumental control and data collection.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and analyses Protein annotation and statistical analysis was performed using PEAKS Studio 7·5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Canada), in which the raw mass data were processed and subjected to de novo sequencing with the following setting: except that: (i) parent mass error tolerance was 1.5 Da, (ii) fragment mass error tolerance was 0.5 Da, (iii) trypsin as digestion enzyme, (iv) carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da, C) as fixed modification, (v) oxidation (+15.99 Da, M) as variable modification, (vi) maximum variable post-translation modification allowed per peptide was three and (vii) the UniProtKB Human reference proteomes database, which comprised of 20,191 proteins, was used for identifications. Peptides were identified with PEAKS DB and filtered at 1% false discover rate (FDR). Proteins were filtered at 1 minimum unique peptide. Label-free quantification of protein abundances were estimated in each sample by correlation the average of the feature intensities of the three most highly responding peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
H.pylori, Proteomic, Lc/q-tof ms, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Malaya/ 
Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Sana’a University.
Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

### Submitter
Anis Al-Maleki

### Lab Head
Dr Jamuna Vadivelu
Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.


