### Accession
PXD040614

### Title
First description of Botrytis cinerea Extracellular vesicles proteome: Unrevealing new tools for its infection process

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are membranous particles released by different organisms. EVs carry several kinds of macromolecules implicated in cell communication. EVs have become an important topic in the study of pathogenic fungi, due to their relation with the fungal-host interactions. One of the essential research areas in this field is the characterization protein profile of EV cargo, because of plant fungal pathogens rely heavily on secreted proteins to invade their hosts. However, little is known about EVs of Botrytis cinerea, which is one of the most devastating phytopathogenic fungi.  The present study has two main objectives: the first isolation and characterization of B. cinerea EVs; and the description of their potential role during the infective process. All the experimental process was conducted in B. cinerea growing in mimimal salt medium supplemented with glucose as a constitutive stage, and deproteinized tomato cell walls (TCW) as virulence inductor. The isolation of EV was performed by differential centrifugation, filtration, ultrafiltration, and sucrose cushion ultracentrifugation. EV fractions were visualised by TEM using negative staining. Proteomic analysis of EV cargo was addressed by LC-MS/MS. The used methodology had allowed, for the first time, the correct isolation of B. cinerea EVs, and the identification of a high number of EV proteins, including potential EV markers. The isolated EVs displayed differences in the morphology under both assayed conditions. GO analysis of EV proteins showed an enrichment in cell wall metabolism and proteolysis under TCW. KEGG analysis also showed difference in EV function under both conditions, highlighting the presence of potential virulence/pathogenic factors implicated in cell wall metabolism, between others. This is the first evidence and characterization of B. cinerea EVs production, showing that EVs are essential in the infection process of B. cinerea and share crucial functions with the conventional secretion pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Three different fractions were subjected to protein extractions. Firstly, to identify proteins present inside the EVs, the vesicles were sonicated twice for 30 s with UP50H Compact Lab Homogenizer (amplitude 80%, cycle 0.5, 50 watts, 30 kHz; Hielscher Ultrasonics, Teltow, Germany) after adding 1% of SDS. Proteins from vesicle suspensions were then precipitated by adding 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone and incubating overnight at -80°C. On the other hand, proteins present in the supernatant of ultracentrifugation steps used as a control, were precipitated by adding 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone and incubating overnight at -80°C. Finally, proteins from mycelia were extracted using CK14 7 mL homogenizing kit (Precellys® 7 mL Soft Tissue Homogenizing Kit) by grinding 0,3 g mycelia in 6 mL of PBS +1% of SDS, with ceramic beads (1.4 mm zirconium oxide beads, Precellys; Bertin Technologies, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France) using a Minilys (Bertin Technologies, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France) at maximum level, 5 cycles of 30 sec. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 10000 x g for 10 min at 4°C, retaining the supernatant. Proteins were precipitated by adding 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone and incubating overnight at -80°C. Proteins were precipitated by centrifugation at 10000 x g for 15 min at 4°C, in each sample fraction (EVs, supernatant of ultracentrifugation and mycelium). Protein digestion was performed using FASP small scale protocol. To this aim, protein pellet was dissolved in denaturing buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 5mM DTT) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature for 30 minutes to allow proteins reduction. Then protein concentration was determined using Pierce 660 protein assay reagent (Thermo Scientific™, Massachusetts, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. 450 µL of 50 µg of protein aliquot diluted in buffer UA (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) was added to a 30 kDa cutoff filter unit (Vivacon 500, VN01H22; Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) and centrifuged at 14,000 xg for 10 minutes. Then the filter was washed with 450 µL of buffer UA at 14,000 xg for 10 minutes. Alkylation of protein was performed adding 100 µL of CAA solution (55 mM chloroacetamide, 8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and incubating at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. After centrifuging the filter at 14,000 xg for 10 minutes and washing it twice with 450 µL of buffer UA, 450 µL of dilution solution (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2) was added. Protein digestion was performed with 1:100 trypsin to protein ratio at 37ºC overnight. Peptides were collected by centrifuging the unit filter at 14,000 xg for 10 minutes and acidified with 20% of TFA solution (final concentration 0,5%). Peptides solution was filtered using C18 matrix packed in yellow pipette tips as described by Rappsilber et al [15]. C18 matrix was equilibrated with 75 μl Methanol, 75 μl Solution B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.5 % FA) and 75 μl Solution A (2 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA) by centrifugation at 1200 xg, 3 min. Peptide solution (max. 50 μg) was loaded by centrifugation at 800g for 5-10 min. The tip was washed with 75 μl solution A at 1200 xg, 3 min.). Peptides were eluted from the matrix with 25 μl solution B by centrifugation at 500g for 5 min. The elution was repeated step once. Eluted peptide was dry in a Vacuum Concentrator (Vacufuge Vacuum Concentrator 5301 Centrifuge; Eppendorf, Hamburgo, Alemania) for 40 min. Peptide pellet was resuspended in 10μl buffer A* (2 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA) and measure peptide concentration in Nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Scientific™, Massachusetts, USA). Peptide solution was diluted to 0.1μg/μl for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS experiment  Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA (10 µL) and diluted to 0.1 µg/µL for analysis. Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min : 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors. Data analysis  Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences of B. cinerea B05.10 proteome available at UniProt (UP000001798, downloaded 19th of July 2022) and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Comprehensive analysis of generated protein list was performed using the software Perseus 2.0.6.0. Identified proteins was filtered by removing contaminant proteins, proteins only identified by site or reverse sequence, proteins with less than two matching peptide or those that were not present in at least two biological replicates of one fraction. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and significance was determined using a  two sample t-test with a permutation-based FDR (0.01) for q-value calculation. P-value 0.01 and q-value 0.01 was used as cut-off for the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are membranous particles released by different organisms. EVs carry several sets of macromolecules implicated in cell communication. EVs have become a relevant topic in the study of pathogenic fungi due to their relationship with fungal-host interactions. One of the essential research areas in this field is the characterization protein profile of EVs since plant fungal pathogens rely heavily on secreted proteins to invade their hosts. However, EVs of <i>Botrytis cinerea</i> are little known, which is one of the most devastating phytopathogenic fungi. The present study has two main objectives: the characterization of <i>B. cinerea</i> EVs proteome changes under two pathogenic conditions and the description of their potential role during the infective process. All the experimental procedure was conducted in <i>B. cinerea</i> growing in a minimal salt medium supplemented with glucose as a constitutive stage and deproteinized tomato cell walls (TCW) as a virulence inductor. The isolation of EVs was performed by differential centrifugation, filtration, ultrafiltration, and sucrose cushion ultracentrifugation. EVs fractions were visualised by TEM using negative staining. Proteomic analysis of EVs cargo was addressed by LC-MS/MS. The methodology used allowed the correct isolation of <i>B. cinerea</i> EVs and the identification of a high number of EV proteins, including potential EV markers. The isolated EVs displayed differences in morphology under both assayed conditions. GO analysis of EV proteins showed enrichment in cell wall metabolism and proteolysis under TCW. KEGG analysis also showed the difference in EVs function under both conditions, highlighting the presence of potential virulence/pathogenic factors implicated in cell wall metabolism, among others. This work describes the first evidence of EVs protein cargo adaptation in <i>B. cinerea</i>, which seems to play an essential role in its infection process, sharing crucial functions with the conventional secretion pathways.

### Keywords
Botrytis cinerea; extracellular vesicles; proteome; infection tool; virulence factors, Cell wall degrading enzyme; unconventional secretion, Pathogenicity factors

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


