### Accession
PXD024726

### Title
Shotgun proteomic analysis of the marine cyanobacterium Prochlorococcus sp. MED4 exposed to titanium dioxide nanoparticles

### Description
Cell- and extracellular proteomes obtained from Prochlorococcus sp. MED4 cultures exposed to nTiO2 were analysed to investigate any molecular features of toxicity.

### Sample Protocol
Cell-dense cultures of Prochlorococcus sp. MED4 were routinely grown in Pro99 media. 30 mL culture was subbed into a 50 mL tissue culture flask. Incubations with nTiO2 were established at a concentration of 100 μg L-1 and cultures exposed for a period of 24 h under constant 10 μmol photons m−2 s−1 light intensity and shaking (100 rpm) at 23 oC. After 24 h, samples were immediately centrifuged for 10 mins at 4 oC at 4000 xg and pellets were immediately frozen in dry ice. The supernatants containing the extracellular proteome were filtered (0.22 μm) and stored at -20 oC.  Supernatants were thawed at room temperature and underwent trichloroacetic acid (TCA) protein precipitation as previously described [Christie-Oleza et al 2010 Marine Drugs]. Subsequently, cell and extracellular proteome pellets were resuspended in 1x LDS buffer (ThermoFisher) containing 1% beta-marcaptoethanol and run on a NuPage 4-12% Bis-Tris precast polyacrylamide gels. In-gel trypsin digestion and peptide recovery was performed [Shevchenko et al, 2006 Nat Protoc] followed by a nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion(Thermo Scientific)using settings as previously described [Christie-Oleza et al 2015 Proteomics].

### Data Protocol
RAW mass spectral files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 for peptide identification and protein label-free quantification using the Prochlorococcus sp. MED4 UniProt coding domain sequences (downloaded on 16/01/2018). Downstream statistical analysis was carried out using Perseus version 1.5.5.3.

### Publication Abstract
Nano-sized titanium dioxide (nTiO<sub>2</sub>) represents the highest produced nanomaterial by mass worldwide and, due to its prevalent industrial and commercial use, it inevitably reaches the natural environment. Previous work has revealed a negative impact of nTiO<sub>2</sub> upon marine phytoplankton growth, however, studies are typically carried out at concentrations far exceeding those measured and predicted to occur in the environment currently. Here, a series of experiments were carried out to assess the effects of both research-grade nTiO<sub>2</sub> and nTiO<sub>2</sub> extracted from consumer products upon the marine dominant cyanobacterium, <i>Prochlorococcus</i>, and natural marine communities at environmentally relevant and supra-environmental concentrations (<i>i.e.</i>, 1 &#x3bc;g L<sup>-1</sup> to 100 mg L<sup>-1</sup>). Cell declines observed in <i>Prochlorococcus</i> cultures were associated with the extensive aggregation behaviour of nTiO<sub>2</sub> in saline media and the subsequent entrapment of microbial cells. Hence, higher concentrations of nTiO<sub>2</sub> particles exerted a stronger decline of cyanobacterial populations. However, within natural oligotrophic seawater, cultures were able to recover over time as the nanoparticles aggregated out of solution after 72 h. Subsequent shotgun proteomic analysis of <i>Prochlorococcus</i> cultures exposed to environmentally relevant concentrations confirmed minimal molecular features of toxicity, suggesting that direct physical effects are responsible for short-term microbial population decline. In an additional experiment, the diversity and structure of natural marine microbial communities showed negligible variations when exposed to environmentally relevant nTiO<sub>2</sub> concentrations (<i>i.e.</i>, 25 &#x3bc;g L<sup>-1</sup>). As such, the environmental risk of nTiO<sub>2</sub> towards marine microbial species appears low, however the potential for adverse effects in hotspots of contamination exists. In future, research must be extended to consider any effect of other components of nano-enabled product formulations upon nanomaterial fate and impact within the natural environment.

### Keywords
Marine, Ecotoxicology, Cyanobacteria, Phytoplankton, Nanomaterials

### Affiliations
University of the Balearic Islands
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Craig Dedman

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph A. Christie-Oleza
University of the Balearic Islands


