### Accession
PXD011079

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of HeLa rtTA-HIV-ΔMls cells treated with 5342191, 9147791, or DMSO +/- Dox.

### Description
Proteomics analysis was used to determine the relative abundance of proteins in HeLa rtTA-HIV-ΔMls cells treated with a HIV-1 RNA processing inhibitor (5342191 or 9147791) or DMSO +/- Dox.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysate samples were submitted to SPARC BioCentre Molecular Analysis (The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada), trypsin digested, and TMT (10-plex) labeled for quantitation of proteins by LC-MS/MS as previously described (Plubell et al. 2017).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (1.4.1.14) and X! Tandem (CYCLONE 2010.12.01.1) to search and match sample results (42,128 or 42,175 entries, resp.) digested with trypsin within Homo sapiens in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database. Searches had a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine and TMT 10-plex of lysine and the N-terminus were specified as fixed modifications whereas deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were specified as variable modifications. In addition, ammonia loss of the N-terminus was specified as a variable modification in X! Tandem. FDR of 1% was accepted for protein and peptide identifications and calculated based on searches for reverse sequences from target decoys. Scaffold Q+ (Scaffold_4.8.7) was used to quantitate TMT 10-plex peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hiv-1, Inhibitors, Lc-ms/ms, Rna processing, Small molecules, Abundance, Proteome, Compounds, Protein

### Affiliations
Dept. of Medicine, University of Toronto, 67 College St., Rm 453, Toronto, ON, Canada, M5G 2M1
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, M5S 1A8

### Submitter
Raymond Wong

### Lab Head
Dr Alan Cochrane
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, M5S 1A8


