### Accession
PXD000967

### Title
Triple Null, a soybean bred to lack major seed allergen P34 and bioactive lectin and kunitz trypsin inhibitor

### Description
Seeds, including soybean (Glycine max), contain bioactive proteins with anti-nutritional and immunological properties that affect metabolism and assimilation of seed derived nutrients and as allergens that can induce escalating adverse immune responses. The presence of anti-nutritional proteins requires soybean protein to be processed by heat that results in energy costs and alteration of soybean protein’s physiochemical properties. Nulls for bioactive seed proteins have been isolated from the USDA soybean collection including Kunitz trypsin inhibitor (TI) and soybean agglutinin (LE) and immunodominant soybean allergen P34 proteins. Each of these nulls has the potential to partially address concerns of soybean feed/food consumption and stacked together these traits can form a basis for engineering improved soybean cultivars. A stack of cultivars of recessive nulls of TI, LE, and P34 was created in a cv Williams 82 background termed “Triple Null”. The reduction of these proteins slightly diminishes the overall protein content of the seed that was analyzed by 2D IEF/SDS gels and proteomics. P34 and Kunitz Trypsin Inhibitor nulls are frame shift mutants shown by mass spectroscopy to accumulate small amounts of authentic protein. Triple Null’s capacity for biolistic transformation was assessed showing that Triple Null can be transformed permitting stacking of transgene traits. Triple Null has possible application as a conventional feed/food source and for immunotherapy to mitigate soybean allergenic response and be leveraged as a transformation platform to stack other production or consumer traits.

### Sample Protocol
sample prep  Triple Null and Williams 82 seed samples derived from 5 individual seeds of homozygous lines were ground and defatted with acetone and were suspended in 1X laemmli sample buffer and the protein concentration was determined using the Pierce 660 nm assay as per the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce, Rockford IL). Thirty g of total protein per sample were electrophoresed by SDS-PAGE using a 7 cm 10% Mini-Protean TGX gel from BioRad (BioRad, Hercules CA) and stained with BioSafe Coomassie Blue (BioRad, Hercules CA). The gel lanes were digested with trypsin following reduction with DTT and alkylation with iodoacetamide, followed by peptide extraction from the gel lane. The peptide digest was cleaned up using Spec-C18 cartridges (Varian, Lake Forest, CA). Tandem mass spectrometry coupled to tandem liquid chromatography (LC-LC-MS/MS): For LC-LC-MS/MS analyses, a microbore HPLC system (Surveyor, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used with separate strong cation exchange (SCX) and reversed phase (RP) columns: a 100 μm I.D. capillary packed with 3.5 cm of 5 µm PolySulfoethyl-Asp strong cation exchanger (SCX, PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD) and a separate 100 μm I.D. capillary packed with 7.5 cm of 5 µm Zorbax Eclipse XDB-C18 material (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). The various sample as prepared an assayed above following trypsin digestion and subsequent clean up, were acidified using trifluoroacetic acid and 30 ug were manually loaded by pressure packing onto the SCX column. Peptides were eluted at 400 nanol/min by a RP gradient using Buffer A (water/0.1% formic acid), Buffer B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid), preceded by a salt bump using Buffer C (250 mM ammonium acetate), and Buffer D (1.5 M ammonium acetate). Twelve steps were then performed as follows: (step 1) 0% C with a RP gradient of 5-50% B over 90 minutes followed by a column clean-up of 5 minutes using 50-98% B and an equilibration of 20 minutes with 5% B. (steps 2-11) X% C (where X = 10-100% C increased in increments of 10%) loaded over 4 minutes and then washed with 5% B for 7 minutes followed by a RP gradient of 5-50% B over 60 minutes.  Each RP gradient was followed by a column clean-up of 5 minutes using 50-98% B and an equilibration of 20 minutes with 5% B.  (step 12) 50% D loaded over 4 minutes and then washed with 5% B for 7 minutes followed by a gradient of 5-50% B over 60 minutes.  The flow rate was 1.0 uL/min for the 7-minute washes following each salt bump and for each final 5% B equilibration step. Peptides were directly eluted into a custom-built nano electrospray ionization source of a ThermoFinnigan LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, Ca).  Electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied using a gold electrode via a liquid junction up-stream of the column. Spectra were scanned over the range 400-1500 atomic mass units (amu).  Automated peak recognition, dynamic exclusion (45 seconds), and daughter ion scanning of the top seven most intense ions were performed using the Xcalibur v 1.4 SR1 data system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose CA) (Andon et al 2002). The LC-LC-MS/MS analysis was repeated three times for a total of four replicates and the data were combined.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS spectra of peptides were analyzed with TurboSEQUEST v 3.1, a program that allows the correlation of experimental tandem MS data with theoretical spectra generated from known protein sequences. The peak list for the search was generated by Bioworks 3.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Parent peptide mass error tolerances were set at 1.5 amu and fragment ion mass tolerance set at 0.5 amu during the search. Iodoacetamide derivatives of cysteines and oxidation of methionines were specified as variable modifications during the database search, which took into account fully tryptic peptides, with up to two missed cleavages. The criteria that were used for a preliminary positive peptide identification are the same as previously described, namely peptide precursor ions with a +1 charge having a Xcorr >1.8, +2  Xcorr > 2.5 and +3 Xcorr > 3.5. A dCn score > 0.08 was also used as filtering criteria for reliable matched peptide identification. Tandem mass spectra were searched against a translated protein database derived from the reference Williams 82 soybean genome (). At the time of the search this custom protein database, to which were also added common contaminant proteins (eg: trypsin, keratins, etc). The results were also validated using X!Tandem, another search engine (Craig and Beavis 2004), and displayed with Scaffold v 3.6.1 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland OR) ( http://www.proteomesoftware.com/ ), a program that relies on various search engine results (ie: Sequest, X!Tandem, MASCOT) and which uses Bayesian statistics to reliably identify more spectra.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Null, Seed, Soybean, Allergen

### Affiliations
School of Plant Sciences University of Arizona, USA
University of Arizona, Tucson

### Submitter
Eliot Herman

### Lab Head
Dr Eliot Herman
School of Plant Sciences University of Arizona, USA


