### Accession
PXD017030

### Title
Tryp-N: A thermostable protease for the production of N-terminal argininyl and lysinyl peptides

### Description
Identification and characterization of Tryp-N, A thermostable protease for the production of N-terminal argininyl and lysinyl peptides

### Sample Protocol
Replication:  Three biological replicates of HEK293 cell lysate was enzymatically digested with Tryp-N, then assessed by LC/MS/MS.  Samples were fractionated (8 fractions each) for data collection.

### Data Protocol
Determination of unique peptide and protein numbers.  Peptides were filtered with a targeted FDR of 1%; proteins were filtered based on the presence of at least two mapping peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up proteomics is a mainstay in protein identification and analysis. These studies typically employ proteolytic treatment of biological samples to generate suitably sized peptides for tandem mass spectrometric (MS) analysis. In MS, fragmentation of peptides is largely driven by charge localization. Consequently, peptides with basic centers exclusively on their N-termini produce mainly b-ions. Thus, it was long ago realized that proteases that yield such peptides would be valuable proteomic tools for achieving simplified peptide fragmentation patterns and peptide assignment. Work by several groups has identified such proteases, however, structural analysis of these suggested that enzymatic optimization was possible. We therefore endeavored to find enzymes that could provide enhanced activity and versatility while maintaining specificity. Using these previously described proteases as informatic search templates, we discovered and then characterized a thermophilic metalloprotease with N-terminal specificity for arginine and lysine. This enzyme, dubbed Tryp-N, affords many advantages including improved thermostability, solvent and detergent tolerance, and rapid digestion time.

### Keywords
Lys-n, Tryp-n, Trypsin, Arginine, Ulilysin, Lysine, Proteomics, Metalloprotease, Thermostable, Lysarginase

### Affiliations
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory

### Submitter
Jonathan Ipsaro

### Lab Head
Dr Darryl J. Pappin
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory


