### Accession
PXD035992

### Title
Systematic evaluation of protein synthesis inhibition through global quantification of newly synthesized protiens

### Description
Manipulating protein synthesis is commonly applied in bio-related research to uncover protein functions and cellular activities. Multiple inhibitors with distinct mechanisms are widely used, but it is extraordinarily challenging to systematically determine and evaluate their inhibition efficiencies, especially for individual proteins. Newly synthesized proteins are direct products of protein synthesis, and thus their comprehensive and quantitative analysis provides a unique opportunity to study protein synthesis inhibition. Here, we systematically investigate and evaluate popular inhibitors through global quantification of nascent proteins in several types of human cells. The same inhibitor results in dramatic differences in the inhibition efficiencies for different proteins, and each inhibitor exhibits unique synthesis inhibition preference. Overall, nucleolar and ribosomal proteins have relatively higher inhibition efficiencies, while the efficiencies of proteins in the peroxisome and the Golgi are lower. The sensitivity of proteins to the inhibition can reflect the characteristics of each cell type. Moreover, proteins generally resistant to the inhibition have lower translation efficiency, among which chaperones are overrepresented. Systematic evaluation of protein synthesis inhibition aids in better understanding protein synthesis regulation and provides valuable information to the biology and biomedicine communities.

### Sample Protocol
Metabolic labeling and treatment with protein synthesis inhibitors For A549 and MCF7 cells, cells were grown in T-175 flask (SPL life science) until reach ~70% of confluency. Then all cells were detached, washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) (Sigma-Aldrich), and equally spilt into two 6-well plates (Corning) for the gel-based experiment, and into eight T-75 flasks for the MS-based experiments. Cells were then cultivated in the normal DMEM medium. For Jurkat and THP-1 cells, they are cultivated in RPMI medium until their density reach 106 cells/mL. Then all cells were washed with PBS and equally spilt into eight T-75 flasks. After 48 h, cells were starved by replacing the medium with DMEM (Athena) (for MCF7 and A549 cells) or RPMI (Athena) (for Jurkat and THP-1 cells) depleted of Lys and Met and 10% dialyzed FBS (DiFBS, R&D Systems) for 30 min before metabolic labeling. For the gel-based experiments, cycloheximide (CHX), puromycin (Puro), anisomycin (ANM), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (Sigma-Aldrich) were added to each well to the desired final concentrations at the same time.  For the MS-based experiments, CHX, Puro, ANM, and DMSO were added to separate flasks to a final concentration of 6.9 µM, 10.8 µM, 25.1 µM, and 0.1%, respectively.  Cells were metabolically labeled in the depleted DMEM containing heavy lysine (13C6 and 15N2, +8 Da, Lys8) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), azidohomoalanine (AHA) (Click Chemistry Tools), and 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Fisher Scientific) for 1 hour with same concentration of each inhibitor and DMSO, respectively. For the booster channel, cells were metabolically labeled with heavy lysine and AHA for 48 h. Then the cells were collected, and the cell numbers were counted using a hemocytometer. Newly synthesized protein enrichment and protein digestion The supernatants of the lysate were transferred to new tubes and incubated with dibenzocyclooctyne (DBCO) conjugated magnetic beads at 4 ˚C overnight. Newly synthesized proteins bearing the azido group were enriched through the click reaction between the azido and DBCO groups. Enriched proteins were then reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 °C for 25 min and subsequently alkylated by 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The beads were washed with 2 mL lysis buffer with 2.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 2.5% SDC four times at 95°C, 2 mL of 8 M urea in 100 mM HEPES pH=8.1 three times, 2 mL 50% isopropanol twice, and 2 mL of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) twice. The magnetic beads were resuspended in the digestion buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH=8.1, 1.6 M urea, and newly synthesized proteins were digested with 100:1 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C) (Wako) overnight at 37 ˚C with shaking. The digestion was quenched by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.4%. Digests were centrifuged to remove the precipitates and desalted using 50 mg SepPak tC18 cartridges (Waters).    TMT labeling and peptide fractionation by HPLC Purified peptides were lyophilized and resuspended in 100 μL of 100 mM HEPES pH = 8.5, and 30 μL ACN. For each cell line, samples were labeled by the TMT10plex reagent (Thermofisher). After a one-hour reaction, the excessive amount of the TMT reagents was quenched by adding 10 μL of 5% hydroxylamine. Labeled peptides in the same group were pooled, purified, and fractionated by high-pH reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) into 25 fractions with a 40-min gradient of 5-50% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH=10). The collected fractions were further purified by the StageTip method.   LC-MS/MS analysis Dried peptides were resuspended in 6 µL loading solution containing 5% ACN and 4% formic acid (FA), and 3 µl was loaded onto a microcapillary column packed with C18 beads (Magic C18AQ, 5 μm, 200 Å, 75 μm x 16 cm) by a Dionex WPS-3000TPLRS autosampler (UltiMate 3000 Thermostatted Pulled Loop Rapid Separation Wellplate Sampler). Peptides were separated by reversed-phase HPLC using an UltiMate 3000 binary pump with a 150-minute gradient designed for the TMT-labeled peptides. The full MS and MS2 were detected in a hybrid dual-cell quadrupole linear ion trap – Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Elite, Thermo Scientific, with Xcalibur 3.0.63 software) using a data-dependent Top15 method. Each cycle included one full MS scan (resolution: 60,000) in the Orbitrap at the automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1*106, followed by up to 15 MS/MS for the most intense ions. Selected ions were excluded from further analysis for 90 s. Ions with a single or unassigned charge were not sequenced. MS2 scans were activated by HCD at 40% normalized collision energy with an isolation width of 1.2 m/z and detected in the Orbitrap cell with a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
Database searching, data filtering, and protein quantification Raw data files recorded from the mass spectrometer were converted into the mzXML format. Mass spectra were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm (version 28) against a human proteome (Homo sapiens) database encompassing sequences of all proteins downloaded from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/9606). Each protein sequence was listed in both forward and reversed orientations to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide and protein identifications. The following parameters were used for the search: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 0.025 Da product ion mass tolerance; fully digested with Lys-C; up to two missed cleavages; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) and heavy lysine (+8.0142); fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the TMT labeling of lysine and the N-termini (+229.1630).  The target-decoy method (Elias and Gygi, 2007) was employed to evaluate and control the FDRs of peptide and protein identifications. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) was used to distinguish correct and incorrect peptide identifications using numerous parameters such as XCorr, ΔCn, and precursor mass error. After scoring, peptides with fewer than seven amino acids in length were discarded, and peptide spectral match was filtered to a less than 1% FDR based on the number of decoy sequences in the final data set.  The TMT reporter ion intensity in the MS2 spectra was used to quantify peptides. The isotopic information provided by Thermo was utilized to correct the ion intensity. The summed intensity for each protein was calculated based on all unique peptides from this protein in each sample. The average intensity of each duplicate was calculated, and the protein ratio under the treatment of each inhibitor was calculated as the ratio of the average intensity with the treatment to the average intensity without treatment. The inhibition efficiency of each protein was calculated by subtracting the protein ratio from one. The overall inhibition efficiency for each inhibitor was calculated by subtracting the ratio of the total ion intensity with the treatment to the total ion intensity without treatment from one. It should be noted that some proteins were upregulated during the inhibition, thus causing them to have a negative inhibition efficiency. We manually assigned their efficiencies as zero. This did not much affect our data analysis, as less than 20 out of thousands of proteins were found to have a negative efficiency in each treatment.

### Publication Abstract
Manipulation of protein synthesis is commonly applied to uncover protein functions and cellular activities. Multiple inhibitors with distinct mechanisms have been widely investigated and employed in bio-related research, but it is extraordinarily challenging to measure and evaluate the synthesis inhibition efficiencies of individual proteins by different inhibitors at the proteome level. Newly synthesized proteins are the immediate and direct products of protein synthesis, and thus their comprehensive quantification provides a unique opportunity to study protein inhibition. Here, we systematically investigate protein inhibition and evaluate different popular inhibitors, i.e. cycloheximide, puromycin, and anisomycin, through global quantification of newly synthesized proteins in several types of human cells (A549, MCF-7, Jurkat, and THP-1 cells). The inhibition efficiencies of protein synthesis are comprehensively measured by integrating azidohomoalanine-based protein labeling, selective enrichment, a boosting approach, and multiplexed proteomics. The same inhibitor results in dramatic variation of the synthesis inhibition efficiencies for different proteins in the same cells, and each inhibitor exhibits unique preferences. Besides cell type- and inhibitor-specific effects, some universal rules are unraveled. For instance, nucleolar and ribosomal proteins have relatively higher inhibition efficiencies in every type of cells treated with each inhibitor. Moreover, proteins intrinsically resistant or sensitive to the inhibition are identified and found to have distinct functions. Systematic investigation of protein synthesis inhibition in several types of human cells by different inhibitors provides valuable information about the inhibition of protein synthesis, advancing our understanding of inhibiting protein synthesis.

### Keywords
Bioorhogonal chemistry; protein synthesis inhibtion; protein inhibition efficiency; mass spectromety; multiplexed proteomics; newly synthesized proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Insititute of Technology
Georgia Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Kejun Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Ronghu Wu
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Insititute of Technology


