### Accession
PXD007971

### Title
In-depth analysis of differential protein expression in patients greater than 45 years old with papillary thyroid cancer through quantitative proteomics

### Description
Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) accounts for the predominant histological types of all thyroid cancers. Additionally, 15% PTC with LNM are unfortunately associated with increased radioiodine resistance, distant metastasis, recurrence and increased mortality. Additionally, 15% PTC with LNM are unfortunately associated with increased radioiodine resistance, distant metastasis, recurrence and increased mortality.Two proteomics research has been implemented to investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in pathogenesis of PTC patients younger than 45 years with LNM and identified several candidate biomarker.However, until now there is no study to comprehensively investigate the differential expressed proteins (DEPs) in PTC patients older than age 45 years.

### Sample Protocol
All 48 tumorous and paired normal tissues from 24 PTC patients ≥ 45 years were recruited to this study from the Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute (China) from January 2016 to April 2017. These tissues were collected from each patient by the same surgeon during surgical thyroidectomy. The tissues were immediately stored in liquid nitrogen and then at −80°C prior to use. The histopathologic and clinical characteristics of these patients are listed in Supplemental Table S1. On the basis of clinical and histopathologic features, PTC patients were categorized into three groups (Group N0, N1a and N1b) according to the N0, N1a, and N1b diseases, which were balanced for other variables including sex, pathological T (tumor) status, and M (metastases) status. Informed consent were obtained from all patients and this study was approved by Ethics Committee of Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) was used to analysis MS/MS raw data against the reviewed Swiss-Prot human FASTA database of UniProt (released on 20170721) using. The criteria for searching were set as follows according to the software recommendations: A maximum number of two missed trypsin/Lys-C cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set as 10 ppm (all MS in an Orbitrap mass analyzer) and 20 mmu (all MS2 spectra), respectively. Carbamidomethylation (C, +57.021 Da) and TMT-6plex (K and peptide N-terminus) were set as static modifications, and oxidation (methionine, M) was specified as the dynamic modification. The proteins and peptides identified within a 1% global FDR were selected for further analysis. Based on the reporter ion intensities per peptide, relative protein intensities were quantified. The protein median was used to normalize the experimental bias, and the minimum protein count was set as 20.

### Publication Abstract
Approximately 85% of histological subtypes of thyroid cancer are papillary thyroid cancer (PTC), and the morbidity and mortality of PTC patients rapidly increased due to lymph node metastases or distant metastasis. Therefore, it needs to distill an enhanced understanding of the pathogenesis of PTC patients with lymph node metastases or distant metastasis. We employed the TMT-based quantitative proteomics approach to identify and analyze differentially expressed proteins in PTC with different degrees of lymph node metastases. Compared with paired normal tissues, asporin is overexpressed in PTC-N0, PTC-N1a, and PTC-N1b tumorous tissues <i>via</i> proteomics, western blotting, and immunohistochemistry assays. Functionally, asporin is mainly expressed in the extracellular matrix, cell membrane, and cytoplasm of PTC tumorous tissues, and promotes thyroid cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Mechanistically, asporin, interacting with HER2, co-localizes HER2 on the cell membrane and cytoplasm, and the asporin/HER2/SRC/EGFR axis upregulate the expression of EMT-activating transcription factors through the MAPK signaling pathway. Clinically, asporin can be regarded as a serological biomarker to identify PTC patients with or without lymph node metastasis, and high expression of asporin in PTC tumorous tissues is a risk factor for poor prognosis.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, 45 years, Ptc

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, No 5 Dongdan Santiao, Dongcheng district, Beijing 100005, China.

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, No 5 Dongdan Santiao, Dongcheng district, Beijing 100005, China.


