### Accession
PXD039540

### Title
Anti-FLAG co-immunoprecipitation of FLAG-tagged DIDO isoforms and mutants in HEK293T cells

### Description
The analysis of interactome of different DIDO isoforms and mutants upon transient overexpression of FLAG-tagged constructs in HEK293T cells.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transiently transfected with CMV10 3xFLAG constructs expressing DIDO isoforms (DIDO1, DIDO2 and DIDO3) and DIDO mutants (DIDO1 ΔN, DIDO2 ΔN, DIDO3 ΔN and DIDO3 ΔSPOC).  Cells were lysed in the buffer containing 50mM Tris pH8, 150mM NaCal, 0.1% Triton, 1mM DTT, 50U/ml benzonase, EDTA-free proteinase inhibitors (Roche), 1mM PMSF, 2mM NaF. After immunoprecipitation with anti-FLAG magnetic beads, proteins were washed 1x in lysis buffer (without benzonase) and 4x in TBS. Beads with cross-linked antibody were transferred to new tubes and resuspended in 30 µL of 2 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature before adding 25 mM iodoacetamide and incubating for another 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Remaining iodoacetamide was quenched by adding 5 mM DTT and the proteins were digested with 150 ng trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) at room temperature for 90  min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube, the beads were washed with another 30 µL of 2 M urea in 50 mM ABC and the wash combined with the supernatant. After diluting to 1 M urea with 50 mM ABC we added 150 ng trypsin and digested overnight at 37°C in the dark. The digest was stopped by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and the peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.14.0) and the Uniprot human reference proteome (July 2018, www.uniprot.org) as well as a database of most common contaminants.  The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of three missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For label-free quantification the “match between runs” feature and the LFQ function were activated - all other parameters were left at default. Downstream data analysis was performed using the LFQ values in Perseus (version 1.6.2.1). Mean LFQ intensities of biological replicate samples were calculated and proteins were filtered for at least two quantified values being present in the three biological replicates. Missing values were replaced with values randomly selected from a normal distribution (with a width of 0.3 and a median downshift of 1.8 standard deviations of the sample population). To determine differentially enriched proteins we used the LIMMA package in R (version 3.5.1.) and applied the Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing to generate adjusted p-values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dido, Co-immunoprecipitation

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Laboratories Support GmbH

### Submitter
WeiQiang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Dea Slade
Medical University of Vienna, Austria


