### Accession
PXD005657

### Title
Direct evidence of the presence of cross-linked Aβ dimers in the brains of Alzheimer’s disease patients

### Description
Brain-derived amyloid-β (Aβ) dimers are associated with Alzheimer´s disease (AD). However, their covalent nature remains controversial. This feature is relevant, as a covalent cross-link would make brain-derived dimers (native dimers) more synaptotoxic than Aβ monomers and would make them suitable candidates for biomarker development. To resolve this controversy, we here present a three-step approach. First, we validated a type of synthetic cross-linked Aβ (CL Aβ) dimers, obtained by means of the photo-induced cross-linking of unmodified proteins (PICUP) reaction, as well-defined mimics of putative native CL Aβ dimers. Second, we used these PICUP CL Aβ dimers as standards to improve the isolation of native Aβ dimers and to develop state-of-the-art mass spectrometry (MS) strategies to allow their characterization. Third, we applied these MS methods to the analysis of native Aβ dimer samples allowing the detection of the CL [Aβ(6-16)]2 peptide comprising a dityrosine cross-link. This result demonstrates the presence of CL Aβ dimers in the brains of patients with AD and opens up avenues for establishing new therapeutic targets and developing novel biomarkers for this disease.

### Sample Protocol
nanoLC-MS/MS conditions for the identification of CL peptides and positions in PICUP CL Aβ(1-40) dimers  Trypsin or GluC digested PICUP CL Aβ(1-40) dimer samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Trap column (100 µm × 2 cm, 5 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 µL/min using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated using an Acclaim PepMap® RSLC C18 analytical column (75 µm × 50 cm, nanoViper, 2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) and a 100-min run at 200 nL/min, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 3 to 35% B in 120 min, from 35 to 50% B in 5 min, and from 50% to 85% B in 2 min, followed by isocratic elution at 85% B in 5 min (A= 0.1% FA in water, B= 0.1% FA in acetonitrile (ACN)). The column outlet was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate fitted to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Positive ESI was used with a spray voltage in the NanoMate source set to 1.6 kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120,000. The lock mass was user-defined at 445.12 m/z in each Orbitrap scan. The top speed (most intense) ions per scan were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) and detected in the Orbitrap. The ion count target value was 400,000 and 50,000 for the survey scan and for the MS/MS scan respectively. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 50,000 and activation Q was 0.250. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation. Immunoprecipitation of native Aβ dimer fractions Immunoprecipitation was performed by cross-linking the antibody to magnetic beads. Briefly, 5 μg of the Aβ-specific antibody 4G8 (1 mg/mL, epitope 17-24) was added to 50 μL of magnetic Dynabeads coated with Protein G (Life technologies, Oslo, Norway) and then incubated in an end-over-end mixer for 30 min at room temperature. After this time, the unbound antibody remaining was removed by washing twice with PBS at pH 7.4. The tubes were then placed in a magnetic particle concentrator and the supernatant was discarded. Antibody cross-linking to the magnetic Dynabeads was performed by adding 500 µL of 20 mM dimethyl pimelimidate solution in 0.2 M triethanolamine pH 8.5 and incubated in an end-over-end mixer for 30 min at room temperature. To quench the cross-linking reaction, 50 µL of 1 M Tris HCl at pH 7.5 was added to each tube and incubated in an end-over-end mixer for 1 h at room temperature. Beads were then washed once with 0.2 M glycine pH 2.5, twice with PBS-Tween 0.1%, and twice with 10 mM ammonium acetate at pH 8.5. The beads were then used to immunoprecipitate 650-800 μL SEC fractions eluting at 24 and 25 mL, assigned to the highest concentration of native Aβ dimers, and containing 555 ng/mL and 222 ng/mL, respectively (Figure S1). After an overnight incubation at 4°C, the beads were pelleted using a magnetic particle concentrator and washed three times with 10 mM ammonium acetate at pH 8.5. After the final wash, immunoprecipitated Aβ was eluted by adding 30 μL 0.5% FA in H2O, and gently tapping it. The FA elution was repeated twice. The eluate was neutralized by adding 600 μL of 50 mM ammonium carbonate and then frozen in liquid N2 and lyophilized. nanoLC-MS/MS conditions for bottom-up MS proteomic identification of cross-linked Aβ peptide [Aβ(6-16)]2  Samples prepared for bottom-up MS analysis were loaded onto a Symmetry C18 trap column (180 µm × 2 cm, 5 µm; Waters) at a flow rate of 15 μL/min, using a nanoAcquity Ultra Performance LCTM chromatographic system (Waters). The peptides were separated using a BEH130™ C18 analytical column (75 µm × 25 cm, 1.7 µm; Waters) and a 90-min run at a 250 nL/min, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients running from 1 to 35% B in 60 min, from 35 to 50% B in 5 min, and from 50% to 85% B in 3 min, followed by isocratic elution at 85% B for 10 min (A= 0.1% FA in H2O, B= 0.1% FA in acetonitrile (ACN)). The spectrometric analysis was done using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid mass spectrometer using two parallel events. The first event is an MS1 from m/z 400 to 1,000 Da at 120K resolution. In the second event, the mass spectrometer was operating in a parallel reaction monitoring mode, acquiring a full MS/MS scan in the Orbitrap at 30K resolution on the selected precursor ion (m/z 534.8444) corresponding to CL Aβ peptide [Aβ(6-16)]2 using CID. The collision energy was set to 35%, the Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target to 50,000 and the maximum injection time to 500 ms. MS data were analyzed with StravoX and Skyline. StavroX was used to analyze the MS/MS spectra.

### Data Protocol
To identify cross-linked peptides and determine cross-link positions, all data were processed using StavroX v3.6.2. Searches were run against a FASTA database, which contained the Aβ(1-40) sequence. Search parameters included trypsin and GluC enzyme, allowing for two missed cleavage sites, and for methionine oxidation as a dynamic modification. Given the proposed mechanism for PICUP described in the main text, the following cross-linking positions were considered: Y-Y, tyrosine-serine (Y-S), tyrosine-lysine (Y-K), and tyrosine-histidine (Y-H). Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance at 20 ppm. To establish the position of the cross-link, peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% and subsequently validated manually

### Publication Abstract
Brain-derived amyloid-&#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;) dimers are associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, their covalent nature remains controversial. This feature is relevant, as a covalent cross-link has been proposed to make brain-derived dimers (brain dimers) more synaptotoxic than A&#x3b2; monomers and would also make them suitable candidates for biomarker development. To resolve this controversy, we here present a three-step approach. First, we validated a type of synthetic cross-linked A&#x3b2; (CL A&#x3b2;) dimers, obtained by means of the photoinduced cross-linking of unmodified proteins (PICUP) reaction, as well-defined mimics of putative brain CL A&#x3b2; dimers. Second, we used these PICUP CL A&#x3b2; dimers as standards to improve the isolation of brain A&#x3b2; dimers and to develop state-of-the-art mass spectrometry (MS) strategies to allow their characterization. Third, we applied these MS methods to the analysis of brain A&#x3b2; dimer samples allowing the detection of the CL [A&#x3b2;(6-16)]<sub>2</sub> peptide comprising a dityrosine cross-link. This result demonstrates the presence of CL A&#x3b2; dimers in the brains of patients with AD and opens up avenues for establishing new therapeutic targets and developing novel biomarkers for this disease.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Alzheimer’s disease, Cross-linked dimers, Amyloid-β

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Baldiri Reixac 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain CBMN (UMR 5248), University of Bordeaux – CNRS – IPB, Institut Européen de Chimie et Biologie, 2 rue Escarpit, 33600, Pessac, France

### Submitter
Marina Gay

### Lab Head
Dr Natàlia Carulla
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Baldiri Reixac 10, 08028 Barcelona, Spain CBMN (UMR 5248), University of Bordeaux – CNRS – IPB, Institut Européen de Chimie et Biologie, 2 rue Escarpit, 33600, Pessac, France


