### Accession
PXD039577

### Title
Biofilm formation on human immune cells is a multicellular predation strategy of Vibrio cholerae

### Description
Biofilm formation is generally recognized as a bacterial defense mechanism against environmental threats, including antibiotics, bacteriophages, and leukocytes of the human immune system. Here, we show that for the human pathogen Vibrio cholerae, biofilm formation is not only a protective trait, but also an aggressive trait to collectively predate different types of immune cells. We find that V. cholerae forms biofilms on the eukaryotic cell surface using an extracellular matrix comprising primarily mannose-sensitive hemagglutinin pili, toxin-coregulated pili, and the secreted colonization factor TcpF, which is distinct from the matrix composition of biofilms on abiotic surfaces. These biofilms encase immune cells and establish a high local concentration of a secreted hemolysin to kill the immune cells, before the biofilms disperse in a c-di-GMP-dependent manner. Together, these results uncover a mechanism for how bacteria employ biofilm formation as a multicellular strategy to invert the typical relationship between the human immune system as the hunter and bacteria as the hunted.

### Sample Protocol
3E6 THP-1 monocytes were differentiated into macrophages using culture dishes with 60 mm in diameter as described before . Macrophages were washed three times with 5 ml PBS (pH 7.5).A total of 6 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer was added (MSHA pili/TcpF experiment: 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 5 % glycerol, 0.5 % NP40, pH 7.5; differential protein abundance experiment: 1% Sodium deoxycholate, 10  mM TCEP, 100 mM Tris, pH=8.5). Subsequently, macrophages were scraped off the surface and collected. Lysis of macrophages was achieved by vigorous pipetting every 5 min for a total time of 30 min on ice, followed by the usage of a tissue grinder. THP-1 Monocyte cells (3x106) were collected by centrifugation (200 g, 5 min) for each experiment and washed three times with 5 ml PBS. After the last wash step, monocytes were lysed in lysis buffer as described above. Lysates from macrophages and monocytes were stored at -80°C until further use. For pulldown experiments, Protino Ni-IDA 150 columns were used (Macherey-Nagel, cat. no. 745150.10) and all steps were performed at 4°C. After equilibrating the column according to the manufacturer’s protocol, the column was loaded with 1 mg of the purified 6x–His tagged bait protein (MshA, TcpF or GFP). After 30 min of incubation the column was drained by gravity. Subsequently, the lysate from macrophages or monocytes  was loaded onto the column. After the cell lysate passed through, the column was washed five times with 500 µL LEW buffer containing 40 mM imidazole. Finally, bound proteins were eluted three times with 240 µL LEW buffer containing 250 mM imidazole and precipitated with 100 % TCA (Sigma, cat. no. T6399). The pellet was washed with acetone and the proteins were dissolved in resuspension buffer (5 % SDS, 10 mM TCEP, 100 mM TEAB) for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
For affinity pulldown analysis, the acquired raw-files were searched by FragPipe using MSFragger (doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4256) against the human UniProt protein database (version Feb 2022) containing the predicted UniProt entries of tcpF and MshA from Vibrio Cholerae N16961 (EBI, release date 2022/5/12) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 20,755 sequences). Default settings were used for search, search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 2 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) and N-terminal acetlyation as a variable modification. A target-decoy search strategy was used in order to obtain a protein false discovery rate of 1%. Search results were analysed using the Scaffold software environment (https://www.proteomesoftware.com).

### Publication Abstract
Biofilm formation is generally recognized as a bacterial defense mechanism against environmental threats, including antibiotics, bacteriophages, and leukocytes of the human immune system. Here, we show that for the human pathogen Vibrio cholerae, biofilm formation is not only a protective trait but also an aggressive trait to collectively predate different immune cells. We find that V.&#xa0;cholerae forms biofilms on the eukaryotic cell surface using an extracellular matrix comprising primarily mannose-sensitive hemagglutinin pili, toxin-coregulated pili, and the secreted colonization factor TcpF, which differs from the matrix composition of biofilms on other surfaces. These biofilms encase immune cells and establish a high local concentration of a secreted hemolysin to kill the immune cells before the biofilms disperse in a c-di-GMP-dependent manner. Together, these results uncover how bacteria employ biofilm formation as a multicellular strategy to invert the typical relationship between human immune cells as the hunters and bacteria as the hunted.

### Keywords
Biofilm formation, Vibrio cholerae

### Affiliations
Alexander Schmidt,  Biozentrum, University of Basel Spitalstrasse 41, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland Tel. +41 61 207 0927, https://www.biozentrum.unibas.ch
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Thomas Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Alexander Schmidt,  Biozentrum, University of Basel Spitalstrasse 41, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland Tel. +41 61 207 0927, https://www.biozentrum.unibas.ch


