### Accession
PXD026904

### Title
CAMKK and CRAC channel regulate autophagy, differentiation and apoptosis in acute promylocytic leukemia cells treated by ATRA

### Description
ATRA is an active metabolite of vitamin A that is frequently used for the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) patients.  Despite the success of this treatment, some APL patients are refractory or relapse. This emphasis the need for new therapeutic strategies aiming to improve the anti-cancer effect of ATRA. We and other have previously shown that autophagy is activated during ATRA-induced granulocytic differentiation of acute promyelocytic leukemia cells. Although the transcription effect of ATRA on autophagy has been well-documented, little is known on the post-transcription/ post-translational  regulation autophagy in response to ATRA. Given the importance of calcium ions in the control of autophagy, we hypothesized that calcium ions are involved in the initiation of autophagy by ATRA in APL cells. We thus examined how ATRA regulate intracellular calcium and sense perturbation of Ca2+ responses to autophagy, differentiation and cell death in APL cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples were entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q-Exactive hybrid quadruplole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Ten microliters of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After 5 min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 350-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27% and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were done in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.5 algorithms were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Uniprot Homo sapiens database (75 091 entries, release May 20, 2020). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed for the trypsin. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation (M) and acetylation (K) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate at peptide level. Minora feature detector node (LFQ) was used along with the feature mapper and precursor ions quantifier. The normalization parameters were selected as follows : (1) Unique peptides (2) Precursor abundance based on intensity (3) Normalization mode : total peptide amount (4) Protein abundance calculation : summed abundances (5) Protein ratio calculation : pairwise ratio based and (6) Hypothesis test : t-test (background based). Quantitative data were considered for master proteins, quantified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides, a fold changes above 2 and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Calcium signaling, Cell death, Acute promyelocytic leukemai quantitative proteome, Differentiation, Autophagy

### Affiliations
a) Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers (CRC), Université de Paris, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut Universitaire de France, Paris, France.  b) Metabolomics and Cell Biology Platforms, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Mojgan Djavaheri-Mergny
a) Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers (CRC), Université de Paris, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Institut Universitaire de France, Paris, France.  b) Metabolomics and Cell Biology Platforms, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.


