### Accession
PXD004421

### Title
Hypoxia decreases the pathogenicity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa by reducing expression of multiple virulence factors.

### Description
Hypoxia is a feature of the microenvironment during P. aeruginosa infection in several disease states. We confirm that the pathogenicity of P. aeruginosa derived from sites of acute infection is higher than those derived from sites of chronic infection. Hypoxia attenuated the pathogenicity of acute but not chronic strains implicating a role for hypoxia in controlling virulence. Mass spectrometric analysis revealed reduced expression of multiple virulence factors in hypoxia including exotoxin A, alkaline protease and proteins important in the synthesis of pyoverdine. Inhibition of pyoverdine production by iron supplementation mimicked the effects of hypoxia. Finally, strains of P. aeruginosa which lacks a functional pseudomonas prolyl-hydroxylase domain containing protein (PPHD) do not respond to hypoxia implicating a possible role for PPHD as an oxygen-sensing determinant of pathogenicity. Understanding how hypoxia influences bacterial virulence will identify new targets for anti–infective therapy against P. aeruginosa.

### Sample Protocol
Cell free supernatant was ultracentrifugated at 100 000g, 4°C for 70 minutes (Optima L-100 XP, Beckman Coulter) and concentrated with amicon ultra  filters, 50K (Millipore). Concentrate was denatured by adding SDS to a concentration of 1%, 100 mM DTT and heated to 95°C for 5 minutes. Removal of SDS, alkylation and reduction was performed using the FASP protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Peptides were desalted and analysed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer as previously described (Farrell et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified by MaxLFQ (Cox et al., 2014) by searching with the MaxQuant version 1.5 against the Plasmodium reference proteome data base (Uniprot). Modifications included C Carbamlylation (fixed) and M oxidation (variable). Bioinformatic analysis was performed with the Perseus software suite.

### Publication Abstract
Our understanding of how the course of opportunistic bacterial infection is influenced by the microenvironment is limited. We demonstrate that the pathogenicity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains derived from acute clinical infections is higher than that of strains derived from chronic infections, where tissues are hypoxic. Exposure to hypoxia attenuated the pathogenicity of strains from acute (but not chronic) infections, implicating a role for hypoxia in regulating bacterial virulence. Mass spectrometric analysis of the secretome of P. aeruginosa derived from an acute infection revealed hypoxia-induced repression of multiple virulence factors independent of altered bacterial growth. Pseudomonas aeruginosa lacking the Pseudomonas prolyl-hydroxylase domain-containing protein, which has been implicated in bacterial oxygen sensing, displays reduced virulence factor expression. Furthermore, pharmacological hydroxylase inhibition reduces virulence factor expression and pathogenicity in a murine model of pneumonia. We hypothesize that hypoxia reduces P. aeruginosa virulence at least in part through the regulation of bacterial hydroxylases.

### Keywords
Hypoxia, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
ECRC, IGMM, University of Edinburgh
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
ECRC, IGMM, University of Edinburgh


