### Accession
PXD011952

### Title
Rapid Proteomic Screen of CRISPR Experiment Outcome by Data Independent Acquisition Mass Spectrometry: A Case Study for HMGN1

### Description
CRISPR-Cas gene editing holds substantial promise in many biomedical disciplines and basic research. Due to the important functional implications of non-histone chromosomal protein HMG-14 (HMGN1) in regulating chromatin structure and tumor immunity, we performed gene knockout of HMGN1 by CRISPR in cancer cells and studied the following proteomic regulation events. In particular we utilized DIA mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) and reproducibly measured more than 6200 proteins (protein- FDR 1%) and more than 82,000 peptide precursors in the single MS shots of two hours. HMGN1 protein deletion was confidently verified in all of the clone- and dish- replicates following CRISPR by DIA-MS. Statistical analysis revealed 144 proteins changed their expressions significantly after HMGN1 knockout. Functional annotation and enrichment analysis indicate the deletion of HMGN1 induces the histone inactivation, various stress pathways, remodeling of extracellular proteomes, and immune regulation processes related to complement and coagulation cascade and interferon alpha/ gamma response in cancer cells. These results shed new lights on the cellular functions of HMGN1. We suggest that DIA-MS can be reliably used as a rapid, robust, and cost-effective proteomic-screening tool to assess the outcome of the CRISPR experiments.

### Sample Protocol
cell pellets were suspended in 10M urea lysis buffer and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), ultrasonically lysed at 4°C for 2 minutes by two rounds using a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology). The mixtures were centrifuged at 18,000 g for 1 hour to remove the insoluble material. The supernatant protein amount was quantified by Bio-Rad protein assay. Protein samples were reduced by 10mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine for 1 hour at 37°C and 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 45 minutes at room temperature. All the samples were further diluted by 1:6 (v/v) with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and were digested with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:25 overnight at 37°C. The amount of the purified peptides was determined using Nanodrop ND-1000 (Thermo Scientific) and 1.5 μg peptides were injected in each LC-MS run.

### Data Protocol
The DIA runs were analysed with Spectronaut Pulsar version 12.0 (Biognosys AG, Switzerland). In the directDIA approach, DIA runs were directly searched against Swiss-Prot protein database (March 2018, 20,258 entries) with following settings: full tryptic allowing two missed cleavages, set carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification on all cysteines, set oxidation of methionines, protein N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Both precursor and protein FDR were controlled at 1%. As for quantification, interference correction function was enabled, and top 3 peptide precursors were summed for protein quantification. Data filtering was done with Qvalue sparse in this 12-sample experiment.. In panHuman approach, the published set of mass spectrometric assays for 10,000 human proteins was downloaded [39] and the protein quantitative results were summarized in the same way as directDIA. In both approaches, all the other parameters Spectronaut in are kept as default unless mentioned. To combine directDIA and panHuman results, the protein quantification results of those only acquired by panHuman library (but not by directDIA) were simply appended into the directDIA results.

### Publication Abstract
CRISPR-Cas gene editing holds substantial promise in many biomedical disciplines and basic research. Due to the important functional implications of non-histone chromosomal protein HMG-14 (HMGN1) in regulating chromatin structure and tumor immunity, gene knockout of HMGN1 is performed by CRISPR in cancer cells and the following proteomic regulation events are studied. In particular, DIA mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) is utilized, and more than 6200 proteins (protein- FDR 1%) and more than 82&#xa0;000 peptide precursors are reproducibly measured in the single MS shots of 2 h. HMGN1 protein deletion is confidently verified by DIA-MS in all of the clone- and dish- replicates following CRISPR. Statistical analysis reveals 147 proteins change their expressions significantly after HMGN1 knockout. Functional annotation and enrichment analysis indicate the deletion of HMGN1 induces histone inactivation, various stress pathways, remodeling of extracellular proteomes, cell proliferation, as well as immune regulation processes such as complement and coagulation cascade and interferon alpha/ gamma response in cancer cells. These results shed new lights on the cellular functions of HMGN1. It is suggested that DIA-MS can be reliably used as a rapid, robust, and cost-effective proteomic-screening tool to assess the outcome of the CRISPR experiments.

### Keywords
Crispr, Proteomics, Hmgn1, Dia

### Affiliations
Yale University
Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA

### Submitter
Wenxue Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA


