### Accession
PXD033964

### Title
Phagocytosis of Plasmodium falciparum ring-stage parasites predicts protection against malaria

### Description
Ring-infected erythrocytes are the predominant asexual stage in the peripheral circulation but are rarely investigated in the context of acquired immunity against Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Here we compare antibody-dependent phagocytosis of ring-infected parasite cultures in samples from a controlled human malaria infection (CHMI) study (NCT02739763). Protected volunteers did not develop clinical symptoms, maintained parasitaemia below a predefined threshold of 500 parasites/μl and were not treated until the end of the study. Antibody-dependent phagocytosis of both ring-infected and uninfected erythrocytes from parasite cultures was strongly correlated with protection. A surface proteomic analysis revealed the presence of merozoite proteins including erythrocyte binding antigen-175 and -140 on ring-infected and uninfected erythrocytes, providing an additional antibody-mediated protective mechanism for their activity beyond invasion-inhibition. Competition phagocytosis assays support the hypothesis that merozoite antigens are the key mediators of this functional activity. Targeting ring-stage parasites may contribute to the control of parasitaemia and prevention of clinical malaria.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite harvest: P. falciparum 3D7 parasite cultures were synchronized with D-sorbitol every 46 hours until a 20% parasitaemia was achieved. Mature infected erythrocytes (mIEs, 40-45 hours) were purified by magnetic-assisted cell sorting (MACS) and cultured with 2x volume of fresh uEs for 12 hours to allow invasion. The resultant ring culture (containing rIEs of 0-12 hours) was purified by a combination of MACS and D-sorbitol to remove unwanted mIEs. Uninfected erythrocytes: in control experiments, uEs (same batch and age as uEs used for parasite ring culture) were incubated for 24 hours, either in 24 hours-old culture supernatants (mixed culture containing at least 10% rIEs), or in fresh culture media.  Surface trypsinization: four experimental conditions were established each in four independent biological replicates; trypsinized ring cultures (~ 20% rIEs, ≤ 12 hours); mock-shaved ring cultures (~ 20% rIEs, ≤ 12 hours, not-trypsinized); trypsinized uEs in used media (see above) and trypsinized uEs in fresh media (see above). The cultures were washed gently with ice cold 1X PBS and 300 µl resuspended to make a final volume of 1 ml before digestion with 1 µg/ml of porcine-modified trypsin at 37°C for 30 minutes. Trypsinization was terminated by the addition of 10 mg/ml of soybean trypsin inhibitor, and erythrocytes pelleted by centrifugation (725 g for 30 seconds). Mock-shaved ring-cultures were treated identically except that trypsin was omitted during incubation. The resultant supernatant was centrifuged again at 16,000 g for 3 minutes at 4°C, peptides were quantified using the CYTATION|3 imaging reader (Thermo Fischer scientific) and analysed using the Gen 5 3.02 software.  Mass spectrometry: proteins (10µg per sample) were loaded on SDS-PAGE-gel, which ran only a short distance of 0.5 cm. After Coomassie staining the total sample was cut out unfractionated and used for subsequent trypsin digestion according to a slightly modified protocol 59 on a DigestPro MSi robotic system (INTAVIS Bioanalytical Instruments AG). Peptides were loaded on a cartridge trap column, packed with Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5µm, 300Å wide pore (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated in a three step, 120 min gradient from 3% to 40% ACN on a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 200 mm, Waters) carried out on a UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system. Eluting peptides were analyzed online by a coupled Q-Exactive-HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) running in data depend acquisition mode where one full scan at 120 k resolution was followed by up to 25 MSMS scans at 15 k resolution of eluting peptides at an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and a collision energy of 27 NCE. Unassigned and singly charged peptides were excluded from fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 60 sec to prevent oversampling of same peptides.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry: data analysis was carried out by MaxQuant version 1.6.3.3 61 using experiment specific databases (Plasmodium falciparum; Homo sapiens; total entries: 131126) extracted from Uniprot.org under default settings. Identification FDR cut-offs were 0.01 on peptide level and 0.01 on protein level. Match between runs option was enabled to transfer peptide identifications across raw files based on accurate retention time and m/z. Quantification was done using a label free quantification approach based on the MaxLFQ algorithm 62. A minimum of 2 quantified peptides per protein was required for protein quantification. Data were further processed by in-house compiled R-scripts to plot and filter data and the Perseus software package version 1.6.6.0 using default settings for further imputation of missing values and statistical analysis 63. To identify differentially abundant proteins, only protein groups were considered that had 3/4 none zero LFQ-values in at least one condition. If values for samples were missing, they were imputed by random values drawn from a down shifted (1.8 standard deviation) and narrowed (0.3 standard deviation) normal distribution of the according samples. Differences of two treatment conditions were calculated with two-sample t-tests utilizing Permutation-based FDR (0.05) and an S0 value of 0.1.  Identities and quantities of proteins and peptides were compared across the four experimental conditions. These were classified as differentially identified if they were relatively more abundant in the trypsin-shaved ring culture and uEs in used media compared to either absent or relatively less abundant in uEs in fresh media and mock-shaved ring cultures (two-sample-t-test). They were classified as comparably identified if the LFQ intensities were not statistically different across the samples in the four experimental conditions (two-sample-t-test).

### Publication Abstract
Ring-infected erythrocytes are the predominant asexual stage in the peripheral circulation but are rarely investigated in the context of acquired immunity against Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Here we compare antibody-dependent phagocytosis of ring-infected parasite cultures in samples from a controlled human malaria infection (CHMI) study (NCT02739763). Protected volunteers did not develop clinical symptoms, maintained parasitaemia below a predefined threshold of 500 parasites/&#x3bc;l and were not treated until the end of the study. Antibody-dependent phagocytosis of both ring-infected and uninfected erythrocytes from parasite cultures was strongly correlated with protection. A surface proteomic analysis revealed the presence of merozoite proteins including erythrocyte binding antigen-175 and -140 on ring-infected and uninfected erythrocytes, providing an additional antibody-mediated protective mechanism for their activity beyond invasion-inhibition. Competition phagocytosis assays support the hypothesis that merozoite antigens are the key mediators of this functional activity. Targeting ring-stage parasites may contribute to the control of parasitaemia and prevention of clinical malaria.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Ring stage

### Affiliations
Centre for Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany
KEMRI Wellcome Trust Research Programme

### Submitter
James Tuju

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Faith Osier
Centre for Infectious Diseases, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany


