### Accession
PXD041335

### Title
Mistranslation of the genetic code by a new family of bacterial transfer RNAs

### Description
The correct coupling of amino acids with transfer RNAs (tRNAs) is vital for translating genetic information into functional proteins. Errors during this process lead to mistranslation, where a codon is translated using the wrong amino acid. While unregulated and prolonged mistranslation is often toxic, growing evidence suggests that organisms, from bacteria to humans, can induce and use mistranslation as a mechanism to overcome unfavorable environmental conditions. Most known cases of mistranslation are caused by translation factors with poor substrate specificity or when substrate discrimination is sensitive to molecular changes such as mutations or post-translational modifications. Here we report two novel families of tRNAs, encoded by bacteria from the Streptomyces and Kitasatospora genera, that adopted dual identities by integrating the anticodons AUU (for Asn) or AGU (for Thr) into the structure of a distinct proline tRNA. These tRNAs are typically encoded next to a full-length or truncated version of a distinct isoform of bacterial-type prolyl-tRNA synthetase. Using two protein reporters, we showed that these tRNAs translate asparagine and threonine codons with proline. Moreover, when expressed in Escherichia coli, the tRNAs cause varying growth defects due to global Asn-to-Pro and Thr-to-Pro mutations. Yet, proteome-wide substitutions of Asn with Pro induced by tRNA expression increased cell tolerance to the antibiotic carbenicillin, indicating that Pro mistranslation can be beneficial under certain conditions. Collectively, our results significantly expand the catalog of organisms known to possess dedicated mistranslation machinery and provide support for the concept that mistranslation is a mechanism for cellular resiliency against environmental stress.

### Sample Protocol
sfGFP expression was induced with 0.15 % arabinose for 5 h. The suspension cultures were harvested and lysed with Bugbuster® (Merck Millipore) and roll-incubated at room temperature for 20 min in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 300 mM NaCl, 10 mM Imidazole, and cOmplete™ EDTA-free protease inhibitor mixture tablets (Roche), and 1 µL Benzonase® (Sigma-Aldrich). Lysed cells were centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 45 min at 4ºC. The lysate was passed through a TALON® Metal Affinity Resin (Takara Bio), and the proteins were eluted with 300 mM imidazole. Subsequently, the buffer with was exchanged to 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 100 mM NaCl using Amicon® Ultra-4 centrifugal filter units (10.000 k, Merck Millipore) following protein concentration using the same filter units. Samples were reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA before digestions with trypsin and LysC. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher), equipped with a nanospray ionization source in positive ion mode with a Thermo Fisher Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC System. Peptide mixtures were loaded into a PEPMAP100 C18 5uM trap column (ThermoFisher) at a constant flow of 30uL/min, holding at 60°C.  Peptides were eluted at a rate of 0.25 μL/min and separated using a PepSep reprosil c18, 1.9 μm, 15 cm ID 75 μM analytical column (Bruker) throughout a 60-minute gradient: 0-50 minutes; 4% - 32% Acetonitrile + 0.1% Formic acid, 50-55 minutes; 95% Acetonitrile + 0.1% Formic acid, and 55-60 minutes; 4% Acetonitrile + 0.1% Formic acid.   MS data were acquired using the data-dependent mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds. MS1 scan was performed in orbitrap within a range of 400-1600 m/z, at resolution 120000 and auto injection time with a standard AGC target. RF lens was set to 30%. Isolation for MS2 scans was performed in the quadrupole, with an isolation window of 0.7. MS2 scans were done in the linear ion trap at turbo scan rate, with an auto maximum injection time and a standard AGC target level. HCD was used for generating MS2 spectrum as fixed normalized collision energy of 30%. MS2 spectrum were acquired at 15000 resolution. All LC-MS/MS was performed at Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.

### Data Protocol
MS Raw Files were processed using PEAKS XPro (v10.6, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Ontario, Canada). The data was searched against a custom database containing the sfGFP sequence in the E. coli K12 Uniprot-reviewed database. Precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass error tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Semi-specific cleavage with trypsin or chymotrypsin was selected with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages.  A fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) on cysteine residues were specified.  Variable modifications of deamidation (+0.98 Da) on asparagine and glutamine, as well as oxidation (+15.99 Da) on methionine, were specified. The peptide false discovery rate was set to 1% for the database search and only confident mutations with an A-Score of 20 or higher and having minimum mutation ion intensities of 1% were considered. To ensure the accuracy in identifying mutations, we applied a false discovery rate (FDR) filter of <1% for peptide identification and minimum fragment ion intensity of 1% for each mutation.

### Publication Abstract
The correct coupling of amino acids with transfer RNAs (tRNAs) is vital for translating genetic information into functional proteins. Errors during this process lead to mistranslation, where a codon is translated using the wrong amino acid. While unregulated and prolonged mistranslation is often toxic, growing evidence suggests that organisms, from bacteria to humans, can induce and use mistranslation as a mechanism to overcome unfavorable environmental conditions. Most known cases of mistranslation are caused by translation factors with poor substrate specificity or when substrate discrimination is sensitive to molecular changes such as mutations or posttranslational modifications. Here we report two novel families of tRNAs, encoded by bacteria from the Streptomyces and Kitasatospora genera, that adopted dual identities by integrating the anticodons AUU (for Asn) or AGU (for Thr) into the structure of a distinct proline tRNA. These tRNAs are typically encoded next to a full-length or truncated version of a distinct isoform of bacterial-type prolyl-tRNA synthetase. Using two protein reporters, we showed that these tRNAs translate asparagine and threonine codons with proline. Moreover, when expressed in Escherichia coli, the tRNAs cause varying growth defects due to global Asn-to-Pro and Thr-to-Pro mutations. Yet, proteome-wide substitutions of Asn with Pro induced by tRNA expression increased cell tolerance to the antibiotic carbenicillin, indicating that Pro mistranslation can be beneficial under certain conditions. Collectively, our results significantly expand the catalog of organisms known to possess dedicated mistranslation machinery and support the concept that mistranslation is a mechanism for cellular resiliency against environmental stress.

### Keywords
Mistranslation, Genetic code, Translation, Protein synthesis, Trna, Streptomyces, Aminoacyl-trna synthetase

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.

### Submitter
Kyle Hoffman

### Lab Head
Dr Oscar Vargas-Rodriguez
Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA


