### Accession
PXD006253

### Title
Stichodactyla haddoni - Proteomic analysis of milked venom

### Description
To identify proteins present in the milked venom of the sea anemone Stichodactyla haddoni we used a bottom-up proteomics approach to analyze the digested 2DE gel spots, RP-HPLC fractions, as well as crude desalted venom.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues in venom proteins and peptides was performed using the volatile reagents triethylphosphine and iodoethanol. Reduced/alkylated venom was incubated overnight at 37°C in 10 μL of 40 ng/μL proteomics-grade trypsin (Sigma) in 40 mM NH4CO3, pH 8. The digested reduced/alkylated samples were then resuspended in a final concentration of 1% FA and centrifuged for 15 min at 12,000 g prior to LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against predicted coding sequences (CDSs) from the assembled transcriptome (see below) using ProteinPilot v4.5 (AB SCIEX). Searches were run as thorough identification searches, specifying tryptic digestion and the alkylation reagent as appropriate. Biological modifications and amino acid substitutions were allowed in order to maximize the identification of protein sequences from the transcriptome despite the inherent variability of toxins, potential isoform mismatch with the transcriptomic data, and to account for experimental artifacts leading to chemical modifications. We used a stringent detected protein threshold score of 5% false discovery rate (FDR) as calculated by decoy searches.

### Publication Abstract
Centipedes are among the most ancient groups of venomous predatory arthropods. Extant species belong to five orders, but our understanding of the composition and evolution of centipede venoms is based almost exclusively on one order, Scolopendromorpha. To gain a broader and less biased understanding we performed a comparative proteotranscriptomic analysis of centipede venoms from all five orders, including the first venom profiles for the orders Lithobiomorpha, Craterostigmomorpha, and Geophilomorpha. Our results reveal an astonishing structural diversity of venom components, with 93 phylogenetically distinct protein and peptide families. Proteomically-annotated gene trees of these putative toxin families show that centipede venom composition is highly dynamic across macroevolutionary timescales, with numerous gene duplications as well as functional recruitments and losses of toxin gene families. Strikingly, not a single family is found in the venoms of representatives of all five orders, with 67 families being unique for single orders. Ancestral state reconstructions reveal that centipede venom originated as a simple cocktail comprising just four toxin families, with very little compositional evolution happening during the approximately 50&#x2009;My before the living orders had diverged. Venom complexity then increased in parallel within the orders, with scolopendromorphs evolving particularly complex venoms. Our results show that even venoms composed of toxins evolving under the strong constraint of negative selection can have striking evolutionary plasticity on the compositional level. We show that the functional recruitments and losses of toxin families that shape centipede venom arsenals are not concentrated early in their evolutionary history, but happen frequently throughout.

### Keywords
Stichodactyla haddoni, Venom, Sea anemone

### Affiliations
Institute for Molecular Bioscience - UQ
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia

### Submitter
Bruno Madio

### Lab Head
Dr Glenn F. King
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia


