### Accession
PXD035392

### Title
STUB1 is an intracellular checkpoint for interferon gamma sensing

### Description
Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) leads to durable and complete tumour regression in some patients but in others gives temporary, partial or no response. Accordingly, significant efforts are underway to identify tumour-intrinsic mechanisms underlying ICB resistance. Results from a published CRISPR screen in a mouse model suggested that targeting STUB1, an E3 ligase involved in protein homeostasis, may overcome ICB resistance but the molecular basis of this effect remains unclear. Herein, we report an under-appreciated role of STUB1 to dampen the interferon gamma (IFNg) response. Genetic deletion of STUB1 increased IFNGR1 abundance on the cell surface and thus enhanced the downstream IFNg response as showed by multiple approaches including Western blotting, flow cytometry, qPCR, phospho-STAT1 assay, immunopeptidomics, proteomics, and gene expression profiling. Human prostate and breast cancer cells with STUB1 deletion were also susceptible to cytokine-induced growth inhibition. Furthermore, blockade of STUB1 protein function recapitulated the STUB1-null phenotypes. Despite these encouraging in vitro data and positive implications from clinical datasets, we did not observe in vivo benefits of inactivating Stub1 in mouse syngeneic tumour models - with or without combination with anti-PD-1 therapy. However, our findings elucidate STUB1 as a barrier to IFNg sensing, prompting further investigations to assess if broader inactivation of human STUB1 in both tumors and immune cells could overcome ICB resistance.

### Sample Protocol
CRISPR-engineered B16-F10 cells (gControl, gStub1 #1, and gStub1 #2) were seeded separately in 12-well plate (50,000 cells per well) with DMEM + 10% FBS. After overnight incubation, the culture media were replaced with fresh media (DMEM + 10% FBS) supplemented with 0.03 ng ml-1 of recombinant mouse IFNR&D Systems, #485-MI-100).After 24 h treatment, the cells were trypsinized, collected and washed twice with 0.5 ml PBS. The cell pellets collected from three independent experiments on separate day were lysed in 100 l of lysis buffer containing 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 50 g ml-1 of DNase (Roche, #10104159001), 50 g ml-1 of RNase (Roche, #10109169001) and Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, #78430) on ice for 30 min followed by 65 °C for 30 min. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000g at 10 °C for 30 min. Protein content was re-extracted from the pellet with 50 l of lysis buffer, sonicated with a single burst using a probe sonicator and heated at 95 °C for 10 min before centrifugation at 16,000g at 10 °C for 15 min. Lysates from first and second extractions were pooled. Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, # 23225). Detergent removal and protein digestion were performed in centrifugal suspension trap columns (Protifi, C02-micro) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 80 g protein extract from each sample was reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma, #43815) at 95 °C for 10 min and then alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, I2512) in the dark at ambient temperature for 30 min. The samples were acidified with 1.2% of phosphoric acid and mixed well with washing buffer consisting of 90% methanol and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The samples were transferred to the suspension trap columns and centrifuged at 4000 g for 30 s. The columns were washed 3 times with washing buffer. Proteins trapped in the suspension bed were digested in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with trypsin and endoproteinase Lys-C (Promega, V5073) at enzyme to protein ratio 1:25 in a 47 °C waterbath for 2 h. Peptides were eluted firstly with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then with 0.2% formic acid and lastly with 50% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid. The eluates were pooled and vacuum dried completely. Dried peptides were reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid in water, followed by injecting 4 g for mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were loaded on a reverse phase EASY-Spray column (50 cm  75 μm inner diameter) operated using Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 120 min linear gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. The Q-Exactive was operated in ‘top-10’ data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with full scan acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (scan range 2001800 m/z) with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6. The top ten most abundant ions from the full scan were isolated with an isolation width of 0.7 m/z and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27. MS/MS scan was acquired at a resolution of 30,000 with an AGC target of 1e5. The default charge state was set at 2 and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 10 s. Maximum ion injection time for full scan and MS/MS scan were 100 ms and 105 ms respectively.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using Sequest HT search engine where mass spectrometric data was searched against SwissProt TaxID 10090 mouse database (v2017-10-25). Percolator was used to validate search results based on the concatenated mode where only the best scoring PSMs (target/decoy) were considered. Trypsin was specified as the enzyme, cleaving after all lysine and arginine residues and allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification while variable modifications included oxidation of methionine, acetylation of N-terminus, N-terminal loss of methionine and N-terminal loss of metionine along with the addition of an acetyl group. The minimum peptide length required for protein identification was six amino acids. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set as 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Overall, a total of 3048 proteins were detected by mass spectrometry (n = 6 replicates per cell group, 3 biological replicates  2 mass spectrometry replicates).

### Publication Abstract
This paper presents an analytical approach on capturing the effect of incompressible, non-Newtonian, viscous, Casson nanofluid flow past a stretching/shrinking surface, under the influence of heat radiation and mass transfer parameter. The governing nonlinear partial differential equations are first transformed into a series of associated nonlinear ordinary differential equations with aid of predictable transformation, while numerical computations follow. The implied nanofluid here is aluminum oxide ([Formula: see text]). The analytical solution is exploited to reveal the accompanying non-dimensional boundary value problem and output results are employed to verify the method's reliability, where it is shown that they agree with current findings in the field. An incomplete gamma function is used to solve temperature equation analytically. We present various instances of the solution, depicting effects of the essential flow factor, the stretching/shrinking parameter, the mass transfer parameter, radiation parameter, and Prandtl number.

### Keywords
Mouse melanoma cell lines

### Affiliations
MSD Singapore

### Submitter
Simon Ng

### Lab Head
Dr Brian Henry
MSD Singapore


