### Accession
PXD018691

### Title
Truncated PARP1 promotes RNA Polymerase III during apoptosis

### Description
The N-terminal three zinc finger motifs of PARP1 are evolutionarily conserved in multicellular organism。However, during apoptosis, human PARP1 is mainly cleaved by caspase 3 at D214. As a result, the truncated PARP1 loses two N-terminal zinc finger motifs and only contains the third zinc finger motif, the BRCT domain, the WGR domain and the C-terminal catalytic domain. Interestingly, when we explored the domain architecture of PARP1 in other organisms, we found that similar to human tPARP1, PARP1 orthologs in several lower organisms do not have the N-terminal two zinc fingers or even they lack the third zinc finger motif. It indicates that even without the first two zinc finger motifs, tPARP1 may still catalyze ADP-ribosylation and play an important role in certain biological processes. To reveal the biological function of tPARP1, we performed tandem affinity purification and searched for the possible substrates.

### Sample Protocol
To capture tPARP1-interacting proteins, we generated a SFB-tagged tPARP1 dead enzymatic mutant stable cell line. Twenty 10-cm-dishes of SFB-mtPARP1 293T cells were harvested and the pellets were washed twice with ice-cold PBS followed by lysing in the NETN100. Cell lysates were cleaned by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 13000 rpm at 4 °C. The supernatants were incubated with streptavidin-beads for 2 hours at 4 °C. Biotin was used to elute the protein complex and S-beads were incubated with the eluted solution for another 2 hours at 4 °C. After four washes, the captured proteins were boiled in the 2 × SDS loading buffer and subjected to the SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was recovered after the sample running into the separate gel. The sample was sent to the Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility at Harvard Medical School.

### Data Protocol
xcised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (1).  Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min. followed by removal of acetonitrile.  Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac.  Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC.  After 45 min., the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces.  Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight.  Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid.  The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr).  The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis.    On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (2).  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column.    A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).    As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.  Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) (3).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.      References: 1. Shevchenko, et al., Anal Chem. 68:850-858, 1996 2. Peng, J and Gygi S.P. Proteomics: The move to mixtures, J. Mass Spec. Oct:36(10):1083-91 3. Eng. et al., J. Am. Soc. Mass. Spectrom. 5:976-989, 1994

### Publication Abstract
Caspase-mediated cleavage of PARP1 is a surrogate marker for apoptosis. However, the biological significance of PARP1 cleavage during apoptosis is still unclear. Here, using unbiased protein affinity purification, we show that truncated PARP1 (tPARP1) recognizes the RNA polymerase III (Pol III) complex in the cytosol. tPARP1 mono-ADP-ribosylates RNA Pol III in vitro and mediates ADP-ribosylation of RNA Pol III during poly(dA-dT)-stimulated apoptosis in cells. tPARP1-mediated activation of RNA Pol III facilitates IFN-&#x3b2; production and apoptosis. In contrast, suppression of PARP1 or expressing the non-cleavable form of PARP1 impairs these molecular events. Taken together, these studies reveal a novel biological role of tPARP1 during cytosolic DNA-induced apoptosis.

### Keywords
Turncated parp1, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Genetics and Epigenetics, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA
City of hope

### Submitter
Qian Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Qian Chen
Department of Cancer Genetics and Epigenetics, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA


