### Accession
PXD000517

### Title
Discovery of serum protein biomarkers of Active Tuberculosis in HIV- and HIV+ Individuals (US center)

### Description
The overall goal of the project is to identify candidate biomarkers of Active infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) in individuals with or without HIV. Samples were analyzed from two tuberculosis (TB) endemic countries, Brazil and South Africa (SA), as well as from the United States (US). The US site included patients that were in the early stages of Active TB, with mean symptom duration of 1.5 months. The subjects from the Brazil site had mean symptom duration of 6 months, and the SA site subjects had advanced TB. All sites also provided samples asymptomatic for TB or with Latent TB infection. The US and SA sites also had subjects with and without HIV co-infection, whereas the Brazilian subjects were all HIV-. This specific dataset corresponds to the Discovery step of the study, for the US center.

### Sample Protocol
Subjects were bled at the time of enrolment, and serum aliquots were stored at − 80 °C until testing. Sample processing, liquid chromatography MS (LC–MS) and multiplex MRM-MS were performed by individuals blinded to the classification and diagnosis of subjects. Samples were grouped into blocks containing each of the disease groups. The order of the samples within each block was randomized. Samples were depleted of abundant proteins using an HSA/IgG column (Agilent Technologie, Mississauga, ON) in tandem with an IgY14 and Supermix (Sigma, Oakville, Ont) column and the flow through digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:10. The digested samples were freeze-dried, resolubilized, and treated with TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) to reduce disulfide bonds. Samples were desalted by solid phase extraction using a 3 M Empore C18 desalting plate and distributed into 96-well plates and vacuum evaporated. Peptides were stored at −20 °C until use.

### Data Protocol
Samples were resuspended in 92.5/7.5 water/ACN + 0.2% formic acid and analyzed by LC–MS (nanoAcquity pump HPLC and Q-TOF mass spectrometer, Waters, Mississauga, Ont). Peptide separation was achieved using a Waters nanoAcquity Symmetry UPLC Trap column (180 μm × 20 mm, 5 μm particle size) and a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC BEH300 analytical column (150 μm × 100 mm, 1.7 μm particle size). The mobile phases were (A) 0.2% formic acid in water and (B) 0.2% formic acid in acetonitrile. For each sample approximately 2.5 μg was loaded onto the trap column for 4 min at a flow rate of 6 μL/min. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient (92.5% A to 75% A) at 0.6 μL/min for 57 min. MS spectra were acquired from 400–1600 Da. Components were detected and matched across all samples using the Elucidator software version 3.3.0.1.SP4.25 (Rosetta Biosoftware, Seattle, WA) and compared for relative peak intensity. All intensity values were log (base e) transformed, and after transformation values < 0 were replaced by 0. Intensity data was normalized to account for small differences in protein concentration between samples. A subset of the samples was used to create a reference sample against which all samples were then normalized. The normalization factors were chosen so that the median of log ratios between each sample and the reference sample over all the peptides was adjusted to zero.

### Publication Abstract
Biomarkers for active tuberculosis (TB) are urgently needed to improve rapid TB diagnosis. The objective of this study was to identify serum protein expression changes associated with TB but not latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection (LTBI), uninfected states, or respiratory diseases other than TB (ORD). Serum samples from 209 HIV uninfected (HIV(-)) and co-infected (HIV(+)) individuals were studied. In the discovery phase samples were analyzed via liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry, and in the verification phase biologically independent samples were analyzed via a multiplex multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (MRM-MS) assay. Compared to LTBI and ORD, host proteins were significantly differentially expressed in TB, and involved in the immune response, tissue repair, and lipid metabolism. Biomarker panels whose composition differed according to HIV status, and consisted of 8 host proteins in HIV(-) individuals (CD14, SEPP1, SELL, TNXB, LUM, PEPD, QSOX1, COMP, APOC1), or 10 host proteins in HIV(+) individuals (CD14, SEPP1, PGLYRP2, PFN1, VASN, CPN2, TAGLN2, IGFBP6), respectively, distinguished TB from ORD with excellent accuracy (AUC&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.96 for HIV(-) TB, 0.95 for HIV(+) TB). These results warrant validation in larger studies but provide promise that host protein biomarkers could be the basis for a rapid, blood-based test for TB.

### Keywords
Biomarker discovery, Plasma, Tuberculosis, Us center hiv, Cohorts, Latent tuberculosis, Serum

### Affiliations
Caprion Biosciences Inc. 
Caprion Proteomics Inc., 201 President-Kennedy Ave., Montreal H2X 3Y7, Quebec, Canada

### Submitter
Eustache Paramithiotis

### Lab Head
Dr Eustache Paramithiotis
Caprion Proteomics Inc., 201 President-Kennedy Ave., Montreal H2X 3Y7, Quebec, Canada


