### Accession
PXD012828

### Title
Rapid and reversible knockdown of endogenously tagged endosomal proteins via an optimized HaloPROTAC degrader

### Description
Combining pharmacologic and genetic tools to induce post-translational protein knockdown is an emerging approach to probe biology and validate potential drug targets. A powerful strategy involves expression of a protein of interest fused to an exogenous tag, allowing tag-directed chemical degraders to mediate protein ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation. Here, we combine improved HaloPROTAC degrader probes with CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing technology to trigger rapid degradation of endogenous target proteins. Our optimized probe, HaloPROTAC-E, a chloroalkane conjugate of high-affinity VHL binder VH298, induced reversible degradation of two endosomally-localized proteins, SGK3 and VPS34, with a DC50 of 3-10 nM. HaloPROTAC-E induced rapid (~50% degradation after 30 minutes) and complete (Dmax of ~95% at 48 h) depletion of Halo-tagged SGK3, blocking downstream phosphorylation of the SGK3 substrate NDRG1. This study exemplifies the combination of HaloPROTACs with CRISPR/Cas9 endogenous protein tagging as a useful method to induce rapid and reversible degradation of endogenous proteins to interrogate their function.

### Sample Protocol
THE cells were lysed with 8 M Urea buffer containing protease inhibitor and phosphoatase inhibitors. The cell lysate were digested with Lys-C and trypsin. The peptide from cell lysate digest were desalted using C18 column and were then labelled with TMT tag. The TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated by basic reverse phase chromatography. The concatenated 30 fractions were analysed by orbitrap Fusion Lumos operated in positive ion data dependent mode with synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 analysis for reporter ion quantitation.

### Data Protocol
All the acquired LC-MS data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer software v.2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot search engine. A maximum missed cleavages for trypsin digestion was set to 2. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0. 5 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT-10plex tags on N termini as well as lysine (+229.163 Da) were set as static modifications. Variable modifications were set as oxidation on methionine (+15.995 Da). Data were searched against a complete UniProt mouse (20,414 entry downloaded at July 2018) with a 1% FDR using Percolator.  Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation. Reporter ion abundances were corrected for isotopic impurities based on the manufacturer’s data sheets. Signal-to-noise (S/N) values were used to represent the reporter ion abundance with a co-isolation threshold of 50% and an average reporter S/N threshold of 10 and above required for quantitation from each MS3 spectra to be used. The S/N value of each reporter ions from each PSM were summed to represent the abundance of the quantified protein. The summed abundance is used for protein quantitation. The precursor spectra with higher than 50% co-isolation were excluded for quantitation. The total peptide amount was used for the normalisation. The quantification were calculated by the average of four biological replicates values. The standard deviation of four biological replicates lower than 25% were used for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Inducing post-translational protein knockdown is an important approach to probe biology and validate drug targets. An efficient strategy to achieve this involves expression of a protein of interest fused to an exogenous tag, allowing tag-directed chemical degraders to mediate protein ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation. Here, we combine improved HaloPROTAC degrader probes with CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing technology to trigger rapid degradation of endogenous target proteins. Our optimized probe, HaloPROTAC-E, a chloroalkane conjugate of high-affinity VHL binder VH298, induced reversible degradation of two endosomally localized proteins, SGK3 and VPS34, with a DC<sub>50</sub> of 3-10 nM. HaloPROTAC-E induced rapid (&#x223c;50% degradation after 30 min) and complete ( D<sub>max</sub> of &#x223c;95% at 48 h) depletion of Halo-tagged SGK3, blocking downstream phosphorylation of the SGK3 substrate NDRG1. HaloPROTAC-E more potently induced greater steady state degradation of Halo tagged endogenous VPS34 than the previously reported HaloPROTAC3 compound. Quantitative global proteomics revealed that HaloPROTAC-E is remarkably selective inducing only degradation of the Halo tagged endogenous VPS34 complex (VPS34, VPS15, Beclin1, and ATG14) and no other proteins were significantly degraded. This study exemplifies the combination of HaloPROTACs with CRISPR/Cas9 endogenous protein tagging as a useful method to induce rapid and reversible degradation of endogenous proteins to interrogate their function.

### Keywords
Degradation, Haloprotac, Vps34

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
1 Medical Research Council (MRC) Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Houjiang Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Dario Alessi
1 Medical Research Council (MRC) Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


