### Accession
PXD042822

### Title
Cyclophilin A isomerization of Septin 2 mediates abscission during cytokinesis

### Description
The isomerase activity of Cyclophilin A is important for midbody abscission during cell division, however to date, midbody substrates remain unknown. In this study, we report that the GTP-binding protein Septin 2 interacts with Cyclophilin A. We highlight a dynamic series of Septin 2 phenotypes at the midbody, previously undescribed in human cells. Furthermore, Cyclophilin A depletion or loss of isomerase activity is sufficient to induce phenotypic Septin 2 defects at the midbody. Structural and molecular analysis reveals that Septin 2 proline 259 is important for interaction with Cyclophilin A. Moreover, an isomerisation-deficient EGFP-Septin 2 proline 259 mutant displays defective midbody localisation, and undergoes impaired abscission, consistent with data from cells with loss of Cyclophilin A expression or activity. Collectively, this data reveals Septin 2 as a novel interacting partner and isomerase substrate of Cyclophilin A at the midbody that is required for abscission during cytokinesis in cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
K562 cells were transiently transfected with pEGFP or pEGFP-CypAWT, lysed 48 hr later and subjected to immunoprecipitation as described below (see ‘Co-immunoprecipitation’) using GFP-Trap© beads (ChromoTek, GmbH). Immunoprecipitated proteins were digested as described previously by Turriziani et al., 2014 [36]; in brief, proteins were first incubated in 60 µL Elution Buffer 1 (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.5, 5 µg/mL trypsin) at 27°C on a shaker for 30 min. Samples were then subjected to centrifugation at 13,000 RPM for 30 s and the resulting supernatant was collected. 25 µL Elution Buffer 2 (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.5, 1 mM dithiothreitol) was then added to each sample followed by centrifugation at 13,000 RPM for 30 s each, and the resulting supernatant was collected. This step was repeated once more, and both supernatants were combined and incubated at room temperature overnight. Samples were alkylated by the addition of 20 µL iodoacetamide (5 mg/mL) and incubation in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 1 µL 100% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid to each sample, and 100 µL of each sample was immediately loaded onto equilibrated handmade C18 StageTips containing Octadecyl C18 disks (Supelco). Equilibration of the tips was achieved using 50 µL 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA, followed by centrifugation and addition of 50 µL 0.1% (v/v) TFA. TFA was discarded, and the samples were desalted by 2x50 µL 0.1% (v/v) TFA and eluted with 2x25 µL 50% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA. The resulting eluates were pooled and concentrated using a CentriVap Concentrator (Labconco) to 5 µL, before dilution to a final volume of 15 µL using 0.1% (v/v) TFA. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 13,000 RPM and subjected to Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) using a Nanoflow Ultimate 3000 LC and Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). Three experimental replicates were injected twice, and data was acquired in automatic data-dependent switching mode, selecting the 12 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files and label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using MaxQuant (Ver. 1.3.0.5). Default settings were used unless stated otherwise; the initial search was set at 20 ppm (main search performed at 6 ppm mass accuracy and 20 mass deviation for fragment ions), data was searched against a human database (Uniprot: HUMAN), false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for both peptides and proteins, minimum peptide length of 6, and LFQ with a minimum ratio count set to 1. Specific proteins were identified based on their fold change and p-values derived from t-test calculations; proteins with a fold change of > 2 and p-values of < 0.01 were considered specific. Fold changes were calculated by dividing the EGFP-CypAWT immunoprecipitation LFQ intensities by the EGFP control LFQ intensities, while t-tests were performed using the average LFQ values obtained between the EGFP and EGFP-CypAWT immunoprecipitations.

### Publication Abstract
The isomerase activity of Cyclophilin A is important for midbody abscission during cell division, however, to date, midbody substrates remain unknown. In this study, we report that the GTP-binding protein Septin 2 interacts with Cyclophilin A. We highlight a dynamic series of Septin 2 phenotypes at the midbody, previously undescribed in human cells. Furthermore, Cyclophilin A depletion or loss of isomerase activity is sufficient to induce phenotypic Septin 2 defects at the midbody. Structural and molecular analysis reveals that Septin 2 proline 259 is important for interaction with Cyclophilin A. Moreover, an isomerisation-deficient EGFP-Septin 2 proline 259 mutant displays defective midbody localisation and undergoes impaired abscission, which is consistent with data from cells with loss of Cyclophilin A expression or activity. Collectively, these data reveal Septin 2 as a novel interacting partner and isomerase substrate of Cyclophilin A at the midbody that is required for abscission during cytokinesis in cancer cells.

### Keywords
Human, Septin 2, K562 cells, Cyclophilin a, Cytokinesis, Cancer

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, University College Dublin, School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute Belfield Dublin 4
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Philip Cotter

### Lab Head
Dr Margaret M. McGee
Associate Professor, University College Dublin, School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute Belfield Dublin 4


