### Accession
PXD026047

### Title
Streptococcus suis, LC-MSMS, EGCG

### Description
EGCG effect proteomic  profiles of Streptococcus suis

### Sample Protocol
Untargeted Metabolomics Analyses were performed on Agilent 1290 Infinity LC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa-Clara, California, USA) combined with an AB SCIEX Triple TOF 6600 System (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). Chromatographic separation was performed on ACQUITY BEH Amide 1.7 µm (2.1 × 100 mm) and ACQUITY HSS T3 1.8 µm (2.1 × 100 mm) columns for both positive and negative models. The mobile phase contained A (25 mM ammonium acetate and 25 mM ammonium hydroxide in water) and B (acetonitrile). The gradient elution program was 95% B from 0 to 0.5 min, and was linearly reduced to 65% B from 0.5 to 7 min, and then was reduced to 40% B in 1 min and kept for 0.1 min, finally, increased to 95% B in 0.1 min and kept for 2.9 min. The ESI source conditions were set as follows: Ion Source Gas1 (Gas1) as 60, Ion Source Gas2 (Gas2) as 60, curtain gas (CUR) as 30, source temperature: 600℃, IonSpray Voltage Floating (ISVF) ±5500 V. In MS only acquisition, the instrument was set to acquire over the m z-1 range 60-1000 Da, and the accumulation time for TOF MS scan was set at 0.20 s spectra-1. In auto MS/MS acquisition, the instrument was set to acquire over the m z-1 range 25-1000 Da, and the accumulation time for product ion scan was set at 0.05 s spectra-1. The product ion scan is acquired using information dependent acquisition (IDA) with high sensitivity mode selected. The collision energy (CE) was fixed at 35 V with ±15 eV. Declustering potential (DP) was set as ±60 V.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were converted to MzXML files using Proteo Wizard MS Convert and processed using XCMS for feature detection, retention time correction and alignment. The metabolites were identified by accuracy mass (<25 ppm) and MS/MS data which were matched with the laboratory’s self-built database (Applied Protein Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China). For the multivariate statistical analysis, the MetaboAnalyst (www.metaboanalyst.ca) web-based system was used. After the Pareto scaling, principal component analysis (PCA) and partial least-squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) were performed. The significant different metabolites were determined based on the combination of a statistically significant threshold of variable influence on projection (VIP) values obtained from PLS-DA model and two-tailed Student’s t test (p value) on the raw data, and the metabolites with VIP values larger than 1.0 and p values less than 0.1 were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Streptococcus suis</i> (<i>S. suis</i>) is a highly virulent zoonotic pathogen and causes severe economic losses to the swine industry worldwide. Public health security is also threatened by the rapidly growing antimicrobial resistance in <i>S. suis</i>. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop new and safe antibacterial alternatives against <i>S. suis</i>. The green tea polyphenol epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) with a number of potential health benefits is known for its antibacterial effect; however, the mechanism of its bactericidal action remains unclear. In the present, EGCG at minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) showed significant inhibitory effects on <i>S. suis</i> growth, hemolytic activity, and biofilm formation, and caused damage to <i>S. suis</i> cells <i>in vitro</i>. EGCG also reduced <i>S. suis</i> pathogenicity in <i>Galleria mellonella</i> larvae <i>in vivo</i>. Metabolomics and proteomics analyses were performed to investigate the underlying mechanism of antibacterial activity of EGCG at MIC. Many differentially expressed proteins involved in DNA replication, synthesis of cell wall, and cell membrane, and virulence were down-regulated after the treatment of <i>S. suis</i> with EGCG. EGCG not only significantly reduced the hemolytic activity of <i>S. suis</i> but also down-regulated the expression of suilysin (Sly). The top three shared KEGG pathways between metabolomics and proteomics analysis were ABC transporters, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis. Taken together, these data suggest that EGCG could be a potential phytochemical compound for treating <i>S. suis</i> infection.

### Keywords
Streptococcus suis, Lc-msms，egcg

### Affiliations
HHubei Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Wuhan, China ubei Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Wuhan, China
Hubei Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Ting Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Yongxiang Tian
HHubei Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Wuhan, China ubei Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Wuhan, China


