### Accession
PXD027161

### Title
Original TIMS-TOF pro BSA data sets for MaxLynx, a novel computational proteomics workflow for XL-MS integrated into the MaxQuant environment.

### Description
Cross-linking combined with mass spectrometry (XL-MS) provides a wealth of information about the 3D structure of proteins and their interactions. We introduce MaxLynx, a novel computational proteomics workflow for XL-MS integrated into the MaxQuant environment and here we have tested the performance of MaxLynx on the data sets that were generated by using a Bruker timsTOF pro instrument.

### Sample Protocol
Bovine serum albumin (GERBU Biotechnik GmbH, #1062) was dissolved in 50 mM PBS pH 7.0 and the protein solution was transferred into Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL centrifugal filters (10 kDa NMWCO). After several rounds of dilution with 50 mM PBS pH 7.0 and re-concentration by centrifugation to remove potential interfering small molecules, the protein concentration was adjusted to 10 µM and proteins were crosslinked at a molar ratio of crosslinker to protein of 25 : 1 by addition of 1 µL 50 mM disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO, ThermoFisher Scientific, #A33545) and 50 mM disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea (DSBU, Bruker Daltonics, #1881355) in DSMO, respectively. After overnight reaction at 4 °C, the reactions were quenched by addition of 100 µL 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5. Proteins were denatured by buffer-exchange to 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 8M urea, and reduced/ alkylated by incubation with DTT (5 mM) for 30 min and iodoacetamide (15 mM) for 20 min at room temperature. Proteins were buffer-exchanged to 50 mM ABC and digested with 4 µg Trypsin Gold (Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega, #V5280) for 1 h at 37 °C. The flowthrough after centrifugation was combined with the flowthrough from an additional wash of the filters with 200 µL water with 0.1% formic acid. After evaporation of solvent by SpeedVac Vacuum concentration, peptides were resuspended in water with 0.1% formic acid. 200 ng digested sample was analyzed with a NanoElute coupled to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). Peptides were separated on an Aurora C18 column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm particle size, Ionoptics, AUR2-25075C18A-CSI) at a flow rate of 0.4 µL/min at 50 °C. The following gradient was used: Within 60 min from 2 to 17% B, within 30 min from 17 to 25% B, within 10 min from 25 to 37% B, within 10 min from 37 to 80% B, isocratic at 80% B for 10 min. Solvent A was water with 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Mass spectra were recorded from m/z 100 -1700 and inverse reduced mobility of 0.6 - 1.52 Vs/cm2. Charge states for PASEF were set to 3-5 and selected ions were fragmented by TIMS stepping with two 1/K0-dependent collision energies (collision energies linearly interpolated between 0.85 – 1.2 Vs/cm2 to 25 – 55 and to 30 – 70 eV). 10 PASEF MS/MS scans were triggered per cycle (2.23 sec).

### Data Protocol
The search database contains the bovine serum albumin protein plus Pyrococcus furiosus (PFU) proteins. The search settings are as follow: variable modification is oxidation of methionine with one maximum number of modification per peptide and the fixed modification is of carbamidomethyl of cysteine. Trypsin is the enzyme with maximum missed cleavage of 3. The default MaxLynx cross link search settings plus using either DSSO or DSBU (both as heterobifunctional as a lysine residue can be linked to lysine, serine, threonine and tyrosine residues). The minimum peptide length of 6 and the maximum peptide mass of 6000 Da, without including contaminants. The default MaxQuant maximum charge was changed from 4 to 6 for the Bruker TIMS instrument settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cross-linking

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany

### Submitter
Sule Yilmaz

### Lab Head
Dr Juergen Cox
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany


