### Accession
PXD038183

### Title
Venom composition and pain-causing toxins of the Australian great carpenter bee Xylocopa aruana

### Description
Most species of bee are capable of delivering a defensive sting which is often painful. A solitary lifestyle is the ancestral state of bees and most extant species are solitary, but information on bee venoms comes predominantly from studies on eusocial species. In this study we investigated the venom composition of the Australian great carpenter bee, Xylocopa aruana Ritsema, 1876. We show that the venom is relatively simple, composed mainly of one small amphipathic peptide (XYTX1-Xa1a), with lesser amounts of an apamin homologue (XYTX2-Xa2a) and a venom phospholipase-A2 (PLA2). XYTX1-Xa1a is homologous to, and shares a similar mode-of-action to melittin and the bombilitins, the major components of the venoms of the eusocial Apis mellifera (Western honeybee) and Bombus spp. (bumblebee), respectively. XYTX1-Xa1a and melittin directly activate mammalian sensory neurons and cause spontaneous pain behaviours in vivo, effects which are potentiated in the presence of venom PLA2. The apamin-like peptide XYTX2-Xa2a was a relatively weak blocker of small conductance calcium-activated potassium (KCa) channels and, like A. mellifera apamin and mast cell-degranulating peptide, did not contribute to pain behaviours in mice. While the composition and mode-of-action of the venom of X. aruana are similar to that of A. mellifera, the greater potency, on mammalian sensory neurons, of the major pain-causing component in A. mellifera venom may represent an adaptation to the distinct defensive pressures on eusocial Apidae.

### Sample Protocol
A single adult female X. aruana specimen was collected with permission of the landholders at Aroona station, Queensland, Australia. The venom apparatus was dissected in PBS. Venom glands were placed directly in RNAlater and stored at −20 °C, and venom was squeezed from the dissected venom reservoir and venom duct into 20 µL water and stored at −20 °C. The total amount of venom collected from the individual, estimated from A280 measured using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA), was 142 µg. Using TRIzol (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA), total RNA (148 ng) was extracted from the venom glands for transcriptome sequencing. Complementary DNA library preparation and sequencing was performed by the UQ Institute for Molecular Bioscience Sequencing Facility.  A combination of top-down proteomics of native and reduced and alkylated venom, and bottom-up proteomics of reduced, alkylated and trypsin-digested venom was used to examine the venom composition of the individual X. aruana. Two aliquots of venom (10 µg each) were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Gas phase reduction and alkylation was performed according to the protocol described by Hale et al. (2004) 100 µL of reduction/alkylation reagent (50% (v/v) ammonium carbonate, 48.75% ACN, 1% 2-iodoethanol, 0.25% triethylphosphine was added to the lid of each 1.5 mL tube containing dried venom, which was then inverted, closed, and incubated at 37 °C for 90 min. One aliquot of reduced and alkylated venom was then digested by incubating with trypsin (20 ng/µL) overnight at 37 °C, according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Three venom samples (10 µg each)—native venom, reduced and alkylated venom, and reduced, alkylated and trypsin-digested venom—were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Samples were separated on a Nexera uHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) with a Zorbax stable-bond C18 column (2.1 x 100 mm; particle size, 1.8 µm; pore size, 300 Å; Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA), using a flow rate of 180 µL/min and a gradient of 1–40% solvent B (90% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA)) in 0.1% FA over 25 min, 40–80% solvent B over 4 min, and analyzed on an AB Sciex 5600 TripleTOF (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA; operated with Analyst TTF v1.8) mass spectrometer equipped with a Turbo-V source heated to 550 °C. MS survey scans were acquired at 300 to 1800 mass/charge ratio (m/z) over 250 ms, and the 20 most intense ions with a charge of +2 to +5 and an intensity of at least 120 counts were selected for MS/MS. The unit mass precursor ion inclusion window mass within 0.7 Da and isotopes within 2 Da were excluded from MS/MS, with scans acquired at 80 to 1400 m/z over 100 ms and optimized for high resolution.

### Data Protocol
To generate a transcriptome, a dual-indexed library was constructed with the TruSeq-3 Stranded mRNA Sample Prep Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) with oligo (dT) selection and an average insert size of 180 base pairs. The sample was pooled in a batch of 20 samples, and 150-cycle paired-end sequencing was performed on an Illumina NextSeq 500 instrument. Adapter trimming of demultiplexed raw reads was performed using fqtrim v0.9.7,27 followed by quality trimming and filtering using prinseq-lite v0.20.4.28 Error correction was performed using BBnorm tadpole, part of the BBtools package. Trimmed and error-corrected reads were assembled using Trinity v2.4.029 with a k-mer length of 31 and a minimum k-mer coverage of 2. Assembled transcripts were annotated using a BLASTX30 search (E value setting of 1e−3) against the UniRef90 database. Estimates of transcript abundance were performed using the RSEM31 plugin of Trinity (align_and_estimate_abundance). Using TransDecoder, Transcripts were translated and filtered to open-reading frames (>30 amino acid residues). This was used as a search database for ProteinPilot.  Using ProteinPilot v5.0 (SCIEX), MS/MS spectra were searched against the translated venom apparatus transcriptome. Transcripts encoding venom components were then manually examined using the Map-to-Reference tool of Geneious v10.2.6,33 where two paralogues of XYTX1-Xa1a were reassembled. These were then reincorporated back into the complete transcriptome, estimation of transcript abundance repeated, and a second, final ProteinPilot search performed. Peptides identified by ProteinPilot were validated by comparison of experimentally derived MS/MS peaks against a theoretical peak list generated using MS-Product in ProteinProspector v5.22.1 (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/cgi-bin/msform.cgi?form=msproduct).

### Publication Abstract
Most species of bee are capable of delivering a defensive sting which is often painful. A solitary lifestyle is the ancestral state of bees and most extant species are solitary, but information on bee venoms comes predominantly from studies on eusocial species. In this study we investigated the venom composition of the Australian great carpenter bee, Xylocopa aruana Ritsema, 1876. We show that the venom is relatively simple, composed mainly of one small amphipathic peptide (XYTX<sub>1</sub>-Xa1a), with lesser amounts of an apamin homologue (XYTX<sub>2</sub>-Xa2a) and a venom phospholipase-A<sub>2</sub> (PLA<sub>2</sub>). XYTX<sub>1</sub>-Xa1a is homologous to, and shares a similar mode-of-action to melittin and the bombilitins, the major components of the venoms of the eusocial Apis mellifera (Western honeybee) and Bombus spp. (bumblebee), respectively. XYTX<sub>1</sub>-Xa1a and melittin directly activate mammalian sensory neurons and cause spontaneous pain behaviours in vivo, effects which are potentiated in the presence of venom PLA<sub>2</sub>. The apamin-like peptide XYTX<sub>2</sub>-Xa2a was a relatively weak blocker of small conductance calcium-activated potassium (K<sub>Ca</sub>) channels and, like A. mellifera apamin and mast cell-degranulating peptide, did not contribute to pain behaviours in mice. While the composition and mode-of-action of the venom of X. aruana are similar to that of A. mellifera, the greater potency, on mammalian sensory neurons, of the major pain-causing component in A. mellifera venom may represent an adaptation to the distinct defensive pressures on eusocial Apidae.

### Keywords
Toxin, Apamin, Melittin, Xylopin, Apidae, Carpenter bee, Xylopinin, Hymenoptera

### Affiliations
University of Queensland
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.

### Submitter
Vanessa Schendel

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Samuel D. Robinson
Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.


