### Accession
PXD041924

### Title
Taxanes trigger cancer cell killing in vivo by inducing non-canonical T cell cytotoxicity

### Description
Secretome analysis of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells treated with docetaxel. Analysis of EV fraction and soluble fraction from 6x10^6 mouse splenic T cells that had been treated with either control or docetaxel.

### Sample Protocol
Mass-spectrometry of conditioned media and extracellular vesicles T cells isolated from the mouse spleen were treated with PBS or docetaxel (10 nmol/L) for 72h, in the absence of FBS. For analysis of the conditioned media, conditioned media were collected and T cells were removed by centrifugation.To analyse the proteins contained in EVs, EVs were isolated using sepharose beads, as described in the relevant Method sub-section of this manuscript. For each repeat, we isolated the EVs released by 6x10^6 T cells treated with PBS or with docetaxel. Samples were processed for mass-spectrometry as follows. Proteins in the conditioned media were precipitated with subsequent addition of 4x (v/v) MeOH, 1x (v/v) CHCl3 and 3x (v/v) MQ. The protein pellet was resuspended in digestion buffer, containing 1% SDC, 100 mmol/L Tris pH 8.5, 5 mmol/L Tris(20carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 30 mmol/L CAA. Trypsin (1:50) and LysC (1:100) were added and proteins were digested overnight at 37oC. Digestion was terminated and SDC was precipitated by addition of 10% FA to a final concentration of 0.5% FA (v/v). SDC was removed by centrifugation. Peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB plates (Waters). LC-MS/MS Microflow LC-MS/MS was performed using an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480. Lyophilized phosphopeptides were resuspended in 1 % (v/v) formic acid and injected, trapped and washed on a trap-column (µ-Precolumn, 300µm i.d. x 5mmC18 PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å (Thermo Scientific, Cat. No. 160454)) for 5 min at a flow rate of 5 μL/minute with 92 %buffer A (0.1 FA, in HPLC grade water). Peptides were subsequently transferred onto an analytical column (75μm x50 cm Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7μm, Agilent Technology, packed in-house) and separated at 40°C at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min using a 175 min (for conditioned media samples) or a 90 min (for EVs) linear gradient from 9% to 36% buffer B (0.1% FA, 80 %ACN). Electrospray ionization was performed using 1.9kV spray voltage and a capillary temperature of 275°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode: full scan MS spectra (m/z 375 – 1,600) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution for a maximum injection time set to auto-mode with a standard AGC target. High resolution HCD MS2 spectra were generated using a normalized collision energy of 28%. MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 (isolation window of 1.4Th) with a standard AGC target and an automatic maximum injection time. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state as well as charge state of 1+ or superior/equal to 6+ were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0) and the Andromeda search engine was used to search against  Mus Musculus database (Uniprot reviewed, 17090 entries) with the following parameters: trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02 Da) as a fixed modification and  methionine oxidation (15.99 Da) as variable modification. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm at the MS1 level and 20 ppm at the MS2 level. The False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein identification using a target-decoy approach, minimum peptide length was set to 7 residues. Relative label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm with the minimum ratio count set to 2. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and only proteins with at least two valid values in each conditions were considered. Relative label-free quantification was performed using iBAQ algorithm, intensities were log2 transformed and only proteins with at least two valid values were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T cell therapy, Extracellular vesicles, T cells, Taxanes, In vivo mode of action

### Affiliations
NKI

### Submitter
Jacco van Rheenen

### Lab Head
Dr Jacco van Rheenen
NKI


