### Accession
PXD028834

### Title
Global profiling of the proteomic changes associated with the post-testicular maturation of mouse spermatozoa

### Description
Spermatozoa acquire fertilization potential during passage through a highly specialized region of the extra-testicular ductal system known as the epididymis. In the absence of de novo gene transcription or protein translation, this functional transformation is extrinsically driven via the exchange of varied macromolecular cargo between spermatozoa and the surrounding luminal plasma. Key among these changes is a substantive remodeling of the sperm proteomic architecture, the scale of which has yet to be fully resolved. Here, we have exploited quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to define the extent of changes associated with the maturation of mouse spermatozoa; reporting the identity of an unprecedented >6,000 proteins, encompassing the selective loss and gain of several hundred proteins. Further, we demonstrate epididymal driven activation of RHOA mediated signaling pathways is an important component of sperm maturation. These data contribute molecular insights into the complexity of proteomic changes associated with epididymal sperm maturation.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, 250 µL of chilled lysis buffer [4% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC); 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)], was added to each sample and immediately heated (95°C, 5 min) to inactivate endogenous proteases and phosphatases. Samples were sonicated (4 × 20 s cycles, 75% output power), and an aliquot taken to determine protein concentration using a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). All samples were diluted to equal protein amounts (120 µg) in 270 µL of lysis buffer in 2 mL deep well plates. Samples were reduced and alkylated [100 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride; 400 mM 2-chloroacetemide], using a Thermomixer (Eppendorf; Hamburg, Germany), samples were incubated for 5 min at 45°C (1,500 rpm). Enzymatic digestion was achieved using Lys-C and trypsin, at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w/w) and incubated overnight at 37°C with shaking (1,500 rpm). 50 µL peptides were aliquoted into fresh PCR tubes for each sample, comprising ~7.5µg. Each sample was diluted 1:1 with HPLC grade water to lower SDC concentration below 1% and vortexed briefly, followed by the addition of 100 µL of 99% ethylacetate/1% TFA and mixing for 5 min at room temperature (2,000 rpm). The resultant 200 µL was transferred to styrenedivinylbenzene-reverse phase sulfonated (SDB-RPS) StageTips for desalting. StageTips were centrifuged at 1,500 × g for 3 min and subsequently washed with 100µL 99% ethylacetate/1% TFA (1,500 × g, 3 min). Finally, StageTips were washed with 100 µL each of 99% isopropanol/1% TFA and 0.2% TFA/5% acetonitrile, eluted with 60 µL of 5% NH4OH/80% acetonitrile, dried by vacuum concentration and re-suspended in MS loading buffer (2% acetonitrile/0.3% TFA). Purified sperm peptides were subjected to off-line high pH fractionation, prior to analysis by high resolution nano liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). Reverse phase nLC-MS/MS was performed on 12 high pH concatenated fractions using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 75 μm × 20 mm trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for pre-concentration and online de-salting. Separation was then achieved using an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 75 μm × 250 mm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), employing a curved gradient of acetonitrile (2 - 35%, 46 min; 35 - 95%, 4 min; 95% - 2%, 10 min) over 60 min. Full MS/data dependent acquisition MS/MS mode was utilized on Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 4.2.47) with the Orbitrap mass analyzer set at a resolution of 60,000, to acquire full MS with an m/z range of 350 – 1500, incorporating a normalized automatic gain control target of 300% and maximum fill times of 50 ms. The 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation with a collisional energy of 30%. MS/MS fragments were measured at an Orbitrap resolution of 15,000 using standard mode for automatic gain control target and maximum fill times of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of each sample group’s raw files were performed separately using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). SEQUEST HT was used to search against the UniProt Mus musculus database (25,285 sequences, downloaded 30th July 2020). Database searching parameters included up to two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Trypsin was designated as the digestion enzyme. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while acetylation (K, N-terminus) and oxidation (M) were designated as dynamic modifications. Interrogation of the corresponding reversed database was also performed to evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identification using Percolator on the basis of q-values, which were estimated from the target-decoy search approach. To filter out target peptide spectrum matches over the decoy-peptide spectrum matches, a fixed FDR of 1% was set at the peptide level. Each protein list was exported from Proteome Discoverer 2.4 as an Excel file and further refined to include only those with a quantitative value (label-free quantification; Minora Feature Detector) in each of the three biological replicates and two or more unique peptides. By exception, proteins with one unique matched peptide were included in the analysis if the coverage sequence (%) of that protein was equal to or greater than the average sequence coverage of the full complement of proteins with two or more unique peptides. All sample groups were combined, and raw abundance values were normalized using Perseus, version 1.6.10.43

### Publication Abstract
Spermatozoa acquire fertilization potential during passage through a highly specialized region of the extratesticular ductal system known as the epididymis. In the absence of de novo gene transcription or protein translation, this functional transformation is extrinsically driven via the exchange of varied macromolecular cargo between spermatozoa and the surrounding luminal plasma. Key among these changes is a substantive remodeling of the sperm proteomic architecture, the scale of which has yet to be fully resolved. Here, we have exploited quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to define the extent of changes associated with the maturation of mouse spermatozoa; reporting the identity of &gt;6,000 proteins, encompassing the selective loss and gain of several hundred proteins. Further, we demonstrate epididymal-driven activation of RHOA-mediated signaling pathways is an important component of sperm maturation. These data contribute molecular insights into the complexity of proteomic changes associated with epididymal sperm maturation.

### Keywords
Epididymis, Spermatozoa, Sperm maturation, Male fertility, Sperm proteome, Proteomics, Acrosome reaction, Mass spectrometry, Rhoa

### Affiliations
The University of Newcastle
Reproductive Science Group, Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science School of Environmental and Life Sciences College of Engineering, Science and Environment

### Submitter
David Skerrett-Byrne

### Lab Head
Dr Brett Nixon
Reproductive Science Group, Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science School of Environmental and Life Sciences College of Engineering, Science and Environment


