### Accession
PXD032140

### Title
Mass spectrometry identifies insoluble candidate RBPs in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

### Description
To discover RBPs with increased insolubility in a human ALS model, we applied a well established dual-SMAD inhibition-based protocol (Fang et al., 2019; Markmiller et al., 2021; Markmiller et al., 2018; Martinez et al., 2016) to generate iPSC-MN from six control iPSC lines, from four iPSC lines originating from two sALS patients, and from two iPSC lines originating from fALS patients with pathogenic variants in the TARDBP gene (Table S1; Figure S1A). No difference in differentiation capacity was observed (Figure S1B-G), resulting in average 40% ISL1+ MN (Figures S1G), comparable to numbers observed in large scale MN differentation studies (Baxi et al., 2022). The susceptibility of ALS MN to sodium arsenite-induced stress was not changed (Figure S1H and I). Next, we asked which proteins exhibit an increased insolubility in our ALS iPSC-MN. We fractioned iPSC- MN by lysis in radio-immunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer, followed by ultracentrifugation and solubilization of RIPA insoluble proteins in urea buffer. The ultracentrifugation-cleared RIPA insoluble protein fraction is widely used to study protein insolubility in the context of neurodegeneration (Nuber et al., 2013; Walker et al., 2015). Label-free mass spectrometry of the insoluble protein fraction was utilized to identify proteins that are insoluble in sALS and fALS, relative to control iPSC-MNs (Figure 1A). Gene ontology (GO) analysis of the 100 proteins (top 2.9% of all detected proteins) with the highest label free quantification (LFQ) intensities in controls (Figure S1J) revealed that ‘unfolded protein binding’ (corrected P = 7.95 x 10-16) and ‘structural constituent of cytoskeleton’ (corrected P = 1.47 x 10-10) were among the 10 most significantly enriched GO terms, indicating enrichment of insoluble proteins (Figure S1K). Principle component analysis of the insoluble fractions did not distinguish ALS from control samples, suggesting that the overall insoluble proteome is not changed (Figure S1L). At threshold P ≤ 0.05 (Welch’s t-test) and fold change ≥ 1.5, we identified 88 proteins enriched in the insoluble fraction in ALS samples relative to control (Figure 1B). When the sample labels were randomly shuffled, we observed an average of 7.5 proteins (~12-fold lower) as differentially enriched at the same statistical thresholds, indicative of an ALS-specific protein insolubility pattern (Figure 1C). The 88 candidate proteins included cytoskeletal components and motor proteins, functional categories associated with prominent ALS in vitro phenotypes (Akiyama et al., 2019; Egawa et al., 2012; Fazal et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2017; Kreiter et al., 2018) (Figure 1D). Notably, 5 RBPs, NOVA1, ELAVL4, FXR2, RBFOX2, and RBFOX3 were also enriched (Figure 1D). The NOVA1 paralog NOVA2 was significantly enriched (P = 0.03) but did not meet our enrichment threshold (fold change = 1.36). Interestingly, insoluble TDP-43 protein was not significantly different in ALS and control (P = 0.98; fold change = 0.97). Western blot analysis confirmed the increase in insolubility of NOVA1, NOVA2, ELAVL4, RBFOX2 and RBFOX3 (Figure 1E and 1F). The soluble protein levels of NOVA1 and NOVA2 were also increased (Figure 1F). In conclusion, we identified 5 RBPs with elevated insoluble protein levels of ALS-iPSC-MNs.

### Sample Protocol
The MNs, which form a dense network of cells, were washed with warm DPBS. The sheet of cells was transferred to a 1.5ml Eppendorf tube and centrifuged. After removing the supernatant, the pellet weight was determined. For 1μg cell pellet, 4μl of ice cold RIPA buffer were added to facilitate the lysis of the cells. The cell lysate was sonicated for five minutes with 30s on/off on a low intensity level using a Bioruptor. Afterwards, the lysate was centrifuged at 100,000g for 30min at 4°C. This supernatant represents the soluble protein fraction. The pellet was washed with ice-cold RIPA once and then resuspended in 4μl urea buffer (7M urea, 3M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30mM Tris) per original μg of pellet weight. Subsequently, the suspension was sonicated using a Bioruptor under the same conditions as described before. The sonicated suspension is centrifuged at 100,000g for 30min at 4°C again. The resulting supernatant reflects the insoluble fraction. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on Ultimate3000 RSLCnano systems (Thermo Scientific) coupled to either an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected automatically and loaded at a flow rate of 10 μl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water onto a nano trap column (2 mm x 10 mm, µPACTM Trapping column, 300 nm, 100-200 Å, PharmaFluidics). After 3 min, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (315 µm x 50cm, µPACTM nano-LC columns – 50cm µPACTM C18, 300 nm, 100-200 Å, PharmaFluidics) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 147 min. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B in 5 minutes. From the high resolution MS pre-scan with a mass range of 335 to 1500. The Orbitrap Fusion was run in top speed mode with a cycle time 3 sec. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to a value of 30 and the resulting fragments were detected with a resolution of 7500. The lock mass option was activated; the background signal with a mass of 445.12003 was used as lock mass [23]. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 60 s by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and assignment was performed using MaxQuant  version 1.6.0.16 (Cox and Mann, 2008). LFQ intensities representing peptide quantities were used for further calculations of proteins enriched in the urea fraction. Controls (CV-B, Ctrl-3-1, Ctrl-1-1, Ctrl-1-2, Ctrl-2-1, Ctrl-2-2) were compared to ALS samples (sALS-1-1, sALS-1-2, sALS-2-1, sALS-2-2, fALS-1-1, fALS-2-1). For further calculations, +1 was added to all values For further calculations, +1 was added to all values to avoid divisions by 0. A fold changed was computed (mean(LFQ intensity+1)ALS /mean(LFQ intensity+1)Ctrl). To test for statistical significance, Welch’s test was performed on log2-transformed LFQ intensity+1 values. A p value below 0.05 was considered as significant. Additionally, we used a fold change cutoff of greater than 1.5. The SciPy package was used for statistical calculations and seaborn package for visualization in Python 3.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna binding proteins, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

### Affiliations
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen
Medical Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Karsten Boldt

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Medical Bioanalytics Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen


