### Accession
PXD034564

### Title
Reduced polymerase pausing compensates for increased chromatin accessibility in the aging liver

### Description
Regulation of gene expression is linked to the organization of the genome. With age, chromatin alterations occur on all levels of genome organization, accompanied by changes in the gene expression profile. However, little is known about the changes on the level of transcriptional regulation. Here, we used a multi-omics approach and integrated ATAC-, RNA- and NET-seq to identify age-related changes in the chromatin landscape of murine liver and to investigate how these are linked to transcriptional regulation. We provide the first systematic inventory of the connection between aging, chromatin accessibility and transcriptional regulation in a whole tissue. Aging in murine liver is characterized by an increase in chromatin accessibility at promoter regions, but not in an increase of transcriptional output. Instead, aging is accompanied by a decrease of promoter-proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II (Pol II). We propose that these changes in transcriptional regulation are due to a reduced stability of the pausing complex and may represent a mechanism to compensate for the age-related increase in chromatin accessibility in order to prevent aberrant transcription.

### Sample Protocol
Regulation of gene expression is linked to the organization of the genome. With age, chromatin alterations occur on all levels of genome organization, accompanied by changes in the gene expression profile. However, little is known about the changes on the level of transcriptional regulation. Here, we used a multi-omics approach and integrated ATAC-, RNA- and NET-seq to identify age-related changes in the chromatin landscape of murine liver and to investigate how these are linked to transcriptional regulation. We provide the first systematic inventory of the connection between aging, chromatin accessibility and transcriptional regulation in a whole tissue. Aging in murine liver is characterized by an increase in chromatin accessibility at promoter regions, but not in an increase of transcriptional output. Instead, aging is accompanied by a decrease of promoter-proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II (Pol II). We propose that these changes in transcriptional regulation are due to a reduced stability of the pausing complex and may represent a mechanism to compensate for the age-related increase in chromatin accessibility in order to prevent aberrant transcription.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data was analyzed using MaxQuant, version 1.6.17.0, (Cox and Mann 2008). The isotope purity correction factors, provided by the manufacturer, were included in the analysis. Differential expression analysis was performed using limma, version 3.34.9, (Ritchie, Phipson et al. 2015) in R, version 3.4.3 (R Core Team 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of gene expression is linked to the organization of the genome. With age, chromatin alterations occur on all levels of genome organization, accompanied by changes in the gene expression profile. However, little is known about the changes in the level of transcriptional regulation. Here, we used a multi-omics approach and integrated ATAC-, RNA- and NET-seq to identify age-related changes in the chromatin landscape of murine liver and to investigate how these are linked to transcriptional regulation. We provide the first systematic inventory of the connection between aging, chromatin accessibility, and transcriptional regulation in a whole tissue. Aging in murine liver is characterized by an increase in chromatin accessibility at promoter regions, but not in an increase in transcriptional output. Instead, aging is accompanied by a decrease in promoter-proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II (Pol II), while initiation of transcription is not decreased as assessed by RNA polymerase mapping using CUT&amp;RUN. Based on the data reported, we propose that these age-related changes in transcriptional regulation are due to a reduced stability of the pausing complex.

### Keywords
Polymerase, Liver, Chromating, Aging, Tmt

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b, 50931 Cologne, Germany CECAD Research Center, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Tessarz
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b, 50931 Cologne, Germany CECAD Research Center, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany


