### Accession
PXD030379

### Title
Exploring the effect of citronellol on Candida albicans using proteomics appraoch

### Description
To explore the proteome profiles of Candida albicans exposed to citronellol. We used label-free proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lysed by lysis buffer (0.5% Triton X-100, 10mM DTT, 10mM NaCl in 50mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail. Proteins extracted were precipitated using ice-cold acetone and stored at -20 °C for 16 hours. After precipitation, the protein pellet was reconstituted in 0.3% RapidGest SF (Waters, UK) in 10 mM Ammonium bicarbonate. The protein concentrations were determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay kit (Pierce, New York, NY, USA), using bovine serum albumin as the standard. The total protein amount of 25 µg was subjected to trypsin digestion. Reduction of the sulfhydryl bonds by using 5 mM DTT in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 92 C for 15 minutes and alkylation of sulfhydryl at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. The solution was cleaned up by the Desalting column (Zebra-spin, ThermoFisher). The flow-through solution was enzymatically digested by trypsin (Promega, Germany) at a ratio of 1:60 (enzyme: protein) and incubated at 37 C for 6 hours.  The digested peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and transferred to a TruView LCMS vial (Waters, UK)

### Data Protocol
To assemble a differential expressed protein table, multiple consensus workflows were used within the PD to compile the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) into peptide groups, protein database matches, and non-redundant proteins groups using the principle of strict parsimony as defined by the software defaults. To investigate the heterogeneity of variation of 2 experimental conditions of cells, the principal component analysis (PCA) was used to visualize the differences among intra- and inter-group replicates. Venn-diagrams grouping the identified proteins of different species were created by Microsoft word 365 to express the unique and common proteins. The heatmap was obtained using PD for hierarchical clustering with complete linkage algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarker, Yeast, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Mahidol University
1Center for Neuroscience, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand  2Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Genetic Engineering, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, 10900, Thailand

### Submitter
Sucheewin Krobthong

### Lab Head
Dr Sucheewin Krobthong
1Center for Neuroscience, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 10400, Thailand  2Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Genetic Engineering, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, 10900, Thailand


