### Accession
PXD012993

### Title
Response of marine Staphylococcus cohnii strain to Chromium

### Description
Study of expression of proteins as a response to varying chromium concentrations

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were extracted from the cells harvested at different growth stages, exposed to varying Chromium concentrations, using standardised protocols and digested using trypsin before loading onto LC-MS QToF. The MS analysis was carried using Agilent nanoChipLCMS QToF using ProtID chip using water acetonitrile solvents. The spectra were captured using Mass Hunter Qual software.

### Data Protocol
The spectra generated were analyzed using Spectrum Mill Software. The searches were done at an accuracy of 50 ppm for MS and 100ppm for MS-MS. The searches were carried out against generic NCBI dataset to identify the likely proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Chromium in its hexavalent state is a water-soluble and toxic element to living organisms present in the environment. However, some organisms are resistant and reduce the toxic forms of Cr(vi) to less toxic or non-toxic forms. A global proteomic analysis of Staphylococcus sp. #NIOSBK35 under different chromate concentrations (0, 100, 200 and 300 mg L<sup>-1</sup>) at different time points in its growth stages (6, 9, 12, 18, 24 and 36 h) resulted in the identification of 878 proteins. Of all the proteins expressed, 13 proteins [23 rDNA (uracil-5-) methyltransferase RumA, multidrug ABC transporter ATP binding protein, dihydroxy acid dehydratase, polysaccharide biosynthesis protein, etc.] were expressed only in the presence of chromium. 14 proteins were up-regulated in response to chromium(vi), namely, alkyl hydroperoxide reductase, ATP-dependent Zn metallopeptidase, hsp90- like protein, NAD (P)-dependent oxidoreductase, etc. Most of the proteins involved in normal cell functioning like 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase, ribosomal proteins (30S ribosomal protein S11, 30S ribosomal protein S2, and 50S ribosomal protein L32), aconitate hydratase, DNA primase, serine-tRNA ligase, phosphoenolpyruvate-protein phosphotransferase, enolase, sulfur transferase FdhD, etc. were found to be down-regulated. On grouping these proteins into their COG (cluster of orthologous groups) functional categories, they were found to be involved in translation, carbohydrate metabolism, stress proteins, amino acid transport and membrane transport mechanisms. The proteomic response given by Staphylococcus sp. #NIOSBK35 did not show expression of Cr-specific proteins, indicating a different mechanism of Cr-tolerance as the organism was able to survive and grow at high concentrations of Cr(vi).

### Keywords
Peptide mass fingerprinting, Chromium, Lc-ms qtof, Protein

### Affiliations
CSIR-National Institute of Oceanography

### Submitter
Samir Damare

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Samir R Damare
CSIR-National Institute of Oceanography


