### Accession
PXD021413

### Title
Inflammatory Signaling is Regulated by Fucosylation in Metastatic Breast Cancer Cells

### Description
N-linked glycosylation results in a large branched tree-like sugar structure composed of several types of individual carbohydrates being attached to a protein. Fucosylation is one specific type of glycosylation that is defined by the addition of α-L-fucose to a carrier protein. Although fucosylation has been relatively well defined as a biomarker for progression in some human cancers, for example, pancreatic and hepatocellular carcinoma, its role in breast cancer is much less well defined. A growing body of evidence indicates that levels of fucosylation correlate with breast cancer progression and contributes to metastatic disease. However, very little is known about the signaling and functional outcomes that are driven by fucosylation. We performed tandem- mass-tag (TMT) proteomics on 4T1 metastatic mammary tumor cells that were treated with a fucosylation inhibitor, 2-fluorofucose (2FF) or vehicle (DMSO) control. This analysis identified &gt;400 proteins that were significantly increased or decreased in 2FF treated samples compared to the DMSO treated samples. We found that two proteins, Tollip and Bcl-10, were downregulated in 4T1 cells in response to 2FF treatment. Functionally, Tollip and Bcl10 signaling induce pro-inflammatory responses through activation of NF-κB, a transcription factor that is pro-tumorigenic and a prime target in human cancer. Our results show that treatment of 4T1 cells with 2FF leads to a reduction in NF-κB expression and activity through increased IκBα. This observation is consistent with a reduction in inflammatory response due to the loss of Tollip and Bcl-10 expression. Collectively, our results indicate that fucosylation is a key mediator of inflammatory signaling in metastatic breast cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell and tissue preparation. Cells were lysed in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris.HCl pH 8.5 (25 μL). Samples were sonicated in 1.5 mL Micro Tubes (TPX Plastic for Sonication from Diagende Inc.) using a Bioruptor® sonication system from Diagende Inc. USA, North America with 30 sec/30 sec on/off cycles for 15 minutes in a water bath at 4 o C. Protein concentrations were determined using a Bradford protein assay employing vendor provided protocols. Protein samples in equal amounts (50 μg) were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetaminde (CAM). Samples were diluted with 100 mM Tris-HCl to a final urea concentration of 2 M and digested overnight with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix Mass Spectrometry (1:100 protease:substrate ratio, cat. num. V5072, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI 53711-5399, U.S.A.) [36-38]. Peptide purification and labeling Peptides were desalted on 50 mg Sep-Pak® Vac (Waters Corporation Milford, MA 01757, U.S.A.) employing a vacuum manifold (Waters Corporation Milford, MA 01757, U.S.A.). After elution from the column in 70% ACN, 0.1% FA, peptides were dried by speed vacuum and resuspended in 24 µL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Peptide concentration was measured using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit (cat. num. 23275, Thermo Scientific) to ensure that an equal amount of each sample was labeled. Samples were then Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeled with 0.2 mg of reagent resuspended in 20 µL acetonitrile for two hours at room temperature (Fig 1, TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set; lot no. UH285567 and 131C lot UD280157A). Labelling reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine at room temperature 15 minutes. Labelled peptides were then mixed and dried by speed vacuum.  Biomedicines 2020, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of High pH basic fractionation The peptide mixture was resuspended in 0.1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) and 150 μg was fractionated on Pierce TM High pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation spin columns using vendor methodology (Cat 84868). Each fraction was dried by speed vacuum and resuspended in 24 uL 0.1% formic acid (FA). Nano-LC-MS/MS Analysis. Nano-LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an EASY-nLC™ HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). One third of each fraction was loaded onto a reversed phase PepMap TM RSLC C18 column (2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 50 cm) with Easy-Spray tip at 400 nL/min. Peptides were eluted from 4-28% B over 160 minutes, 28%-35% B over 5 mins, 35-50% B for 14 minutes, and dropping from 50-10%B over the final 1 min (Mobile phases A: 0.1% FA, water; B: 0.1% FA, 80% Acetonitrile). Mass spectrometer settings include capillary temperature of 275 o C and ion spray voltage was kept at 2.5 kV. The mass spectrometer method was operated in positive ion with a 4 sec cycle time data-dependent acquisition method with advanced peak determination and Easy-IC (internal calibrant). Precursor scans (m/z 400-1750) were done with an orbitrap resolution of 120000, RF lens% 30, maximum inject time 50 ms, standard AGC target, including charges of 2 to 6 for fragmentation with 60 s dynamic exclusion. HCD MS 2 scans were performed at 50k Orbitrap resolution, isolation window = 1, fixed collision energy of 35%, normalized AGC target 20% and dynamic max IT. The data were recorded using Thermo Scientific Xcalibur (4.3) software (Copyright 2017 Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer™ 2.4 (ThermoScientific) with FASTA databases including uniprot organism sequences plus common contaminants. Quantification methods utilized isotopic impurity levels available from Thermo Fisher. SEQUEST HT searches were conducted with a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Static modifications used for the search were, 1) carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C) residues; 2) TMT sixplex label on lysine (K) residues and the N-termini of peptides. Dynamic modifications used for the search were oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-termini. Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05. Values from both unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. In the consensus workflow, peptides were normalized in by total peptide amount with no scaling. Resulting grouped abundance values for each sample type, abundance ratio values; and respective p-values (t-test) from Proteome Discoverer™ were exported to Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nf-κb, Fucosylation; n-glycsoylation; breast cancer, Metastasis

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Associate Professor of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth Yeh
Associate Professor of Pharmacology & Toxicology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN


