### Accession
PXD017032

### Title
Comparative phosphoproteomic analysis of sporulated oocysts between virulent and avirulent strains of Toxoplasma gondii reveals strain-specific patterns

### Description
Phosphorylation is a regulatory mechanism by which intracellular apicomplexan parasites control the process of invading and modifying host cells. However, the sporulated oocysts’ phosphoprotein repertoires between virulent and avirulent strains of Toxoplasma gondii and the underlying mechanisms contributing to virulence is still a mystery. A quantitative analysis of the sporulated oocysts’ phosphoproteome profile of T. gondii virulent and avirulent strains belonging to different genotypes was conducted to reveal phosphoprotein expression patterns that contribute to the virulence of a particular phenotype. Phosphopeptides from the sporulated oocysts of the virulent strain PYS (Chinese ToxoDB#9) and the avirulent strain type II (PRU strain) were enriched by titanium dioxide (TiO2) affinity chromatography and quantified using iBT technology. A total of 10,645 unique phosphopeptides, 8,181 nonredundant phosphorylation sites and 2,792 phosphoproteins were identified. The quantitative analysis identified 4,129 differentially expressed phosphopeptides (DEPs) between sporulated oocysts of the PYS strain and PRU strain (|log1.5 fold change| > 1 and P < 0.05), including 2,485 upregulated and 1,644 downregulated phosphopeptides. Motif analysis identified 24 motifs from the upregulated phosphorylated peptides including 22 serine motifs and two threonine motifs (TPE and TP), and 15 motifs from the downregulated phosphorylated peptides including 12 serine motifs and three threonine motifs (TP, RxxT and KxxT) in PYS strain when comparing PYS/PRU. Several kinases were consistent with motifs of overrepresented phosphopeptides, such as PKA, PKG, CKII, IKK, MAPK, EGFR, INSR, Jak, Syk, Src, Ab1. GO analysis, KEGG pathway analysis and STRING analysis revealed differentially expressed phosphoproteins (DEPs) exhibiting significant functional properties. Kinase associated network analysis showed that AGC kinase had the greatest connected peptides. Our findings reveal significant difference in phosphopeptides of sporulated oocysts between virulent and avirulent T. gondii strains, which provides solid foundation for further exploring the mechanisms contributing to the virulence of T. gondii.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Digestion   Total protein was extracted from at least three biological repeats of mature oocysts of PYS and PRU strains (～107 each biological repeat). Briefly, sporulated oocysts suspension was centrifugated at 350 g for 15 min followed by the deposit suspended in a lysis buffer (7 M urea/2 M thiourea, 0.2% SDS, 20 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM DTT, pH 8.5) supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP, Roche) and phenylmethylsulfonyl (PMSF, 1 mM, Thermo Scientific). Then, sporulated oocysts within the suspension were lysed by sonication on ice (2 sec ON/3 sec OFF pulses for 5mins) and the suspension was pelleted (25,000 g for 20 min at 4°C) to eliminate lysate debris. Subsequently, the supernatant were deoxidized and alkylated by dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mM, 60 min at 56°C) and iodoacetamide (IAM, 55 mM, 45 min at ambient condition) respectively. Bradford assay was applied to measure the concentration of protein. Afterward, trypsin (Promega) was supplied into protein (300 μg) extracted from each biological repeat of samples (enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:40) to digest protein by incubation at 37°C for 24 hr. The the enzymatic reaction was terminated by formic acid (FA) with a volume ration of 0.5%. Finally, samples were desalted and dried using Strata X solid-phase extraction columns (Phenomenex) and a SpeedVac, respectively.  iBT Labeling Vaccum-dried peptides were labeled with 6-plexed iBT reagent (BGI-Shenzhen , Shenzhen , China) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Firstly, about 50 µl isopropyl alcohol were mixtured with labeling reagent, and then the mixture was blended with the samples to incubate at ambient temperature for 2 hr. Then, a Sep-Pack C18 Cartridges (Waters) was used to desalt and concentrate labelled peptides. Finally, labelled peptides were preserved at -80 ℃ until enrichment of phosphopeptides. Proteins of sporulated oocysts of PYS and PRU strains were labelled with iBT tags as follows: PYS strain (114, 115N and 115C) and PRU strain (116N, 116C and 117).  Enrichment of Phosphopeptides    TiO2 (Titanium dioxide, GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) beads were utilized to enrich the labelled phosphopeptides. Before enrichment, 1 ml loading buffer (2% glutamic acid/65% ACN/2% TFA/) was used to suspend TiO2 beads with peptides-to-beads ratio of 1:4 for 10 min. Afterwards, labeled peptides were mixed with the TiO2 suspension and the mixture was agitated on a rotator for 1 hr at 37 oC. Then, the mixture was centrifugated at 12,000 g for 5 min, and the sediment was washed three times with 2 ml loading buffer using pellet (12,000 g for 5 min). After the final wash, the pellet was dissolved with 600 μl elution buffer and the slurry were pendulated for 20 min followed by pellet at 12,000 g for 1 min. The sediment was rinsed with 500 μl elution buffer by the above pendulation and centrifugation. Finally, supernatant from the both centrifugation, which contained phosphopeptides enriched by TiO2, were collected and vacuum-dried for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) combined with a Mascot search engine (version 2.3, Matrix Science) was employed to search the database (http://www.toxodb.org/common/downloads/release-10.0/Toxoplasma gondii ME49/fasta/data/) and identify phosphopeptides. Parameters used in the search were set as following: enzyme = trypsin; peptide mass tolerance = 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance = 0.05 Da; fixed modification = IBT-10plex (N-term), carbamidomethyl (C), IBT-8plex (K); variable modification = oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), deamidated (NQ); phosphorylation (S/T/Y) maximum missed cleavage = 2. In order to filter the results, P value was set as P ≤ 0.05 to identify and quantify phosphopeptides, and phosphpsites with a phosphoRS probability not less than 0.75 were deemed as reliable phosphosites. For differentially expressed phosphopeptides (DEPs), those with a fold-change>1.5 or <0.75 were determined as upregulated or downregulated DEPs, respectively. Hierarchical clustering method was applied to group the DEPs and heat maps were created by the software Multiple Experiment Viewer (Mev, version 4.9.0).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> is an obligate intracellular protozoan of severe threat to humans and livestock, whose life history harbors both gamic and apogamic stages. Chinese 1 (ToxoDB#9) was a preponderant genotype epidemic in food-derived animals and humans in China, with a different pathogenesis from the strains from the other nations of the world. Posttranslational modifications (PTMs) of proteins were critical mediators of the biology, developmental transforms, and pathogenesis of protozoan parasites. The phosphoprotein profiling and the difference between the developmental phases of <i>T. gondii</i>, contributing to development and infectivity, remain unknown. A quantitative phosphoproteomic approach using IBT integrated with TiO<sub>2</sub> affinity chromatography was applied to identify and analyze the difference in the phosphoproteomes between the sporulated oocysts and the tachyzoites of the virulent ToxoDB#9 (PYS) strain of <i>T. gondii</i>. A total of 4058 differential phosphopeptides, consisting of 2597 upregulated and 1461 downregulated phosphopeptides, were characterized between sporulated the oocysts and tachyzoites. Twenty-one motifs extracted from the upregulated phosphopeptides contained 19 serine motifs and 2 threonine motifs (GxxTP and TP), whereas 16 motifs identified from downregulated phosphopeptides included 13 serine motifs and 3 threonine motifs (KxxT, RxxT, and TP). Beyond the traditional kinases, some infrequent classes of kinases, including Ab1, EGFR, INSR, Jak, Src and Syk, were found to be corresponding to motifs from the upregulated and downregulated phosphopeptides. Remarkable functional properties of the differentially expressed phosphoproteins were discovered by GO analysis, KEGG pathway analysis, and STRING analysis. S8GFS8 (DNMT1-RFD domain-containing protein) and S8F5G5 (Histone kinase SNF1) were the two most connected peptides in the kinase-associated network. Out of these, phosphorylated modifications in histone kinase SNF1 have functioned in mitosis and interphase of <i>T. gondii</i>, as well as in the regulation of gene expression relevant to differentiation. Our study discovered a remarkable difference in the abundance of phosphopeptides between the sporulated oocysts and tachyzoites of the virulent ToxoDB#9 (PYS) strain of <i>T. gondii</i>, which may provide a new resource for understanding stage-specific differences in PTMs and may enhance the illustration of the regulatory mechanisms contributing to the development and infectivity of <i>T. gondii</i>.

### Keywords
Sporulated oocyst, Toxoplasma gondii, Phosphoproteomics, Genotype, Ibt

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (LVRI, CAAS)

### Submitter
Ze-Xiang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xing-Quan Zhu
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China


