### Accession
PXD026327

### Title
Intestinal N-glycomics in pediatric ulcerative colitis

### Description
This project used glycomics approach to study the N-glycan present at the intestinal mucosal-luminal interface of pediatric UC patients.

### Sample Protocol
Microbiota cells were harvested from the intestinal MLI samples and proteins extracted for glycan purification. The purified glycans were then measured using MALDI-TO-MS or PGC-LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
The N-linked glycan composition was identified and verified using both MSMS with a 10ppm mass tolerance and retention-time. MS/MS spectra were inspected for each structure based on the feature ions. Glycans were relatively quantified to the total intensity by integration of the extracted ion chromatogram peak area (EIC).

### Publication Abstract
Pediatric ulcerative colitis (UC) is a distinct type of inflammatory bowel disease with severe disease activity and rapid progression, which can lead to detrimental life-long consequences. The pathogenesis of pediatric UC remains unclear, although dysbiosis of the gut microbiota has been considered an important factor. In this study, we collected intestinal mucosal-luminal interface microbiota samples from a cohort of treatment-na&#xef;ve pediatric UC or control patients and used two different mass spectrometry-based glycomic approaches to examine the N-glycans that were associated with the microbiota. We observed abundant small N-glycans that were associated with the microbiota and found that the pediatric UC microbiota samples contained significantly higher levels of these atypical N-glycans compared to those of controls. Four paucimannosidic or other truncated N-glycans were identified to successfully segregate UC from control patients with an area under the ROC curve of &#x2265;0.9. This study indicates that the aberrant metabolism of glycans in the intestinal by gut microbiota may be involved in the pathogenesis of UC and intestinal N-glycans, including small glycans, can act as novel biomarker candidates for pediatric UC. SIGNIFICANCE: There is no cure for pediatric ulcerative colitis (UC) due to its unclear pathogenesis and the diagnosis of UC in children still largely depends on invasive colonoscopic examination. Recent evidence suggests that the dysbiosis of intestinal microbiota is associated with the onset and development of UC, however how the microbiota interact with the host remains unclear. This study used two different mass spectrometry-based glycomic approaches to quantitatively examine N-glycans that are associated with colonic mucosal-luminal interface microbiota of pediatric UC or control patients. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive glycomic study of intestinal microbiota samples in UC, which demonstrated that intestinal microbiota was associated with abundant atypical small N-glycans with elevated levels in UC than controls. This study also identified four intestinal paucimannosidic or other truncated N-glycans as promising biomarker candidates for pediatric UC. These findings shed light on the mechanism study of host-microbiome interactions in UC and indicate that atypical glycans present in the gut can be a source for UC biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
Glycomics, Ibd, Microbiome, Ulcerative colitis

### Affiliations
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
University of Ottawa


