### Accession
PXD037378

### Title
Quantification of membrane protein expression in G0 and G1 cell cycle phase samples in PC3 prostate cancer cells

### Description
Prostate cancer (PCa) has a significant ability to disseminate and survive in the bone marrow (BM). Once there, disseminated tumor cells (DTCs) may lie dormant for years, but often eventually reactivate proliferative pathways, thus largely contributing to bone metastasis, disease progression, and relapse. Unfortunately, quiescent PCa cells are difficult to identify and target with treatment, in part because formerly identified relevant markers are intracellular and regulated by protein stability. We sought to address this problem by identifying a G0 marker that is expressed on the cell surface and therefore amenable to antibody binding for identification and therapeutic targeting. In doing so, we utilized stably transduced fluorescent markers for CDKN1B (p27) and CDT1 protein levels, which separate viable PCa cells into G0, G1, or combined S/G2/M populations (as described in PMID 34957090). We then performed FACS to collect G1 and G0 PC3 PCa cells, isolated membrane proteins, and subsequently used GC-MS proteomics to determine differences in protein abundance between G0 and G1. In total, 3,791 proteins were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of membrane proteins: PC3 cells with p27 and CDT1 reporters were cultured in the presence of 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS) for 48 hours, and cells were treated with Accutase (Innovatove cell technologies, Cat #: AT104-500) for 10 minutes at room temperature to harvest from culture flasks. The cell cycle reporter’s expression was analyzed by FACS, and G0 (p27+ Cdt1+) or G1 cells (p27- Cdt1+) were sorted by FACS. Membrane proteins were extracted from isolated PC3 cells in G0 or G1 phase using MEM-PER Plus Membrane Protein Extraction kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. # 89842) following the manufacturer’s directions. Material from three biological replicate preparations was pooled for subsequent mass spectrometry analysis.  The samples were concentrated by buffer exchange on a 3kDa Amicon molecular weight cutoff filter. The protein concentration of the concentrated samples was measured using Qubit fluorometry (Invitrogen). 20µg of each lysate was processed by SDS-PAGE using a 10% Bis-Tris NuPAGE mini-gel (Invitrogen) with the MES buffer system, the gel was run approximately 5cm. Each gel lane was excised into 20 equally sized bands and processed by in-gel digestion with trypsin using a ProGest robot (Digilab) with the following protocol: (a) Washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile, (b) reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT, (c) digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h, and quenched with formic acid and the supernatant was analyzed directly without further processing. Half of each gel digest was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex).  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 70,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS. A total of 10hrs of instrument time was employed per sample.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters:  Enzyme: Trypsin/P  Database: SwissProt Human (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants)  Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C)  Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (N,Q)  Mass values: Monoisotopic  Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm  Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da  Max Missed Cleavages: 2   Mascot DAT files were parsed into Scaffold (Proteome software) for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using at 1% protein and peptide FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Quiescent prostate cancer (PCa) cells are common in tumors but are often resistant to chemotherapy. Quiescent PCa cells are also enriched for a stem-like tumor initiating population, and can lead to recurrence after dormancy. Unfortunately, quiescent PCa cells are difficult to identify and / or target with treatment in part because the relevant markers are intracellular and regulated by protein stability. We addressed this problem by utilizing PCa cells expressing fluorescent markers for CDKN1B (p27) and CDT1, which can separate viable PCa cells into G<sub>0</sub>, G<sub>1</sub>, or combined S/G<sub>2</sub>/M populations. We used FACS to collect G<sub>1</sub> and G<sub>0</sub> PC3 PCa cells, isolated membrane proteins, and analyzed protein abundance in G<sub>0</sub> vs G<sub>1</sub> cells by gas chromatography mass spectrometry. Enrichment analysis identified nucleocytoplasmic transport as the most significantly different pathway. To identify cell surface proteins potentially identifying quiescent PCa cells for future patient samples or for antibody based therapeutic research, we focused on differentially abundant plasma membrane proteins, and identified ERBB2 (HER2) as a cell surface protein enriched on G<sub>0</sub> PCa cells. High HER2 on the cell membrane is associated with quiescence in PCa cells and likely induced by the bone microenvironment. Using a drug conjugated anti-HER2 antibody (trastuzumab emtansine) in a mouse PCa xenograft model delayed metastatic tumor growth, suggesting approaches that target HER2-high cells may be beneficial in treating PCa. We propose that HER2 is deserving of further study in PCa as a target on quiescent cells to prevent recurrence, decrease chemotherapy resistance, or eradicate minimal residual disease.

### Keywords
Dormancy, Quiescent, Erbb2, Disseminated tumor cells, Cell cycle, G0, G1, Prostate cancer, Her2

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Henriette A. Remmer, Ph.D.   Director, Proteomics & Peptide Synthesis Core  University of Michigan  C570C  MSRB II  SPC 5674  1150 W. Medical Center Drive Ann Arbor, MI 48109  https://brcf.medicine.umich.edu/cores/proteomics-peptide-synthesis/

### Submitter
Henriette Remmer

### Lab Head
Dr Henriette Remmer
Henriette A. Remmer, Ph.D.   Director, Proteomics & Peptide Synthesis Core  University of Michigan  C570C  MSRB II  SPC 5674  1150 W. Medical Center Drive Ann Arbor, MI 48109  https://brcf.medicine.umich.edu/cores/proteomics-peptide-synthesis/


