### Accession
PXD006143

### Title
Amblyomma sculptum sialotranscriptome and proteome

### Description
Ticks are obligate blood feeding ectoparasites that transmit a wide variety of pathogenic organisms to their vertebrate hosts. The tick Amblyomma sculptum is vector of Rickettsia rickettsii, the causative agent of Rock Mountain spotted fever, the most lethal rickettsiosis that affects humans. It is known that the transmission of pathogens by ticks is mainly associated with the physiology of the feeding process. Pathogens that are acquired with the blood meal must first colonize the tick gut and later the salivary glands (SG). Then, to be transmitted during a subsequent blood feeding, pathogens must reach the saliva. Tick saliva contains a complex mixture of bioactive molecules with anti-clotting, anti-platelet aggregation, vasodilatory, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory properties to counteract both the host hemostasis and defense mechanisms, which besides facilitating tick feeding, may also benefits survival and establishment of pathogens in the host. In the current study, we compared the sialotranscriptome of unfed A. sculptum ticks and fed for 72 hours on rabbits using RNA-seq. The total of reads obtained were mapped in 9,560 coding sequences (CDSs) distributed in six major functional classes. Genes encoding secreted proteins, including lipocalins, mucins, protease inhibitors, glycine rich, metalloprotease, and 8.9 kDa superfamily were mostly upregulated by blood feeding. Selected genes were analyzed by RT-qPCR and all of them presented the same transcriptional profile regulation observed in RNA-seq, corroborating the transcriptional findings of this study. Finally, we mapped 116 proteins secreted in tick saliva by mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis. Identified proteins should be functionally characterized and might be potential targets to develop vaccines for tick control and/or blocking of R. rickettsii transmission as well as pharmacological bioproducts with anti-hemostatic, anti-inflammatory and anti-bacterial activities.

### Sample Protocol
Ticks were obtained from a laboratory colony of A. sculptum (Pedreira strain, São Paulo State, Brazil). Larvae, nymphs, and adults were fed on rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus) as previously described (Pinter et al., 2002). Off-host phases were held in an incubator at 25°C and 95% of relative humidity. Adult females were manually removed from the vertebrate hosts after 24 or 72 hours of feeding for dissection of salivary glands (SG). The ticks were washed in 70% ethanol and sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (10 mM NaH2PO4, 1.8 mM KH2PO4, 140 mM NaCl, and 2.7 mM KCl, pH 7.4) for 10 minutes. The SG of adult females were dissected, gently washed in ice cold PBS, and immediately transferred to 50 L of RNAlater® Solution (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The SG from unfed A. sculptum females (control) or from females fed for 24 or 72 hours were stored in pools of three glands per sample. Each sample correspond to one biological replicate and each group is represented by 20 biological replicates.  Saliva was collected from 200 partially engorged females (after 8 days of feeding) and the salivation was induced by injection of approximately 1-3 l of a solution of 50 mg/mL pilocarpine in 0.7M NaCl, into the hemocoel using a 12.7 x 0.33 mm needle BD Ultra-Fine™ (Becton Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). The saliva was harvested every 10-15 min using a micropipette and transferred to a polypropylene tube in ice. Samples were stored at -80ºC. First, protein concentration of A. sculptum saliva was determined using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). An aliquot of 25 µg of protein was submitted to extraction according to (Mudenda et al., 2014) with modifications. Saliva sample was diluted in an extraction buffer containing 8M urea and cocktail inhibitor protease). Then, reduction, alkylation with iodoacetamide, and digestion with trypsin were performed following the procedure described by (citar trabalho sugerido pelo Giuseppe). The reaction was stopped with 1% TFA and desalted with C18 stage-tips. The sample was dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Following digestion, peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and submitted to LC-MS/MS analysis using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled with a nano-HPLC system. Peptides were loaded onto an analytical C18 column (10 cm; 75 µm; 3 μm) and separated using a linear  gradient of acetonitrile (0-35%) in 0.1% formic acid for 150 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The nanoelectrospray voltage of the capillar was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature was 250°C. The analysis was performed in full scan (m/z 200- 2000) with  the resolution of Orbitrap adjusted to r= 60,000. The 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 30,000 and isolation width of 2 and fragmented in the linear ion trap using low-energy CID (normalized collision energy of 35 %) with activation time of 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 500, exclusion duration of 70 s, and a repeat count of 1.

### Publication Abstract
Ticks are obligate blood feeding ectoparasites that transmit a wide variety of pathogenic microorganisms to their vertebrate hosts. <i>Amblyomma sculptum</i> is vector of <i>Rickettsia rickettsii</i>, the causative agent of Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF), the most lethal rickettsiosis that affects humans. It is known that the transmission of pathogens by ticks is mainly associated with the physiology of the feeding process. Pathogens that are acquired with the blood meal must first colonize the tick gut and later the salivary glands (SG) in order to be transmitted during a subsequent blood feeding via saliva. Tick saliva contains a complex mixture of bioactive molecules with anticlotting, antiplatelet aggregation, vasodilatory, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory properties to counteract both the hemostasis and defense mechanisms of the host. Besides facilitating tick feeding, the properties of saliva may also benefits survival and establishment of pathogens in the host. In the current study, we compared the sialotranscriptome of unfed <i>A. sculptum</i> ticks and those fed for 72 h on rabbits using next generation RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). The total of reads obtained were assembled in 9,560 coding sequences (CDSs) distributed in different functional classes. CDSs encoding secreted proteins, including lipocalins, mucins, protease inhibitors, glycine-rich proteins, metalloproteases, 8.9 kDa superfamily members, and immunity-related proteins were mostly upregulated by blood feeding. Selected CDSs were analyzed by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction preceded by reverse transcription (RT-qPCR), corroborating the transcriptional profile obtained by RNA-seq. Finally, high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis revealed 124 proteins in saliva of ticks fed for 96-120 h. The corresponding CDSs of 59 of these proteins were upregulated in SG of fed ticks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on the proteome of <i>A. sculptum</i> saliva. The functional characterization of the identified proteins might reveal potential targets to develop vaccines for tick control and/or blocking of <i>R. rickettsii</i> transmission as well as pharmacological bioproducts with antihemostatic, anti-inflammatory and antibacterial activities.

### Keywords
Blood feeding, Spotted fever, Salivary glands, Rna-seq, Transcriptome, Proteome, Tick, Amblyomma

### Affiliations
Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Rebeca Kawahara

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea C. Fogaça
Departamento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil


