### Accession
PXD017539

### Title
AIG1 and ADTRP are endogenous FAHFA hydrolases

### Description
Fatty acid esters of hydroxy fatty acids (FAHFAs) are a newly discovered class of signaling lipids with anti-inflammatory and anti-diabetic activities. However, the endogenous regulation of FAHFAs remains a pressing but unanswered question. Here, we find that androgen- induced gene 1 (AIG1) and androgen-dependent TFPI-regulating protein (ADTRP), two threonine hydrolases, control FAHFA levels in vivo. Tissues from mice lacking ADTRP (Adtrp-KO), AIG1 (Aig1-KO), and AIG1/ADTRP (DKO) have higher concentrations of FAHFAs, including 9-PAHSA, due to decreased FAHFA hydrolysis activity. No other lipids were changing in these samples to indicate that AIG1 and ADTRP are specific FAHFA hydrolases. To complement these genetic studies, we identified a dual AIG1/ADTRP inhibitor, ABD-110207, that is active in vivo. Acute treatment of wild-type mice with ABD-110207 results in elevated FAHFA levels further supporting AIG1 and ADTRP enzymatic activity in controlling endogenous FAHFAs. The loss of AIG1/ADTRP does not mimic the effects of pharmacologically administered FAHFAs on glucose tolerance or insulin sensitivity in mice, indicating that therapeutic strategies should continue to focus on FAHFA administration. Together, these studies designate AIG1 and ADTRP as the first endogenous FAHFA hydrolases identified and provide critical genetic and chemical tools for further characterization of these enzymes and endogenous FAHFAs.

### Sample Protocol
For ABPP-ReDiMe samples of WT and KO mouse tissues, proteomes (1 mg / mL in 1 mL of PBS) were labeled with FP-biotin (5 μM) for 1 h at room temperature while rotating. For brain, liver and kidney samples from vehicle or ABD-110207- treated mice, higher protein (3 mg/mL in 1 mL) and FP-biotin (10 μM) amounts were used to facilitate the detection of ADTRP. After labeling, the proteomes were denatured and precipitated using 4:1 MeOH/CHCl3, resuspended in 0.5 mL of 6 M urea in PBS, reduced using tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP , 10 mM) for 30 min at 37 °C, and then alkylated using iodoacetamide (40 mM) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The biotinylated proteins were enriched with PBS-washed avidin-agarose beads (100 μL; Sigma-Aldrich) by rotating at room temperature for 1.5 h in PBS with 0.2% SDS (6 mL). The beads were then washed sequentially with 5 mL 0.2% SDS in PBS(3×)and5mLDIH2O (3×). On-bead digestion was performed using sequencing-grade trypsin (2 μg; Promega) in 2 M urea in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2 mM CaCl2 for 12–14 h at 37 °C (200 μL). Duplex or triplex reductive dimethylation was performed as previously described (25). Briefly, for duplex ReDiMe of WT versus KO tissues, either 13CD2O (heavy) or CH2O (light) was added to each sample (0.15%) followed by addition of NaBH3CN (22.2 mM). Tissue samples from vehicle- or inhibitor-treated mice were labeled using a triplex ReDiMe protocol where control samples (i.e. vehicle-treated) were labeled with CH2O (light) and inhibitor-treated samples labeled with either CD2O (medium) or 13CD2O (heavy). Light and medium samples were then treated with NaBH3CN whereas heavy samples were treated with NaBD3CN. Following a 1 h incubation period at room temperature, the reaction was quenched by addition of NH4OH (0.23%) and formic acid (0.5%). The samples were then combined and analyzed by LC/MS.

### Data Protocol
ABPP-ReDiMe MS and data analysis  MS was performed using an LTQ-Orbitrap or an Orbitrap Velos following previously described protocols. Peptides were eluted using a five-step multidimensional LC/MS protocol in which increasing concentrations of ammonium acetate are injected followed by a gradient of increasing acetonitrile, as previously described. For all samples, data were collected in data-dependent acquisition mode over a range from 400–1,800 m/z. Each full scan was followed by up to 7 or 30 fragmentation events for experiments using the LTQ and Orbitrap or Orbitrap Velos instruments, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (repeat count of 1, exclusion duration of 20 s) for all experiments. Data files (Thermo RAW) were converted into mzXML format using RawConverter (1.1.0.23) with monoisotopic precursor selection selected. The data were searched using the ProLuCID algorithm (2.1.5) against an in-house reverse-concatenated mouse FASTA database (43, 438 entries). This had been assembled from 1) the UniProt Mouse Reference proteome (accessed 11/09/2012), cross-referenced with Ensembl, giving preference to long, reviewed entries, and filtered to 98% protein sequence identity using CD-HIT (21, 602 forward entries) and 2) common contaminant proteins (117 forward entries) from the Global Proteome Machine cRAP protein sequences (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). ProLuCID searches specified static modification of cysteine residues (+57.021464; iodoacetamide alkylation), allowed differential modification of methionine residues (+15.994915; oxidation), and required peptides to contain at least one tryptic terminus. Each data set was independently searched with light, medium (if applicable) and heavy parameter files. For duplex ReDiMe, the search included static modifications on lysine and N-termini (+28.031300 m/z [light] or + 34.063117 m/z [heavy]). For triplex ReDiMe, the search included static modifications on lysine and N termini (+28.031300 m/z [light], +32.056407 m/z [medium], or + 36.075670 m/z [heavy]). Mass tolerances were set to 50 and 600 ppm for precursor and fragment ions respectively. The resulting peptide spectral matches were filtered using DTASelect (2.1.5) with the maximum peptide false discovery rate set to the default (<5%) and enabling the following flags: use cleavage status when calculating probabilities (--trypstat), use separate models for modified peptides (--modstat), use delta mass for statistics (--dm), show all spectra for each sequence (-t 0), and remove proteins (-l keratin) with descriptions matching “keratin”. ReDiMe ratios were quantified using in-house CIMAGE software (41). Briefly, spectral matches were used to localize a 10-min retention time window for ion chromatogram extraction using ±10 ppm mass accuracy. Extracted ion chromatograms of light and heavy peptides were required to have a coelution R2 (correlation score) of greater than or equal to 0.8 to be used for further analysis. Peptides detected as “singletons”, where extracted signal was present exclusively for either the m/z of the light or the heavy peptide, were given a ratio of 32 which is the maximum ReDiMe ratio reported here. Further quantitative analysis was restricted to FP-reactive serine and threonine hydrolases, as well as endogenously biotinylated proteins. Peptide ratios were log2 transformed and the median was used to represent the ReDiMe ratio of a protein. A per-sample normalization was applied, correcting protein ratios by the median ratio of quantified endogenously biotinylated proteins. The mean and standard error of ReDiMe ratios was calculated when combining replicates. We required proteins to have at least 2 unique quantified peptides and to be detected in at least 2 replicate experiments (where available). Protein ratios were calculated as the median ratio of unique peptides and transformed into percent inhibition values.

### Publication Abstract
Fatty acid esters of hydroxy fatty acids (FAHFAs) are a newly discovered class of signaling lipids with anti-inflammatory and anti-diabetic properties. However, the endogenous regulation of FAHFAs remains a pressing but unanswered question. Here, using MS-based FAHFA hydrolysis assays, LC-MS-based lipidomics analyses, and activity-based protein profiling, we found that androgen-induced gene 1 (AIG1) and androgen-dependent TFPI-regulating protein (ADTRP), two threonine hydrolases, control FAHFA levels <i>in vivo</i> in both genetic and pharmacologic mouse models. Tissues from mice lacking ADTRP (<i>Adtrp</i>-KO), or both AIG1 and ADTRP (DKO) had higher concentrations of FAHFAs particularly isomers with the ester bond at the 9<sup>th</sup> carbon due to decreased FAHFA hydrolysis activity. The levels of other lipid classes were unaltered indicating that AIG1 and ADTRP specifically hydrolyze FAHFAs. Complementing these genetic studies, we also identified a dual AIG1/ADTRP inhibitor, ABD-110207, which is active <i>in vivo</i> Acute treatment of WT mice with ABD-110207 resulted in elevated FAHFA levels, further supporting the notion that AIG1 and ADTRP activity control endogenous FAHFA levels. However, loss of AIG1/ADTRP did not mimic the changes associated with pharmacologically administered FAHFAs on extent of upregulation of FAHFA levels, glucose tolerance, or insulin sensitivity in mice, indicating that therapeutic strategies should weigh more on FAHFA administration. Together, these findings identify AIG1 and ADTRP as the first endogenous FAHFA hydrolases identified and provide critical genetic and chemical tools for further characterization of these enzymes and endogenous FAHFAs to unravel their physiological functions and roles in health and disease.

### Keywords
Fahfa, Enzyme inhibitor, Threonine hydrolase, Diabetes, Metabolism, Adtrp, Aig1, Lipid

### Affiliations
Lundbeck La Jolla Resesarch Center
Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology The Salk Institute for Biological Studies 10010 North Torrey Pines Road La Jolla, CA, USA

### Submitter
Kenneth Lum

### Lab Head
Dr Alan Saghatelian
Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology The Salk Institute for Biological Studies 10010 North Torrey Pines Road La Jolla, CA, USA


