### Accession
PXD037375

### Title
Characterization of extracellular vesicles from Bothrops jararaca snake venom

### Description
Venoms are important evolutionary keys and innovation for several animal taxons., including snakes. Their use is specially related to feed, predation and defense. Snake venoms are composed mainly by free secreted proteins, about 98%, and stored in the lumen of the venom gland, where they are processed through poorly understood mechanisms. In the perspective of protein-diversity, venoms undergo evolutionary pressure which generate a rapid evolutionary response, causing a great diversity in their toxin-components. We know now that extracellular vesicles exist in snake venom, although their biological role are still unknown. We believe that understanding EV-mediated effects could change our way of seeing envenoming, especially long-term sequelae. From what we know about EVs and snake venoms, there is a lot of potential of cross-organism communication occurrence between snakes and human victims. To advance in the comprehension of venom EVs function, we used fresh B. jararaca venom as our model. Fresh venom was fractionated by sequential centrifugation, resulting in two populations of vesicles (Bj-EVs). Purified Bj-EVs were analyzed by electron microscopy, NTA and proteomics. The interaction of Bj-EVs with mammalian cells was accessed by fluorescence and electron microscopy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples (30 µg) were precipitated in cold acetone overnight at -20º C. Then, samples were resuspended in 50 µL of 8M urea, 2M thiourea and 2% sodium deoxycholate (DOC) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0. Incubation steps were followed at room temperature (RT) as described: protein reduction (10 mM DTT for 60 min), alkylation (55 mM iodoacetamide – IAA for 30 min) and IAA quenching (55 mM of DTT for 15 min), the last two steps were taken in the dark. Finally, urea was diluted to <1M with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and trypsin digestion (Sequencing grade, Promega) proceeded overnight at a ratio of 1:20 at 37º C.  DOC was precipitated by solution acidification with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), repeating 2 centrifugations steps at 12,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C. Tryptic peptides were desalted in a homemade C18 column using POROS® 50 R2 reversed-phase packing matrix (Applied Biosystems) and eluted peptides were dried under vacuum. For LC-MS/MS analyses, samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA), quantified by Qubit® Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and injected into a nano-HPLC system Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific): first, at reverse-phase trap column (2 cm x 150 µm i.d., ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ, 5 µm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH); followed by the analytical column (15 cm x 75 µm i.d. ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ, 3 µm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The flow rate was set to 250 nL/min with 0.1% FA + 5% acetonitrile (solution A) and 0.1% FA + 95% acetonitrile (solution B). A linear gradient was developed with a flush time of 10 min with 100% A, followed by 5 – 40% B for 107 min, 40 – 95% B for 5 min and isocratically 90% B for 8 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed online by electrospray-ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS) using a LTQ Velos Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) controlled by Tune 2.7.0.1103 SP1 and Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48. A full scan was performed in high resolution (60,000) in the Orbitrap with 500 ms accumulation time and 350 – 2000 m/z range. In DDA mode, the 10 most abundant ions were selected for Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with an isolation width of 2.5 m/z, normalized collision energy of 35 and 10 ms activation time. MS2 analyses were performed in the Orbitrap (7,500 resolution) with 100 ms accumulation time and 45s excluding time.

### Data Protocol
- Peptide Spectrum Matching (PSM) Data were analyzed with PatternLab for proteomics software v4.1.1.22, which uses the comet algorithm [145]. A database was created merging “Uniprot serpentes”, B. jararaca accessory gland proteome [146] and B. jararaca tissues 454-sequecing [147], resulting in 227,747 sequences. B. jararaca translated databases were kindly provided by the authors. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. Also, for peptide search the parameters were three trypsin missed cleavages, mass error tolerance of 40 ppm (for precursor ions) and 1.0005 bin (for fragment ions). PSM-generated data were pro-cessed and filtered using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro) [145,148]. Proteins were assigned with a cutoff of 2 peptides and a minimum of 3 spectral counts, accepted based on a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR). The final protein list was obtained by grouping proteins with maximum parsimony. - Quantitative analysis For descriptive a protein list and relative protein abundances in each sample, NSAF was used with a cutoff of 2 peptides and a minimum of 3 spectral counts. For relative percent abundances, contaminants were manually removed. Protein families clustering was also manually assembled (Supplementary Data S2). For quantitative comparisons among samples, XIC data were used to calculate Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (linear Kernel PCA), and to analyze differentially expressed proteins by the T-Fold algorithm

### Publication Abstract
Snake venoms are complex cocktails of non-toxic and toxic molecules that work synergistically for the envenoming outcome. Alongside the immediate consequences, chronic manifestations and long-term sequelae can occur. Recently, extracellular vesicles (EVs) were found in snake venom. EVs mediate cellular communication through long distances, delivering proteins and nucleic acids that modulate the recipient cell's function. However, the biological roles of snake venom EVs, including possible cross-organism communication, are still unknown. This knowledge may expand the understanding of envenoming mechanisms. In the present study, we isolated and characterized the EVs from <i>Bothrops jararaca</i> venom (Bj-EVs), giving insights into their biological roles. Fresh venom was submitted to differential centrifugation, resulting in two EV populations with typical morphology and size range. Several conserved EV markers and a subset of venom related EV markers, represented mainly by processing enzymes, were identified by proteomic analysis. The most abundant protein family observed in Bj-EVs was 5'-nucleotidase, known to be immunosuppressive and a low abundant and ubiquitous toxin in snake venoms. Additionally, we demonstrated that mammalian cells efficiently internalize Bj-EVs. The commercial antibothropic antivenom partially recognizes Bj-EVs and inhibits cellular EV uptake. Based on the proteomic results and the in vitro interaction assays using macrophages and muscle cells, we propose that Bj-EVs may be involved not only in venom production and processing but also in host immune modulation and long-term effects of envenoming.

### Keywords
Snake venom, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Brazil
Instituto de Bioquímica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Laboratório de Hemostase e Venenos, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Brazil.

### Submitter
Larissa Gonçalves Machado

### Lab Head
Dr Russolina Benedeta Zingali
Instituto de Bioquímica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Laboratório de Hemostase e Venenos, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Brazil.


