### Accession
PXD008025

### Title
Evasin RHIPU-P672 characterization

### Description
Characterization of glycosylation sites of evasin RHIPU-P672

### Sample Protocol
P672_RHIPU was deglycosylated using PNGaseF and Endo-F1. The deglycosylated P672_RHIPU was reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated using iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin or neutrophil elastase.  Peptide aliquots from tryptic digests (n=3) were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to an Orbitrap-LTQ-XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were desalted and concentrated by a C18 PepMap 100 trap (300um x 5mm, 5um particle size, 100 Å) and separated by a C18 Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 um x 250 mm, 2um particle size, 100Å) using a linear gradient from 0 to 80% acetonitrile:H2O with 0.1% formic acid during 25 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. For samples run in the orbitrap-LTQ-XL, precursor ions were acquired at a mass resolution of 60,000 (m/z 400) and product ions were acquired in the ion trap. The 5 most intense precursor ions of charge ≥2 were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (35V) and dynamic exclusion settings allowed a precursor to be selected up to 3 times in a period of 30s prior to be excluded for 60s. A peptide aliquot (n=1) from an elastase digest was analysed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC. Samples were desalted online (PepMap C18, 300µm x5mm, 5 µm particle size) for 1 minute at a flow rate of 20 µl/min and separated on a nEASY column (PepMap C18, 75 µm x 500mm, 2 µm particle size) over 60 Minutes using a gradient of 2%-35% acetonitrile in 5% DMSO/0.1% Formic acid at a flow rate of 250nL/min. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 @ 200m/z, and the 15 most abundant precursors of charge between 2 and 7 were selected for HCD  fragmentation  (35V) and dynamic exclusion parameters were set in order to select a precursor ion once prior to be excluded for 60s.

### Data Protocol
Data files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the search engine SEQUEST HT against a custom-made sequence database including RHIPU-P672 protein sequence and a list of typical contaminant proteins (246 entries). Precursor and product ion tolerances were set to 20 ppm and 0.6 Da and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation was required as a static modification, and deamidation of asparagine present in N-X-S/T motif, oxidation of methionine, and HexNAc in Asn residues were considered as variable modifications. The presence of 2 unique peptides with false discovery rate FDR ≤ 1% and PTM site probability threshold ≥ 75 were required for identification and modification site location. Manual inspection of precursor and product ion spectra was performed in order to confirm the sequence fragmentation patterns observed.

### Publication Abstract
Tick chemokine-binding proteins (evasins) are an emerging class of biologicals that target multiple chemokines and show anti-inflammatory activities in preclinical disease models. Using yeast surface display, we identified a CCL8-binding evasin, P672, from the tick <i>Rhipicephalus pulchellus</i> We found that P672 binds CCL8 and eight other CC-class chemokines with a <i>K<sub>d</sub></i> &lt; 10 nm and four other CC chemokines with a <i>K<sub>d</sub></i> between 10 and 100 nm and neutralizes CCL3, CCL3L1, and CCL8 with an IC<sub>50</sub> &lt; 10 nm The CC chemokine-binding profile was distinct from that of evasin 1 (EVA1), which does not bind CCL8. We also show that P672's binding activity can be markedly modulated by the location of a StrepII-His purification tag. Combining native MS and bottom-up proteomics, we further demonstrated that P672 is glycosylated and forms a 1:1 complex with CCL8, disrupting CCL8 homodimerization. Homology modeling of P672 using the crystal structure of the EVA1 and CCL3 complex as template suggested that 44 N-terminal residues of P672 form most of the contacts with CCL8. Replacing the 29 N-terminal residues of EVA1 with the 44 N-terminal residues of P672 enabled this hybrid evasin to bind and neutralize CCL8, indicating that the CCL8-binding properties of P672 reside, in part, in its N-terminal residues. This study shows that the function of certain tick evasins can be manipulated simply by adding a tag. We conclude that homology modeling helps identify regions with transportable chemokine-binding functions within evasins, which can be used to construct hybrid evasins with altered properties.

### Keywords
Rhipu-p672, Glycosylation sites

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Lucia Geis-Asteggiante

### Lab Head
Dr Shoumo Bhattacharya
Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.


