### Accession
PXD015113

### Title
Rescuing over-activated microglia by acetaminophen treatment restores cognitive performance in the Dp(16) mouse model of Down Syndrome.

### Description
Microglia are the resident immune cells of the brain and have been implicated in mechanisms essential for cognitive functions. Down syndrome (DS), the most frequent cause of genetic intellectual disability, is caused by the presence of a supernumerary chromosome 21, which contains genes essential for the function of the immune system. Here, we investigated the presence of microglial alterations and their implication for cognitive impairment in the Dp(16) mouse model of DS. In the hippocampus of Dp(16) mice and individuals with DS, we found microglial morphology indicative of an activated state. Accordingly, we found increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and altered interferon signaling in Dp(16) mice. In addition, Dp(16) mice showed decreased dendritic spine density and cognitive deficits. Remarkably, depletion of defective microglia by PLX3397 treatment or rescue of the microglia activated state by the commonly used anti-inflammatory drug acetaminophen fully rescued dendritic-spine density and cognitive deficits in Dp(16) mice. Our data suggest an involvement of microglia in the cognitive impairment of DS animals and identify a new therapeutic approach for the potential rescue of cognitive disabilities in individuals with DS.

### Sample Protocol
Microglia samples were solubilized in 15 ul 2% SDC, 40 mM Chloroacetamide, 10 mM TCEP and 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8 at 100 °C for 10 min and sonicated with a Ultrasonic Processor  UP200St (Hielscher), 3 cycles of 30 sec. Lysates samples were digested with 0.3 ug Trypsin and 0.1 ug LysC over night at 37 °C. Digested samples were processed by iST protocol.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (2), version 1.6.6.0, was used to process the raw data, setting a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for the identification of proteins, peptides and PSM (peptide-spectrum match), a minimum length of 6 amino acids for peptide identification was required. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot mouse database (release UP000000589_10090 April 2018). In the processing the variable modifications are Acetyl (Protein N-Term), Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ), on the contrary  the Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as fixed modification. The intensity values were extracted and statistically evaluated using the ProteinGroup Table and Perseus software. Algorithm MaxLFQ  was chosen for the protein quantification with the activated option ‘match between runs’ to reduce the number of the missing proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mass-spectrometry based proteomics, Acetaminophen, Down syndrome, Microglia

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
Istituto Giannina Gaslini

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Istituto Giannina Gaslini


