### Accession
PXD029069

### Title
Metallothionein immunohistochemistry has high sensitivity and specificity for detection of Wilson disease

### Description
Diagnosis of Wilson disease (WD) can be difficult because of its protean clinical presentation, but early diagnosis is important because effective treatment is available and can prevent disease progression. Using quantitative proteomics, we characterized proteins that are differentially expressed in WD compared to normal liver. Further the expression of MT1M and COX17 were validated using immunohistochemistry. We found diffuse MT immunoreactivity in all liver specimens from patients with WD (n=20), the intensity of the staining was moderate to strong. This staining pattern was distinct from that seen in specimens from the control groups which included diseases that may be in the clinical or histologic differential of WD (steatohepatitis (n=51), chronic viral hepatitis (n=40), autoimmune hepatitis (n=50), chronic biliary tract disease (n=42), and normal liver (n=20)). COX17 immunostain showed no significant difference in expression between the WD and control groups. MT had higher sensitivity than rhodanine for diagnosis of WD. While the quantitative liver copper assays also had high sensitivity, they require more tissue, have a higher cost, have longer turnaround time, and are less widely available than an immunohistochemical stain. We conclude that MT IHC is a sensitive immunohistochemical stain for the diagnosis of Wilson disease that could be widely deployed as a screening tool for liver biopsies in which Wilson disease is in the clinical or histologic differential diagnosis.

### Sample Protocol
Archived liver FFPE sections from patients with Wilson’s disease and control individuals (three 10 µm sections each) were used for quantitative proteomics analysis. Deparaffinization was performed by heating the slides (65 °C for 10 min) followed by serial incubation in xylene, 99%, 95%, 70% ethanol and water. The tissue was scraped and resuspended in lysis buffer (50% 2,2,2- Triflouroethanol, 300 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). Proteins were de-crosslinked by heating (90 °C for 90 min) and further protein extraction was performed by subjecting to cycles of high pressure and atmospheric pressure in a Barocycler (Pressure Biosciences Inc., South Easton, MA). Samples were then reduced, alkylated and digested using lys-C/trypsin. Digested peptides were labelled with TMTpro reagents using manufacturers protocol. Labeled peptides were pooled and subjected to basic pH reverse phase fractionation on UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Fractions collected in 96 well plate were subsequently pooled into 24 fractions.  LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer connected to Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Online peptide separation was performed using two column strategy in which peptides were initially loaded on a trapping column (PepMap C18, 2 cm × 100 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and separated on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18 2 µm, 75µm × 50 cm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using a gradient of solvent B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Total run time of the method was 150 min. During the peptide separation, orbitrap mass analyzer was operated in data dependent mode in cycles of MS followed by MS/MS scans for 3 sec. In the MS scan, precursor ions were acquired for a mass range of 350 – 1700 m/z using 120,000 resolution, AGC setting of 400,000 and ion injection time of 50 ms. Precursor ions were sequentially selected based on their abundance and filtered by quadrupole for MS/MS analysis using an isolation width of 0.7 Da. Additionally, precursor ions were filtered for a minimum intensity threshold of 20,000, charge state of 2-5 and excluded for repeated MS/MS analysis for 40 sec. After fragmentation using high-energy collision-induced dissociation at 34% normalized collision energy, fragment ions were recorded in orbitrap using AGC setting of 100,000 and injection time of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer software version 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). MS/MS spectra were searched against human UniProt protein database using Sequest and Mascot search engines. The following parameters were specified during the database searching: full tryptic cleavage, 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da, oxidation (Methionine) and protein N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications and TMTpro at peptide N-terminus, lysine  and carbamidomethylation (Cysteine) as fixed modifications. False discovery rate was maintained to 1% at protein-level using Percolator. Peptide spectral matches with an average reporter ion S/N threshold of <15 and co-isolation threshold of >60 were not considered for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Diagnosis of Wilson disease (WD) can be difficult because of its protean clinical presentations, but early diagnosis is important because effective treatment is available and can prevent disease progression. Similarly, diagnosis of WD on liver biopsy specimens is difficult due to the wide range of histologic appearances. A stain that could help identify WD patients would be of great value. The goal of this study was to use mass spectrometry-based proteomics to identify potential proteins that are differentially expressed in WD compared to controls, and could serve as potential immunohistochemical markers for screening. Several proteins were differentially expressed in WD and immunohistochemical stains for two (metallothionein (MT) and cytochrome C oxidase copper chaperone (COX17)) were tested and compared to other methods of diagnosis in WD including copper staining and quantitative copper assays. We found diffuse metallothionein immunoreactivity in all liver specimens from patients with WD (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;20); the intensity of the staining was moderate to strong. This staining pattern was distinct from that seen in specimens from the control groups (none of which showed strong, diffuse staining), which included diseases that may be in the clinical or histologic differential of WD (steatohepatitis (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;51), chronic viral hepatitis (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;40), autoimmune hepatitis (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;50), chronic biliary tract disease (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;42), and normal liver (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;20)). COX17 immunostain showed no significant difference in expression between the WD and control groups. MT had higher sensitivity than rhodanine for diagnosis of WD. While the quantitative liver copper assays also had high sensitivity, they require more tissue, have a higher cost, longer turnaround time, and are less widely available than an immunohistochemical stain. We conclude that MT IHC is a sensitive immunohistochemical stain for the diagnosis of WD that could be widely deployed as a screening tool for liver biopsies in which WD is in the clinical or histologic differential diagnosis.

### Keywords
Immunohistochemistry, Sensitivity, Specificity, Quantitative proteomics, Wilson disease, Liver, Mt1g, Metallothionein-1g

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,  Mayo Clinic, 200 First ST SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,  Mayo Clinic, 200 First ST SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA


