### Accession
PXD010513

### Title
Functional abnormalities in iPSC-CMs generated from titin-mutated patients

### Description
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), a myocardial disorder that can result in progressive heart failure and arrhythmias, is defined by ventricular chamber enlargement and dilatation, and systolic dysfunction. To decipher the basis for the cardiac pathology in titin-mutated patients, we investigated the hypothesis that induced Pluripotent Stem Cell (iPSC)- derived cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CM) generated from patients, recapitulate the disease phenotype.Our findings show that the mutated cardiomyocytes from DCM patients recapitulate abnormalities of the inherited cardiomyopathies.

### Sample Protocol
iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes were resuspended in a lysis buffer containing 6M guanidinium chloride (GCl), boiled for 5 minutes and subsequently reduced with 10 mM  tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP)and alkylated with 40 mM 2-chloro-N,N-diethylacetamide. Samples were incubated  at 37°C overnight under continuous shaking.  The digestion was blocked by acidifying the sample with TFA (1% total). Peptides were de-salted  using SDB-RPS StageTips as described   (Kulak et al, 2014). MS analysis was performed in triplicates using a nanoflow uHPLC system (Easy1000 nLC,) coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant (version. 1.6.1.3) (Cox and Mann, 2008). The false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off was set to 1% for protein and peptide spectrum matches. Peptides were required to have a minimum length of 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4600 Da. Peak list files were searched against the UniprotKB Homo sapiens database, based on the 2018_02 release, combined with 245 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dilated cardiomyopathy (dcm); induced pluripotent stem cell-derived (ipsc); cardiomyocytes; titin mutation; calcium transients and contraction.

### Affiliations
MPI Biochemistry
Klinik und Poliklinik Innere Medizin I, Klinikum rechts der Isar - Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Marta Murgia

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandra Moretti
Klinik und Poliklinik Innere Medizin I, Klinikum rechts der Isar - Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany


