### Accession
PXD025818

### Title
Human cytomegalovirus-induced host protein citrullination is crucial for viral replication

### Description
Citrullination is the conversion of arginine-to-citrulline by protein arginine deiminases (PADs), whose dysregulation is implicated in the pathogenesis of various types of cancers and autoimmune diseases. Consistent with the ability of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) to induce post-translational modifications of cellular proteins to gain a survival advantage, we show that HCMV infection of primary human fibroblasts triggers PAD-mediated citrullination of several host proteins, and that this activity promotes viral fitness. Citrullinome analysis reveals significant changes in deimination levels of both cellular and viral proteins, with interferon (IFN)-inducible protein IFIT1 being the most heavily deiminated one. As genetic depletion of IFIT1 strongly enhances HCMV growth, and in vitro IFIT1 citrullination impairs its ability to bind to 5’-pppRNA, we propose that viral-induced IFIT1 citrullination is a novel mechanism of HCMV evasion from host antiviral resistance. Overall, our findings point to a crucial role of citrullination in subverting cellular responses to viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
Citrullinome analysis by mass spectrometry: sample preparation. Sample preparation in technical triplicates followed the procedure outlined in61.  Equal amounts of cell lysates from each experimental group (300 g) were diluted in buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.6) to a final concentration of 1 g/L and incubated with 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and 0.5 mM biotin-PG62 for 30 min at 37 C.  Labeled proteomes were precipitated on ice for 30 min.  Samples were pelleted through tabletop centrifugation (15,000 rpm, 15 min) at 4 C.  The supernatants were discarded, and the pellets were washed with cold acetone (300 L). After drying for 5 min, the pellets were resuspended in 1.2% SDS in PBS by bath sonication and heating. Samples were then transferred to 15 mL screw cap tubes and diluted in 1X PBS to a 0.2% SDS final concentration.  Samples were incubated with streptavidin agarose slurry (Sigma Aldrich, 170 L) overnight at 4 C and for an additional 3 h at 25 C. After discarding the flow through, the streptavidin beads were washed with 0.2% SDS in PBS (5 mL) for 10 min at 25 C. The beads were then washed three times with 1X PBS (5 mL) and three times with water (5mL) in order to remove any unbound proteins. Beads were then transferred to a screw cap microcentrifuge tube and heated in 1X PBS with 500 L 6 M urea and 10 mM DTT (65 C, 20 min). Proteins bound to the beads were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM, 37 C for 30 min). The beads were successively pelleted by centrifugation (1,400 x g for 3 min) and the supernatant was removed.  The pellet was resuspended in a premixed solution of 2 M urea, 1 mM CaCl2 and 2 g Trypsin Gold (Promega) in PBS. These were shaken overnight at 37 C.  The supernatant was collected and the beads were washed twice with water (50 L), each time collecting the supernatant. The fractions were combined, acidified with formic acid (5% final concentration) and stored at -20 C until use.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed with an LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Easy-nLC HPLC (ThermoFisher). Samples were pressure loaded onto a 250 µm fused-silica capillary hand packed with 4 cm Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex). Samples were separated on a hand packed 100 µm fused-silica capillary column with a 5 µm tip packed with 10 cm Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex).  Peptides were eluted using a 10-h gradient of 0-100% Buffer B in Buffer A (Buffer A: 95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The flow rate through the column was set to ~400 nL/min, and the spray voltage was set to 2.5 kV. One full MS scan (FTMS) was followed by 7 data-dependent MS2 scans (ITMS) of the nth most abundant ions. The tandem MS data were searched by the SEQUEST algorithm using a concatenated target/decoy variant of the human and viral UniProt database. A static modification of +57.02146 on cysteine was specified to account for alkylation by iodoacetamide. SEQUEST output files were filtered using DTASelect 2.0.  Reductive Dimethylation (ReDiMe) labeling and mass spectrometry for the citrullinome analysis of wtAD169 and AD169ΔIE1-infected cells. The trypsin digest was desalted using Pierce C18 spin column (catalogue no 89870) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and was resuspended in 200 µL 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5.  20% H12CHO (4 µL, light formaldehyde), D12CDO (4 µL, medium formaldehyde) and D13CDO (4 µL, heavy formaldehyde) were added to the mock, AD169- and AD169∆IE1-infected samples, respectively. 20 µL of 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) was then added to both the mock and AD169-infected samples, respectively, while 20 µL of 0.6 M sodium cyanoborodeuteride (NaBD3CN) was added to the AD169∆IE1-infected samples. The samples were incubated at room temperature for 2 h. The samples were then cooled on ice and the reaction quenched with 4 µL of 20% ammonium hydroxide. Formic acid (8 µL) was then added to the samples. Heavy, medium and light formaldehyde-labelled samples were mixed together, and mixture was desalted and stored at -20 ⁰C for proteomic analysis. Data was acquired using a NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptides were trapped and separated using an in-house 100 µm I.D. fused-silica pre-column (Kasil frit) packed with 2 cm ProntoSil (Bischoff Chromatography, DE) C18 AQ (200Å, 5µm) media and configured to an in-house packed 75 µm I.D. fused-silica analytical column (gravity-pulled tip) packed with 25 cm Magic (Bruker, Billerica, MA) C18AQ (100Å, 3µm) media, respectively. Mobile phase A was water supplemented with 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and mobile phase B was acetonitrile supplemented with 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. Following a 3.8 µL sample injection, peptides were trapped at flow rate of 4 µL/min with 5% B for 4 min, followed by gradient elution at a flow rate of 300 nL/min from 5-35% B over 120 min (total run time 145 min). Electrospray voltage was delivered by a liquid junction electrode (1.5 kV) located between the columns and the transfer capillary to the mass spectrometer was maintained at 275 °C. Mass spectra were acquired over m/z 375-1500 Da with a resolution of 120,000 (m/z 200), maximum injection time of 110 ms, and an AGC target of 400,000. Tandem mass spectra were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (3 sec cycle) with an isolation width of 1.6 Da, HCD collision energy of 30%, resolution of 15,000 (m/z 200), maximum injection time of 50 ms, and an AGC target of 50,000.   Database Search. Raw data were processed and searched using Maxquant 1.6.14 and its integrated Andromeda search engine using the Swiss-Prot human (downloaded 04/09/2019) and Uniprot HCMV (downloaded 02/27/2021). Search parameters were as follows: tryptic digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages; peptide N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamate conversion were specified as variable modifications. The monoisotopic mass increment of the triplex dimethyl labels, light, medium and heavy dimethyl label at 28.0313, 32.0564 and 36.0757 Da, respectively were set as variable modification on the peptide N-termini and lysine residues. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as static modification. Main search tolerance was 6 ppm, and the first search tolerance was 50 ppm. Both the protein and peptides identification false discovery rates (FDR) were <1%. Protein grouping, dimethyl ratio calculations and downstream statistics was performed in Scaffold Q+S 4.8.9 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR).

### Publication Abstract
Citrullination is the conversion of arginine-to-citrulline by protein arginine deiminases (PADs), whose dysregulation is implicated in the pathogenesis of various types of cancers and autoimmune diseases. Consistent with the ability of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) to induce post-translational modifications of cellular proteins to gain a survival advantage, we show that HCMV infection of primary human fibroblasts triggers PAD-mediated citrullination of several host proteins, and that this activity promotes viral fitness. Citrullinome analysis reveals significant changes in deimination levels of both cellular and viral proteins, with interferon (IFN)-inducible protein IFIT1 being among the most heavily deiminated one. As genetic depletion of IFIT1 strongly enhances HCMV growth, and in vitro IFIT1 citrullination impairs its ability to bind to 5'-ppp-RNA, we propose that viral-induced IFIT1 citrullination is a mechanism of HCMV evasion from host antiviral resistance. Overall, our findings point to a crucial role of citrullination in subverting cellular responses to viral infection.

### Keywords
Citrullination

### Affiliations
Boston College

### Submitter
Eranthie Weerapana

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Boston College


