### Accession
PXD017047

### Title
Isolation and whole protein characterization of species A and B bovine rotaviruses from Chinese calves.

### Description
Rotaviruses (RVs) account for severe diarrhea in children and young animals globally. In the current study, the fecal samples of diarrheic calves from a beef farm in Inner Mongolia were screened for RVA by ELISA and RT- PCR, followed by culture of three positive RVA samples in the MA-104 cell line. After 10 blind passages, cytopathic effects (CPE) appeared as detachment, granulation, and clustering of the inoculated cells. The virus isolates were identified by RT-PCR (VP6 gene RVA) and ESI-LC-MS/MS for whole protein sequencing. The protein sequences demonstrated the presence of two strains from species A rotavirus and one RVB strain; RVA/Cow-tc/ CHN/35333/2019/G6P[5] was mixed with one RVB strain (RVB/Cow-tc/CHN/35334/2019/G5P[3]) in two samples, and RVA/Cow-tc/CHN/10927/2019/G8P[7] was found in one sample. They are of genotype constellations (G6-P[5]-I2-R2-C2-M2-A3-N2-T6-E2-H3), (G8-P[7]-I5-R1-C1- M2-A1-N1-T1-E1-H1), and (G5-P[3]-I3-R5- C5-A5-N4-H5), respectively. Besides, phylogenetic analysis of the obtained sequences demonstrated viral evolution.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Concentration and Peptide Preparation: The semi-purified sample was adjusted with 1M tris-HCl (pH 9.0) to achieve a pH value of 8.0 (approximately 300µL sample+ 30ml1M tris-HCl pH 9.0), then was loaded at the chromatography column with a flow rate of 1.2ml/min after washing the column with NTA-0 (146.2gNaCl and 12.11g Tris were dissolved in 4L pure water, with concentrated HCL adjusted to pH 8.0 and up to volume  5L). Finally, the eluent was collected by 10mM imidazole, followed by ultra-filteration and SDS-PAGE testing. The protein in the eluent was precipitated by trichloroacetic acid (TCA) method, washed and dried with acetone, and then 8 M Urea/100 mM tris-HCL solution (pH 8.0) was added to the protein precipitate to fully dissolve the protein. After centrifugation at 12000 × g for 15 min, DTT added to the supernatant until the final concentration of 10 mM. After incubation at 37 ℃ for 1 h, the reduction reaction was performed to break the disulfide bond. Subsequently, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to the final concentration of 40 mM and alkylation was conducted at room temperature and in the dark to seal the sulfhydryl groups. An appropriate volume of 100 mM tris-HCL solution (pH 8.0) was added, protein concentration was quantified using the Bradford method, and diluted up to 2 M. Trypsin was added to the protein atratio (50:1) and incubated at 37℃ overnight for digestion. On the second day, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to stop the enzyme digestion, the pH value of the solution was adjusted to around 6.0, and the solution was centrifuged at 12000 × g for 15 minutes. The desalination was carried out by using C18 microcolumn. The demineralized peptide solution was drained by centrifugal concentrator and frozen at -20℃ for machine test (HuBei- Proteingene Technology Co. Ltd, Wuhan, China).  Electro-spray Ionization-liquid chromatography-tandem Mass spectrometry (ESI-LC/MS/MS) detection: The complete sequence analysis of virus protein was conducted by large-scale, high-throughput study of a complete set of proteins using ESI-LC-MS/MS, detects the protein composition of the completely concentrated sample by means of mass spectrometry (Wilhelm et al., 2014). The field of proteomics research approach USES a shotgun method, which namely to extract the sample after reduction, alkylation, enzymatic hydrolysis of protein steps into peptides mixture, peptides after electro-spray mass spectrometry were scanned again, get the MS spectra, finally through the relevant software parsing the mass spectrogram can get protein in the sample of quantitative or qualitative information. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using SCIEX's TripleTOF 5600 liquid-mass system, ABSCIEX (Andrews et al.,2011). The peptide samples were inhaled by the automatic sampler and then combined to the C18 capture column (5 m, 5 × 0.3 mm), then eluted to the analysis column (75 × m × 150 mm, 3 × m particle size, 100 A pore size, Eksigent) for separation. Two mobile phases (mobile phase A: H2O, 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B: ACN (acetonitrile), 0.1% formic acid) were used to establish A 30-minute analysis gradient (0 min in 5% B, 15 min of 5-35% B, 1 min of 35-80% B, 80% B for 5 min, 0.1 min of 80-5% B, and 5% B for 8.9 min). The velocity of the liquid phase was set at 300 nL/min. At the time of the mass spectrometry information dependent acquisition (IDA) model analysis, each scan cycle consisted of one MS full scan (m/z range of 350-1500, ion accumulation time of 250 MS), followed by 40 MS/MS scans (m/z range of 100-1500, ion accumulation time of 50 MS). The conditions of MS/MS acquisition are set as the parent ion signal is greater than 120 CPS and the charge is +2~+5. The exclusion time of repeated ion collection was set to 18 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data generated by TripleTOF 5600 were retrieved by ProteinPilot (V4.5), using Paragon as the database retrieval algorithm (Shilov et al., 2007). The database used for retrieval was the proteome reference database of rotavirus in UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/).The retrieval parameters are as follows: Sample Type: select Identification; Iodoacetamide was selected by Cys Alkylation. Trypsin Digestion choose; The Search Effort is set to Rapid ID. The retrieval results were screened with Unused≥1.3 as the standard, the retrieved items and contaminated proteins in the inverse database were deleted, and the remaining identification information was used for subsequent analysis. (https://string-db.org)is protein interaction database, you can input the login number of the protein into the website to query the protein interacting with the protein, or input a number of proteins, draw the interaction network.

### Publication Abstract
Rotaviruses (RVs) account for severe diarrhea in children and young animals globally. In the current study, the fecal samples of diarrheic calves from a beef farm in Inner Mongolia were screened for RVA by ELISA and RT-PCR, followed by culture of three positive RVA samples in the MA-104 cell line. After 10 blind passages, cytopathic effects (CPE) appeared as detachment, granulation, and clustering of the inoculated cells. The virus isolates were identified by RT-PCR (VP6 gene RVA) and ESI-LC-MS/MS for whole protein sequencing. The protein sequences demonstrated the presence of two strains from species A rotavirus and one RVB strain; RVA/Cow-tc/CHN/35333/2019/G6P[5] was mixed with one RVB strain (RVB/Cow-tc/CHN/35334/2019/G5P[3]) in two samples, and RVA/Cow-tc/CHN/10927/2019/G8P[7] was found in one sample. They are of genotype constellations (G6-P[5]-I2-R2-C2-M2-A3-N2-T6-E2-H3), (G8-P[7]-I5-R1-C1- M2-A1-N1-T1-E1-H1), and (G5-P[3]-I3-R5-C5-A5-N4-H5), respectively. Besides, phylogenetic analysis of the obtained sequences demonstrated viral evolution.

### Keywords
Bra, Bovine rotavirus, Brb, Protein typing, Esl-lc- ms/ms

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, The state Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Cooperative Innovation Center of Substantial Pig Production, Wuhan, 433070, China
College of Veterinary Medicine, HZAU

### Submitter
Gehad Elkady

### Lab Head
Dr Aizhen Guo
College of Veterinary Medicine, The state Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Cooperative Innovation Center of Substantial Pig Production, Wuhan, 433070, China


