### Accession
PXD005230

### Title
Proteome changes during mouse brain aging

### Description
Analysis of proteome changes during mouse brain aging

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were lysed in 0.1 M Tris–HCl (pH 8.0) containing 50 mM DTT and 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) (w/v) in boiling water for 4 min. After cooling to room temperature, the lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min. The lysates were processed according to the MED–FASP (multiple enzymes for sample digestion–filter-aided sample preparation) protocol using endoproteinase LysC and trypsin [Anal Chem.88, ( 2016) 5438-43]. Total protein and total peptide contents were determined using the tryptophan–fluorescence (WF) assay, as described recently [Anal. Chem., 87 (2015) 4110–16].

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant and raw intensity based Total protein Approach quantification [J Proteomics. 109 (2014) 322-31].

### Publication Abstract
Aging is believed to be the result of alterations of protein expression and accumulation of changes in biomolecules. Although there are numerous reports demonstrating changes in protein expression in brain during aging, only few of them describe global changes at the protein level. Here, we present the deepest quantitative proteomic analysis of three brain regions, hippocampus, cortex and cerebellum, in mice aged 1 or 12 months, using the total protein approach technique. In all the brain regions, both in young and middle-aged animals, we quantitatively measured over 5,200 proteins. We found that although the total protein expression in middle-aged brain structures is practically unaffected by aging, there are significant differences between young and middle-aged mice in the expression of some receptors and signaling cascade proteins proven to be significant for learning and memory formation. Our analysis demonstrates that the hippocampus is the most variable structure during natural aging and that the first symptoms of weakening of neuronal plasticity may be observed on protein level in middle-aged animals.

### Keywords
Brain, Aging

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


