### Accession
PXD015369

### Title
Proteomic analysis upon miR195/497 replacement reveals potential chemo sensitizing candidates for colorectal cancer

### Description
Patients with advanced colorectal cancer (CRC) are commonly treated with systemic combination therapy but suffer eventually from drug resistance. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are suggested to play a role in treatment resistance of CRC. We studied whether restoring downregulated miR-195-5p and 497-5p sensitize CRC cells to currently used chemotherapeutics 5-fluorouracil, oxaliplatin and irinotecan. Sensitivity to 5-FU, oxaliplatin and irinotecan before and after transfection with miR-195-5p and miR-497-5p mimics was analyzed in CRC cell lines HCT116, RKO, DLD-1 and SW480. Mass spectrometry based proteomic analysis of transfected and wild-type cells was used to identify targets involved in sensitivity to chemotherapy. Proteomic analysis revealed 181 proteins with significantly altered expression after transfection with miR-195-5p mimic in HCT116 and RKO, including 118 downregulated and 63 upregulated proteins. After transfection with miR-497-5p mimic, 130 proteins were significantly downregulated and 102 were upregulated in HCT116 and RKO (P<0.05 and FC<-3 or FC>3). CHUK and LUZP1 were coinciding downregulated proteins in sensitized CRC cells after transfection with either mimic. Resistance mechanisms of these two proteins may be related to nuclear factor kappa-B signaling and G1 cell cycle arrest, respectively. Restoring miR-195-5p and miR-497-5p expression enhanced sensitivity to chemotherapy, mainly oxaliplatin, in CRC cells and could be a promising treatment strategy for patients with mCRC. Proteomics revealed potential targets of these miRNAs involved in sensitivity to chemotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE/ In-gel-digestion Proteins were run just into the running gel of a 12% SDS-PAGE gel. Gels were fixed in a solution of 50% ethanol and 3% phosphoric acid and stained with a 0.1% Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 solution (containing 34% methanol, 3% phosphoric acid and 15% ammonium sulfate). Proteins were in-gel reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 54 mM iodoacetamide [1]. Each unresolved protein ‘blob’ was cut out from the gel and subsequently sliced into 1 mm³ cubes. Proteins were digested in-gel with 6.3 ng/ml trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel with 1% formic acid and 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile, concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge an desalted using a HLB OASIS SPE cartridge, and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge prior to injection. LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40-cm x 75-μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9-μm, 120-Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10-mm × 100-μm ID trap column packed with 5-μm, 120-Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 minutes (130 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of + 2 kV into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 15 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell using 1.6 amu isolation width and 25% normalized collision energy. MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 32 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot 2018-01 human canonical and isoform FASTA file (42258 entries) using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16 [2]. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Proteins were quantified by spectral counting. Spectral counts were normalized on the sum of the counts per sample and differential protein analysis between groups was performed using the beta-binominal test [3].  [1] Piersma SR, Warmoes MO, de Wit M, de Reus I, Knol JC, Jiménez CR. Whole gel processing procedure for GeLC-MS/MS based proteomics. Proteome Sci. 2013 Apr 23;11(1):17 [2] Cox J, Mann M (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol, 26, pp 1367-72. [3] Pham TV, Piersma SR, Warmoes M, Jimenez CR (2010) On the beta binomial model for analysis of spectral count data in label-free tandem mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Bioinformatics, 26(3):363-369.

### Publication Abstract
Most patients with advanced colorectal cancer (CRC) eventually develop resistance to systemic combination therapy. miR-195-5p and miR-497-5p are downregulated in CRC tissues and associated with drug resistance. Sensitization to 5-FU, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan by transfection with miR-195-5p and miR-497-5p mimics was studied using cell viability and clonogenic assays in cell lines HCT116, RKO, DLD-1, and SW480. In addition, proteomic analysis of transfected cells was implemented to identify potential targets. Significantly altered proteins were subjected to STRING (protein-protein interaction networks) database analysis to study the potential mechanisms of drug resistance. Cell viability analysis of transfected cells revealed increased sensitivity to oxaliplatin in microsatellite instable (MSI)/P53 wild-type HCT116 and RKO cells. HCT116 transfected cells formed significantly fewer colonies when treated with oxaliplatin. In sensitized cells, proteomic analysis showed 158 and 202 proteins with significantly altered expression after transfection with miR-195-5p and miR-497-5p mimics respectively, of which CHUK and LUZP1 proved to be coinciding downregulated proteins. Resistance mechanisms of these proteins may be associated with nuclear factor kappa-B signaling and G1 cell-cycle arrest. In conclusion, miR-195-5p and miR-497-5p replacement enhanced sensitivity to oxaliplatin in treatment na&#xef;ve MSI/P53 wild-type CRC cells. Proteomic analysis revealed potential miRNA targets associated with the cell-cycle which possibly bare a relation with chemotherapy sensitivity.

### Keywords
Microrna, Mirna, Colorectal cancer, Label-free

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


