### Accession
PXD043164

### Title
Plasmodium ARK2 and EB1 drives the unconventional spindle dynamics, during chromosome segregation in sexual transmission stages

### Description
The Aurora family of kinases orchestrates chromosome segregation and cytokinesis during cell division, with precise spatiotemporal regulation of its catalytic activities by distinct protein scaffolds. Plasmodium spp., the causative agents of malaria, are unicellular eukaryotes with three unique and highly divergent aurora-related kinases (ARK1-3) that are essential for asexual cellular proliferation, but lack most canonical scaffolds/activators. Here we investigate the role of ARK2 during sexual proliferation of the rodent malaria Plasmodium berghei, using a combination of super-resolution microscopy, mass spectrometry, and live-cell fluorescence imaging. We find that ARK2 is primarily located at spindle apparatus microtubules in the vicinity of kinetochores during both mitosis and meiosis. Interactomic and co-localisation studies reveal several putative ARK2-associated interactors including the microtubule plus end-binding protein EB1, together with MISFIT and Myosin-K, but no conserved eukaryotic scaffold proteins. Gene function studies indicate that ARK2 and EB1 are complementary in driving endomitotic division and thereby parasite transmission through the mosquito. This discovery underlines the flexibility of molecular networks to rewire and drive unconventional mechanisms of chromosome segregation in the malaria parasite.

### Sample Protocol
Male gametocytes of ARK2-GFP and EB1-GFP parasites were used at 1 min post activation to prepare cell lysates. WT-GFP gametocytes were used as controls. Purified parasite pellets were crosslinked using formaldehyde (10 min incubation with 1% formaldehyde, followed by 5 min incubation in 0.125 M glycine solution and three washes with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; pH 7.5). Immunoprecipitation was performed using the protein lysates and a GFP-Trap_A Kit (Chromotek) following the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, the lysates were incubated for 2h with GFP-Trap_A beads at 4º C with continuous rotation. Unbound proteins were washed away, and proteins bound to the GFP-Trap_A beads were digested using trypsin. The tryptic peptides were analysed by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mascot (http://www.matrixscience.com/) and MaxQuant (https://www.maxquant.org/) search engines were used for mass spectrometry data analysis. Experiments were performed in duplicate. Peptide and proteins having a minimum threshold of 95% were used for further proteomic analysis. The PlasmoDB database was used for protein annotation, and a separate manual curation was performed to classify proteins into 5 categories relevant for functional annotation of ARK2/EB1 immunoprecipitates: cohesin/condensin, DNA repair/replication, kinetochore, MTOC, spindle, proteasome and ribosome/translation. The latter two categories were not further used in our analyses, but these are often found in the background of GFP-pulldowns in Plasmodium (Table S3). To capture co-variation of pulldown proteins between different experiments (GFP-only versus ARK2-GFP versus EB1-GFP) we performed principal component analysis (PCA) using unique peptide values per protein present in each of the samples. Values for undetected proteins were set to 0. Values were ln(x+1) transformed and PCA was performed using the ClustVis webserver.

### Publication Abstract
Mechanisms of cell division are remarkably diverse, suggesting the underlying molecular networks among eukaryotes differ extensively. The Aurora family of kinases orchestrates the process of chromosome segregation and cytokinesis during cell division through precise spatiotemporal regulation of their catalytic activities by distinct scaffolds. Plasmodium spp., the causative agents of malaria, are unicellular eukaryotes that have three divergent aurora-related kinases (ARKs) and lack most canonical scaffolds/activators. The parasite uses unconventional modes of chromosome segregation during endomitosis and meiosis in sexual transmission stages within mosquito host. This includes a rapid threefold genome replication from 1N to 8N with successive cycles of closed mitosis, spindle formation and chromosome segregation within eight minutes (termed male gametogony). Kinome studies had previously suggested likely essential functions for all three Plasmodium ARKs during asexual mitotic cycles; however, little is known about their location, function, or their scaffolding molecules during unconventional sexual proliferative stages. Using a combination of super-resolution microscopy, mass spectrometry, omics and live-cell fluorescence imaging, we set out to investigate the contribution of the atypical Aurora paralog ARK2 to proliferative sexual stages using rodent malaria model Plasmodium berghei. We find that ARK2 primarily localises to the spindle apparatus associated with kinetochores during both mitosis and meiosis. Interactomics and co-localisation studies reveal a unique ARK2 scaffold at the spindle including the microtubule plus end-binding protein EB1 and lacking some other conserved molecules. Gene function studies indicate complementary functions of ARK2 and EB1 in driving endomitotic divisions and thereby parasite transmission. Our discovery of a novel Aurora spindle scaffold underlines the emerging flexibility of molecular networks to rewire and drive unconventional mechanisms of chromosome segregation in the malaria parasite Plasmodium.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Warwick_rtp, Eb1, Ark2

### Affiliations
University of Warwick
School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Rita Tewari
School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.


