### Accession
PXD022349

### Title
Protein profiling of CAST.APP/PS1 mouse brain-derived Extracellular vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are secreted by any neuronal cells in the central nervous system (CNS) for molecular clearance, cellular communications and disease spread in multiple neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), although their exact molecular mechanism is poorly understood. We hypothesize that high-resolution proteomic profiling of EVs separated from animal models of AD would determine the composition of EV contents and their cellular origin.

### Sample Protocol
For separating of brain-derived EVs, the frozen brain tissue was chopped on ice using a razor blade to generate 0.5mm3 sections. The sections were transferred to Hibernate E solution containing Papain in Earle’s Balanced Salt Solution and then incubated in a water bath. After incubation, the samples were immediately place on ice, and ice-cold Hibernate E solution. The dissociated brain tissue samples were homogenized. The homogenized tissue samples were filtered. After differential centrifugation, the supernatant from this final spin was filtered through a 0.22-μm mesh filter and then was centrifuged at 140,000 × g for 70 min at 4°C. For sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation method, after ultracentrifugation, the EV was collected by sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation. The interphases between the second (0.65M) and third (0.825M) steps correspond to fraction “V” and the third and fourth steps corresponded to fraction “VI” have a buoyant density of 1.10 - 1.12 and 1.12 - 1.15 g/cm3, respectively, and enriched in EVs. The V and VI fractions were diluted to a total volume of 12 mL with dfPBS and centrifuged at 140,000 × g for 70 min at 4°C, and mixed fraction V and VI fractions as an EV-enriched sample. Ice-cold 100% (w / v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added to the separated EV fraction to a final concentration of 20% of TCA, then the mixed sample was incubated for 30 min on ice and was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 20 min at 4°C. The pellet was then washed twice with ice-cold acetone. After drying, the pellet was resuspended in Laemmli sample buffer with 5 mM dithiothreitol, reduced for 20 min at 65°C, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, the samples were run in a 4% to 20% gradient gel until the dye front was 10 mm from the top of the gel. The gels were washed twice with distilled water, fixed with 100% Methanol, and stained with GelCode Blue Stain Reagent for 16 hrs. Each lane was then individually removed from the gel. Gel pieces were then transferred to 1.5 mL tubes and destained twice using 50% acetonitrile in 25 mM HEPES (pH 8.8) at 22°C, for 15 min with shaking, and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile for additional 10 min with shaking, for a total of three times. The destained gel piece was dried up using SpeedVac Concentrators. The gel pieces were digested with proteomic grade trypsin 25 mM HEPES overnight at 37°C. The digested peptide was extracted with 70% acetonitrile /1% formic acid, and were removed the gel by Ultrafree-MC Centrifugal Filter. The digested peptides were reconstituted in 25 μL of 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.0) and vortexed for 5 min. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, 4μL of TMT reagent (20 ng/μL) was added to the digested peptides. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with 2μL of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. The TMT-labeled peptide samples were pooled at a 1:1 ratio across 10 samples. The combined sample was added into 100 μL of 20% formic acid, 2 mL of 1% formic acid, desalted via StageTip, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 5% formic acid for nano-liquid chromatography and tandem mass-spectrometry (NanoLC-MS/MS). NanoLC–MS/MS analysis was conducted by an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon EASY-nanoLC 1200 liquid chromatography pump. Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with ~40 cm of Accucore150 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). We loaded 4 μL onto the column and separation was achieved using a 180 min gradient of 8 to 23% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of ~550 nL/min. The analysis used an MS3 based TMT method, which has been shown to reduce ion interference. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap; resolution 120,000; mass range 400-1400 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 5 × 105; maximum injection time 100 ms). Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected using a Top10 method. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (quadrupole ion trap; AGC 2 × 10^4; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 150 ms). Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, we collected an MS3 spectrum using our recently described method in which multiple MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms with multiple frequency notches. MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed using the Orbitrap (NCE 65; AGC 1 × 10^5; maximum injection time 150 ms, resolution was 50,000 at 200 Th).

### Data Protocol
A compendium of in-house developed software was used to convert mass spectrometric data (Raw file) to the mzXML format, as well as to correct monoisotopic m/z measurements. Database searching included all entries from the Mus musculus with human APP and PS1 UniProt database (ver. October 2018). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da, which was chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with SEQUEST searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Filtering was performed using an in-house linear discrimination analysis (LDA) method to create one combined filter parameter from the following peptide ion and MS2 spectra metrics: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and ΔCn, peptide ion mass accuracy and charge state, in-solution charge of peptide, peptide length, and mis-cleavages. Linear discrimination scores were used to assign probabilities to each MS2 spectrum for being assigned correctly, and these probabilities were further used to filter the dataset with an MS2 spectra assignment FDR of smaller than 1% at the protein level. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide FDR and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with more than eight TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise ratio less than 100, or no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are secreted by any neural cells in the central nervous system for molecular clearance, cellular communications, and disease spread in multiple neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD), although their exact molecular mechanism is poorly understood. We hypothesize that high-resolution proteomic profiling of EVs separated from animal models of AD would determine the composition of EV contents and their cellular origin. Here, we examined recently developed transgenic mice (CAST.<i>APP/PS1</i>), which express familial AD-linked mutations of amyloid precursor protein (<i>APP</i>) and presenilin-1 (<i>PS1</i>) in the CAST/EiJ mouse strain and develop hippocampal neurodegeneration. Quantitative proteomics analysis of EVs separated from CAST.<i>APP/PS1</i> and age-matched control mice by tandem mass tag-mass spectrometry identified a total of 3444 unique proteins, which are enriched in neuron-, astrocyte-, oligodendrocyte-, and microglia-specific molecules. CAST.<i>APP/PS1</i>-derived EVs show significant enrichment of Psen1, APP, and Itgax and reduction of Wdr61, Pmpca, Aldh1a2, Calu, Anp32b, Actn4, and Ndufv2 compared to WT-derived EVs, suggesting the involvement of A&#x3b2;-processing complex and disease-associated/neurodegenerative microglia (DAM/MGnD) in EV secretion. In addition, Itgax and Apoe, DAM/MGnD markers, in EVs show a positive correlation with <i>Itgax</i> and <i>Apoe</i> mRNA expression from brain tissue in CAST.<i>APP/PS1</i> mice. These datasets indicate the significant contribution of A&#x3b2; plaque and neurodegeneration-induced DAM/MGnD microglia for EV secretion in CAST.<i>APP/PS1</i> mice and shed light on understanding AD pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, App/ps1 mouse, Brain tissue, Lc-msmsms, Tmt label

### Affiliations
Boston University School of Medicine
Departments of Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics and Neurology Boston University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Satoshi Muraoka

### Lab Head
Dr Tsuneya Ikezu
Departments of Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics and Neurology Boston University School of Medicine


