### Accession
PXD035924

### Title
Selective Macrocyclic Peptide Modulators of Lys63-linked Ubiquitin Chains Disrupt DNA Damage Repair

### Description
Developing an effective binder for a specific ubiquitin (Ub) chain is a promising approach for modulating various biological processes with potential applications in drug discovery. In this study, we combined the Random Non-standard Peptides Integrated Discovery (RaPID) method and chemical protein synthesis to screen an extended library of macrocyclic peptides against synthetic Lys63-linked Di-Ub. This enabled us to discover a novel binder with low nanomolar affinity and specificity for this particular Ub chain. We further chemically modified the most effective binder to generate next-generation binders. We show that our potent cyclic peptide is cell-permeable and inhibits DNA damage repair, leading to cell cycle arrest and apoptotic cell death. Concordantly, a pulldown experiment with the biotinylated analog of our lead cyclic peptide identified various proteins involved in DNA synthesis and damage repair. Collectively, we established a novel and powerful strategy for selective inhibition of protein-protein interactions associated with Lys63-linked Di-Ub using cyclic peptides. This study offers an advancement in modulating central Ub pathways and provides new opportunities in drug discovery areas associated with Ub signaling.

### Sample Protocol
The elution of the interacting protein from the beads was done by 30 min incubation in 8M Urea and 400mM ammonium bicarbonate than removed from the beads, reduced with 3mM DTT (60ºC for 30 min), modified with 10mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (room temperature 30 min in the dark) and digested in 2M Urea, 25mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (Promega), overnight at 37oC in a 1:50 (M/M) enzyme-to-substrate ratio. The tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 tips (Top tip, Glygen) dried and re-suspended in 0.1% Formic acid. The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 X 180-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 60 minutes gradient of 5 to 28% 15 minutes gradient of 28 to 95% and 25 minutes at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a positive mode (m/z 300–1800 resolution 70,000 for MS1 and 17,500 for MS2) using repetitively full MS scan followed by high collision induces dissociation (HCD at 25 normalized collision energy) of the 10 most dominant ions (>1 charges) selected from the first MS scan. The AGC settings were 3x106 for the full MS and 1x105 for the MS/MS scans. The intensity threshold for triggering MS/MS analysis was 1x104. A dynamic exclusion list was enabled with exclusion duration of 20 s.)

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data of the three biological replicates was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8 (1) for peak picking and identification using the Andromeda search engine, searching against the human proteome from the Uniprot database with mass tolerance of 6 ppm for the precursor masses and 20 ppm for the fragment ions. Oxidation on methionine ubiquitination on lysine and protein N-terminus acetylation were accepted as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl on cysteine was accepted as static modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed.  The data was quantified by label free analysis using the same software (1). Peptide- and protein-level false discovery rates (FDRs) were filtered to 1% using the target-decoy strategy. Protein table were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database, and common contaminants and single peptide identifications. Missing values were imputated by the minimal intensity of the project (18 in log2). Paired T-Test analysis between the control and the experimental groups was done using Perseus software (2).  Refs 1. Jürgen Cox, Marco Y. Hein, Christian A. Luber, Igor Paron, Nagarjuna Nagaraj, and Matthias Mann. Accurate Proteome-wide Label-free Quantification by Delayed Normalization and Maximal Peptide Ratio Extraction, Termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Sep; 13(9): 2513–2526.   2. Stefka Tyanova, Tikira Temu, Pavel Sinitcyn, Arthur Carlson, Marco Y Hein, Tamar Geiger, Matthias Mann  Jürgen Cox. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods . 2016 Sep;13(9):731-40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Dna damage repair

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel institute of technology

### Submitter
Keren Bendalak

### Lab Head
Dr Ashraf Brik
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel institute of technology


