### Accession
PXD027420

### Title
Retroelement Ty1 Integrase interactome identified using tandem chromatin affinity purification ( TChAP) after in vivo crosslink in yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
To identify yeast proteins associated with Ty1 integrase (IN) that could regulate Ty1 replication, we co-purified IN partners using the tandem chromatin affinity purification procedure after in vivo cross-link (TChAP), which we developed previously (Nguyen et al. 2014). We first identified RNA Pol I and Pol III complexes and also a small subset of additional evolutionary conserved complexes, including PAF1 (Polymerase-Associated Factor 1),FACT (FAcilitates Chromatin Transcription), the proteasome and the CK2 kinase. We next confirmed that CK2 interacts with Ty1 integrase in vivo and repress Ty1 retromobility. We showed that Ty1 IN is a substrate of CK2 in vitro and identified 12 phosphorylated residues. In vivo approaches showed that only part of the protein was phosphorylated in the cells and did not demonstrate any direct evidence between Ty1 IN phosphorylation and retromobility inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
TCHAP protocol The yeast strain transformed with the pcm185-Ty1 INHBH plasmid, a Tet-off inducible promoter expressing Ty1 IN with the histidine biotin tag (Tagwerker et al. 2006), in 10 ml of minimal growth medium (CASA medium, and doxycycline 10µg/ml) and grown overnight at 30°C. The cells were diluted ON in the absence of doxycycline.  The next day, the cells in the exponential phase where crosslinked with 1% Formaldehyde (prepared in 1X PBS) for 20 min before to be harvested by centrifuging at 3500 rpm at 4°C for 5 min. The cell pellets were washed 3 times with ice cold PBS (1X) and once in sucrose buffer (300mM sucrose, 1%Triton X-100, PBS 1X) and then lyzed using  a french press. The cell lysate is then centrifuged at 6000 rpm at 4°C for 5 min. The pellet is washed three times with PBS1x + tween 0,5%, once with Urea buffer 1 (20 mM NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4 pH=7.5, 6M Urea, 1M NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.1% Sarkosyl, 10mM Imidazole and 5mM b-mercaptoethanol, pH=8) and then resuspended in 15ml Urea buffer 1 containing EDTA- free protease inhibitor mixture and 100mM PMSF. The chromatin was solubilized and sheared using a Q700 sonicator with a microtip probe (Qsonica). The sonicator was set to 5 cycles of 10 sec ON followed by 50 sec OFF with 70% amplitude. The resulting lysates were clarified by centrifuging for 30 min at 10000 rpm at 10°C. To avoid non-specific binders , the supernatant was first pre-cleared on a 5ml sepharose fast flow column, before to be subjected to Nickel affinity purification using an AKTA purifier system (GE Healthcare) pre-equilibrated with Urea buffer 1. The sample was injected for a total of 3 times. After the complete injection, the system was washed extensively with Urea buffer 2 (20 mM NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4 pH=7.5, 6M Urea, 300mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.1% Sarkosyl, 10mM Imidazole and 5mM b-mercaptoethanol, pH 6.3). The proteins from the nickel column were eluted with Urea buffer 3 (20 mM NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4 pH=7.5, 6M Urea, 300mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 0.1% Sarkosyl, 10mM EDTA and 5mM b-mercaptoethanol, pH 4.3). The elution fractions were neutralized with Tris-HCl pH=8.8 before to be incubated ON at 10°C overnight with Streptavidin magnetic sepharose slurry beads, previously equilibrated with Urea buffer 1. The supernatant was cleared from the beads using a magnetic separator. The beads were then washed once with Urea buffer 1 and 3 times with PBS(1X) for 5 min (each wash) at room temperature. The beads were then resuspended in 500µl of reversal buffer (250mM Tris HCl pH=8.8, 2% SDS and 0.5M b-mercaptoethanol) and boiled at 95°C for 15 minutes (3 x 5 min at 95°C with 30 sec on ice). The elution was transferred to a low-protein binding Eppendorf tube and 20% Trichloro-acetic acid was added for protein precipitation and kept on ice for 10 min. The protein pellet was collected by centrifugation at 4°C at 15000rpm for 15 min. The protein pellet was washed twice with 1ml of ice cold acetone to remove the excess TCA and dried under the hood for 5 min. Finally, the pellet was resuspended in 20µl of reversal buffer and boiled for 5 min at 95°C. The protein sample was then diluted with a 5X sample buffer (Thermofisher scientific) according to the supplier’s protocol and resolved by SDS PAGE on a 4-12% gradient NuPAGE gel. The bands were visualized by staining the gel with Imperial blue and de-staining with water overnight. The following day the bands were sliced from the gel and sent to the mass spectrometry facility, IBB, in Warsaw (Poland) where proteins were excised from the gel, treated with trypsin and identified by LC–MS/MS using the Nano-Acquity LC system (Waters) and Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp.)  Identification of IN phosphorylated sites To identify Ty1 IN sites phosphorylated by CK2 in vitro,  a monomeric recombinant IN purified by nickel-affinity chromatography and gel filtration (Superdex 200) was incubated for 30min with purified yeast CK2 holoenzymes and loaded on SDS PAGE gel before to be stained with Imperial blue , sliced and sent to the mass spectrometry facility, IBB, in Warsaw to identify the phosphorylated sites.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were processed and searched by Mascot Distiller/ Mascot Server suite (Matrixscience, version 2.4 and 2.5) against Saccharomyces Genome Database (http://www.yeastgenome.org/). Search parameters included Carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification and Oxidation (M) as variable one and 1 missed cleavage. In cases of phospho-oriented searches, semitryptic enzyme specificity and Phospho (STY) was specified, otherwise enzyme was defined as trypsin. Peptide and fragment mass tolerance was established after offline mass recalibration. Mascot Decoy option was set to compute the score threshold for 1% of false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Integrase, Yeast, Rna polymerase iii, Ck2, Ty1

### Affiliations
Integrative Biology and Molecular Genetics Unit (SBIGeM)
IBB PAS

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Joël Acker
Integrative Biology and Molecular Genetics Unit (SBIGeM)


