### Accession
PXD015408

### Title
The pancreatic islet MHC-II peptidome identifies key features of autoimmune peptides

### Description
The nature of autoantigens that trigger autoimmune diseases has been much discussed but direct biochemical identification is lacking for most. Addressing this question demands unbiased examination of the self-peptides displayed by a defined autoimmune MHC-II molecule. We have examined the immunopeptidome of the pancreatic islets of the NOD mouse that spontaneously develops autoimmune diabetes based on its MHC-II, the I-Ag7 variant. The relevant peptides that induced early CD4 T cells derived from insulin and C-peptide; these were also found in the MHC-II peptidome of the pancreatic lymph node and spleen. The insulin-derived peptides followed a trajectory from internal processing in beta cells to exocytosis, uptake, and presentation in islets and peripheral sites. Such process not only generated conventional epitopes but also resulted in presentation of post-translationally modified peptides, including deamidated and fused sequences. These analyses reveal the key features of a restricted component in the self-MHC-II peptidome causing autoreactivity.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide isolation: Cells isolated from islets, pLNs or spleens were suspended in lysis buffer (40mM MEGA 8, 40mM MEGA 9, 1mM PMSF, 0.2mM Iodoacetamide, 20ug/ml Leupeptin, Roche Complete Mini Protease cocktail in PBS) and rocked for 1hr at 4oC. Cell lysate was spun in a centrifuge at 20,000xg for 30min at 4oC, and the supernatant was transferred to a tube containing PBS washed sepharose conjugated to polyclonal mouse IgG (Bio X cell; 1.5 mg antibody/sample). The sepharose/cell lysate was incubated at 4oC for 30min and then was added to an empty column; unbound peptides were collected as the flow-through. This flow-through was then added to a tube containing PBS-washed sepharose conjugated to anti-I-Ag7 antibody (AG2.42.7, 1.5 mg/sample) and incubated at 4oC overnight. The I-Ag7-sepharose was applied to a column and washed four times as follows: 10ml 150mM NaCl, 20mM Tris pH7.4; 10ml 400mM NaCl, 20mM Tris pH7.4; 10ml 150mM NaCl, 20mM Tris pH7.4; 10ml 20mM Tris pH8.0. Peptides were eluted with 10% acetic acid and dried with a SpeedVac. Eluted peptides were passed over detergent removal spin columns (Pierce) to remove traces of remaining detergent and were cleaned by using the C18 Spin Columns from ThermoScientific (Pierce). Mass Spectrometry. A Dionex UltiMate 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) through an Easy-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific). For the islet and one of the PLN samples, nLC separation was carried out as follows, while other samples were analyzed as previously described22. Peptide samples were loaded (15 µL/min, 1 min) onto a trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 50 ºC), eluted (0.2 µL/min) onto an Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 µm, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, 50 ºC, Thermo Scientific) and separated with the following gradient, all % Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in ACN): 0–110 min, 2%–22%; 110–120 min, 22%–35%; 120–130 min, 35–95%; 130–150 min, isocratic at 95%; 151–153 min, 95%–2%, 153–171 min, isocratic at 2%. Spray voltage was 1900V, ion transfer tube temperature was 275°C, and RF lens was 30%. MS scans were acquired in profile mode and MS/MS scans in centroid mode, for ions with charge states 2–7, with a cycle time of 3 sec. MS spectra were recorded from 375–1500 Da at 120K resolution (at m/z 200), and HCD MS/MS was triggered above a threshold of 2.0e4, with quadrupole isolation (0.7 Da) at 30K resolution, and collision energy (CE) of 30%. Dynamic exclusion was used (60 s), and monoisotopic precursor selection was on.

### Data Protocol
Data files were processed and searches were performed using PEAKS X (BSI). Searches were performed against a Uniprot-Mouse database (downloaded 1/12/2019; 17,000 entries) with no enzyme specificity, with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.01 ppm. Variable modifications were oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) and trioxidation (C). False discovery rate estimation was enabled. Peptides were filtered at 1% or 5% FDR at the peptide-spectrum match level. Protein filtering was disabled was disabled by setting Protein -10logP score to 0, 0 unique peptides, and requiring significant peptides. To identify HIPs, a multi-round search was performed in which unassigned spectra were searched against the Delong-Haskins in silico HIP database.

### Publication Abstract
The nature of autoantigens that trigger autoimmune diseases has been much discussed, but direct biochemical identification is lacking for most. Addressing this question demands unbiased examination of the self-peptides displayed by a defined autoimmune major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) molecule. Here, we examined the immunopeptidome of the pancreatic islets in non-obese diabetic mice, which spontaneously develop autoimmune diabetes based on the I-A<sup>g7</sup> variant of MHC-II. The relevant peptides that induced pathogenic CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells at the initiation of diabetes derived from proinsulin. These peptides were also found in the MHC-II peptidome of the pancreatic lymph nodes and spleen. The proinsulin-derived peptides followed a trajectory from their generation and exocytosis in &#x3b2; cells to uptake and presentation in islets and peripheral sites. Such a pathway generated conventional epitopes but also resulted in the presentation of post-translationally modified peptides, including deamidated sequences. These analyses reveal the key features of a restricted component in the self-MHC-II peptidome that caused autoreactivity.

### Keywords
Spleen, Nod mouse, Pln, Hybrid insulin peptides, Mhc-ii peptidome, Islets

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110
Washington University

### Submitter
Cheryl Lichti

### Lab Head
Dr Cheryl Lichti
Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO 63110


