### Accession
PXD007116

### Title
Mitotic post-translational modifications of histones promote chromatin compaction in vitro

### Description
As histones undergo major changes in their post-translational modifications during mitotic entry, we speculated that the spectrum of cell cycle-specific histone modifications might contribute to chromosome compaction during mitosis. To test this hypothesis, we isolated core histones from interphase and mitotic cells and reconstituted chromatin with them. We used mass spectrometry to show that key post-translational modifications remained intact during our isolation procedure.

### Sample Protocol
Endogenous histones purified from DT40 cells were derivatized (propionylated) and enzymatically digested with trypsin. Peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed with MaxQuant proteomics suite of algorithms (version 1.5.3.17). The data were searched against a chicken histone database (generated from a chicken proteome database downloaded on 09.10.2015 from UniProt) with the following parameters: the maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions; the minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids; the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 5 with the maximum charge state 6; multiplicity was set to 2 with Lys8/Arg10 as the Heavy Label and max. labelled AAs were set to 7. Variable modifications included acetylation (Protein N-term and K), Methylation (KR), di-Methylation (KR), tri- Methylation (K), Phosphorylation (STY), LRGG (K), GlyGly (K)- ubiquitylation remnant on lysine residue after trypsin digestion- and Propionylation (K). FTMS top peaks per 100 Da were set to 20.

### Publication Abstract
How eukaryotic chromosomes are compacted during mitosis has been a leading question in cell biology since the nineteenth century. Non-histone proteins such as condensin complexes contribute to chromosome shaping, but appear not to be necessary for mitotic chromatin compaction. Histone modifications are known to affect chromatin structure. As histones undergo major changes in their post-translational modifications during mitotic entry, we speculated that the spectrum of cell-cycle-specific histone modifications might contribute to chromosome compaction during mitosis. To test this hypothesis, we isolated core histones from interphase and mitotic cells and reconstituted chromatin with them. We used mass spectrometry to show that key post-translational modifications remained intact during our isolation procedure. Light, atomic force and transmission electron microscopy analysis showed that chromatin assembled from mitotic histones has a much greater tendency to aggregate than chromatin assembled from interphase histones, even under low magnesium conditions where interphase chromatin remains as separate beads-on-a-string structures. These observations are consistent with the hypothesis that mitotic chromosome formation is a two-stage process with changes in the spectrum of histone post-translational modifications driving mitotic chromatin compaction, while the action of non-histone proteins such as condensin may then shape the condensed chromosomes into their classic mitotic morphology.

### Keywords
Mitotic histones, Chromatin condensation, Histones, Ptms

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Group, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, Germany
University of Edinburgh, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology

### Submitter
Juan Jose Bonfiglio

### Lab Head
Dr William Earnshaw
University of Edinburgh, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology


