### Accession
PXD013363

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of SUMOylation in renal cortical collecting duct cells after aldosterone stimulation

### Description
SILAC was employed to investigate the effect of aldosterone stimulation on SUMOylation of cortical collecting duct (mpkCCD) cells.

### Sample Protocol
A modified form of SUMO1 or SUMO2, with a histidine tag and a T to K mutation preceding the carboxyl-terminal GG motif was expressed in mpkCCD cells. mpkCCD cells were treated with aldosterone while SILAC heavy labeled mpkCCD cells were used as vehicles. Equal amount of light and heavy labeled proteins were combined. Four passages of cells were cultured and regarded as four biological replicates. SUMO-conjugated proteins were purified using the histidine tag, and after cleavage with the endoproteinase Lys-C followed by Glu-C, a di-glycine specific antibody was used to enrich SUMOylated peptides. Flow-through of KGG pull-down of Lys-C digest for all SILAC experiments were fractionated into 8 fractions.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with Proteome Discoverer (v2.1.0.81) with both Sequest and Mascot (v2.5). Two parallel processing nodes, corresponding to LysC and LysC+GluC digest were set up. Settings were as follows: acetylation of Protein N-term, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and di-glycine modification of lysine were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. In both processing nodes, except for the aforementioned variable modifications, heavy version of di-glycine-modified Lys was manually set in both Sequest and Mascot.  It is worth noting that heavy version of di-glycine on non-C terminus lysine is regarded as a “light” modification, therefore Proteome Discoverer marked the SUMO peptides that were only identified through the heavy form as “InconsistentlyLabeled” and refused to report any ratios. Results from these two parallel processing nodes were transferred to a consensus node, where quantification was done with the default precursor quantification parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Protein post-translational modification by the small&#xa0;ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) is a mechanism that allows a diverse response of cells to stress. Five SUMO family members, SUMO1-5, are expressed in mammals. We hypothesized that because kidney epithelial cells are often subject to stresses arising from various physiological conditions, multiple proteins in the kidney will be SUMOylated. Here, we profiled SUMO1- and SUMO2-modified proteins in a polarized epithelial cell model of the renal cortical collecting duct (mpkCCD14 cells). Modified forms of SUMO1 or SUMO2, with a histidine tag and a Thr to Lys mutation preceding the carboxyl-terminal di-gly motif, were expressed in mpkCCD14 cells, allowing SUMO-conjugated proteins to be purified and identified. Protein mass spectrometry identified 1428 SUMO1 and 1957 SUMO2 sites, corresponding to 741 SUMO1 and 971 SUMO2 proteins. Gene ontology indicated that the function of the majority of SUMOylated proteins in mpkCCD14 cells was related to gene transcription. After treatment of the mpkCCD14 cells for 24 h with aldosterone, the levels of SUMOylation at a specific site on the proton and oligopeptide/antibiotic cotransporter protein Pept2 were greatly increased. In conclusion, the SUMOylation landscape of mpkCCD14 cells suggests that protein modification by SUMOylation is a mechanism within renal epithelial cells to modulate gene transcription under various physiological conditions.

### Keywords
Renal, Sumoylation, Silac, Collecting duct, Quantitative, Kidney

### Affiliations
InterPrET Center, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus DK-8000, Denmark
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University

### Submitter
Qi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Robert A. Fenton
InterPrET Center, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus DK-8000, Denmark


