### Accession
PXD008486

### Title
Palaeoproteomic Profiling of Conservation Layers on a 14th Century Italian Wall Painting

### Description
Ahead of display, a non-original layer was observed on the surface of a fragment of a wall painting by Ambrogio Lorenzetti (active 1319, died 1348/9). FTIR analysis suggested proteinaceous content. Mass spectrometry was used to better characterise this layer and revealed two protein components: sheep and cow glue and chicken and mallard egg white. Analysis of posttranslational modifications detected several photo-oxidation products, which suggest that the egg experienced prolonged exposure to UV-light and was likely applied long before the addition of the glue. Additionally, glycation products detected may indicate naturally occurring glycoprotein degradation or reaction with a carbohydrate material such as starch, identified by ATR-FTIR in a cross-section of a sample taken from the painting. Palaeoproteomics is shown to provide detailed characterisation of organic layers associated with mural paintings and therefore aids reconstruction of the conservation history of these objects.

### Sample Protocol
wo samples of the unknown layer, OS6 and OS7, <100 µg each (Figure 1), were carefully removed. Proteomics workflow was adapted from methods previously published for ancient material using a guanidinium buffer to extract the proteins, followed by digestion with endoproteinases Lys-C and trypsin. The digested peptides were subsequently analysed by single-shot nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) on a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap instrument.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and additional data analysis was performed with the MaxQuant software. The resulting proteins and their modifications from the two samples were compared with data from samples prepared with the same basic workflow. Modern HeLa cell lysate samples were used to eliminate PTMs caused by sample preparation, and skeletal remains of relatively similar age, but not exposed to UV light, to evaluate age-induced degradation.

### Publication Abstract
Ahead of display, a non-original layer was observed on the surface of a fragment of a wall painting by Ambrogio Lorenzetti (active 1319, died 1348/9). FTIR analysis suggested proteinaceous content. Mass spectrometry was used to better characterise this layer and revealed two protein components: sheep and cow glue and chicken and duck egg white. Analysis of post-translational modifications detected several photo-oxidation products, which suggest that the egg experienced prolonged exposure to UV light and was likely applied long before the glue layer. Additionally, glycation products detected may indicate naturally occurring glycoprotein degradation or reaction with a carbohydrate material such as starch, identified by ATR-FTIR in a cross-section of a sample taken from the painting. Palaeoproteomics is shown to provide detailed characterisation of organic layers associated with mural paintings and therefore aids reconstruction of the conservation history of these objects.

### Keywords
Conservation science, Posttranslational modifications, Proteomics, Cultural heritage, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Natural History Museum of Denmark University of Copenhagen, Øster Voldgade 5–7, 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Meaghan Mackie

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Natural History Museum of Denmark University of Copenhagen, Øster Voldgade 5–7, 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark


