### Accession
PXD021376

### Title
Mitochondrial respiration is necessary to combat oxidative stress in quiescent cells

### Description
Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) makes ATP and supports biosynthesis during proliferation, but its role in non-proliferating cells, beyond ATP production, is less understood. Here we show that OXPHOS protects quiescent (but not proliferating) cells from oxidative stress. Using in vivo models of OXPHOS deficiency (whole body and endothelium-specific) we show that OXPHOS mediated resistance to ROS (i) maintains selectivity of ROS-based anticancer therapy by protecting normal tissues during treatment, and in quiescent endothelium (ii) ameliorates systemic LPS-induced inflammation and (iii) attenuates symptoms of the inflammatory bowel disease. ROS-resistance provided by OXPHOS is independent of its role in biosynthesis or NADH recycling. Instead, in quiescent cells OXPHOS constitutively generates low levels of endogenous ROS that support basal autophagic flux and protect from exogenous ROS challenge. Hence, during evolution cells acquired mitochondria to profit from oxidative metabolism, but also built in an OXPHOS-dependent mechanism to guard against the resulting oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in 100 mM TEAB containing 2% SDC and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Protein concentration was determined using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 20 µg of protein per sample was used for MS sample preparation. Cysteine residues were reduced with 5 mM final concentration of TCEP (60°C for 60 min) and blocked with 10 mM final concentration of MMTS (10 min at RT). Samples were digested with trypsin (trypsin/protein ratio 1/30) at 37°C overnight. Next, samples were acidified with TFA to 1% final concentration. SDC was removed by extraction to ethylacetate (Masuda et al., 2008) and peptides were desalted using in-house made stage tips packed with C18 disks (Empore) described previously (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Nano Reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) were used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm particle size, 300 μm x 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 4 min at 18 μl/min, with loading buffer composed of water, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were eluted with mobile phase B gradient from 4% to 35% B in 120 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed in orbitrap at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles (Hebert et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) (Cox and Mann, 2008). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and we specified a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the Human database (downloaded from Uniprot on September 2017, containing 20,142 entries). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification and N- terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs based on their masses and retention time (maximum deviation 0.7 min) and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithm in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2014).  Data analysis was performed in R after loading the proteinGroups result files from MaxQuant. Proteins with less than 10% valid values were removed. Differentially expressed proteins and their false discovery rate (FDR) corrected p values were identified by the Limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015). We used gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) as implemented in the clusterProfiler package (version 3.6.0) (Yu et al., 2012) and gene set variation analysis (GSVA) as implemented in the GSVA R-package (version 1.26.0) (Hanzelmann et al., 2013). Gene set analysis was performed using KEGG gene sets. GSEA and GSVA scores were calculated for sets with a minimum of 5 detected genes, all other parameters were default.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) generates ATP, but OXPHOS also supports biosynthesis during proliferation. In contrast, the role of OXPHOS during quiescence, beyond ATP production, is not well understood. Using mouse models of inducible OXPHOS deficiency in all cell types or specifically in the vascular endothelium that negligibly relies on OXPHOS-derived ATP, we show that selectively during quiescence OXPHOS provides oxidative stress resistance by supporting macroautophagy/autophagy. Mechanistically, OXPHOS constitutively generates low levels of endogenous ROS that induce autophagy via attenuation of ATG4B activity, which provides protection from ROS insult. Physiologically, the OXPHOS-autophagy system (i) protects healthy tissue from toxicity of ROS-based anticancer therapy, and (ii) provides ROS resistance in the endothelium, ameliorating systemic LPS-induced inflammation as well as inflammatory bowel disease. Hence, cells acquired mitochondria during evolution to profit from oxidative metabolism, but also built in an autophagy-based ROS-induced protective mechanism to guard against oxidative stress associated with OXPHOS function during quiescence.<b>Abbreviations</b>: AMPK: AMP-activated protein kinase; AOX: alternative oxidase; Baf A: bafilomycin A<sub>1</sub>; CI, respiratory complexes I; DCF-DA: 2',7'-dichlordihydrofluorescein diacetate; DHE: dihydroethidium; DSS: dextran sodium sulfate; &#x394;&#x3a8;mi: mitochondrial inner membrane potential; EdU: 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine; ETC: electron transport chain; FA: formaldehyde; HUVEC; human umbilical cord endothelial cells; IBD: inflammatory bowel disease; LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; LPS: lipopolysaccharide; MEFs: mouse embryonic fibroblasts; MTORC1: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase complex 1; mtDNA: mitochondrial DNA; NAC: N-acetyl cysteine; OXPHOS: oxidative phosphorylation; PCs: proliferating cells; PE: phosphatidylethanolamine; PEITC: phenethyl isothiocyanate; QCs: quiescent cells; ROS: reactive oxygen species; PLA2: phospholipase A2, WB: western blot.

### Keywords
Electron transport chain, Mitochondria, Reactive oxygen species, Oxidative phosphorylation, Cell death, Autophagy, Endothelial cells, Atg4

### Affiliations
Charles University
Institute of Biotechnology, Czech Academy of Sciences, 252 50 Vestec, Prague-West, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Jakub Rohlena
Institute of Biotechnology, Czech Academy of Sciences, 252 50 Vestec, Prague-West, Czech Republic


