### Accession
PXD011721

### Title
The circadian clock components BMAL1 and Rev-Erb regulate flavivirus replication

### Description
detection and qunatitation of proteins by mass spectromerty to see the effect of drug treatment in human cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of control and drug treated Huh 7.5 cells (1 million cells per sample) were lysed separately using radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer and sonication, and the total protein concentration determined using a Nanodrop protein assay. The protein concentrations for Control A (CA), Control B (CB), Control C (CC), Treated A (SA), Treated B (SB) and Treated C (SC) were 4.0, 3.5, 3.9, 3.5, 4.5 and 4.2 mg protein per mL, respectively. 25 µL of each sample were mixed with 15 µL of sample buffer and dithiothreitol (DTT) and heated at 96oC for 10 minutes before being loaded on a 10 well gel (NuPAGE 4-12% bis-tris). Proteins were separated according to their molecular weights using MES buffer for 35 minutes.  A total of 11 gel bands were analysed by LC-MS (Gel image), confirming the presence of proteins (O00767)ACOD, (P60033)CD81, (Q8WTV0)SCRB1, (O95832)CLD1, (Q16625)OCLN. Peptides from gel bands corresponding to each of these proteins were quantified using the LC-MS PRM based method to evaluate the effect of drug treatment.

### Data Protocol
Data dependent acquisition (DDA), parallel reaction monitorin (PRM), Mascot search, Skyline

### Publication Abstract
The circadian clock regulates immune responses to microbes and affects pathogen replication, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are not well understood. Here we demonstrate that the circadian components BMAL1 and REV-ERB&#x3b1; influence several steps in the hepatitis C virus (HCV) life cycle, including particle entry into hepatocytes and RNA genome replication. Genetic knock out of Bmal1 and over-expression or activation of REV-ERB with synthetic agonists inhibits the replication of HCV and the related flaviruses dengue and Zika via perturbation of lipid signaling pathways. This study highlights a role for the circadian clock component REV-ERB&#x3b1; in regulating flavivirus replication.

### Keywords
Dda, Prm

### Affiliations
Oxford Glycobiology Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, UK
Oxford University

### Submitter
Abhinav Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Nicole Zitzmann
Oxford Glycobiology Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, UK


