### Accession
PXD048176

### Title
A metabolite sensor subunit of the Atg1/ULK complex regulates selective autophagy; whole cell proteome

### Description
Cells convert complex metabolic information into stress-adapted autophagy responses. Canonically, multilayered protein kinase networks converge on the conserved Atg1/ULK kinase complex (AKC) to induce non-selective and selective forms of autophagy in response to metabolic changes. Here, we show that, upon phosphate starvation, the metabolite sensor Pho81 interacts with the adaptor subunit Atg11 at the AKC via an Atg11/FIP200 interaction motif to modulate pexophagy by virtue of its conserved phospho-metabolite sensing SPX domain. Notably, core AKC components Atg13 and Atg17 are dispensable for phosphate starvation-induced autophagy revealing significant compositional and functional plasticity of the AKC. Our data indicate that, instead of functioning as a selective autophagy receptor, Pho81 compensates for partially inactive Atg13 by promoting Atg11-phosphorylation by Atg1 critical for pexophagy during phosphate starvation. Our work shows Atg11/FIP200 adaptor subunits not only bind selective autophagy receptors but also modulator subunits that convey metabolic information directly to the AKC for autophagy regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell extraction for mass spectrometry analysis Cells were disrupted using Tissue Lyser (Qiagen) 1 min 25 Hz. 1 ml -20°C cold Extraction Buffer MTBE:MeOH 75:25 (v/v) (Sigma, 306975; Biosolve, 136841) was added and samples were vortexed thoroughly, ultrasonicated for 10 min in bath-type sonicator cooled with ice and incubated on a thermomixer at 4°C for 30 min, and then centrifuged for 10 min at 4°C and 16.000xg. Supernatants were removed and pellets (containing proteins) dried under the hood and stored at -80°C. The pellet was resolved in 50 µl urea (8 M, Sigma, U5378) and 0.4 µl TCEP (0.25 M, Sigma, 75259) and 0.69 µl CAA (0.8 M) were added prior to 1 h incubation at room temperature. After addition of 1 µl Lys-C (0.5 µg/µl) (Endoproteinase, Life Technologies, 90051) samples were incubated for >2 h at room temperature. 150 µl ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM, Sigma, 09830) were added followed by incubation with 1 µl trypsin (1 µg/µl, Trypsin-gold Promega, V5280) over night at 37°C. Reactions were stopped by the addition of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma, 302031). Whole cell proteomics analysis For the analysis of the total proteome, 4µg of desalted peptides were labeled with tandem mass tags (TMT10plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 90110) using a 1:20 ratio of peptides to TMT reagent5. TMT labeling was carried out according to manufacturer’s instruction with the following changes: dried peptides were reconstituted in 9 µl 0.1M TEAB to which 7 µl TMT reagent in acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma, 34998) was added to a final ACN concentration of 43.75%, the reaction was quenched with 2 µl 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma, 159417). Labeled peptides were pooled, dried, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (Sigma, 33015), split into two samples, and desalted using home-made STAGE tips. One of the two samples was fractionated on a 1 mm x 150 mm ACQUITY column, packed with 130 Å, 1.7 µm C18 particles (Waters, SKU: 186006935), using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow of 30 µl/min with a 96 min segmented gradient from 1% to 50% buffer B for 85 min and from 50% to 95% buffer B for 11 min; buffer A was 5% ACN, 10mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, Sigma, 09830), buffer B was 80% ACN, 10 mM ABC. Fractions were collected every three minutes, and fractions were pooled in two passed (1 + 17, 2 + 18 etc.) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf). Dried fractions were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on a Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a FAIMS device (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was operated in two compensation voltages, -50 and -70. Synchronous precursor selection based MS3 was used for TMT reporter ion signal measurements. Raw files were split based on the FAIMS compensation voltage using FreeStyle (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.17, 1.6.10.43 or 2.3.0 using the integrated Andromeda search engine6, or using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.1.15 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the yeast proteome (downloaded May 2017, February 2018 or October 2018 from UniProt). Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation on S, T and Y were set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The digestion parameters were set to “specific” and “Trypsin/P,” The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. For the analysis of the total proteome samples, the isotope purity correction factors, provided by the manufacturer, were included in the analysis. The “second peptide” option was on. Successful identifications were transferred between the different raw files using the “Match between runs” option. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using an LFQ minimum ratio count of 2. LFQ intensities were filtered for at least four valid values in at least one group and imputed from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8. Differential expression analysis was performed using limma7, version 3.34.9 in R, version 3.4.3 (R Core Team 2017).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmt, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics Cornell University 201 Biotechnology 526 Campus Road Ithaca, NY 14853
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Graef
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics Cornell University 201 Biotechnology 526 Campus Road Ithaca, NY 14853


