### Accession
PXD041679

### Title
Transcription-coupled DNA-Protein Crosslink repair by CSB and  CRL4(CSA)-mediated degradation

### Description
DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs), arise from enzymatic intermediates, endogenous metabolism or exogenous chemicals like chemotherapeutics. DPCs are highly cytotoxic as they will impede DNA transacting processes such as replication, which is counteracted by proteolysis-mediated DPC removal by the protease SPRTN or the proteasome. However, how DPCs affect transcription and how transcription-blocking DPCs are repaired remains largely unknown. Here, we show that DPCs severely inhibit RNA polymerase II (Pol II)-mediated transcription, resulting in the recruitment of the transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER) factors CSA and CSB. Interestingly, CSA and CSB are indispensable for transcription-coupled DPC (TC-DPC) repair, while the downstream TC-NER factors UVSSA and XPA are not, indicative of a non-canonical TC-NER mechanism. TC-DPC repair functions independent of SPRTN, but is mediated by the activities of the ubiquitin ligase CRL4CSA and the proteasome. Thus, DPCs are preferentially repaired in genes by a dedicated transcription-coupled repair mechanism, which is crucial to warrant correct transcription.

### Sample Protocol
SDS–PAGE gel lanes were cut into slices and subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol (Sigma, D8255), alkylation with iodoacetamide (Sigma, I6125) and digestion with trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega) as previously described39. Nanoflow liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (nLC–MS/MS) was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 coupled to a Lumos Tribid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) operating in positive mode. Peptide mixtures were trapped on a 2 cm × 100 μm Pepmap C18 column (Thermo Fisher, 164564) and then separated on an in-house packed 50 cm × 75 μm capillary column with 1.9-μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch) at a flow rate of 250 nl min−1 using a linear gradient of 0–32% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min. The eluate was directly sprayed into the electrospray ionization source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode by HCD.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analysed using MaxQuant software (v.1.6.3.3). The FDR of both PSM and protein was set to 0.01 and the minimum ratio count was set to 1. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the UniProt database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens, release June 2017), concatenated with the reversed sequences of all proteins. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. In case the identified peptides of two proteins were the same or the identified peptides of one protein included all peptides of another protein, these proteins were combined by MaxQuant and reported as one protein group. Before further analysis, known contaminants and reverse hits were removed. GO term enrichment analysis, which included genes with an average SILAC log2 ratio of >1.2, was performed using the g:Profiler website 72 to identify the top 10 biological processes and reactions after FA.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Csa, Csb, Silac, Tc-ner

### Affiliations
Proteomics center, Erasmus MC
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics center, Erasmus MC


