### Accession
PXD019784

### Title
Hypoxis hemerocallidea (Afrtican potato) corm, leaf and flower transcriptomics and proteomics

### Description
The corm of Hypoxis hemerocallidea, commonly known as the African potato, is used in traditional medicine to treat several medical conditions, such as urinary infections, benign prostate hyperplasia, inflammatory conditions and testicular tumours amongst others.  The metabolites of H. hemerocallidea have been identified in several studies. More recently, the terpenoids of the plant have been identified. However, the biochemical pathways and the enzymes involved in the production of metabolites have not been characterised. In this study, total RNA extracted from the corm, leaf and flower tissues of H. hemerocallidea was sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. A total of 143,549 transcripts were assembled de novo using Trinity and 107,131 transcripts were functionally annotated between the nr, GO, COG, KEGG and SWISS-PROT databases. Additionally, the proteome of the three tissues was sequenced using LC-MS/MS, revealing aspects of secondary metabolism and serving as data validation for the transcriptome. Functional annotation led to the identification of numerous terpene synthases such as nerolidol synthase, germacrene D synthase and cycloartenol synthase amongst others. Transcripts were also annotated to encode for the terpene phytoalexin momilactone A synthase. Differential expression analysis using edgeR identified 946 transcripts differentially expressed between the three tissues and revealed that the leaf upregulates linalool synthase compared to the corm and the flower tissues. The transcriptome as well as the proteome of Hypoxis hemerocallidea presented here provide a foundation for future research.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction using P-PER The working solution (WS) from the P-PER plant protein extraction kit (Thermo Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) was prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions with the addition of 10 mm DTT and cOmplete ULTRA protease inhibitor cocktail tablets from Roche (Basel, Switzerland). H. hemerocallidea plant material (corm, leaf and flower) was individually crushed in liquid nitrogen using a sterile mortar and pestle. The WS was then mixed with 80 mg of crushed plant tissue in the provided polypropylene mesh bags, in which the mixture was further homogenised mechanically. The homogenous mixture was centrifuged for 5 minutes at 5,000 x g at room temperature. The lower aqueous layer, containing the extracted soluble proteins, was transferred to a clean Eppendorf tube. The protein was quantified using the Qubit Fluorometer 2.0 from Life Technologies (California, USA) and then subjected to electrophoresis as described in the “Sodium-dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis” section. Corm protein extraction and fractionation The corm from H. hemerocallidea is a tuberous tissue with a high starch content. This inherently results in low protein yields following extraction. In order to enrich proteins from the corm tissue, fractionation was employed. Approximately 5 g of H. hemerocallidea corm tissue was crushed in liquid nitrogen using a sterile mortar and pestle. The ground tissue was resuspended in 5 volumes of 50 mM sodium borate buffer pH 9.0 containing 5 mM DTT, 5 % PVPP and a cOmplete ULTRA protease inhibitor cocktail tablet from Roche (Basel, Switzerland). Protein was extracted in the aforementioned buffer with gentle stirring at 4 °C for 1 hour. The slurry was then centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was loaded onto a 5 ml HiTrap DEAE FF column from GE Healthcare (Illinois, USA), pre-equilibrated with 50 mM sodium borate buffer pH 9.0. Proteins were eluted over 50 ml using a linear gradient from 0 M to 1 M NaCl in 50 mM sodium borate buffer pH 9.0. Fractions of 5 ml each were collected. Chromatography was carried out on the ÄKTA Prime Plus from GE Healthcare (Illinois, USA) with the flow rate maintained at 5 ml/min. Fractions containing protein were then extracted in tris-buffered phenol and precipitated with ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol. Samples were washed with a ice-cold solution of 10 mM DTT in acetone and air-dried. The protein pellets were resuspended in reducing sample buffer and subjected to electrophoresis as described in the “Sodium-dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis” section. Protein concentrations were routinely determined using the Qubit Fluorometer 2.0 from Life Technologies (California, USA).  Dry peptide samples were dissolved and acidified in 0.1% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated by nano-HPLC using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 equipped with an enrichment column (C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 5 x 0.3 mm) and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanocolumn (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 500 x 0.075 mm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria). Peptides were concentrated for 6 minutes at a flow rate 5 µl/min on the enrichment column using 0.1% formic acid as isocratic solvent. Peptides were separated using the nanocolumn at 60 ºC with a flow rate of 250 nl/min with a gradient between 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid and acetonitrile (B). The gradient was set up as follows: 0 – 6 minutes at 4% B; 6-94 minutes at 4 – 25% B; 94-99 minutes at 25 – 95% B; 99 – 109 minutes at 95% B; 109.1 – 124 minutes at 4% B. Sample ionisation was facilitated by the nanospray source equipped with stainless steel emitters (ES528, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vienna, Austria). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using an Orbitrap velos pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) operated in positive ion mode, applying alternating full scan MS (m/z 400 to 2000) in the ion cyclotron and MS/MS by CID of the 20 most intense peaks with dynamic exclusion enabled.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analysed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFischer Scientific) and Mascot 2.4.1 (MatrixScience, London, UK) by searching against the 6-frame translation of the H. hemerocallidea transcriptome assembled here as well as all common contaminants. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed and methionine oxidation was set as variable modification. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: semitrypsin; max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 10 ppm; product mass tolerance +/- 0.7 Da; acceptance parameters: 1% false discovery rate (FDR); only rank 1 peptides; minimum Mascot ion score 20; minimum 2 peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Terpene biosynthesis., Transcriptome, Proteome, Differential expression, Secondary metabolism, African potato

### Affiliations
Researcher
Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology Laboratory, School of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa.

### Submitter
Silviu Tomescu

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Rumbold
Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology Laboratory, School of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa.


