### Accession
PXD026821

### Title
Integrated liver and plasma proteomics in obese mice reveals complex metabolic and immune regulation

### Description
Obesity leads to the development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and associated alterations to the plasma proteome. To elucidate the underlying changes associated with obesity, we performed liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry in the liver and plasma of obese leptin-deficient ob/ob mice. We quantified 7173 and 555 proteins in the liver and plasma, respectively. The abundance of proteins related to fatty acid metabolism were increased, alongside peroxisomal proliferation in ob/ob liver. Putatively secreted proteins and the secretory machinery were also dysregulated in the liver, which was mirrored by a substantial alteration of the plasma proteome. Greater than 50% of the plasma proteins were differentially regulated, including NAFLD biomarkers, lipoproteins, the 20S proteasome, and the complement and coagulation cascades of the immune system. Integration of the proteomes identified proteins that were concomitantly regulated in the liver and plasma in obesity, suggesting the systemic abundance of these plasma proteins are regulated by secretion from the liver. These analyses yield a comprehensive insight into obesity and provide an extensive resource for obesity research in a prevailing model organism.

### Sample Protocol
Liver: Liver samples from ob/ob mice were prepared for mass spectrometry as described for skeletal muscle (Schonke et al., 2018). Briefly, approximately 50 mg of liver (n = 4 per group) was homogenised in 750 µl of SDS buffer (0.1 M TrisHCl, pH 7.5, 0.1 M DTT and 4% SDS) with an Ultra-Turrax homogeniser (IKA) and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Lysates were sonicated using a Branson tip-sonicator and subjected to centrifugation at 16000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and 200 µg proteins were processed according to the MED-FASP protocol using LysC (1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) and trypsin (1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) (Wisniewski & Mann, 2012). Peptides (10 µg) originating from trypsin and LysC digests were purified on 2 x C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2003). Peptides were separated on a 50-cm C18 column (inner diameter 75 µm, 1.8 µm beads, Dr, Maisch GmbH, Germany) and measured via LC-MS/MS using an Easy nano-flow HPLC coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using data-dependent acquisition (DDA). Peptides obtained from the LysC and Trypsin fractions were loaded onto the column with buffer A (0.5% formic acid) and eluted with a 270-minute linear gradient increasing from 2-60% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid). After the gradient, the column was washed with 95% buffer B and re-equilibrated with buffer A. The mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS using a top 5 method. MS spectra were aquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300-1750 m/z a reslution of 70000 with a target of 3 x 106 ions and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. HCD peptide fragments acquired at 25 normalised collision energy were analysed at a resolution of 17500 in the Orbitrap analyser with a target of 1 x 105 ions and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Peptides were measured in singleton.  Plasma: Plasma samples from ob/ob mice were prepared for mass spectrometry as described (Geyer et al., 2016) with minor modifications. Briefly, 1 µl of plasma was mixed with 24 µl of PreOmics lysis buffer (P.O. 00001, PreOmics GmbH) and boiled at 95°C for 10 min. Proteins were digested with LysC (1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) for 1h at 37°C prior to the addition of trypsin (1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) for overnight digestion at 37°C. 10-15 g of peptides were purified on 3 x SDB-RPS StageTips. Peptides were separated on a 15-cm C18 column (inner diameter 75 µm, 1.8 µm beads, Dr, Maisch GmbH, Germany) and measured via LC-MS/MS using an Easy nano-flow HPLC coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) using data-independent acquisition (DIA). Peptides were loaded onto the column with buffer A (0.5% formic acid) and eluted with a 45-minute linear gradient increasing from 3-35% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid). After the gradient, the column was washed with 98% buffer B. The DIA method used for the plasma proteome measurements contained one full scan (350 to 1650 m/z, resolution = 120000) at a target of 3 x 106 ions, followed by 22 windows with a resolution of 30000 where precursor ions were fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation (stepped collision energy 25%, 27.5%, 30%) and analysed with an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions and maximum injection time at 54 ms in profile mode using positive polarity.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analyses Liver proteome: Raw MS files were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 (Tyanova et al, 2016a) (http://www.maxquant.org). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the decoy UniProt-mouse database supplemented with 262 frequently observed contaminants and forward and reverse sequences. In the main Andromeda search precursor, mass and fragment mass were matched with an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. MS runs were analysed with the “match between runs” option, with a retention time window of 30 seconds. When all identified peptides were shared between two proteins, results were combined and reported as one protein group. Matches to the reverse database were excluded.  Plasma proteome: Plasma proteome files acquired in DIA mode were processed using Biognosys Spectronaut software version 12 (Bruderer et al, 2015). DIA raw data were analysed using an in-house generated spectral library of mouse plasma that contains 8899 peptides and 1458 protein groups (mouse UniProt FASTA database, version 201806, containing 92096 entries). The experimental DIA runs were analysed in Spectronaut using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Obesity leads to the development of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and associated alterations to the plasma proteome. To elucidate the underlying changes associated with obesity, we performed liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry in the liver and plasma of obese leptin-deficient ob/ob mice and integrated these data with publicly available transcriptomic and proteomic datasets of obesity and metabolic diseases in preclinical and clinical cohorts. We quantified 7173 and 555 proteins in the liver and plasma proteomes, respectively. The abundance of proteins related to fatty acid metabolism were increased, alongside peroxisomal proliferation in ob/ob liver. Putatively secreted proteins and the secretory machinery were also dysregulated in the liver, which was mirrored by a substantial alteration of the plasma proteome. Greater than 50% of the plasma proteins were differentially regulated, including NAFLD biomarkers, lipoproteins, the 20S proteasome, and the complement and coagulation cascades of the immune system. Integration of the liver and plasma proteomes identified proteins that were concomitantly regulated in the liver and plasma in obesity, suggesting that the systemic abundance of these plasma proteins is regulated by secretion from the liver. Many of these proteins are systemically regulated during type 2 diabetes and/or NAFLD in humans, indicating the clinical importance of liver-plasma cross talk and the relevance of our investigations in ob/ob mice. Together, these analyses yield a comprehensive insight into obesity and provide an extensive resource for obesity research in a prevailing model organism.

### Keywords
Obesity, Nafld, Proteome, Ob/ob, Lcms

### Affiliations
Copenhagen University
Novo Nordisk Center For Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
atul shahaji deshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Atul S Deshmukh
Novo Nordisk Center For Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen.


