### Accession
PXD009286

### Title
Expansion of DUB functionality by alternative isoforms: USP35, a case study

### Description
Protein ubiquitylation is a dynamic post-translational modification that can be reversed by deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs). It is unclear how the small number of ~100 DUBs present in mammalian cells regulates the thousands of different ubiquitylation events. Here we analysed annotated transcripts of human DUBs and find ~300 ribosome-associated transcripts annotated as protein coding, which thus increase the total number of DUBs. Using USP35, a poorly studied DUB, as a case study we provide evidence that alternative isoforms contribute to the functional expansion of DUBs. We show the existence of two different USP35 isoforms that localise to different intracellular compartments and have distinct functions. Our results reveal that isoform 1 is an anti-apoptotic factor that inhibits staurosporine- and TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL)-induced apoptosis. In contrast, USP35 isoform 2 is an integral membrane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) present also at lipid droplets. Manipulations of isoform 2 levels cause rapid ER stress likely through deregulation of lipid homeostasis and lead to cell death. Our work highlights how alternative isoforms provide functional expansion of DUBs and sets directions for future research.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed in 1mL of modified RIPA lysis buffer (1% (v/v) NP-40, 50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 1:500 protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), with 250 U benzonase nuclease (Sigma)) in agitator for 1h at 4°C. The lysate was centrifuged for 30 min at 20,817g at 4°C. Clarified supernatants were incubated with 30µl prewashed and equilibrated streptavidin-sepharose beads (GE Healthcare, catalog no. 17-5113-01) at 4°C for 3 hr. Beads were collected by centrifugation (2000 rpm, 2 min), washed twice in RIPA buffer (1 ml per wash), twice in TAP lysis buffer(50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 8.0), 2 mM EDTA, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 100 mM KCl, 0.1% (v/v) NP-40), and four times in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC; pH 8.0). Beads were then resuspended in 200µl ammonium bicarbonate buffer and treated with 1µg of Promega modified trypsin for 12 h at 37°C with agitation. Additional 1µg of trypsin was added after overnight digestion followed by reduction with 5µl of 10mM DTT and 5µl of 10mM IAA. The supernatant containing the tryptic peptides was collected and de-salted using C18 micro-spin columns (The Nest Group, Inc.) and vacuum centrifuged. Peptides were re-suspended in 20μl of 0.1% formic acid and 5µl were used per MS run.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) (Cox and Mann, 2008), with the integrated Andromeda search engine. For the identification of peptides and proteins the UniProt human FASTA database (March 2015) was used with the FDR < 0.01.  And oxidized methionine (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) as variable modifications as well as carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification. MaxQuant LFQ (Label free quanti- tation) was enabled with the stand ‘match between runs’. The bonafide USP35 interacting proteins were identified with spectral counting as input for SAINTexpress (Significance Analysis of INTeractome)(Teo et al., 2014) with BFDR value of 2%. The resulting high confidence interacting proteins (HCIPs) were then subjected to DAVID enrichment analysis for cell compartment (Huang et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
Protein ubiquitylation is a dynamic post-translational modification that can be reversed by deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs). It is unclear how the small number (&#x223c;100) of DUBs present in mammalian cells regulate the thousands of different ubiquitylation events. Here, we analysed annotated transcripts of human DUBs and found &#x223c;300 ribosome-associated transcripts annotated as protein coding, which thus increases the total number of DUBs. By using USP35, a poorly studied DUB, as a case study, we provide evidence that alternative isoforms contribute to the functional expansion of DUBs. We show that there are two different USP35 isoforms that localise to different intracellular compartments and have distinct functions. Our results reveal that isoform 1 is an anti-apoptotic factor that inhibits staurosporine- and TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL; also known as TNFSF10)-induced apoptosis. In contrast, USP35 isoform 2 is an integral membrane protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that is also present at lipid droplets. Manipulations of isoform 2 levels cause rapid ER stress, likely through deregulation of lipid homeostasis, and lead to cell death. Our work highlights how alternative isoforms provide functional expansion of DUBs and sets directions for future research.This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Deubiquitinase, Lipid droplets, Ubiquitin signalling, Endoplasmic reticulum, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee Sir James Black Centre Dundee, DD1 5EH United Kingdom
MRC PPU, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Jayaprakash Natarajan

### Lab Head
Dr Yogesh Kulathu
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee Sir James Black Centre Dundee, DD1 5EH United Kingdom


