### Accession
PXD019906

### Title
Proteins associated with Cdc48A identified by LC-MS\MS data

### Description
His6-Cdc48a and associated proteins purified from H. volcanii. A) SDS- PAGE of proteins purified by Ni2+  -chromatography. H. volcanii carrying empty vector control (H1209-pJAM202c, lane 1) and ectopically expressing His6-Cdc48a (H1209- pJAM1409, lane 2). Red bars indicate regions of gel excised. B) Proteins identified in gel slices by LC-MS/MS analysis. Criteria for protein inclusion: FDR < 0.01%, normalized total spectra minus control > 50, protein threshold > 99% and 2 peptide minimum. Based on spectral counting, Cdc48a and DUF111 were most abundant in regions (a) and (b), respectively, as indicated. DHS1, deoxyhypusine synthase. DUF111, Cdc48a gene neighbor of unknown function. TnaA, tryptophanase; Rps3, ribosomal protein S3; n.d., not detected.

### Sample Protocol
Cdc48A pull-down assay. The Cdc48A pull-down assays were as above with the following exceptions. H. volcanii H1209-pJAM1409 was used for purification of His6-Cdc48a. Cells were washed in ice-chilled buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.6, 2 M NaCl) prior to storing as pellets at -80°C. The lysis buffer was composed of 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.6, 2 M NaCl, 40 mM imidazole, 4 µg∙ml -1 DNase, protease inhibitor tablet, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM ATP and 5 mM MgCl 2 . Protein samples were applied to a His Trap HP column (5 ml, GE Healthcare) pre-equilibrated in the lysis buffer (minus the protease inhibitor and DNase) and washed with this same buffer. The His6-Cdc48A protein was eluted by supplementing the equilibration buffer with 500 mM imidazole. The column eluates were boiled (6 min) in an equal volume of 2 x SDS reducing buffer and centrifuged (14,549 x g for 10 min at 21°C).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis. Protein samples from the Ubl, RecJ3/4, RNase J and Cdc48A pull down assays were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE, visualized by staining with Bio-Safe Coomassie (Bio-Rad) and destained in double deionized water. SDS-PAGE gels were under reducing conditions with exception of the Ubl pull down samples, which were analyzed under non-reducing conditions. Unique protein bands were excised and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Equivalent regions of the gel were similarly analyzed for the empty vector control. Proteins were treated in the gel slices with 45 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 100 mM 2-chloroacteamide (CAA). To minimize CAA carryover prior to trypsin digest, liquid was removed from the treated gel pieces and samples were washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH&gt;7.9), dehyrated by treatment with acetonitrile, and treated by centrifugal evaporation (SpeedVac) to complete dryness. Samples were treated with trypsin (1 µg to 50 µg protein) at 37°C for 15 h. Tryptic peptides were injected onto a capillary trap (LC Packings PepMap) and desalted for 5 min with 0.1% vol/vol formic acid at a flow rate of 3 µl∙min -1 prior to loading onto an LC Packing C18 Pep Map nanoflow high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) column. The elution gradient of the HPLC column started at 3% solvent A (0.1% vol/vol formic acid, 3% vol/vol acetonitrile, and 96.9% v/v H 2 O), 97% solvent B (0.1% vol/vol formic acid, 96.9% vol/vol acetonitrile, and 3% vol/vol H 2 O) and finished at 60% solvent A, 40% solvent B using a flow rate of 300 µl∙min -1 for 30 min. LC-MS/MS analysis of the eluting fractions was carried out on an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, West Palm Beach, FL). Full MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap from m/z 300–2000. The ten most intense ions were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID). Raw data were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2.2) against H. volcanii and target decoy databases with the latter including a set of reversed sequences generated by Mascot. Mascot  13  was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was indicated as a fixed modification while deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, and isopeptide linkage to Gly-Gly- were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications, where protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm and peptide probabilities were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (28,29) . Protein identities were based on a threshold of 99.9% probability and &lt; 0.1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) and are summarized in Tables S3-S8.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hvo_2380, Cdc48a

### Affiliations
Professor,Microbiology and Cell Science Department, University Of Florida, USA.
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer CE

### Submitter
Swathi Dantuluri

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Maupin-Furlow
Professor,Microbiology and Cell Science Department, University Of Florida, USA.


