### Accession
PXD004319

### Title
Metaproteomic profiling of saliva in subjects with periodontitis, dental caries and orally healthy controls

### Description
The composition of the salivary microbiota has been reported to differentiate between patients with periodontitis, dental caries and orally healthy individuals. Thus, the purpose of the present investigation was to compare metaproteomic profiles of saliva in oral health and disease. Stimulated saliva samples were collected from 10 patients with periodontitis, 10 patients with dental caries and 10 orally healthy individuals. Samples were analyzed by means of shotgun proteomics. 4161 different proteins were recorded out of which 1946 and 2090 were of bacterial and human origin respectively. The human proteomic profile displayed significant overexpression of the complement system and inflammatory mediators in periodontitis and dental caries. Bacterial proteomic profiles and functional annotation were very similar in health and disease. Data revealed multiple potential salivary proteomic biomarkers of oral disease. In addition, comparable bacterial functional profiles were observed in periodontitis, dental caries and oral health, which suggest that the salivary microbiota predominantly thrives in a planktonic state expressing no characteristic disease-associated metabolic activity. Future large-scale longitudinal studies are warranted to reveal the full potential of proteomic analysis of saliva as a biomarker of oral health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
The saliva samples were prepared as described in (Jersie-Christensen et al., 2016) with a few modifications. In short, 1ml of saliva was mixed with 1.5ml lysis buffer (9M Guanidine hydrochloride, 10mM Chloroacetamide, 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine in 100mM Tris pH 8.5) and heated for 10min (99°C) followed by 4min of sonication. All samples were digested with Lysyl Endoproteinase in a ratio of 1:100 for 2hrs and diluted and digested overnight with Trypsin in a 1:100 ratio. 1.5µg peptide mixture was separated on an in-house packed 50 cm capillary column with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads using an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). The column temperature was maintained at 50°C using an integrated column oven. The gradient was 155min The Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was run in a data dependent top 12 mode with the following settings. Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, S-lens RF level at 50, and heated capillary at 275 °C. Full scan resolutions were set to and 60 000 at m/z 200 and scan target was 3 × 10E6 with a maximum fill time of 20 ms. Mass range was set to 300–1750 and dynamic exclusion to 20 s. Target value for fragment scans was set at 1 × 105 with a resolution of 30 000 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Normalized collision energy was set at 28.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.38 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with default settings and 1% FDR at both peptide and protein level and with match between runs. The data was searched against a reduced combined  fasta consisting of the full SwissProt database and the Human Oral Microbiome database (both downloaded August 2014). Intensities were Quantile normalized using the limma package version 3.24.15 with R version 3.2.2. Only proteins identified with more than one peptide (“razor+unique”) and present in more than five out of the 30 samples were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Metaproteomics, Q exactive hf, Saliva

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program

### Submitter
Rosa Jersie-Christensen

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program


