### Accession
PXD012153

### Title
Coxsackievirus B persistence modifies the proteome of pancreatic ductal cells in a virus-strain-specific manner

### Description
In human cells, the group B Coxsackieviruses can establish persistent infections that have been linked to chronic diseases including type 1 diabetes. Still, only little is known about the changes induced by persistent Coxsackievirus B infection in human pancreas. We have established persistent Coxsackievirus B1 infections in human pancreatic duct cell line using two different virus strains, and studied the consequences of these infections on intracellular protein expression using mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Persistent Coxsackievirus B1 infections caused broad changes in protein expression, for example changes in mitochondrial morphology and energy metabolism and in proteins associated with differentiation and survival of pancreatic beta-cells. Strikingly, many of these changes differed between the virus strains, including extensive shut down of antiviral immune responses by one of the viruses. Our results provide novel information about the changes induced by persistent Coxsackievirus B infection in human pancreas and about the potential heterogeneity in the outcomes of the infections.

### Sample Protocol
PANC-1 cells with persistent CVB1 infection and non-infected cells were lysed followed by protein denaturation, alkylation and digestion using filter assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol modified from (Wisniewski et al. 2009). Sample clean-up was done using SepPak C18 96-well plate cartridges (Waters). The samples were then analyzed in triplicate using QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using MaxQuant software (Cox & Mann 2008). The identifications were performed against a combined SwissProt human and Uniprot enterovirus sequence database with added iRT peptide (Biognosys) sequences and common contaminants database included in Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011). N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation was used as a variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Further data processing and statistical analyses were performed using Perseus software (Tyanova et al. 2016) using the normalized LFQintensities from MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Persistent infection, Proteomics, Enterovirus, Pancreas

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Turku Centre for Biotechnology University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University Finland

### Submitter
Niina Lietzen

### Lab Head
Dr Riitta Lahesmaa
Turku Centre for Biotechnology University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University Finland


