### Accession
PXD045082

### Title
Extracellular proteins enhance Cupriavidus pauculus nickel tolerance and cell aggregate formation

### Description
Heavy metal-resistant bacteria secrete extracellular proteins (e-PNs). However, the role of e-PNs in heavy metal resistance remains elusive. Here Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy implied that N-H, C = O and NH2-R played a crucial role in the adsorption and resistance of Ni2+ in the model organism Cuprividus pauculus 1490 (C. pauculus). Proteinase K treatment reduced Ni2+ resistance of C. pauculus underlining the essential role of e-PNs. Further three-dimension excitation-emission matrix fluorescence spectroscopy analysis demonstrated that tryptophan proteins as part of the e-PNs increased significantly with Ni2+ treatment. Proteomic and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction data indicated that major changes were induced in the metabolism of C. pauculus in response to Ni2+. Among those lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, general secretion pathways, Ni2+-affiliated transporters and multidrug efflux play an essential role in Ni2+ resistance. Altogether the results provide a conceptual model for comprehending how e-PNs contribute to bacterial resistance and adsorption of Ni2+.

### Sample Protocol
To reveal the role of e-PNs on heavy metal resistance and adsorption, e-PNs between 3.4 mM Ni2+ stimulation and controls were identified by LC/MS-based quantitative proteomics method. Protein concentration was measured using Bradford assay with a BCA protein assay kit. Samples were run in triplicate. For each sample, 2L cells in the mid-exponential growth phase were collected to extract the EPS, and the samples were run and stored in SDS-PAGE gel to avoid the degradation of e-PNs. In-gel digestion was done following Shevchenko et al.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was searched against C. pauculus secretome using the Sequest algorithm integrated into the Proteome Discoverer software (v 2.4.1.15), Thermo Fisher Scientific). Quantification was performed using the Minora algorithm, implemented in Proteome Discoverer. The secretome was analyzed according to prediction of N-terminal signal peptides using SignalP v.6.0 in fast mode[36]. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification for cysteine residues, methionine oxidation, and pyroglutamate formation at glutamine residues at the peptide N-terminus and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were allowed as variable modifications. A maximum number of 2 missing tryptic cleavages was set. Peptides between 6 and 144 amino acids were considered. A strict cutoff value (FDR<0.01) was set to identify peptides and proteins. Quantification was performed using the Minora algorithm, implemented in Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Heavy metal-resistant bacteria secrete extracellular proteins (e-PNs). However, the role of e-PNs in heavy metal resistance remains elusive. Here Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy implied that N-H, C&#xa0;=&#xa0;O and NH<sub>2</sub>-R played a crucial role in the adsorption and resistance of Ni<sup>2+</sup> in the model organism Cuprividus pauculus 1490 (C. pauculus). Proteinase K treatment reduced Ni<sup>2+</sup> resistance of C. pauculus underlining the essential role of e-PNs. Further three-dimension excitation-emission matrix fluorescence spectroscopy analysis demonstrated that tryptophan proteins as part of the e-PNs increased significantly with Ni<sup>2+</sup> treatment. Proteomic and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction data indicated that major changes were induced in the metabolism of C. pauculus in response to Ni<sup>2+</sup>. Among those lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, general secretion pathways, Ni<sup>2+</sup>-affiliated transporters and multidrug efflux play an essential role in Ni<sup>2+</sup> resistance. Altogether the results provide a conceptual model for comprehending how e-PNs contribute to bacterial resistance and adsorption of Ni<sup>2+</sup>.

### Keywords
Extracellular proteins; cupriavidus pauculus; nickel resistance; secretome; efflux pumps

### Affiliations
Section for Mass spectrometry and Proteomics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, 22609, Germany

### Submitter
Bente Siebels

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang R.
Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, 22609, Germany


