### Accession
PXD016229

### Title
Unbiased identification of the liposome protein corona using photoaffinity based chemoproteomics

### Description
Determination of protein adsorption to the surface of a nanoparticle determined by photoaffinity based chemoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Liposomes are incubated in undiluted human serum and crosslinked using a photoaffinity based chemoproteomics method. Proteins are purified using a methanol chloroform precipitation, reduced and alkylated, digested overnight with trypsin and peptides were purified using StageTips.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was done using PLGS and quantification was done using the ISOQuant software

### Publication Abstract
Protein adsorption to the surface of a nanoparticle can fundamentally alter the character, behavior, and fate of a nanoparticle in vivo. Current methods to capture the protein corona rely on physical separation techniques and are unable to resolve key, individual protein-nanoparticle interactions. As a result, the precise link between the "synthetic" and the "biological" identity of a nanoparticle remains unclear. Herein, we report an unbiased photoaffinity-based approach to capture, characterize, and quantify the protein corona of liposomes in their native state. Compared to conventional methods, our photoaffinity approach reveals markedly different interacting proteins as well as reduced total protein binding to liposome surfaces. Identified proteins do not follow protein abundancy patterns of human serum, as has been generally reported, but are instead dominated by soluble apolipoproteins-endogenous serum proteins that have evolved to recognize the lipidic surface of circulating lipoproteins. We believe our findings are the most accurate characterization of a liposome's biological identity but, more fundamentally, reveal liposome-protein binding is, in many cases, significantly less complex than previously thought.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics photoaffinity labelling human serum protein corona

### Affiliations
Leiden University
Supramolecular and Biomaterials Chemistry, Leiden Intitute of Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Roy Pattipeiluhu

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Kros
Supramolecular and Biomaterials Chemistry, Leiden Intitute of Chemistry, Leiden University, The Netherlands


