### Accession
PXD037098

### Title
Multi-omics Analyses Reveal Sex Differences in Mouse Renal Proximal Tubules

### Description
Sex-dependent differences in kidney function have been recognized. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these differences remain largely unexplored. Advances in genomics and proteomic technologies now allow for an extensive characterization of sex differences. In this study, the authors apply multi-omics approaches integrating RNA-seq, ATAC-seq, and proteomics to investigate gene expression, chromatin accessibility, and protein expression between male and female mouse proximal tubules. This study identifies a large number of sex-biased genes and proteins associated with various kidney functions, including metabolism and transport processes. The authors demonstrate that sex differences may also arise from differences in interaction between transcription factors and accessible chromatin regions. A comprehensive web resource is provided to the research community to advance understanding of sex differences.

### Sample Protocol
Perfused mouse kidneys were homogenized using BeadBug (Southern Labware) in cold triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (Thermo Fisher) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Halt; Thermo Fisher) followed by sonication with the addition of SDS (1%). Protein concentrations were estimated using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce). Equal amounts of protein lysates were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and then alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. The proteins were acetone precipitated at -20°C overnight and the acetone-precipitated pellet was resuspended in TEAB buffer followed by digestion with Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega; 1:50 wt/wt) overnight at 37°C. The digested peptides were quantified using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. For each sample, 100 μg of peptides were labeled using the TMT11Plex Mass Tag Labeling Kit (Thermo Scientific). Labeled male and female samples were combined and desalted using hydrophilic-lipophilic–balanced extraction cartridges (Oasis) and then fractionated into 24 fractions using high pH reverse-phase chromatography (Agilent 1200 HPLC System). Twenty-four fractions were vacuum dried and the dried peptides were resuspended with 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water (J.T. Baker) before mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were searched against the Mus musculus reference proteome downloaded from UniProt.org on May 4, 2020, plus common contaminant database in MaxQuant. TMT11plex was specified as labeling type, and lot-specific TMT isotopic impurity correction factors were used as recommended in the TMT product data sheets. Carbamidomethyl was configured as fixed modifications, and oxidation was set as variable modification. The false discovery rate was controlled at 1% (target decoy). “Trypsin/P” was set as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Other parameters were set to the defaults. We used the “proteinGroups.txt” output file as the input data for proteomic analyses. For each TMT channel, isotopic impurity–corrected reporter ion intensities were normalized to make the sum of intensities in each channel equal.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sex difference, Kidney, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, USA
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center Division of Intramural Research National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute  Building 10, Room 6N307 Bethesda, Maryland 20895-1603

### Submitter
CHIN-RANG YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center Division of Intramural Research National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute  Building 10, Room 6N307 Bethesda, Maryland 20895-1603


