### Accession
PXD014853

### Title
Mining Meningioma Proteomics Alterations Using IP MS

### Description
Herein we have used IP-MS based approach to identify potential interactors (PPI) that bind to Annexin A2. We have used Immunoaffinity based enrichment using antibody specific to ANXA2 followed by LC MS-MS of the Complex post running it in SDS-PAGE

### Sample Protocol
Brain tumor tissue lysates were precleared using Protein G beads(CST) post the conjugation of the Antibody with the beads, the conjugated complex was used as a 'bait' to capture potential interacting partners that would bind to ANXA2.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2, all three replicates were run using the same gradient of 60 minutes in the LC MS-MS.

### Publication Abstract
Meningiomas are one of the most prevalent primary brain tumors. Our study aims to obtain mechanistic insights of meningioma pathobiology using mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative proteome analysis to identifying druggable targets and perturbed pathways for therapeutic intervention. Label-free based proteomics study was done from peptide samples of 21 patients and 8 non-tumor controls which were followed up with Phosphoproteomics to identify the kinases and phosphorylated components of the perturbed pathways. <i>In silico</i> approaches revealed perturbations in extracellular matrix remodeling and associated cascades. To assess the extent of influence of Integrin and PI3K-Akt pathways, we used an Integrin Linked Kinase inhibitor on patient-derived meningioma cell line and performed a transcriptomic analysis of the components. Furthermore, we designed a Targeted proteomics assay which to the best of our knowledge for very first-time enables identification of peptides from 54 meningioma patients via SRM assay to validate the key proteins emerging from our study. This resulted in the identification of peptides from CLIC1, ES8L2, and AHNK many of which are receptors and kinases and are difficult to be characterized using conventional approaches. Furthermore, we were also able to monitor transitions for proteins like NEK9 and CKAP4 which have been reported to be associated with meningioma pathobiology. We believe, this study can aid in designing peptide-based validation assays for meningioma patients as well as IHC studies for clinical applications.

### Keywords
Human immunoprecipitation ms-ms

### Affiliations
PROFESSOR, PRINCIPLE INVESTIGATOR, PROTEOMICS LAB, BSBE, IIT BOMBAY
Lund University

### Submitter
Shuvolina Mukherjee

### Lab Head
Dr SANJEEVA SRIVASTAVA
PROFESSOR, PRINCIPLE INVESTIGATOR, PROTEOMICS LAB, BSBE, IIT BOMBAY


