### Accession
PXD031707

### Title
Structural analysis of human cis-prenyltransferase

### Description
Isoprenoids are synthesized by the prenyltransferases superfamily, which is subdivided according to the product stereoisomerism and length. In short- and medium-chain isoprenoids, product length correlates with active site volume. However, enzymes synthesizing long-chain products and rubber synthases fail to conform to this paradigm, due to an unexpectedly small active site. Here, we focused on the human cis-prenyltransferase complex (hcis-PT), residing at the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and playing a crucial role in protein glycosylation. Crystallographic investigation of hcis-PT along the reaction cycle revealed an outlet for the elongating product. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry analysis showed that the hydrophobic active site core is flanked by dynamic regions consistent with separate inlet and outlet orifices. Finally, using a fluorescence substrate analog, we show that product elongation and membrane association are closely correlated. Together, our results support direct membrane insertion of the elongating isoprenoid during catalysis, uncoupling active site volume from product length.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was diluted to 2uM concentration in 20mM Hepes pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1mM TCEP and subsequently mixed with equal amount (50uL + 50uL) of 1M glycine HCl buffer pH 2.3. Mixture was frozen in liquid nitrogen. Prior to the analysis the sample was quickly thawed and injected onto an LC system coupled to an ESI source of 15T FT-ICR mass spectrometer (solariX XR, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) operating in data dependent mode, where each full scan was followed by six MSMS scans (CID) of the top most abundant ions. Repeat count was set to 2, exclusion was set to 10ppm and 30sec duration. Instrument was calibrated externally using sodium TFA clusters resulting in sub-ppm mass error. The LC method started by an online digestion on the custom-made pepsin column (bed volume 66 µL, DOI: 10.1021/AC404076J). Generated peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 130Å, 1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The digestion and desalting (total time 3 min) were driven by 0.4% formic acid (FA) in water pumped by 1260 Infinity II Quaternary pump (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) at a flow rate of 100 μL·min−1. Desalted peptides were then separated on an analytical column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 130 Å, 1.7 μm, 1 mm × 100 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) using linear gradient (5%–45% B in 7 min) followed by a quick step to 99% B lasting 5 min, where the solvent A was 0.1% FA /2% acetonitrile (ACN) in water, B was 0.1% FA /98% ACN in water. The gradient was delivered by the 1290 Infinity II LC System (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) at a flow rate 40 μL·min−1.  Backbone amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange (HDX) was monitored for cisPT apo form alone. Deuterium exchange was initiated by a 10-fold dilution of the protein solution into D2O-based 50 mM K-HEPES, pD 7.4, 1 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine). The exchange was followed for 20 s, 1 min, 3 min, 10 min, 30min, 1 h and 3 h and it was quenched by the addition of 0.5 M Glycine-HCl, pH 2.3 in a 1:1 ratio and flash freezing in liquid nitrogen. The labelling experiment was done in duplicate. LC-MS analysis was started by rapid thawing of the sample and injection onto the custom-made pepsin column (bed volume 66 µL, DOI: 10.1021/AC404076J). Generated peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 130Å, 1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The digestion and desalting (total time 3 min) were driven by 0.4% formic acid (FA) in water pumped by 1260 Infinity II Quaternary pump (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) at a flow rate of 100 μL·min−1. Desalted peptides were then separated on an analytical column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 130 Å, 1.7 μm, 1 mm × 100 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) using linear gradient (5%–45% B in 7 min) followed by a quick step to 99% B lasting 5 min, where the solvent A was 0.1% FA /2% acetonitrile (ACN) in water, B was 0.1% FA /98% ACN in water. The gradient was delivered by the 1290 Infinity II LC System (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) at a flow rate 40 μL·min−1. The analytical column was coupled to an ESI source of 15T FT-ICR mass spectrometer (solarix XR, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) operating in broad-band MS mode.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were exported using DataAnalysis v. 5.0 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany), processed by in-house designed software called program Deutex and handled as described previously [DOI: 10.1074/MCP.RA118.001044, 10.3390/BIOM9110728]. Peptide identifications were done using separate LC-MS/MS analyses followed by MASCOT database searching (version 2.7, Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) against a custom-build database combining crap database, sequences of the used acidic proteases and the sequences of cisPT subunits. Fully deuterated control was prepared as described previously [DOI: 10.3390/BIOM9110728] and correction for back-exchange was applied according to Zhang [DOI: 10.1002/pro.5560020404].

### Publication Abstract
Isoprenoids are synthesized by the prenyltransferase superfamily, which is subdivided according to the product stereoisomerism and length. In short- and medium-chain isoprenoids, product length correlates with active site volume. However, enzymes synthesizing long-chain products and rubber synthases fail to conform to this paradigm, because of an unexpectedly small active site. Here, we focused on the human <i>cis</i>-prenyltransferase complex (h<i>cis</i>-PT), residing at the endoplasmic reticulum membrane and playing a crucial role in protein glycosylation. Crystallographic investigation of h<i>cis</i>-PT along the reaction cycle revealed an outlet for the elongating product. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry analysis showed that the hydrophobic active site core is flanked by dynamic regions consistent with separate inlet and outlet orifices. Last, using a fluorescence substrate analog, we show that product elongation and membrane association are closely correlated. Together, our results support direct membrane insertion of the elongating isoprenoid during catalysis, uncoupling active site volume from product length.

### Keywords
H/d exchange mass spectrometry, Isoprenoid synthesis, Cis-prenyltransferase

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS
Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Acad Sci Prumyslova 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic

### Submitter
Petr Man

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Man
Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Acad Sci Prumyslova 595 252 50 Vestec Czech Republic


