### Accession
PXD012791

### Title
Mapping the invasive network of glioblastoma by proteomics from laser-capture microdissected samples

### Description
Glioblastomas are brain tumors that are derived from astrocytes or oligodendrocytes. These tumors have a heterogeneous structure composed of a necrotic and vascularized center and an invasive periphery. The rapid development of glioblastoma and its ability to invade surrounding tissues makes it a complex pathology to treat, and the average survival of patients ranging from 12 to 15 months. The first and second lines of treatment, based on the Stupp protocol, consisting of the resection of the tumor mass and adjuvant temozolomide treatment and/or radiotherapy, only allow delaying recurrence for a few months. The additional use of anti-angiogenic treatment, despite its initial effects on tumor vascularization and the central tumor core, invariably leads to tumor escape.  Tumor cell invasion is the central element in tumor recurrence. It is therefore important to understand the mechanisms of tumor invasion and understand the interactions between tumor cells and their microenvironment. Here, we performed proteomics analysis of glioblastoma core and invasive areas, tumor derived from a patient xenograft. Bioinformatics data analysis allowed us to identify molecules that may represent markers of tumor invasion. We established novel protein signatures such as phopholipoprotein-1 (PLP1), 2',3'-cyclic-nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase (CNP) or Dynamin-1 (DNM1), and validated them in tumor samples. Finally, a functional validation was carried out in in vitro experiments.  To conclude, our results report novel unexpected proteins that are involved in GBM invasion and that may constitute novel therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Microdissected tissues were first incubated in RIPA buffer supplemented with inhibitor cocktail (Roche). They were then treated by sonication during 10 sec, supplemented with Laemli buffer, heated at 95°C during 5 minutes and finally loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples had entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into small pieces and proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q-Exactive hybrid quadruplole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Ten microliters of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. After 3 min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN, solvent A : 0.1% formic acid in H2O) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. Full MS scans in the range from m/z 300 to 1600 were recorded at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and the target value for the automatic gain control (AGC) algorithm was set to 3 x 106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200, and the maximum ion injection time and the AGC target were set to 100 ms and 1 x 105 ions, respectively. Only precursors with assigned charges states +2 and +3 were selected for fragmentation. Others settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 270°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27% and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.5 algorithm through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) was used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Mus musculus database (Proteome ID UP000000589 ; release date November 15, 2018 ; 54,188 proteins) merged to a Homo sapiens database (Proteome ID UP000005640 ; release date November 17, 2018 ; 73,931 proteins) from http://www.uniprot.org/ website. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of lysine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were searched as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was searched as static modification. For protein quantification, raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Proline Studio (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) for feature detection, alignment, and quantification. Protein identification was only accepted with at least 2 specific peptides with a pretty rank = 1 and with a protein false discovery rate value < 1.0% calculated using the “decoy” option in Mascot. Label-free quantification of MS1 level by extracted ion chromatograms was carried out using the following parameters (alignment time tolerance : 600 sec, alignment m/z tolerance : 10 ppm, abundance summarizer method : median ratio fitting). Protein ratios were normalized on the median ratio. A missing values inference method on proteins was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Glioblastoma, Tumour cell invasion

### Affiliations
INSERM U1029, University Bordeaux, Pessac, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Daubon
INSERM U1029, University Bordeaux, Pessac, France


