### Accession
PXD005059

### Title
QuaNCAT analysis comparing proteins synthesized in neurites and soma in ASCL1-iNeurons

### Description
Local translation in ASCL1-iNeurons was probed using QuaNCAT

### Sample Protocol
Light neurons were pulsed concurrently with azidohomoalanine (AHA) and either Heavy or Medium SILAC amino acids. Soma from Heavy-pulsed neurons were mixed with Medium-pulsed neurites. Newly synthesized proteins were then enriched by click-chemistry using alkyne bearing agarose beads. Beads were washed and proteins were digested “on bead” by LysC and trypsin. Peptides were separated using a nHPLC system on 15 cm column packed with C18 material and analyzed on a Q Exactive orbitrap.  A label swap experiment was also performed.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant software with "reQuantify" and "match between runs" active. Matching of spectra by Andromeda was done against the Uniprot mouse database (2014-10).

### Publication Abstract
Protein subcellular localization is fundamental to the establishment of the body axis, cell migration, synaptic plasticity, and a vast range of other biological processes. Protein localization occurs through three mechanisms: protein transport, mRNA localization, and local translation. However, the relative contribution of each process to neuronal polarity remains unknown. Using neurons differentiated from mouse embryonic stem cells, we analyze protein and RNA expression and translation rates in isolated cell bodies and neurites genome-wide. We quantify 7323 proteins and the entire transcriptome, and identify hundreds of neurite-localized proteins and locally translated mRNAs. Our results demonstrate that mRNA localization is the primary mechanism for protein localization in neurites that may account for half of the neurite-localized proteome. Moreover, we identify multiple neurite-targeted non-coding RNAs and RNA-binding proteins with potential regulatory roles. These results provide further insight into the mechanisms underlying the establishment of neuronal polarity.Subcellular localization of RNAs and proteins is important for polarized cells such as neurons. Here the authors differentiate mouse embryonic stem cells into neurons, and analyze the local transcriptome, proteome, and translated transcriptome in their cell bodies and neurites, providing a unique resource for future studies on neuronal polarity.

### Keywords
Mouse, Silac, Azidohomoalanine

### Affiliations
Non-coding RNAs and mechanisms of cytoplasmic gene regulation, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicin, Berlin
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin (MDC)

### Submitter
Erik McShane

### Lab Head
Dr Marina Chekulaeva
Non-coding RNAs and mechanisms of cytoplasmic gene regulation, Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicin, Berlin


