### Accession
PXD029436

### Title
The preclinical evaluation of a second-generation antivenom for treating snake envenoming in India

### Description
In this study, by employing chromatographic purification of the bulk, we have significantly enhanced the preclinical performance of the conventional Indian antivenom product. The effectiveness of the test batches of this ‘second-generation’ antivenom was evaluated using a variety of in vitro and in vivo preclinical assays, including venom recognition and toxicity and pathology neutralisation. The outcomes of these experiments demonstrated the significantly superior performance of the purified product over all other major commercial Indian antivenoms.

### Sample Protocol
Indian antivenoms were dissolved in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to mass spectrometric analyses. A final concentration of 10 mM was achieved by adding 100 mM of DTT (dithiothreitol), and the mixture was incubated at 37o C for 30 mins. Following the incubation period, iodoacetamide (100 mM) was added to the solution, and the mixture was subjected to another round of incubation in the dark (37o C for 30 minutes). The pH of the solution was adjusted to 8 using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by overnight digestion of the sample with trypsin (0.2 µg/ml; 1:50) at 37o C. The reaction was stopped using 0.1% formic acid, and the sample was desalted with ZipTip containing acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were then separated using Thermo EASY nLC 1200 series system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) with a 50 cm x 75 µm, C18 (3 µm, 100 Å) nano-LC column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Here, the mobile phase was constituted by 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water (buffer A) and elution buffer of 0.1% formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile (buffer B). The concentration of the buffer was altered as follows: 10-45% over 98 min, 45-95% over 4 min and 95% over 18 min.

### Data Protocol
A Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) was used for mass spectrometric analyses of the antivenom samples. Following parameters were used for MS scans: scan range (m/z) of 375-1700 with a resolution of 120000 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. An ion trap detector with high collision energy fragmentation (30%), scan range (m/z) of 100-2000, and maximum injection time of 35 ms was employed for fragment scans (MS/MS). Using PEAKS Studio X Plus software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., ON, Canada), raw MS/MS spectra were searched against the National Center for Biotechnology Information's (NCBI) non-redundant (nr) database (Equus caballus: 9796; September 2021) to identify antibodies and other proteins present in the antivenom samples. The tolerances for parent and fragment mass errors were set at 10 parts per million (ppm) and 0.6 Da, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation and asparagine or glutamine deamidation were designated as variable modifications. In the semispecific mode, a maximum of two missed cleavages by trypsin was permitted. The match acceptance filtering settings were: FDR of 0.1%; minimum number of unique peptides: 1; and -10lgP protein score of 40.

### Publication Abstract
Snake envenoming afflicts the Indian subcontinent with the highest rates of mortality (47,000) and morbidity globally. The only effective treatment for snakebites is the administration of antivenom, which is produced by the hyperimmunisation of equines. Commercial Indian antivenoms, however, have been shown to exhibit a poor preclinical performance in neutralising venom, as a result of inter- and intrapopulation snake venom variation. Additionally, their poor dose effectiveness necessitates the administration of larger volumes of antivenom for treatment, leading to several harmful side effects in snakebite victims, including serum sickness and fatal anaphylaxis. In this study, we employed chromatographic purification to enhance the dose efficacy of commercial Indian antivenoms. The efficacy of this 'second-generation' antivenom was comparatively evaluated against six other marketed antivenoms using a number of in vitro and in vivo preclinical assays, which revealed its superior venom recognition capability. Enhanced purity also resulted in significant improvements in dose effectiveness, as the 'second-generation' antivenom exhibited a 3 to 4.5 times increased venom neutralisation potential. Furthermore, preclinical assays revealed the increased effectiveness of the 'second-generation' antivenom in countering morbid effects inflicted by the 'big four' Indian snakes. Thus, we demonstrate the role of simpler purification steps in significantly enhancing the effectiveness of snakebite therapy in regions that are most affected by snakebites.

### Keywords
Snakebite, Antivenoms, Second-generation antivenoms

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, Karnataka, India.
Assistant Professor, Evolutionary Venomics Lab, Center for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Kartik Sunagar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Kartik Sunagar
Assistant Professor, Evolutionary Venomics Lab, Center for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India


