### Accession
PXD013933

### Title
Immunoproteomic study of Candida albicans hyphal secretome for the identification of diagnostic biomarker candidates of invasive candidiasis

### Description
Candida albicans is an opportunistic pathogen and a commensal fungus of the mucosa from many healthy patients. Invasive candidiasis (IC) has high levels of morbidity and mortality that are attributed to some extent to the difficulty in its early diagnosis. Diverse and immunogenic proteins with roles such as virulence and immune evasion are secreted by this pathogen. Immunoproteomics is an important technique for the assessment of antibody reactivities to immunogenic proteins and our group previously developed an algorithm to predict the clinical outcome in IC patients. With the ultimate purpose of discovering new biomarkers of IC, immunoproteomics was applied for the analysis of the serological response to hyphal C. albicans extracellular proteins. Gel-free proteomic analysis was performed by LC-MS/MS for the detection of the secreted proteins and 301 proteins were identified. As expected, gene ontology analysis in cellular component showed enrichment in proteins from extracellular region, cell wall, cell surface, cell periphery and intracellular region. Importantly, 46.5% of the intracellular proteins identified were also annotated in extracellular region. Furthermore, from the extracellular proteins identified here, 44 proteins were previously found to be immunogenic against human sera. To carry out immunoproteomic analysis, secreted proteins were separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, electroblotted onto nitrocellulose membranes, and tested by Western blotting with three distinct pools of human sera: P1 (12 IC patients), P2 (11 patients with Candida infection associated with catheters) and P3 (11 patients without IC). A higher reactivity pattern was observed in P1 and P2 in comparison with P3. So far, Glx3 was immunogenic to P1 and P2 but not to P3. Eno1, Pgk1 and Pra1 were found to be more immunoreactive to both P1 and P2 than to the P3. This approach will contribute to a better and faster diagnosis of this life-threatening fungal infection.

### Sample Protocol
Firstly, 20 μg of both secretome pools, S1 and S2, were in-gel digested. Protein bands were cut from the gel to carry out in gel trypsin digestion. Briefly, protein bands with the proteins were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodacetamide and digested with a 1/20 (w/w) ratio of recombinant trypsin (Trypsin sequencing grade; Roche) overnight at 37ºC, according to Sechi and Chait (Sechi & Chait, 2000). Finally, the samples were freeze-dried in Speed-vac and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid before the nano LC-MS/MS analysis. The samples were stored at -20 ºC until the analysis. Four bands of the upper left zone of the preparative gel were cut and in-gel digested with trypsin also as explained above. The peptides were analyzed by reversed-phase liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC-ESI-MS/MS) in an EASY-nLC 1000 System coupled to the Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer through the nano-Easy spray source (all from Thermo Scientific, mississagua, ON, Canada). Peptides were loaded first onto a Acclaim PepMap 100 Trapping column (Thermo Scientific, 20mm x 75 µm ID, 3 µm C18 resin with 100 Å poro size) using buffer A (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and then were separated and eluted on a C18 resin analytical column NTCC (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. de 150 mm x 75 µm ID, 3 µm C18 resin with 100 Å poro size) with an integrated spray tip. A 150 minutes gradient of 5% to 35% buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in buffer A at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min was used. Data acquisition was performed with a Q-Exactive HF. Data were acquired using an ionspray voltage 1.8 KV and ion transfer temperature of 250 ºC. All data were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and in positive mode with Xcalibur 4.0 software. For MS2 scan, were selected top 15 most abundant precursors with charges of 2 to 4+ in MS 1 scans for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a dynamic exclusion of 20 s. The MS1 scans were acquired at m/z range of 350–1600 Da with mass resolution of 60,000 and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3E6 at a maximum ion time (ITmax) of 60 ms. The threshold to trigger MS2 scans was 2E3; the normalized collision energy (NCE) was 27%; the resolved fragments were scanned at mass resolution of 30,000 and AGC target value of 1E5 in a ITmax of 100 ms. This analysis was performed in the Proteomic Facility from the Complutense University of Madrid.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing:  Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using Mascot v.2.6.1 search engine through the Protein Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific). A database search was performed against CGD Assembly 21 (6221 sequences). The following parameters were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites allowed, and tolerances of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS fragment ion. The searches were performed allowing optional methionine oxidation and methionine loss plus acetyl protein N-terminal and fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Search against decoy database (integrated decoy approach) was used to FDR calculate. The Mascot scores were adjusted by a percolator algorithm. The acceptance criteria for protein identification were a FDR < 1% and at least one peptide identified with high confidence (CI>95%).

### Publication Abstract
Invasive candidiasis (IC) is associated with high morbidity and mortality in hospitalized patients if not diagnosed early. Long-term use of central venous catheters is a predisposing factor for IC. Hyphal forms of <i>Candida albicans</i> (the major etiological agent of IC) are related to invasion of host tissues. The secreted proteins of hyphae are involved in virulence, host interaction, immune response, and immune evasion. To identify IC diagnostic biomarker candidates, we characterized the <i>C. albicans</i> hyphal secretome by gel-free proteomic analysis, and further assessed the antibody-reactivity patterns to this subproteome in serum pools from 12 patients with non-catheter-associated IC (ncIC), 11 patients with catheter-associated IC (cIC), and 11 non-IC patients. We identified 301 secreted hyphal proteins stratified to stem from the extracellular region, cell wall, cell surface, or intracellular compartments. ncIC and cIC patients had higher antibody levels to the hyphal secretome than non-IC patients. Seven secreted hyphal proteins were identified to be immunogenic (Bgl2, Eno1, Pgk1, Glx3, Sap5, Pra1 and Tdh3). Antibody-reactivity patterns to Bgl2, Eno1, Pgk1 and Glx3 discriminated IC patients from non-IC patients, while those to Sap5, Pra1 and Tdh3 differentiated between cIC and non-IC patients. These proteins may be useful for development of future IC diagnostic tests.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Immunoproteomics, Biomarkers, Diagnosis

### Affiliations
Microbiology Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Complutense University of Madrid
UCM

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Concha Gil
Microbiology Department, Faculty of Pharmacy, Complutense University of Madrid


