### Accession
PXD017234

### Title
Proteomics analysis of octapeptide from Lingzhi mushroom with anti-tyrosinase and anti-oxidative activity

### Description
Study the effect of novel octapeptide isolated from Lingzhi mushroom on skin melanocyte cell (Mus Musculus) by gel-free based proteomics

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lyzed by lysis buffer solution (10mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 8.0 and 0.5% Triton X-100) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail. The supernatant was collected by centrifugation and subsequent to ice-cold acetone precipitation (1:5 v/v). After precipitation, the pallet protein was reconstituted in 0.2% RapidGest SF (Waters, UK) in 10 mM Ammonium bicarbonate/ 50 µg of protein were subjected to gel-free based digestion. Reduction sulfhydryl bonds by using 5 mM DTT in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 72C for 1 hour and alkylation of sulfhydryl groups by using 10 mM IAA in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. Gel-free digestion by using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Germany) was added to the protein solution and incubated at 37oC for 3 hours.  The peptides were dried and resolubilized in 0.1 % formic acid. The protonated peptide solutions were analyzed with Impact II UHR-TOF MS System (Bruker Daltonics Ltd., Germany) coupled to a nanoLC system: UltiMate 3000 LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) equipped with a Nano captive spray ion source.  A linear gradient for elution (120 minutes) was used to elute peptides into the mass spectrometer, mobile phases A and B at a constant flow rate of 0.3 µl/min which mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile B was 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile. The mass spectrometry was operated in positive ion mode over the range (m/z) = 150–2200 (Compass 1.9 for otofSeries software, Bruker Daltonics). Mass accuracy (TOF detector) calibrated with LC/MS tuning mix, for ESI (Agilent, USA) was within 1.6 ppm. The raw LC-MS runs were carried out using CompassXport Version 3.0.9.2 (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Germany) to convert the raw spectra (.d file format) to mzXML data format

### Data Protocol
The mzXML of LC-MS/MS datasets for label-free quantification were evaluated relative comparison of peak intensity of each peptide ion in all dataset of LC-runs by DeCyder MS Differential Analysis software (DeCyderMS, GE Healthcare) (Johansson et al. 2006). Peak detection (signal/noise ratio < 2) and peak matching (peptide ion peak alignment) were done by Batch and Pepmatch module in the DeCyder MS Differential Analysis software.   All dataset of MS/MS peak lists from the Pepmatch module in the DeCyder MS Differential Analysis software were exported to the Mascot generic format (.mgf file format) and submitted for in-house database search using the Mascot software (Matrix Science, London, UK). The dataset of MS/MS peak lists was searched against the Mus Musculus (Uniprot database, 17027 sequences) for protein identification by following these parameters ; trypsin as digesting enzyme, maximum of 3 missed cleavages, MS peptide tolerance is 1.0 Da, MS/MS peptide tolerance of 0.6 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteins as fixed modification, and the oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as variable modifications. Only significant peptide with ANOVA lower than 0.05 will be accepted. Data normalization of the protein abundance between each LC-runs were performed by internal normalization with 2 peptides from beta-tubulin protein which is housekeeping protein.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Ganoderma lucidum</i> or Lingzhi is a fungus species widely known as a traditional medicine. Exploring the beneficial peptides by hydrolysis using pepsin and trypsin has been extensively performed to identify new bioactive natural products. A multifunctional peptide that expresses potential scavenging activity and tyrosinase inhibition is valuable in therapeutic and cosmetic applications. This study aimed to identify and investigate the effects of a novel multifunctional peptide from Lingzhi on the melanogenic enzymes in melanoma cells by a targeted-proteomics approach. The multifunctional peptide was de novo sequenced by LC-MS/MS to be NH<sub>2</sub>-PVRSSNCA-CO<sub>2</sub>H (octapeptide). This sequence was chemically synthesized by solid-phase peptide synthesis (SPPS). The antioxidant ability of the synthesized octapeptide was measured by the DPPH, ABTS, and FRAP assays. The results showed that the peptide exhibited an antioxidant activity equal to 0.121 &#xb1; 0.01 mg equivalent to ascorbic acid, 0.173 &#xb1; 0.03 mg equivalent to gallic acid, and 2.21 &#xb1; 0.23 mM equivalent to FeSO<sub>4</sub>, respectively, which is comparable to these well-known antioxidants. The proteomics approach identified a total of 5804 proteins and several pathways involved in the effects of the octapeptide in melanoma cells. Targeted proteomics revealed three specific proteins associated with pigmentation including Rab29, Dct, and Tyrp1. The Rab29 and Dct were upregulated whereas Tyrp1 was downregulated in the octapeptide treatment group. These findings could be used in the understanding of the molecular functions of the multifunctional octapeptide on melanogenic enzymes, supporting its potential as a therapeutic and cosmetic ingredient.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Anti-oxidative stress, Anti-tyrosinase, Peptide

### Affiliations
Mahidol University
National Omics Center, NSTDA, Thailand

### Submitter
Sucheewin Krobthong

### Lab Head
Dr Sucheewin Krobthong
National Omics Center, NSTDA, Thailand


