### Accession
PXD023383

### Title
Effect of Nop53 depletion on the compositional changes during pre-60S maturation

### Description
The eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis is a highly orchestrated multistep process that starts at the nucleolus with the transcription of pre-rRNAs 5S and 35S. The latter comprises the mature 18S, 5.8S and 25S rRNAs separated by internal transcribed spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) and externally flanked by the 5’ETS and 3’ETS. The 35S pre-rRNA undergoes several co- and post-transcriptional processing events, which will enable the pre-60S and pre-40S particles to take independent maturation routes. Hundreds of assembly factors (AF) are required, being recruited and released hierarchically, for the proper folding of the rRNAs and correct positioning of the ribosomal proteins. One of the most intricate events that have recently been described is the removal of the ITS2-containing structure called pre-60S foot, which happens in a step-wise manner. Nop53 is an essential 60S AF that binds close to the ITS2 and plays a fundamental role in recruiting the RNA exosome for the 7S pre-rRNA processing, thereby dismantling the foot structure. Here we characterize the impact of Nop53 binding to the pre-60S on the compositional changes that happen during 60S assembly. For this purpose, preribosomes were affinity-purified with TAP-tagged 60S AFs (Nop7, Erb1, Rsa4, Arx1, Nmd3, Yvh1, and Lsg1) representative of different maturation stages both in the presence and absence of Nop53. Nop7 particles were also coimmunoprecipitated in the presence of Nop53 mutants incapable of recruiting the exosome (Nop53∆1-71, Nop53∆48-98) to compare with Nop53 depletion. The isolated preribosomes were analyzed by label-free MS/MS-based quantitative proteomics, revealing early and late-stage specific effects of Nop53 depletion.

### Sample Protocol
The lyophilized eluates were subjected to in solution digestion for LC-MS/MS analysis as previously described (Cepeda, 2019, Villén et al., 2008). Briefly, proteins were resuspended in 50mM NH4HCO3, 8M urea and reduced with DTT at a final concentration of 5 mM at 56 °C for 25 min. Samples were then alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT under protection from light. After dilution with 50mM NH4HCO3 to decrease the final concentration of urea to 1.6M, samples were digested for 16 h with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 (E:S) ratio at 37 °C. The proteolysis was stopped by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.4% (v/v) and the resultant peptides were desalted using SepPak tC18 cartridges (Waters).Digested peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid and and fractionated on an in-house reversed phase capillary emitter column (10 cm × 75 µm, filled with 5 µm particle diameter C18 Aqua resins-Phenomenex) coupled to a nanoHPLC (Thermo). The fractionation was carried out on a 60 min gradient of 2–80% of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B) ( 0- 28% of buffer B in 45 min, 28-80% in 13 min; 80-5% in 2 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. The eluted peptides were analyzed by a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) (source voltage of 1.9 kV, capillary temperature of 200 °C).  The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with dynamic exclusion enabled (exclusion duration of 45 seconds), MS1 resolution of 30,000, and MS2 normalized collision energy of 30. For each cycle, one full MS1 scan range of 200–2000 m/z was followed by ten MS2 scans (for the most intense ions) using an isolation window size of 1.0 m/z and collision induced dissociation (CID). The 10 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation by CID in DDA.

### Data Protocol
Data from LTQ Velos-Orbitrap were analyzed using the MaxQuant 1.5.4 software using the UniProt database (taxonomy Saccharomyces cerevisiae), tolerance in the MS of 4.5 ppm and MS / MS of 0.5 Da, carbamidomethylation in cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation in methionine and acetylation at the N-terminals as variable modifications and a 1 % False discovery rate (FDR). The match between runs option was used to increase the number of trusted IDs. To obtain the quantitative values, the normalized LFQ values of the proteingroups.txt output was used.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis is an elaborate process during which ribosomal proteins assemble with the pre-rRNA while it is being processed and folded. Hundreds of assembly factors (AF) are required and transiently recruited to assist the sequential remodeling events. One of the most intricate ones is the stepwise removal of the internal transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2), between the 5.8S and 25S rRNAs, that constitutes together with five AFs the pre-60S 'foot'. In the transition from nucleolus to nucleoplasm, Nop53 replaces Erb1 at the basis of the foot and recruits the RNA exosome for the ITS2 cleavage and foot disassembly. Here we comprehensively analyze the impact of Nop53 recruitment on the pre-60S compositional changes. We show that depletion of Nop53, different from nop53 mutants lacking the exosome-interacting motif, not only causes retention of the unprocessed foot in late pre-60S intermediates but also affects the transition from nucleolar state E particle to subsequent nuclear stages. Additionally, we reveal that Nop53 depletion causes the impairment of late maturation events such as Yvh1 recruitment. In light of recently described pre-60S cryo-EM structures, our results provide biochemical evidence for the structural role of Nop53 rearranging and stabilizing the foot interface to assist the Nog2 particle formation.

### Keywords
Pre-60s, Nop53, Eukaryotic ribosome biogenesis, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
LCC
Laboratory of Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression, Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo, 05508-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil

### Submitter
Julia Cunha

### Lab Head
Dr Carla Columbano Oliveira
Laboratory of Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression, Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo, 05508-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil


