### Accession
PXD000527

### Title
Analysis of pummelo proteome using iTRAQ

### Description
For protein identification, the following parameters were used. Peptide mass tolerance = 20 ppm, Missed cleavage = 2, MS/MS tolerance = 0.1 Da, Enzyme = Trypsin, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex(K), iTRAQ8plex(N-term), Variable modification：Oxidation(M)，Decoy database pattern=Reverse. The MASCOT search results for each SCX elution were further processed using the ProteomicsTools (version 3.1.6) which includes the programs BuildSummary, Isobaric Labeling Multiple File Distiller and Identified Protein iTRAQ Statistic Builder (Information can be accessed from Research Center for Proteome Analysis (http://www.proteomics.ac.cn/).

### Sample Protocol
Floral bud collection and anther paraffin section preparation were carried out as described in our previous work.8 In each developmental stage, floral buds were collected from at least 50 inflorescences. Three biological replicates for floral bud preparation (floral buds individually collected from different directions of two trees and equally distributed into three independent parts) were performed. Then, the floral buds of each biological replicate were mixed as sample pools according to the development stages that were defined in accordance with the results of paraffin section screening; phenotypes of floral buds are shown in Figure 1A in the Supporting Information, which was cited from our previous work.

### Data Protocol
The iTRAQ labeled and pooled peptide samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy nLC autosampler (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific), survey scans were acquired at resolution of 70 000 at m/z 200, and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17 500 at m/z 200; the mass window was 2 Da for precursor ion selection; normalized collision energy was 30 eV; and dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s. Five μg of the peptide mixture was loaded on a packed capillary tip (C18-reversed phase column with 15 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) with RP-C18 5 μm resin and washed in buffer A (0.1% formic acid). After washing, the peptide mixture was separated with a gradient of buffer B (0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. A data-dependent “top10” method was used to get the most abundant precursor ions (mass range 300−1800 m/z). All raw files were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, U.K.; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discover 1.3 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA). Then, the data were compared with a nonredundant Protein Index Citrus sinensis genome sequence database, Huazhong Agricultural University (http://citrus.hzau.edu.cn/orange/).39 For protein identification, the following parameters were used: peptide mass tolerance ±20 ppm and MS/MS tolerance ±0.1 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed with the enzyme of trypsin; Cys was set as fixed modification of carbamidomethyl and Met was set as variable modification of oxidation. ProteomicsTools (version 3.1.6) was used to further process the MASCOT search results of each SCX elution. Protein identifications according to a target-decoy in shotgun proteomics were assembled by a BuildSummary program. For protein identification, the following filtering parameters were used: all reported data were 99% confidence and false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 1%, FDR = N(decoy)*2/(N(decoy) + N(target)). The final ratios of proteins were then normalized by the median average protein ratio of the equal mix of different labeled samples. iTRAQ ratios were log-transformed in Microsoft Table before being analyzed mathematically. Only proteins detected in all runs (every biological replicate) were included in the data set. Differentially abundant proteins were then functionally annotated using Blast2Go.

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive and quantitative proteomic information on citrus floral bud is significant for understanding male sterility of the cybrid pummelo (G1+HBP) with nuclear genome of HBP and foreign mitochondrial genome of G1. Scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy analyses of the anthers showed that the development of pollen wall in G1+HBP was severely defective with a lack of exine and sporopollenin formation. Proteomic analysis was used to identify the differentially expressed proteins between male sterile G1+HBP and fertile type (HBP) with the aim to clarify their potential roles in anther development and male sterility. On the basis of iTRAQ quantitative proteomics, we identified 2235 high-confidence protein groups, 666 of which showed differentially expressed profiles in one or more stages. Proteins up- or down-regulated in G1+HBP were mainly involved in carbohydrate and energy metabolism (e.g., pyruvate dehydrogenase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, ATP synthase, and malate dehydrogenase), nucleotide binding (RNA-binding proteins), protein synthesis and degradation (e.g., ribosome proteins and proteasome subunits). Additionally, the proteins located in mitochondria also showed changed expression patterns. These findings provide a valuable inventory of proteins involved in floral bud development and contribute to elucidate the mechanism of cytoplasmic male sterility in the cybrid pummelo.

### Keywords
Itraq   floral bud

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology
Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology (Ministry of Education), Huazhong Agricultural University , Wuhan 430070, China

### Submitter
Beibei Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Wen-Wu Guo
Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology (Ministry of Education), Huazhong Agricultural University , Wuhan 430070, China


### SDRF
- organism: Citrus maxima
- organism part: floral bud
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: iTRAQ reagent 113, iTRAQ reagent 114, iTRAQ reagent 115, iTRAQ reagent 116, iTRAQ reagent 117, iTRAQ reagent 118, iTRAQ reagent 119, iTRAQ reagent 121
- modification parameters: NT=iTRAQ8plex;PP=Any N-term;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:730;MT=fixed, NT=iTRAQ8plex:13C(6)15N(2) ;PP=Any N-term;TA=K;AC=UNIMOD:731;MT=fixed
- modification parameters.1: NT=Carbamidomethyl;TA=C;AC=UNIMOD:4;MT=fixed
- modification parameters.2: NT=Oxidation;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35;MT=variable
- instrument: NT=Q Exactive;AC=MS:1001911

