### Accession
PXD021302

### Title
Egg proteome in vtg1 and vtg3 knocked-out zebrafish females

### Description
CRISPR/Cas9 knock-out of the vtg1 and vtg3 genes was performed in zebrafish separately. This project involves proteomics screening for validation of the absence of targeted proteins in vtg1 and vtg3 and their variants in knocked out female zebrafish in eggs and investigating possible changes within the corresponding proteomes as a results of the absence of these specific vitellogenins and their variants.

### Sample Protocol
Egg proteins were stacked in a NUPAGE Bis-Tris gel (ThermoFisher Scientific) and bands were excised and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) for analysis by mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap instrument (LTQ-OrbitrpXL, Thermo Scientific) on Protim platform (https://www.protim.eu/, Rennes, France) as previously described (Yilmaz et al., 2017,  PMID: 29145436).

### Data Protocol
MS data were saved in RAW file format (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using XCalibur 2.0.7 with tune 2.4. The data analysis was performed with the Mascot Distiller v2.5.1.0 software connected to the Mascot (Mascot server v2.5.01; http://www.matrixscience.com) database search engine for peptide and protein identification. MS/MS spectra were searched against a target-decoy concatenated database created from the zebrafish ENSEMBL proteome database (86304 sequences). Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with one miscleavage allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionine. Attributed spectra were then analyzed using ProteoIQ 2.8 (Premier Biosoft, Palo Alto, CA, USA) at<1% FDR, 0.5% minimum protein group probability, and 6 aa minimum peptide length, in order to identify proteins and quantify them based on their N-SC values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zebrafish, Vitellogenins, Knock-out, Eggs

### Affiliations
Protim, Univ Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset (Institut de recherche en santé, environnement et travail) - UMR_S 1085, Rennes, France
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim, Univ Rennes, Inserm, EHESP, Irset (Institut de recherche en santé, environnement et travail) - UMR_S 1085, Rennes, France


