### Accession
PXD008375

### Title
Cdc37 and Hsp90 tyrosine phosphorylation modulate the kinase chaperone cycle

### Description
Cdc37 is a core cochaperone of the Hsp90 machinery. It is involved in an early stage of the chaperone cycle to activate nascent forms of protein kinases as well as to stabilize mature forms of a subset of protein kinases. Overall, the chaperone cycle is quite complex and involves several steps. Progression, through these steps is regulated by the incorporation of several other cochaperones, ATP hydrolysis and posttranslational modifications on both Cdc37 and Hsp90. We show that phosphorylation of Cdc37 at Y298 by Yes kinase results in partial unfolding of its C-terminal domain, without affecting its ability to form binary or ternary complexes with kinases and Hsp90. Unfolding, unmasks a phosphopeptide sequence that exhibits high affinity for SH2 domains of non-receptor tyrosine kinases (nRTKs), resulting in their recruitment in the chaperone complex. In turn, the high local concentration of nRTKs potentiates Hsp90 phosphorylation at Y197, which results in dissociation of this early kinase-recruitment complex

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant protein(s) +/- kinase reactions were separated on an SDS-PAGE gel.  Bands corresponding to the proteins of interest were excised and processed by trypsin in-gel digest. Peptide samples were dried in a speed vac and resuspended in H2O/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Peptides were separated on a PepMap RP C18 analytical column using an Ultimate3000 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific), and analyzed by Top 10 Data-dependet acquisiton on a hybrid-quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed in MaxQuant (v.1.5.8.3) and searched against the UniprotKB human protein sequence database.  MaxQuant settings included constant modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation and the variable modifications, methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine.  Trypsin was specified as the protease, with a maximum of 2 possible missed cleavages. Additionally, the database search specified mass tolerances of 20ppm (first search) and 4.5ppm (recalibrated second search)  for precursor ions, and 20ppm for fragments ions.  Peptides and proteins were identified using a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
During the Hsp90-mediated chaperoning of protein kinases, the core components of the machinery, Hsp90 and the cochaperone Cdc37, recycle between different phosphorylation states that regulate progression of the chaperone cycle. We show that Cdc37 phosphorylation at Y298 results in partial unfolding of the C-terminal domain and the population of folding intermediates. Unfolding facilitates Hsp90 phosphorylation at Y197 by unmasking a phosphopeptide sequence, which serves as a docking site to recruit non-receptor tyrosine kinases to the chaperone complex via their SH2 domains. In turn, Hsp90 phosphorylation at Y197 specifically regulates its interaction with Cdc37 and thus affects the chaperoning of only protein kinase clients. In summary, we find that by providing client class specificity, Hsp90 cochaperones such as Cdc37 do not merely assist in client recruitment but also shape the post-translational modification landscape of Hsp90 in a client class-specific manner.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor Department of Chemisty University of South Florida Tampa, FL. USA.
University of South Florida

### Submitter
Dale Chaput

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ioannis Gelis
Assistant Professor Department of Chemisty University of South Florida Tampa, FL. USA.


