### Accession
PXD039184

### Title
E3 ligase AMFR regulates ARL6IP1 Ubiquitination in cells

### Description
ER-resident membrane-shaping proteins with central reticulon homology domains (RHDs) have been associated with neurodegenerative disorders such as ARL6IP1 and FAM134B.Mutations in ARL6IP1 cause SPG61, a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive leg spasticity (hereditary spastic paraplegia/HSP) in combination with loss of sensory and pain perception, thus reproducing typical symptoms of HSAN {Kurth, 2009 #8;Novarino, 2014 #28;Nizon, 2018 #162}.Our objetive was to analyse FAM134B-ARL6IP1 protein protein interactionS to underlying mechanisms, required for effective ER-remodelling and ER-phagy.

### Sample Protocol
For the LC-MS interactome analysis we doxycycline-induced HA-FAM134B expression in U2OS cells. Additionally, HEK293T cells were transiently transfected with the constructs V1-ARL6IP1, V2-ARLIP1, AMFR-V2 WT and AMFR-V2 RING mut. After 24 h cells were lysed with 1% Triton X-100-IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCL, 150Mm NaCl and 0.5 mM EDTA) and protein lysates were incubated with HA-agarose beads (Sigma) or GFP-trap beads (Chromotek) overnight at 4°C on a rotating platform. Protein-bound beads were washed three times with lysis buffer and three times with lysis buffer without detergents. HA-IP samples were incubated with 40 µl SDC-buffer (2% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 1 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 4 mM chloroacetamide, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and heated at 95°C for 10 min. Samples were mixed 1:1 with 500 ng LysC, incubated for 3 h at 37°C and digested with 500 ng of trypsin in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 overnight at 37°C. Reaction was stopped with 150µl of isopropanol with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were cleaned up by loading them onto SDB-RPS stage tips (Sigma). After one wash with 1% TFA in isopropanol and one wash with 0.2% TFA in water, peptides were eluted using 80% acetonitrile and 1.25% ammonia. Eluted peptides were dried, tandem mass tagged (TMT)-labeled and processed for LC-MS measurements. LC-MS analysis Dried peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA and analysed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 35 cm long, 75 µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 4-28% acetonitrile over 45 minutes and directly sprayed into the mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (300-1650 m/z) were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges. Up to 15 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1.4 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalised collision energy of 28). MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode with a resolution of 30,000, a maximum injection time of 45 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Single charged ions, ions with a charge state above 4 and ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimise the acquisition of fragment spectra of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data was processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.10.43) applying default parameters. Acquired spectra were searched against the human “one sequence per gene” database (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from UniProt (12-03-2020; 20531 sequences), and a collection of 244 common contaminants (“contaminants.fasta” provided with MaxQuant) using the Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant {Cox, 2011 #56;Tyanova, 2016 #58}. Identifications were filtered to obtain false discovery rates (FDR) below 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (PSM; minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins using a target-decoy strategy {Elias, 2007 #61}. Protein quantification and data normalization relied on the MaxLFQ algorithm implemented in MaxQuant {Cox, 2014 #57}. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium {Deutsch, 2017 #62} via the PRIDE partner repository {Perez-Riverol, 2019 #60} with the dataset identifier. All acquired raw files were processed using MaxQuant (1.6.10.43) and the implemented Andromeda search engine. For protein assignment, spectra were correlated with the UniProt human database (v. 2019) including a list of common contaminants. Searches were performed with tryptic specifications and default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues oxidations at methionine, acetylation at the N-terminus were defined as a fixed modification. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and the false discovery rate for proteins and peptide-spectrum matches to 1%. The match-between-run feature with a time window of 1 min was used. For further analysis, the Perseus software (1.6.6.0) was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries as well as proteins that were only identified by a modified peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Membrane-shaping proteins characterized by reticulon homology domains play an important part in the dynamic remodelling of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). An example of such a protein is FAM134B, which can bind LC3 proteins and mediate the degradation of ER sheets through selective autophagy (ER-phagy)<sup>1</sup>. Mutations in FAM134B result in a neurodegenerative disorder in humans that mainly affects sensory and autonomic neurons<sup>2</sup>. Here we report that ARL6IP1, another ER-shaping protein that contains a reticulon homology domain and is associated with sensory loss<sup>3</sup>, interacts with FAM134B and participates in the formation of heteromeric multi-protein clusters required for ER-phagy. Moreover, ubiquitination of ARL6IP1 promotes this process. Accordingly, disruption of Arl6ip1 in mice causes an expansion of ER sheets in sensory neurons that degenerate over time. Primary cells obtained from Arl6ip1-deficient mice or from patients display incomplete budding of ER membranes and severe impairment of ER-phagy flux. Therefore, we propose that the clustering of ubiquitinated ER-shaping proteins facilitates the dynamic remodelling of the ER during ER-phagy and is important for neuronal maintenance.

### Keywords
Amfr, Arl6ip1 ubiquitination

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
Goethe University

### Submitter
Adriana Covarrubias-Pinto

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.


