### Accession
PXD029647

### Title
Protein-protein interactions of BRG1 or BRG1-HSA in SW13 cells

### Description
The SWI/SNF complex remodels chromatin in an ATP-dependent manner through the ATPase subunits BRG1 and BRM. Chromatin remodeling alters nucleosome structure to change gene expression, however aberrant remodeling and gene expression can result in cancer. The function and localization on chromatin of the SWI/SNF complex depends on the protein makeup of the complex. Here we report the protein-protein interactions of wild-type BRG1 or mutant BRG1 in which the HSA domain has been deleted (BRG1-HSA). We demonstrate the interaction of BRG1 with most SWI/SNF complex members and a failure of a number of these members to interact with BRG1-HSA. These results demonstrate that the HSA domain of BRG1 is a critical interaction platform for the correct formation of SWI/SNF remodeling complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were scraped into conical tubes and resuspended in 1% formaldehyde and crosslinked for 10 minutes at room temperature. Crosslinks were halted by the addition of glycine to a final concentration of 125mM and incubated for 10 minutes. Cells were washed with PBS 3 times and then spun at 600xg for 10 minutes at room temperature. Pelleted cells were resuspended in 5 cell volumes of High Salt Extraction Buffer (100mM Tris pH 8, 420mM NaCl, 3mM MgCl2, 1% NP-40, 0.1% SDS) for 30 minutes on ice, followed by 5 passages through a 25-gauge needle. Pierce Universal Nuclease (ThermoFisher Scientific) was added at 1:1000 of the total volume and incubated with rotation for 1 hour at 4 degrees. The lysates were spun at 16000xg for 10 minutes at 4 degrees and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was determined using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay and 2 milligrams of total protein lysate was diluted 1:5 with IP Buffer (100mM Tris pH 8, 1mM EDTA, 100mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40) and 5 micrograms of one antibody was added and rotated overnight at 4 degrees. The following day, 20 microliters per sample Protein G Dynabeads (ThermoFisher Scientific) were washed with IP Buffer, resuspended in 20 microliters of IP Buffer per sample, and 20 microliters of beads were added to each sample, followed by 3 hours of rotation at 4 degrees. Bead-antibody conjugates were placed on a magnetic stand and then were washed three times with IP Wash Buffer (50mM Tris pH 7.5) by adding 1 milliliter of IP Wash Buffer and rotating at 4 degrees for 5 minutes followed by placing on magnetic stand and removal of the supernatant. After three washes with IP Wash Buffer, beads were washed two times in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and snap frozen before mass spectrometry. Bead samples were digested with 250 ng trypsin in 100 uL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8) overnight at 37 oC. Beads were pelleted and the supernatant transferred to a clean tube.  The beads were then resuspended with 100 uL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8) and heated to 75oC, cooled back to 37oC and 250 ng fresh trypsin added and allowed to incubate for an additional 4 hours at 37 oC.  Beads were again pelleted and the supernatants combined.  Peptides were then desalted using SampliQ C18 (100 mg x 1 mL) (Agilent) and a positive pressure manifold with N2 gas as the head pressure.  The SPE cartridges were first pre-conditioned by passing 1 mL of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile through the cartridges and then equilibrating with 2 x 0.5 mL water.  After sample loading, 3 x 0.5 mL water was passed over the cartridges followed by an elution with 2 x 0.3 mL 0.1% formic acid in 1:1 water:acetonitrile.  The eluants were dried to completion using a CentriVap Concentrator (Labconco) and then resuspended in 20 uL of water prior to LC-MS analyses. Protein digests were analyzed by LC/MS on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) interfaced with a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation) equipped with a 75 um x 150 mm BEH dC18 column (1.8 um particle, Waters Corporation) and a C18 trapping column (180 um × 20 mm) with 5 um particle size at a flow rate of 400 nL/min.  The trapping column was positioned in-line of the analytical column and upstream of a micro-tee union which was used both as a vent for trapping and as a liquid junction. Trapping was performed using the initial solvent composition.  5 uL of digested sample was injected onto the column. Peptides were eluted by using a linear gradient from 99% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water (v/v)) and 1% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v)) to 40% solvent B over 60 minutes. For the mass spectrometry, a data acquisition method was employed with an exclusion time of 15 seconds and an exclusion of +1 charge states.  The mass spectrometer was equipped with a NanoFlex source and was used in the positive ion mode.  Instrument parameters were as follows: sheath gas, 0; auxiliary gas, 0; sweep gas, 0; spray voltage, 2.7 kV; capillary temperature, 275 °C; S-lens, 60; scan range (m/z) of 200 to 2000; 2 m/z isolation window; resolution: 70,000; automated gain control (AGC), 2 × 10e5 ions; and a maximum IT of 200 ms.  Mass calibration was performed before data acquisition using the Pierce LTQ Velos Positive Ion Calibration mixture (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peak list were generated from the LC/MS data using Mascot Distiller (Matrix Science) and the resulting peak lists were searched using the Spectrum Mill software package (Agilent) against a species limited (human/rodent) Swissprot protein database.  Search settings included: up to 2 missed cleavages, variable methionine oxidation, 20 ppm precursor mass accuracy and 50 ppm fragment ion mass accuracy.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Sw13, Chromatin, Brg1, Swi/snf

### Affiliations
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
Co-Director – Mass Spectrometry Research and Support Group National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 111 TW Alexander Drive MD F0-04 Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709 Phone:  (984) 287-3374

### Submitter
Jason Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Jason Grant Williams
Co-Director – Mass Spectrometry Research and Support Group National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 111 TW Alexander Drive MD F0-04 Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709 Phone:  (984) 287-3374


