### Accession
PXD038112

### Title
Genome sequence and annotation of the fungus Periconia digitata

### Description
The Periconia genus belongs to the phylum Ascomycota, order Pleosporales, family Periconiaceae. Periconia is widespread in many habitats but little is known about its ecology. Several species produce bioactive molecules, among them, Periconia digitata extracts were shown to be deadly active against the pine wilt nematode. The strain CNCM I-4278, here identified as P. digitata was able to inhibit the plant pathogen Phytophthora parasitica. Since P. digitata has great potential as biocontrol agent and the only other genome available in the Periconiaceae family is that of Periconia macrospinosa, which is quite fragmentary, we generated long-read genomic data for P. digitata. Thanks to the PacBio Hifi sequencing technology, we obtained a high-quality genome with a total length of 38,967,494 bp, represented by 13 haploid chromosomes. The transcriptomic and proteomic data strengthen and support the genome annotation. Besides representing a new reference genome within the Periconiaceae, this work will also contribute in our understanding of the Eukaryotic tree of life. Not least, opens new possibilities to the biotechnological use of the species.

### Sample Protocol
P. digitata was cultivated in 500 mL plastic Roux bottle on 50 mL of 5 different sterile liquid media over 7 days in the dark at 24 °C. The media were chosen for their ability to change the strain phenotype (see RNA extraction above);  and two biological replicates were prepared. The mycelium was recovered by filtration on GF/C Whatman glass filter and rinsed with water. It was ground using liquid nitrogen then sequentially extracted by Tris 20 mM pH 8, 10 mM DTT (dithiothreitol) , same saline (200 mM NaCl) buffer, same buffer with  8 M urea and same buffer with 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (1 mL per 300 mg fresh material weight). Centrifugations (13200 rpm, 5 min, 4°C) were achieved after each extraction and the 4 supernatants were recovered. The two first buffers (alone and saline) were immediately adjusted to 8 M urea. All these fractions were incubated at 37 °C for 15 min then alkylated by iodoacetamide (41.6 mM) during 15 minutes at room temperature. After a short dialysis against water, the samples were digested by trypsin with  1/80  (w/w) trypsin/total protein ratio (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega) according to the manufacturer recommendations. The samples were then cleaned-up on a C18 SPE cartridge (100 mg, NUCLEODUR® 100-30 C18 end capped, Macherey Nagel) equilibrated in H2O 0.1% formic acid (FA). After washing with H2O 0.1% FA, peptides were eluted with acetonitrile (CH3CN)-0.1% FA / water-0.1% FA 40/60 then 70/30 (v/v). Both fractions were pooled

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed by nanoUHPLC-HRMS (nanoElute – timsTOFProII, Bruker Daltonics). 5 µL of sample were injected on an Aurora column (75µm id x 250 mm, C18, 1.6 µm, ionOpticks) with a flow rate of 200 nL/min at 50°C. The mobile phase was a gradient of  CH3CN-0.1 % FA (B) in 0.1% FA-H2O (A) as follows: 5% B for 1 min, 5% to 13% of B for 18 min, 13% to 19% of B for 7 min, 19% to 22% of B for 4 min, 22% to 95% of B for 3 min. The TimsTOFpro was equipped with the CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray ion source. MS and MSMS data were acquired in a positive mode, in a PASEF (Parallel Accumulation -Serial Fragmentation) data dependent acquisition (DDA), TIMS ON mode from 100 to 1700 m/z mass range (TimsControl version 2.0.53.0). Ion mobility resolution (1/K0) was set to 0.70–1.10 V·s/cm2 over a ramp time of 180 ms. To exclude low m/z, singly charged ions from PASEF precursor selection, a polygon filter was applied in the m/z and ion mobility space.

### Publication Abstract
The Periconia fungal genus belongs to the phylum Ascomycota, order Pleosporales, family Periconiaceae. Periconia are found in many habitats, but little is known about their ecology. Several species from this genus produce bioactive molecules. Periconia digitata extracts were shown to be deadly active against the pine wilt nematode. Furthermore, P. digitata was shown to inhibit the plant pathogenic oomycete Phytophthora parasitica. Because P. digitata has great potential as a biocontrol agent and high quality genomic resources are still lacking in the Periconiaceae family, we generated long-read genomic data for P. digitata. Using PacBio Hifi sequencing technology, we obtained a highly-contiguous genome assembled in 13 chromosomes and totaling ca. 39&#x2009;Mb. In addition, we produced a reference transcriptome, based on 12 different culture conditions, and proteomic data to support the genome annotation. Besides representing a new reference genome within the Periconiaceae, this work will contribute to our better understanding of the Eukaryotic tree of life and opens new possibilities in terms of biotechnological applications.

### Keywords
Ascomycota, Proteogenomics, Y3 strain, Agecanonix, Panoramix, Pleosporales, Biocontrol, Abraracoursix, Periconia digitata

### Affiliations
UMR Institut Sophia Agrobiotech, INRAE 1355, CNRS and Université Côte d’Azur, 400, Route des Chappes, BP 167, 06903 Sophia Antipolis Cedex, France

### Submitter
Cyril Van Ghelder

### Lab Head
Dr Aurélie Seassau
UMR Institut Sophia Agrobiotech, INRAE 1355, CNRS and Université Côte d’Azur, 400, Route des Chappes, BP 167, 06903 Sophia Antipolis Cedex, France


