### Accession
PXD033523

### Title
Chemical genetic validation of CSNK2 substrates using an inhibitor-resistant mutant in combination with triple SILAC quantitative phosphoproteomics

### Description
Casein Kinase 2 (CSNK2) is an extremely pleiotropic, ubiquitously expressed protein kinase involved in the regulation of numerous key biological processes. Mapping the CSNK2-dependent phosphoproteome is necessary for better characterization of its fundamental role in cellular signalling. While ATP-competitive inhibitors have enabled the identification of many putative kinase substrates, compounds targeting the highly conserved ATP-binding pocket often exhibit off-target effects limiting their utility for definitive kinase-substrate assignment. To overcome this limitation, we devised a strategy combining chemical genetics and quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify and validate physiological CSNK2 substrates. We engineered U2OS cells expressing exogenous wild type CSNK2A1 (WT) or a triple mutant (TM, V66A/H160D/I174A) with substitutions at residues important for inhibitor binding.  These cells were treated with CX-4945, a clinical-stage inhibitor of CSNK2, and analyzed using large-scale triple SILAC (Stable Isotope Labelling of Amino Acids in Cell Culture) quantitative phosphoproteomics. In contrast to wild-type CSNK2A1, CSNK2A1-TM retained activity in the presence of CX-4945 enabling identification and validation of several physiological CSNK2 substrates on the basis of their increased phosphorylation in cells expressing CSNK2A1-TM.  Based on high conservation within the kinase family, we expect that this strategy can be broadly adapted for identification of other kinase-substrate relationships.

### Sample Protocol
Human osteosarcoma U2OS cells expressing the tetracycline responsible element of Flp-In™ T-REx system were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Wisent) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, HyClone), 100 μg/mL streptomycin and 100 units/mL penicillin at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Following the recommendations of Flp-In™ T-REx cell line development of Thermo Fisher Scientific we developed and characterized FT-U2OS cell lines stably expressing the wild type CSNK2A1-WT (C-terminal HA tag) or inhibitor resistant forms of triple mutant CSNK2A1-TM (V66A/H16D/I174A, C-terminal HA tag) with tight tetracycline regulation. SILAC-dropout DMEM (Wisent) lacking L-arginine and L-lysine was supplemented with isotope-encoded L-arginine (Arg-6) (13C6) and L-lysine (Lys-4) (4,4,5,5-D4) (Silantes) at respective concentrations of 86.2 mg/L (0.398 mM) and 61.16 mg/L (0.274 mM) to create a “Medium” labelled cell medium (M). “Heavy” labelled medium (H) was created by supplementing the SILAC-dropout DMEM with isotope encoded L-arginine (Arg-10) (13C6, 15N4) and L-lysine (Lys-8) (13C6, 15N2) at respective concentrations of 87.7 mg/L (0.397 mM) and 52.4 mg/L (0.274 mM). “Light” labelled medium (L) was created using the SILAC-dropout DMEM and supplementing it with unlabeled L-arginine (R0) (83.9 mg/mL) and L-lysine (K0) (60.04 mg/mL). All media used for SILAC studies were supplemented with 10% of 10 kDa dialyzed FBS (Wisent), penicillin (100 U/mL), streptomycin (100 mg/mL) and L-proline (400 mg/mL). Following 21 days, isotope incorporation was verified by LC-MS/MS to be >95%.  The WT (L, M) and TM (H) cell lines were treated with 1 µg/mL tetracycline for 48 hours (cells were 80% confluent) to induce expression of the appropriate form of CSNK2A1. “Medium” WT and “Heavy” TM cells were treated with 30 µM CX-4945 for 4 hours. “Light” WT cells were treated with equal volume of DMSO vehicle. Experiments were carried out with five biological replicates of each treatment.  Following treatment +/- CX-4945, the cells were lysed following the protocol established by Humphrey et al (Nat Biotechnol. 2015;33(9):990-5.). An equal amount (0.5 mg) of lysate from each treatment—L, M, and H—were mixed for five biological replicates. Proteins were then precipitated by chloroform and methanol extraction method (Anal Biochem. 1984;138(1):141-3.) and LysC and tryptic digested in 1 mL of 5% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) was added at 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio and incubated for 4 hours at 37 °C with gentle agitation. Additional trypsin (Promega) was added at 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio and the sample was incubated at 37 °C for 16 hours with gentle agitation. For phosphoproteome analysis, phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads (Titansphere TiO Bulk 10 μm, Canadian Life Science) and styrenedivinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonated (SDB-RPS) (3M Empore) StageTips, as described by Humphrey et al. Enriched phosphopeptide solutions were acidified using 0.1% formic acid and 1 µg was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis. For the full proteome analysis, digested proteins were desalted using a C18 StageTip (3M Empore) (Nat Protoc. 2007;2(8):1896-906.). Finally, 1 µg of enriched phosphoproteome and 0.7µg of proteome was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometric analysis was done using an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) connected to a NanoFlex (Thermo Electron Corp., Waltham, MA) nanospray ionization source with a source voltage of 2.4 KV. Samples were injected using a NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) onto a Symmetry C18 trapping column (20 mm x 180 μm i.d., 5 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min in 99% mobile phase A (0.1% FA (v/v), 1% mobile phase B (0.1% FA (v/v) in ACN) for 4 minutes. Samples were then separated on a NanoAcquity Peptide BEH C18 analytical column (250 mm x 75 μm i.d., 1.7 μm, 130 Å) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a linear gradient of increasing mobile phase B from initial condition 5% to 7.5% over 1 minute, followed by 7.5% to 25% over 179 minutes, 25% to 32.5% over 40 minutes, and culminating at 60% at 240 minutes. Mass spectrometer was operated by Thermo XCalibur software (version 2.7.0) in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using an FT/IT/CID Top 20 scheme.  MS1 survey scans were performed at 120,000 resolution from 400 – 1450 m/z with full Automatic Gain Control (AGC) set to 106 and an isolation window of 1.0 m/z. The top 20 most abundant ions were selected for MS2. A lock mass ion was enabled at 445.120025 m/z. Peptide ions were fragmented using a CID (Collision-Induced Dissociation) with Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) set to 35%, an activation time of 10 ms, and a Q value of 0.25. Data-dependent MS2 scans were acquired in the linear ion trap using rapid scan type, with a dynamic exclusion window of 30 seconds. Five biological replicates were analyzed without technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data of the five biological replicates were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich and searched against the Human UniProtKB database (May 9, 2020), which contained 20,362 entries.  Default settings of MaxQuant were used with minor changes: multiplicity was set to 3, medium labels were selected as Arg6 and Lys4 and heavy labels were selected as Arg8 and Lys10; maximum number of 3 missed cleavages was chosen for trypsin/P; carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification while oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-terminal), deamidation (NQ), and phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modifications for phosphopeptide enriched samples while the proteome data were searched using analogue modifications yet excluding the phosphorylation (STY). For quantification, unmodified peptides as well as those with fixed and variable modifications, excluding phosphorylation (STY), were included. “Re-quantify” and “Match Between Runs” were selected using default parameters. The maximum number of variable modifications was set to 5. The minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40, and the decoy-database setting was “Revert.” The False Discovery Rate (FDR) of PSM, protein and site of 0.01 was used.

### Publication Abstract
Casein Kinase 2 (CSNK2) is an extremely pleiotropic, ubiquitously expressed protein kinase involved in the regulation of numerous key biological processes. Mapping the CSNK2-dependent phosphoproteome is necessary for better characterization of its fundamental role in cellular signalling. While ATP-competitive inhibitors have enabled the identification of many putative kinase substrates, compounds targeting the highly conserved ATP-binding pocket often exhibit off-target effects limiting their utility for definitive kinase-substrate assignment. To overcome this limitation, we devised a strategy combining chemical genetics and quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify and validate CSNK2 substrates. We engineered U2OS cells expressing exogenous wild type CSNK2A1 (WT) or a triple mutant (TM, V66A/H160D/I174A) with substitutions at residues important for inhibitor binding. These cells were treated with CX-4945, a clinical-stage inhibitor of CSNK2, and analyzed using large-scale triple SILAC (Stable Isotope Labelling of Amino Acids in Cell Culture) quantitative phosphoproteomics. In contrast to wild-type CSNK2A1, CSNK2A1-TM retained activity in the presence of CX-4945 enabling identification and validation of several CSNK2 substrates on the basis of their increased phosphorylation in cells expressing CSNK2A1-TM. Based on high conservation within the kinase family, we expect that this strategy can be broadly adapted for identification of other kinase-substrate relationships.

### Keywords
Csnk2, Protein kinase ck2, Phosphoproteomics, Cx-4945, Lc-ms/ms, Silac, U2os cells

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Department of Oncology, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada
University of Western Ontario

### Submitter
Kristina Jurcic

### Lab Head
Dr David William Litchfield
Department of Biochemistry, Department of Oncology, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada


