### Accession
PXD022768

### Title
Chicken liver TMT-based proteomics

### Description
In order to investigate the chicken SLCO1B3 gene functin on the liver metabolism, we used the Yimeng blue eggshell and brown eggshell chickens as the chicken liver SLCO1B3 gene knock-down animal to do the proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, the tissue was homogenized with lysis buﬀer (8M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 20mM Tris-base, 30mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mg/10 μl) and protease inhibitors (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) on ice. The homogenate was centrifuged at 15,000g, 4°C for 20min. The collected supernatant was precipitated with three volumes of ice-cold acetone for 30min. Then the mixture was centrifuged at 15,000g, 4°C for 20min. The precipitated pellets were re-suspended in 100µL of 5M urea, followed by dissolving in four volumes of 40mM NH4HCO3. The final protein concentration was quantified using a BCA assay. The protein sample was mixed with a solution of 10mM DTT for 1 h to break the proteins’ disulfide bonds. Then, it was incubated in 50mM iodoacetamide for alkylation at room temperature for 1 h in the dark. Proteins were digested using trypsin (sequencing grade) in a volume ratio of 1:50 (enzyme/protein) at 37°C for 14 h. The enzymatic digestion was stopped by adding 1 μL of formic acid to the solution. Finally, peptides were concentrated using a SpeedVac system (RVC 2-18, Marin Christ, Osterod, Germany) for the following LC-MS analysis. Each 25-100μg sample peptide was labeled with TMT Label Reagent for 1 hour at room temperature and quenched with hydroxylamine for 15 minutes according to the manual of TMT Mass Tagging Kits and Reagents (90064, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA ). Combine samples and store at -80°C. Peptides were separated and analyzed with a HPLC system (NCS3500; Dionex, Sunnyvale, USA) coupled to Thermo Scientific Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The peptide sample was loaded onto an LC-MS system. The nano scale liquid chromatography system U3000 nano (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc，USA) was coupled with a mass spectrometer Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, USA) via the nano electrospray source. Reverse-phase chromatography and a trap column packed with 2 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter fused silica trap column containing 3.0 μm Aqua C18 beads (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, USA) were used for peptide enrichment. The peptides were loaded onto the trap column at a ﬂow rate of 5 μL/min, and then eluted from the analytical column (25cm long, 75μm inner diameter fused silica column filing with 2.0 μm Aqua C18 beads, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptides were gradient eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with the following conditions: 100% buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to 3% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) for 5 min, 9% to 18% buffer B for 31.5 min, 25 to 30% buffer B for 2 min, then 80% buffer B for 5 min. The eluted peptides from the analytical column were directly injected into the mass spectrometer via nano-ESI source. Ion signals were collected in a data-dependent mode with the following settings:  full scan resolution at 70,000, scan range: m/z 350-1,600; precursor ions were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation mode with MS/MS scan resolution of 3500, isolation window 2 m/z, normalized collision energy of 29, loop count 20. Dynamic exclusion was also used (charge exclusion: unassigned 1 ≥6; peptide match: preferred; exclude isotopes: on; dynamic exclusion: 10 s). The MS/MS data was collected and saved in raw files through the Xcalibur software (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc).High mass resolution was utilized for peptide identification and high energy collision dissociation (HCD) was used for reporter ion quantification. Search parameters were trypsin specificity; carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification; oxidation and phosphorylation as variable modifications, with two allowed missed cleavages per peptide; three maximum allowed variable PTM per peptide Precursor mass tolerance was set at 15 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance at 0.02 Da. Protein identifications were only considered confident if at least two unique peptides with at least two spectra were identified.

### Publication Abstract
Solute carrier organic anion transporter 1B3 (SLCO1B3) is an important liver primarily highly expressed gene, its encoded protein (OATP1B3) involved in the transport of multi-specific endogenous and exogenous substances. We previously reported that an EAV-HP inserted mutation (IM+) in the 5' flanking region of SLCO1B3 was the causative mutation of chicken blue eggs, and a further research showed that IM+&#x2009;significantly reduced the expression of SLCO1B3 in liver. Herein, we confirmed a cholate response element (IR-1) played an important role in activating SLCO1B3 and in vitro experiments showed that the activation of IR-1 can be significantly reduced by the EAV-HP IM+&#x2009;. We performed transcriptome and proteomic analysis using the same set of IM+&#x2009;and IM- liver tissues from Yimeng hens (a Chinese indigenous breed) to study the effect of SLCO1B3 and OATP1B3 expression reduction on chicken liver function. The results showed that common differential expression pathways were screened out from both transcriptome and proteome, in which fatty acid metabolism and drug metabolism-cytochrome P450 were significantly enriched in the KEGG analysis. The lipid-related metabolism was weakened in IM+&#x2009;group, which was validated by serum biochemical assay. We unexpectedly found that EAV-HP fragment was highly expressed in the liver of the IM+&#x2009;chickens. We cloned the EAV-HP full-length transcript and obtained the complete open reading frame. It is worth noting that there was some immune related differential expressed genes, such as NFKBIZ, NFKBIA, and IL1RL1, which were higher expressed in the IM+&#x2009;group, which may due to the high expression of EAV-HP. Our study showed that EAV-HP IM+&#x2009;reduced the expression of SLCO1B3 in liver, resulting in the decrease of fatty metabolism and exogenous substance transport capacity. The mutation itself also expressed in the liver and may be involved in the immune process. The mechanism needs further study.

### Keywords
Liver, Proteome, Chicken

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University
China Agricultural University, 100193, China

### Submitter
Jianfei Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Xuemei Deng
China Agricultural University, 100193, China


