### Accession
PXD033301

### Title
4E-BP1 counteracts human stem cell senescence via maintaining mitochondrial homeostasis

### Description
Although the mTOR-4E-BP1 signaling pathway is implicated in aging and aging-related disorders, the role of 4E-BP1 in regulating human stem cell homeostasis remains largely unknown. Here, we report that the expression of 4E-BP1 decreases along with the senescence of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). Genetic inactivation of 4E-BP1 in hMSCs accelerates cellular senescence, compromises mitochondrial respiration and increases mitochondrial ROS production. Mechanistically, the absence of 4E-BP1 destabilizes proteins in mitochondrial respiration complexes, especially several key subunits of the complex III including UQCRC2. Ectopic expression of 4E-BP1 attenuates mitochondrial abnormalities and alleviates cellular senescence in 4E-BP1-deficient hMSCs as well as in physiologically aged hMSCs. These findings together demonstrate that 4E-BP1 functions as a geroprotector to alleviate human stem cell senescence and maintain mitochondrial homeostasis, particularly for the mitochondrial respiration complex III and provide a new potential target to counteract human stem cell senescence.

### Sample Protocol
hMSCs were digested by TrypLE into single cells and lysed by urea to harvest total proteins. The total proteins were analyzed by TMT protein labeling. Protein from each group was labeled with TMT6 label reagents, according to the protocol supplied by the manufacturer. The data were then analyzed by the ratio (KO VS WT).

### Data Protocol
Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were filtered after the Student’s t-test, if their P-value < 0.05 and absolute average log2 ratio > 0.2. GO term enrichment analysis was performed using Metascape (https://metascape.org/). The network of enriched terms was generated with Metascape and visualized with Cytoscape (v3.8.2). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using GSEA software (v4.0.3).

### Publication Abstract
Although the mTOR-4E-BP1 signaling pathway is implicated in aging and aging-related disorders, the role of 4E-BP1 in regulating human stem cell homeostasis remains largely unknown. Here, we report that the expression of 4E-BP1 decreases along with the senescence of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). Genetic inactivation of 4E-BP1 in hMSCs compromises mitochondrial respiration, increases mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, and accelerates cellular senescence. Mechanistically, the absence of 4E-BP1 destabilizes proteins in mitochondrial respiration complexes, especially several key subunits of complex III including UQCRC2. Ectopic expression of 4E-BP1 attenuates mitochondrial abnormalities and alleviates cellular senescence in 4E-BP1-deficient hMSCs as well as in physiologically aged hMSCs. These f&#x200a;indings together demonstrate that 4E-BP1 functions as a geroprotector to mitigate human stem cell senescence and maintain mitochondrial homeostasis, particularly for the mitochondrial respiration complex III, thus providing a new potential target to counteract human stem cell senescence.

### Keywords
Eif4ebp1;mitochondria;oxidative phosphorylation

### Affiliations
17812007228
+8617812007228

### Submitter
ji zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Qianzhao Ji
+8617812007228


