### Accession
PXD006692

### Title
Proteomic Investigation of EVLP Tissue Lung Lobes

### Description
The aim of this work concerns the development of a proteomics workflow based on LC-MS/MS useful for a comprehensive study of molecular mechanisms related to the effect on the lung subjected  to EVLP

### Sample Protocol
In the present work, we report the proteomic investigation of a reproducible EVLP animal model. Specifically, three groups, native, pre-EVLP and post-EVLP, were analyzed. Protein extraction Frozen lobes For proteomic analysis of frozen samples, each lobe was suspended in 300 µL 0.1 M H4HCO3 pH 7.9 buffer with 10% acetonitrile and homogenized in ice. The protein concentration was assayed using dotMETRIC and the membrane proteins were solubilised by adding Rapigest SF reagent at the final concentration of 0.33% (w/v). The resulting suspensions were incubated under stirring at 100°C for 5 minutes. The digestion was carried out on 50 µg ± 0.5 µg proteins of each samples by adding Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) overnight at 37°C. An additional aliquot of 2 µg of trypsin (1:25 w/w) was added in the morning, and the digestion continued for 4 hours. Moreover, the addition of 0.5 % Trifluoroacetic acid stopped the enzymatic reaction, and a subsequent incubation at 37°C for 45 minutes completed the RapiGest acid hydrolysis. The water immiscible degradation products were removed by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 minutes. Finally, the tryptic digest mixture was desalted using PepClean C-18 spin column and was resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water. Formalin-Fixed Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) tissues Paraffin-embedded tissue sections were dewaxed by means of xylene deparaffinization. Briefly, each lung biopsy was cut up to obtain five 10 µm-sections from the same block. Slices were placed in a 1.5 ml collection tube and added to xylene. Following a 10 min-incubation at room temperature, samples were centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 2 min. Supernatants were discarded and pellets underwent two additional xylene washes.  Next, samples were re-hydrated using increasing ethanol dilutions (100%, 96%, and 70% ethanol). Dry pellets were stored at -80°C.  The dewaxed tissues from 3 pre-EVLP samples (IIF11, IIG13 and IIH15), were solubilized in RapigestTM SF reagent at the final concentration of 0.25% (w/v) and incubated under stirring, first at 100°C for 20 minutes and sequently at 80°C for 2 hours. Then the protein concentration was assayed using dotMETRIC, and 24 µg ± 2.1 µg of proteins from each sample was digested by Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:25 (w/w) overnight at 37°C. An additional aliquot of 0.5 µg of trypsin (1:12,5 w/w) was added in the morning, and the digestion continued for 4 hours. The enzymatic digestion was stopped with the addition of 0.5% TFA, and a subsequent incubation at 37°C for 45 minutes completed the RapiGest acid hydrolysis. The water immiscible degradation products were removed by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 minutes. Finally, the tryptic digest mixture was desalted using PepClean C-18 spin column and was resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water. Proteomic analysis Liquid Chromatography Trypsin digested mixture were analyzed using nanoLC System combined with cHiPLC system in trap-elute mode. Briefly, samples were first loaded on the cHiPLC trap (200 µm x 500 µm ChromXP C18-CL, 3 µm, 120 Å) and washed with the loading pump running in isocratic mode with 0.1% formic acid in water for 10 minutes at a flow of 3 µL/min. The automatic switching of cHiPLC ten-port valve then eluted the trapped mixture on a nano cHiPLC column (75 µm x 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL, 3 µm, 120 Å) throught a 65 minutes gradient of 5-40% of eluent B (eluent A, 0.1% formic acid in water; eluent B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Trap and column were maintained at 35°C for retention time stability. Mass spectrometry MS spectra were acquired using a QExactive mass spectrometer, equipped with a EASY-Spray ion source. Easy spray was achieved using a EASY-Spray Emitter (nanoflow 7 µm ID Transfer Line 20µm x 50 cm) held to 2.1 kV, while the ion transfer capillary was held at 220 °C. Full mass spectra were recorded in positive ion mode over a 400-1600 m/z range and with a resolution setting of 70000 FWHM (Full Width at Half Maximum) (@ m/z 200) with 1 microscan per second. Each full scan was followed by 7 MS/MS events, acquired at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, sequentially generated in a data dependent manner on the top seven most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥ 2, selected with an isolation window of 2 m/z from the survey scan, fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 30 and dynamically excluded for 30 sec. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 50 and 200 ms and the ion target value were set to 106 and 105, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data handling Database search The experimental MS/MS spectra were correlated to tryptic peptide sequences by comparison with theoretical MS/MS spectra obtained by in silico digestion of the Rattus norvegicus protein database (about 79609 entries), downloaded (January 2014) from the National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) website (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). This allowed the identification of peptide sequences and related proteins. MS/MS were processed using the SEQUEST search engine of BioWorks platform. The confidence of protein identification, particularly when using data from a single peptide, was assured by applying stringent criteria of filtering: the MS/MS tolerance was set to 1.00 Da; the precursor ion tolerance was set to 50 ppm (part-per milion); and the intensity threshold was set to 100. Moreover, searches were performed with no enzyme. Finally, the SEQUEST output data were filtered by setting the peptide probability to 1 × 10−3, a minimum correlation score values (Xcorr) of 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0 for single-,double-, triple-, and quadruple-charged ions, respectively, and the consensus score higher than 10. The output data obtained from the SEQUEST software were aligned, compared ad processed using an in-house algorithm, namely, the Multidimensional Algorithm Protein Map (MAProMa).

### Publication Abstract
Ex vivo lung perfusion (EVLP) is an emerging procedure that allows organ preservation, assessment and reconditioning, increasing the number of marginal donor lungs for transplantation. However, physiological and airflow measurements are unable to unveil the molecular mechanisms responsible of EVLP beneficial effects on lung graft and monitor the proper course of the treatment. Thus, it is urgent to find specific biomarkers that possess these requirements but also accurate and reliable techniques that identify them. The purpose of this study is to give an overview on the potentiality of shotgun proteomic platforms in characterizing the status and the evolution of metabolic pathways during EVLP in order to find new potential EVLP-related biomarkers. A nanoLC-MS/MS system was applied to the proteome analysis of lung tissues from an optimized rat model in three experimental groups: native, pre- and post-EVLP. Technical and biological repeatability were evaluated and, together with clustering analysis, underlined the good quality of data produced. In-house software and bioinformatics tools allowed the label-free extraction of differentially expressed proteins among the three examined conditions and the network visualization of the pathways mainly involved. These promising findings encourage further proteomic investigations of the molecular mechanisms behind EVLP procedure.

### Keywords
Evlp, Lung, Proteomics

### Affiliations
ITB-CNR
ITB-CNR, Italy

### Submitter
Valentina Roffia

### Lab Head
Dr Pierluigi Mauri
ITB-CNR, Italy


