### Accession
PXD003228

### Title
Interaction partners of arginyl-tRNA protein transferase in the moss Physcomitrella patens

### Description
Protein arginylation is a post-translational modification at the N-terminus of proteins and is crucial for viability and physiology in higher eukaryotes. The lack of arginylation causes severe developmental defects in plants and embryo lethality in Drosophila and in mice. Although several studies investigated impact and function of the responsible enzyme, the arginyl-tRNA protein transferase (ATE) in plants, identification of arginylated proteins by mass spectrometry was not hitherto achieved. In the present study, we report the identification of targets and interaction partners of ATE in the model plant Physcomitrella patens by mass spectrometry employing two different immuno-affinity strategies and a recently established transgenic ATE:GUS reporter line (Schuessele et al., 2015 New Phytol., DOI: 10.1111/nph.13656). Here we use a commercially available antibody against the fused reporter protein (GUS) to pull down ATE and its interacting proteins and validate the in vivo interaction with a class I small heatshock protein via Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET).

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation (CoIP) of interaction partners of ATE 6 g fresh weight of gametophores from ATE:GUS and wild type were harvested from hydroponic ring cultures after 7 d cultivation in darkness and used for CoIP. For the CoIP, an anti-GUS antibody (C-terminal, Sigma Aldrich, G5545) was covalently coupled to Dynabeads (Dynabeeds M270 Epoxy Co-Immunoprecipitation Kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA)). The IP-Buffer was further supplemented with 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT and 0.1% plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Aldrich, P9599) . Three biological CoIP replicates were performed for each CoIP (ATE:GUS and wild type). All steps of the CoIP procedure using Dynabeads were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions employing the cryolysis method. Eluted proteins were precipitated overnight using 5 volumes of cold acetone containing 0.2% DTT at -20°C. The samples were centrifuged at 20,000xg for 15 min at 0°C and the acetone supernatant was discarded. The protein pellet was washed for 1 h in cold acetone without DTT at -20°C. The samples were again centrifuged and the supernatant was discarded. 20 µl from each eluate were precipitated separately for Western Blot analysis. The protein pellets were air-dried and stored at -20°C until further usage. Protein pellets were dissolved in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 2% SDS and reduced at 95°C for 10 min using Reducing Agent (Life Technologies). Alkylation of cysteines was performed at a final concentration of 100 mM iodoacetaminde (IAA) for 20 min at RT. Finally the samples were mixed with Laemmli buffer (Bio-RAD, Munich, Germany) for SDS-PAGE. Western Blot analysis with the sub-fractions of the eluates was performed as described (54) using an anti-rabbit HRP-conjugate secondary antibody (Amersham). MS/MS sample preparation After Coomassie staining (PageBlue, Thermo Scientific), gel slices were excised, chopped to small pieces and destained with 30% ACN (Promochem, Teddington, UK) in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma-Aldrich) for 10 min. The step was repeated until the gel was completely destained. The supernatant was discarded and the gel was equilibrated in 100 µl 100mM NH4HCO3. The supernatant was discarded again and the gel was shrunk with 100 µl ACN for 5 min with gentle shaking. Again, the supernatant was discarded and the gel was vacuum-dried. Digests with trypsin (Promega) or elastase (Promega) were performed overnight at 37°C in 50mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8). About 0.1 µg of protease was used for one gel band. Peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5 % formic acid.   Mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Nano LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray Ion Source and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were applied on a trapping column (2 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 3 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) and separated on an EASY-Spray column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) with a 30 minute linear gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, and 200 nl/min flow rate. MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 30 000 at m/z 400. A TOP5 data-dependent MS/MS method was used and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 7500 at m/z 400 using HCD fragmentation with 30% normalized collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 seconds; unassigned and singly charged precursors were excluded from the selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50 000. Predictive AGC was used with AGC target value of 5e5 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. Lock mass option was applied for internal calibration using background ions from protonated decamethylcyclopentasiloxane (m/z 371.10124).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.4.1.12 (60). Database search was performed with Andromeda, which is integrated in MaxQuant. In addition to these sequences, the search was performed against a database containing common contaminants; a target-decoy database was generated on the fly in MaxQuant by reverse concatenation.  Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (<1% FDR on protein and peptide level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings (e.g. at least 1 razor/unique peptide for identification, 2 allowed missed cleavages) the search was performed against following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation and oxidation (on Met). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. For protein quantitation, the LFQ intensities (61) were used. Proteins with less than two identified razor/unique peptides were dismissed as well as proteins with intensities in only one of the three anti-ATE:GUS-CoIP experiments. Missing LFQ intensities in the control samples were imputed with values close to the baseline if intensities in the corresponding anti-ATE:GUS-CoIP samples were present. Data imputation was performed with values from a standard normal distribution with a mean of the 5% quantile of the combined LFQ intensities and a standard deviation of 0.1. For each of the three replicates, ratios of the ATE:GUS-CoIP protein intensities to the corresponding control intensities were calculated. The log2 transformed ratios were normalized to the mode of the distributions and averaged (mean with standard deviation) for each protein. Adjusted p-values for differential abundance were calculated with the limma package (62) from R/Bioconductor.

### Publication Abstract
Protein arginylation is a posttranslational modification of both N-terminal amino acids of proteins and sidechain carboxylates and can be crucial for viability and physiology in higher eukaryotes. The lack of arginylation causes severe developmental defects in moss, affects the low oxygen response in Arabidopsis thaliana and is embryo lethal in Drosophila and in mice. Although several studies investigated impact and function of the responsible enzyme, the arginyl-tRNA protein transferase (ATE) in plants, identification of arginylated proteins by mass spectrometry was not hitherto achieved. In the present study, we report the identification of targets and interaction partners of ATE in the model plant Physcomitrella patens by mass spectrometry, employing two different immuno-affinity strategies and a recently established transgenic ATE:GUS reporter line (Schuessele et al., 2016 New Phytol. , DOI: 10.1111/nph.13656). Here we use a commercially available antibody against the fused reporter protein (&#x3b2;-glucuronidase) to pull down ATE and its interacting proteins and validate its in vivo interaction with a class I small heatshock protein via F&#xf6;rster resonance energy transfer (FRET). Additionally, we apply and modify a method that already successfully identified arginylated proteins from mouse proteomes by using custom-made antibodies specific for N-terminal arginine. As a result, we identify four arginylated proteins from Physcomitrella patens with high confidence.Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003228 and PXD003232.

### Keywords
Moss, Physcomitrella patens, Lc-ms/ms, Co-ip, Protein interaction

### Affiliations
Rudolf-Virchow-Zentrum for Experimental Biomedicine, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2, 97080 Würzburg, Germany
University Wuerzburg

### Submitter
Jens Vanselow

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Schlosser
Rudolf-Virchow-Zentrum for Experimental Biomedicine, University of Würzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 2, 97080 Würzburg, Germany


