### Accession
PXD014508

### Title
The liver proteome in a mouse model for Ascaris suum resistance and susceptibility – evidence for an altered innate immune response

### Description
Ascariasis is a neglected tropical disease that affects 800 million people worldwide. Whereas most people only experience light worm burden, some people experience heavy worm burdens even after several rounds of chemotherapy, a phenomenon known as predisposition. Such heavy infections are associated with more severe symptoms and increased chronic morbidity. In order to investigate potential mechanisms that may explain the observed predisposition, we infected mice with the porcine ascarid A. suum using an established mouse model with two different mouse strains, C57BL/6J and CBA/Ca, as a model for heavy and light infection. At day 7 post infection we investigated the liver proteome, using shotgun mass spectrometry, of both infected and control mice of each strain. We identified intrinsic differences, between the two mouse strains, in both oxidative phosphorylation proteins and proteins involved in the retinol metabolism. Additionally, we found differences between the two mouse strains in activation of the complement system, where the resistant mouse strain has higher protein abundances for lectin pathway proteins and the susceptible mouse strain has higher protein abundances for complement inhibiting proteins. The resistant mouse strain had a higher abundance of proteins involved in the activation of the complement cascade via the lectin pathway. In contrast, the susceptible strain demonstrated a higher abundance of proteins involved in arresting the complement pathway. In conclusion, we observed clear differences between the two mouse strains both intrinsically and under infection.

### Sample Protocol
Four mice of both C57BL/6JOlaHsd (Comparative Medicine Unit, Trinity College Dublin) and CBA/Ca (Harlan laboratories) strains were infected with 1000 embryonated A. suum ova (kindly supplied by Peter Nejsum, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, The University of Copenhagen, Denmark). The animals were euthanized using cervical dislocation at day 7 p.i. and the livers of these mice and their matching controls were extracted and each lobe was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen separately and stored at -80°C. Larval counts on lung tissue were performed on day 7 p.i. on five mice of both strains in order to confirm the difference in larval burden between the strains using the modified Baermann technique. The larval pellet was suspended in 5 ml of 0.9% v/v saline and 6% v/v formalin. The solutions were agitated prior to larval count in order to obtain a homogenous larval distribution in the samples and a 2 ml aliquot was applied to a nematode counting slide (Chalex corporation) and the number of larvae were estimated.  The left lobes of seven days p.i. livers were homogenized in lysis buffer (LB) comprising 6M urea, 2M thiourea, supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Complete Mini). In order to remove cellular debris, the samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000 × g to pellet any cellular debris. 500 µl of this lysate was added to 500 µl LB and quantified using the Qubit System (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s instructions. 75 µg of total protein was removed and purified using a 2D Clean Up Kit (GE Healthcare) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 50 µl of resuspension buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1 MTris-HCl, pH 8.0), requantified and 20 µg was removed for in solution trypsin digest. 105 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1µl DL-dithiothreitol was added to each protein sample and the resulting mixture was incubated for 20 min at 56°C to reduce cysteine disulphide bridges. Cysteines were alkylated by adding 2.7 µl of iodoacetamide (0.55M) and incubated at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. 1 µl of both 1% (w/v) Protease max (Promega) and 0.5 µg/µl trypsin (Promega) were added and the samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. The next day the samples were briefly spun and acidified with 1µl of trifluoroacetic acid for 5 min at room temperature. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 rcf for 10 min and the supernatant, comprising the digested peptides was removed and purified using C18 Spin Columns (Pierce) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were lyophilised using a Speedyvac (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) for 2 hours at 39°C and stored at 4°C. On the day of mass spectrometry, the peptides were resuspended in loading buffer for QExactive (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid), sonicated for 2 min and centrifuged for 5 min at 13,400 rpm. The remaining supernatant was used for mass spectrometry analysis. 1 µg of tryptic peptides was loaded onto a QExactive (ThermoFisher Scientific) high-resolution accurate mass spectrometer, connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. A 50 cm column was used to separate the proteins using a 4 to 40% acetonitrile gradient with a 130 min reverse-phase gradient at a 250 nl/min flow rate. Data was collected using the automatic data dependent switching mode. A full MS scan was set at a resolution of 70,000 with a scan range of 400-1600 m/z, selecting the 15 most intense ions. Subsequently, an MS/MS scan was performed, with a resolution of 17,500 and a range of 200-2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant v1.5.6.5 (http://www.maxquant.org)  was used to perform protein identification and LFQ normalisation on the MS/MS data following. The MS/MS data were searched against both the Mus musculus SWISS-PROT database and a contaminant sequence set supplied by MaxQuant, using the Andromeda algorithm. The search was performed using the first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance of 4.5 ppm with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% for both peptides and proteins. The FDR was estimated using searches against a target-decoy database. Using the MaxLFQ algorithm, LFQ intensities were calculated from razor and unique peptides with a minimum ratio count of two peptides across samples. A minimum length of seven amino acids was needed in order to be considered for identification. Additionally, proteins were only considered for identification if more than one unique peptide for each protein was found. Normalised protein intensities (LFQ intensities) were used for the subsequent quantitative analysis in Perseus (v1.6.0.7). Proteins were filtered for contaminants: only identified by site, reverse and potential contaminants. The LFQ intensities were log2 transformed  and individual replicates were allocated their respective sample groups (CBA infected, CBA control, C57 infected and C57 control) prior to protein annotation. Only proteins found in all four replicates of at least one group were retained for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Shotgun mass spectrometry, Liver, Proteome, Innate immune response, Ascaris

### Affiliations
Biology
Department of Biology, Maynooth University

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr James Carolan
Department of Biology, Maynooth University


