### Accession
PXD006308

### Title
COMPARISON OF RABBIT SEMINAL PLASMA PROTEOME BETWEEN GENETIC LINES AND SEASONS

### Description
Seminal plasma contributes to the safe environment for sperm maturation, sperm viability and fertilization in mammals (Kumar 2013). Moreover, seminal plasma is a promising source for the study of potential reproductive biomarkers, because it is a complex mixture of secretions from testis, epididymis and male accessory sex glands (González-Cadavid et al. 2014). The protein composition of mammalian seminal plasma varies among species, and has important effects on sperm function (Mortarino et al. 1998). In rabbits, seminal plasma has a positive effect in maintaining sperm motility and viability during in vitro storage (Castellini et al. 2000). To study proteins on a large scale, the application of a proteomic approach is mandatory (Dietrich 2014). Rabbit seminal plasma proteome has been proved different between rabbit genetic line A (maternal) and R (growth) (Viudes-de-Castro et al. (2004), Safaa et al. (2008), Casares-Crespo 2016) and between seasons (Casares-Crespo 2016). In these previous studies a traditional 1 dimension polyacrylamide gel was done, identifying only major proteins visible after Coomassie Colloidal Blue staining and obtaining the relative quantity of these protein bands. On the contrary, new approaches such as liquid chromatography in-gel or in-solution digestion coupled with mass spectrometric analysis are a powerful, yet relatively uncomplicated strategy to identify and characterize proteins. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics has become the tool of choice for identifying and quantifying the proteome of an organism (Karpievitch 2010).  Therefore, the present study was conducted to describe the seminal plasma proteome of rabbits, compare the differentially expressed seminal plasma proteins between genetic lines A and R and study the effect of season in rabbit seminal plasma proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Semen collection and preparation of seminal plasma samples One ejaculate per male was collected each week using an artificial vagina. Sperm evaluation was performed to assess the initial seminal quality. Only ejaculates exhibiting a white colour and possessing more than 70 of motility rate, 85% of normal intact acrosome, and less than 15% of abnormal sperm were used in this experiment. All ejaculates from the same line were pooled (12 pools from Line R and 12 pools from Line A, 3 pools for each season and line). The sperm recovery was performed from January to December 2014.  Semen samples were centrifuged at 7400 x g for 10 min at 22 ºC. The resulting supernatants were collected and centrifuged again (7400 x g for 10 min) to remove residual spermatozoa and cell debris. The resulting pellets were discarded, whereas the supernatants were collected, supplemented with a 1% v/v protease inhibitor cocktail (P2714, Sigma) and stored at -80ºC until use. Total protein concentration was quantified in duplicate by the bicinchoninic acid method (BCA) using BSA as standard protein [13] and seminal samples were adjusted to 5 µg/µL in saline.  The proteomic analysis was performed in the proteomics facility of SCSIE University of Valencia that belongs to ProteoRed, PRB2-ISCIII, supported by grant PT13/0001. Forty µg of every sample were taken and the volume was set to 22.5 µL with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Samples were digested with 800 ng of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) according the following steps: (1) the proteins were reduced using 2 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) reducing agent in 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final volume of 25 µL, being the incubation at 60ºC during 20 minutes; (2) the proteins were alkylated using 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final volume of 30 µL, being the incubation during 30 minutes in the dark; (3) trypsin was added (800 ng) to a final volume of 38 µL, the sample was carefully mixed and digestion was carried overnight at 37ºC. The digestion was stopped with 4 µL of trifluoroacetic acid (Fisher Scientific; 10% final concentration). Final tryptic peptides were at 0.9 µg/µL.  2.4 LC-MS/MS analysis Two µL of each sample were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3µm particles size C18-CL, 350 µm diameter x 0.5mm long; Eksigent Technologies) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3µL/min during 5 min. The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µm particles size C18-CL, 75µm diameter x 12cm long, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% formic acid (FA). Peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5% to 35% of solvent B in A for 120 min. (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). Eluted peptides were ionized applying 2.8 kV to the spray emitter. The mass spectrometric analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode. Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1250 m/z for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘UNIT’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired from 100–1500 m/z for 25 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode. Following switch criteria were used: charge: 2+ to 5+; minimum intensity; 70 counts per second (cps). Up to 25 ions were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s. The system sensitivity was controlled with 2 fmol of 6 proteins (LC Packings). Samples were injected in a random order.

### Data Protocol
The SCIEX.wiff data-files were processed using ProteinPilot v5.0 search engine (AB SCIEX). ProteinPilot default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 5600 TripleTof wiff files. The Paragon algorithm of ProteinPilot v 5.0 was used to search ExPASy (07/01/2017) database with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation, no taxonomy restriction, and the search effort set to through.   To avoid using the same spectral evidence in more than one protein, the identified proteins are grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein-Pilot Progroup algorithm. A protein group in a Pro Group Report is a set of proteins that share some physical evidence. Unlike sequence alignment analyses where full length theoretical sequences are compared, the formation of protein groups in Pro Group is guided entirely by observed peptides only. Since the observed peptides are actually determined from experimentally acquired spectra, the grouping can be considered to be guided by usage of spectra. Then, unobserved regions of protein sequence play no role in explaining the data.   For quantification, the group file generated by Protein Pilot was used. The ions areas were extracted from the wiff files obtained from LC-MS/MS experiment by Peak View® v1.1. Only peptides assigned with confidence ≥ 95%, among those without modifications or shared by different proteins were extracted. A total of 24 samples were analyzed and 467 proteins were quantified.   2.6 Bioinformatic analysis Gene ontology terms for biological process, molecular function and cellular component were obtained using UniProt KB database (http://www.uniprot.org/ accessed on 7 January 2017), in combination with PANTHER v11.1 (http://www.pantherdb.org/ accessed on 7 March 2017) [16].   2.7 Statistical analysis  The quantitative data obtained by PeakView® were analyzed by Marker View® v1.3 (AB Sciex). First, areas were normalized by total areas summa. Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA) was performed to evaluate the classification of the samples using mixOmics R package and proteins with a vip score > 1.5 were selected and represented in a heat map. A t-test was used to identify the differentially expressed proteins between genetic lines. Proteins were considered differentially expressed if the adjusted p-value < 0.05. Mean quantity of proteins were calculated and the fold-changes between the two groups were estimated. Finally, an estimation of the β-NGF proportion in rabbit seminal plasma was calculated by comparing the peak area of β-NGF protein with the total area of each sample

### Publication Abstract
The present study was conducted to characterise rabbit seminal plasma proteins (SP proteins) focusing on the influence of the genetic origin and seasonality. In addition, &#x3b2;-NGF protein quantity in SP was determined. Semen samples were recovered from January to December 2014 using 6 males belonging to genotype A and six from genotype R. For each genotype, one pooled sample at the beginning, middle and end of each season was selected to develop the experiment. A total of 24 pools (3 for each season and genetic line) were analysed. SP proteins of the two experimental groups were recovered and subjected to in-solution digestion nano LC-MS/MS and bioinformatics analysis. The resulting library included 402 identified proteins validated with &#x2265;95% Confidence (unused Score&#x202f;&#x2265;&#x202f;1.3). These data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006308. Only 6 proteins were specifically implicated in reproductive processes according to Gene Ontology annotation. Twenty-three proteins were differentially expressed between genotypes, 11 over-expressed in genotype A and 12 in genotype R. Regarding the effect of season on rabbit SP proteome, results showed that there is no clear pattern of protein variation throughout the year. Similar &#x3b2;-NGF relative quantity was observed between seasons and genotypes. In conclusion, this study generates the largest library of SP proteins reported to date in rabbits and provides evidence that genotype is related to a specific abundance of SP proteins.

### Keywords
Genetic line, Rabbit, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Seminal plasma, Season

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Centro de Investigación y Tecnología Animal-Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias (CITA-IVIA), Polígono La Esperanza nº 100, 12400 Segorbe, Castellón, Spain.

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr María Pilar Viudes-de-Castro
Centro de Investigación y Tecnología Animal-Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias (CITA-IVIA), Polígono La Esperanza nº 100, 12400 Segorbe, Castellón, Spain.


