### Accession
PXD021779

### Title
Proteome dynamics during cisplatin exposure in sensitive and resistant human lung cancer cells

### Description
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths and its treatment is based in chemotherapy using platinum containing compounds, mainly cisplatin (CDDP). Many patients show resistance to CDDP leading to treatment failure. To understand the mechanisms involved in CDDP resistance in lung cancer, we used CDDP-sensitive (A549) and –resistant (A549/CDDP) cells to identify newly synthesized proteins in response to CDDP treatment using BONCAT technique. In addition the steady-state proteome of A549 and A549/CDDP cells was also evaluated. It was identified 70 and 69 proteins upregulated by CDDP in A549 and A549/CDDP cells, respectively. The set of proteins upregulated by CDDP in both cells are associated to GO terms related to proteostasis, telomere maintenance cell, RNA processing, cytoskeleton and response to oxidative stress. Interestingly, the profile of biological processes enriched in A549 cells after CDDP treatment is very similar to those identified in the steady-state proteome of A549/CDDP cells, suggesting their positive selection in CDDP-resistant cells development. Therefore, this study of proteomic response to CDDP is relevant to the identification of potential protein targets to development of therapeutic strategies to block drug resistance pathways.

### Sample Protocol
A549 and A549/CDDP cells were conditioned in methionine-free RPMI medium for 1 h at 37 °C to deplete methionine reserves. For metabolic labeling, azidohomoalanine (AHA,1 mM) was added to the culture medium and then the cells incubated for 2, 4 or 8 h in the absence or in the presence of CDDP. Each cell line was exposed to CDDP concentrations corresponding to their respective IC50 values. After each incubation time, cells were lysed and newly synthesized proteins were enriched using the Click-iT Protein Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resin-bound proteins were digested with trypsin and the generated peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters) following manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system coupled to a Xevo G2-XS Q-Tof mass spectrometer (Waters) with a low-flow probe at the source. Peptides were separated by analytical chromatography (Acquity UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 2.1 x 50 mm, Waters) at a flow rate of 8 μl/min, using a 7-85% water/ACN 0.1% formic acid linear gradient over 90 min. The MS survey scan was set to 0.5 s and recorded from 50 to 2000 m/z. MS/MS scans were acquired from 50 to 2000 m/z, and scan time was set to 1 s. Data were collected in data-independent MSE mode.

### Data Protocol
LC-MSE data were processed and searched using ProteinLynx Global Server version 3.0.3 (PLGS 3.0.3, Waters Corporation). The searches were conducted against Homo sapiens protein sequences retrieved from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database, with trypsin as enzyme, maximum of one missed cleavage, fixed carbamidomethyl modification for cysteine residues, and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Peptides and protein  tolerances were set as automatic, allowing minimum fragment ion per protein as 5, minimum fragment ion per peptide as 2, minimum peptide matches per proteins as 1 and false discovery rate (FDR) as 4%. Only proteins identified in at least 2 out of three biological replicates were considered for qualitative and quantitative analysis in order to improve confidence and reproducibility. Data sets were normalized using the “auto-normalization” function of PLGS and label-free quantitative analysis was performed from peak intensity measurements (Hi3 method) [13] using PLGS ExpressionE algorithm. Proteins with regulation-probability (P) values below 0.05 or higher than 0.95 were taken as differentially regulated between samples. Functional annotation and enrichment analysis were performed using PANTHER (Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationships) database [14] matched with the Homo sapiens genome. The Fisher’s exact test was used with FDR correction. The plots of most representative and significant biological processes were constructed using ggplot2 R package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lung cancer, Proteomics, Boncat, Drug resistance, Cisplatin

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
Laboratorio de Genomica Estrutural e Funcional Departamento de Biologia Molecular e Biotecnologia Instituto de Biociencias Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul Porto Alegre Rio Grande do Sul Brazil

### Submitter
Cristine Dutra

### Lab Head
Dr Karina Mariante Monteiro
Laboratorio de Genomica Estrutural e Funcional Departamento de Biologia Molecular e Biotecnologia Instituto de Biociencias Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul Porto Alegre Rio Grande do Sul Brazil


