### Accession
PXD026437

### Title
Explore the lactation function of Protein phosphorylation sites in goat mammary tissues by phosphoproteome

### Description
Background: Protein phosphorylation plays an important role in lactation. Differentially modified phosphorylation sites between peak lactation (PL, 90 days postpartum) and late lactation (LL, 280 days postpartum) were investigated using an integrated approach, namely, liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling, to know the molecular changes in different stages of goat mammary tissues. Results: A total of 1,938 (1,111 up-regulated, 827 down-regulated) differentially modified phosphorylation sites of 1,172 proteins were identified (P values < 0.05 and fold change of phosphorylation ratios > 1.5). In addition, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis showed that calcium signalling pathway, oxytocin signalling pathway and MAPK signalling pathway were enriched. The results of western blot showed phosphorylation levels of ACACA, EIF4EBP1 and IRS1 increased and JUN decreased in PL compared with LL. The results were consistent with the results of phosphoproteome. Conclusions: In this study, we first differentially proteins modified phosphorylation sites between PL and LL in goat mammary tissues. On the other hand, these results analysis indicate that multiple differentially modified phosphorylation sites of FASN, ACACA, mTOR, PRKAA, IRS1, RPS6KB, EIF4EBP1, TSC2 and proteins of Calcium signalling pathway, Oxytocin signalling pathway, and MAPK signalling pathway are worthy of further exploration.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction The mammary tissues epithelial tissues of dairy goats in PL and LL were grinded into cell powder in the presence of liquid nitrogen. The cell powder was transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube. Subsequently, the cell powder was added to four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 2 nM EDTA), followed by thrice of ultrasonic treatment on ice with a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was quantified using the BCA kit (Scientz, Ningbo, China). Proteins were extracted from 18 mammary tissues of dairy goats that included nine mammary tissues in PL and nine mammary tissues in LL. Afterwards, proteins extracted from nine mammary tissues in PL were divided into three groups. Each group was made up of three parts of protein extracted from PL mammary tissues. The same method was used to construct the LL protein library. Trypsin digestion The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Consequently, the protein solution was digested. The protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). The concentration of urea in the solution should be less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin and protein were added at 1:50 mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and at 1:100 mass ratio for the second digestion for 4 h. TMT labelling and HPLC fractionation The production was desalted by a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) after trypsin digestion and vacuum drying. Afterwards, peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed using a TMT kit (Scientz, Ningbo, China). Peptides were labelled using TMT for quantitation; labelling was performed as previously described [31]. One unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were incubated for 2 h at room temperature, pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were divided into segments using a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length) by high pH reversed-phase HPLC. In summary, peptides were separated into 60 fractions after more than 60 min of gradient treatment with 8%–32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0). Subsequently, the peptides were combined into eight fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Reactions were quenched using 8 μL of 11% lysine following the manufacturer’s recommendations. Finally, 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma–Aldrich) was added into the peptide solutions. The volume ratio of the peptide solution to TFA was 1:10, and the mixture was pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Affinity enrichment The mixtures were first incubated with immobilised metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) microsphere suspensions with vibration in loading buffer (50% acetonitrile/6% TFA). Phosphopeptide-rich IMAC microspheres were collected by centrifugation. Afterwards, the supernatant was removed. The IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% TFA and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA to remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, an elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added, and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected for LC–MS/MS analysis after lyophilisation. LC–MS/MS analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient consisted of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile), which increased from 6% to 23% over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min, followed by holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-Nlc 1,000 ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system. Peptides were characterised using tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive™ Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC after the peptides were subjected to NSI source. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 Kv. The m/z scan was 350 to 1,800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Using a normalization collision energy setting of 28, the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 for the selected MS/MS of peptides. A data-dependent procedure was alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with a 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. The automatic gain control was set at 5E4. The fixed first mass was set at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database search Maxquant search engine (V.1.5.2.8) was used to process the resulting MS/MS data. The UniProt Ovis aries (27472 sequences) concatenated with a decoy database that was used for the tandem mass spectra search. The search parameters were as follows: 6-plex TMT, the minimum length of the peptides was set at 7 amino acid residues and the maximum modification number of the peptides was set at 5; fixed modification (carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues); variable modification (protein N-term acetylation); and oxidation of methionine residues and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues, thereby allowing two missing cleavages by cleavage enzyme trypsin/P. The mass error was set at 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the primary search, and the fragment ions of mass tolerance were set at 0.02 Da. The minimum score for modified peptides was set at > 40, and a false discovery rate was set at < 1%. Bioinformatics analysis Gene Ontology (GO) annotation data were obtained from UniProt GoA database. Proteins were divided into three categories by GO annotation, namely, a biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. The GO with a corrected P value < 0.05 was considered significant. InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) was used to detect the enrichment of functional domains of differentially expressed proteins compared with all identified proteins. Protein domains with a corrected P value < 0.05 were considered significant. The KEGG database (https://www.genome.jp/kegg/tool/map_pathway2.html) was used to identify enriched pathways. The pathway with a corrected P value < 0.05 was considered significant. Based on the KEGG website, these pathways were classified into hierarchical categories. Fisher’s exact test was used to examine the enrichment of the differentially phosphorylation protein against all identified phosphorylation proteins. Wolfpsort, a subcellular localisation predication wolf, was used to predict subcellular localisation. Soft motif-x was used to analyse the sequence model constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all protein sequences. In addition, all database protein sequences were used as background database parameter, as well as other parameters with default.  Enrichment-based clustering Hierarchical clustering was based on the functional classification of different proteins. Categories that were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P <0.05 were filtered after collating all the categories and their P values. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = − log10 (P value). Finally, these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance and average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership was visualised by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteome; lactation; irs1; β-casein; triglycerides; goat

### Affiliations
Northwest A&F University
College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling

### Submitter
Xiaopeng An

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaopeng An
College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling


