### Accession
PXD001390

### Title
Re-analysis of: ‘CSF proteome mapping: Human cerebrospinal fluid LC-MS/MS, Part 2’ (PXD000652) to demonstrate the ProteoAnnotator software for mapping identifications to Ensembl genomes

### Description
We have performed a re-analysis of PXD000652 - a human proteome CSF fluid sample, originally queried versus UniProt. We have used our ProteoAnnotator package to re-search the data against Ensembl Human build 76 to demonstrate the capability of the pipeline to perform genome mapping on a large scale.

### Sample Protocol
Re-analysis of PXD000652. See PXD000652 for more information.

### Data Protocol
Searches were done using the ProteoAnnotator pipeline, which embeds OMSSA and X!Tandem search engines – wrapped by the SearchGUI Software. Search parameters were similar to PXD000652. Post-processing involving combining search engines according to PMID: 19253293, performing protein inference using an update to the algorithm described in PMID: 23813117, followed by bespoke statistical processing developed for the ProteoAnnotator software. The search database was Ensembl Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.pep.all.fa

### Publication Abstract
The recent massive increase in capability for sequencing genomes is producing enormous advances in our understanding of biological systems. However, there is a bottleneck in genome annotation--determining the structure of all transcribed genes. Experimental data from MS studies can play a major role in confirming and correcting gene structure--proteogenomics. However, there are some technical and practical challenges to overcome, since proteogenomics requires pipelines comprising a complex set of interconnected modules as well as bespoke routines, for example in protein inference and statistics. We are introducing a complete, open source pipeline for proteogenomics, called ProteoAnnotator, which incorporates a graphical user interface and implements the Proteomics Standards Initiative mzIdentML standard for each analysis stage. All steps are included as standalone modules with the mzIdentML library, allowing other groups to re-use the whole pipeline or constituent parts within other tools. We have developed new modules for pre-processing and combining multiple search databases, for performing peptide-level statistics on mzIdentML files, for scoring grouped protein identifications matched to a given genomic locus to validate that updates to the official gene models are statistically sound and for mapping end results back onto the genome. ProteoAnnotator is available from http://www.proteoannotator.org/. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001042 and PXD001390 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001042; http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001390).

### Keywords
Proteoannotator

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Fawaz Ghali

### Lab Head
Dr Andy Jones
University of Liverpool


