### Accession
PXD043355

### Title
Easy and Accessible Workflow for Label-Free Single-Cell Proteomics

### Description
Single cell proteomics (SCP) can provide information that is unattainable through either bulk-scale protein measurements or single-cell profiling of other omes.  Maximizing proteome coverage often requires custom instrumentation, consumables and reagents for sample processing and separations, which limits accessibility of SCP to a small number of specialized laboratories. Commercial platforms have become available for SCP cell isolation and sample preparation, but the high cost of these platforms and the technical expertise required for their operation place them out of reach of many interested laboratories. Here, we assessed the new HP D100 Single Cell Dispenser for label-free SCP. The low-cost instrument proved highly accurate and reproducible for dispensing reagents in the 200 nL to 2 µL range. We used the HP D100 to isolate and prepare single cells for SCP within 384-well PCR plates. When the well plates were immediately centrifuged following cell dispensing and again after reagent dispensing, we found that ~97% of wells that were identified in the instrument software as containing a single cell indeed provided proteome coverage expected of a single cell. The D100 Single Cell Dispenser combined with one-step sample processing provides a very rapid easy-to-use workflow for SCP with no reduction in proteome coverage relative to a nanowell-based workflow. The commercial well plates also facilitate autosampling with commercial instrumentation. Single cell samples were analyzed using home-packed 30-µm-i.d. nanoLC columns as well as commercially available 50-µm-i.d. columns. The commercial columns led to identification of ~35% fewer identified proteins. However,  combined with the well plate-based preparation platform the presented workflow provides fully commercial and relatively low cost alternative for SCP sample preparations and separations, which should greatly broaden accessibility of SCP to other laboratories.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa and Jurkat cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA), were cultured in 5% CO2 at 37 °C. HeLa cells were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (VWR, Radnor, PA), while Jurkat cells were cultured in RPMI  1640 (Gibco, Billings, MT). Both cell media contained 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. The cells were harvested when they reached approximately 90% confluency. Prior to dispensing and sorting, the cells were filtered using a 35 μm strainer mesh (Stellar Scientific, Baltimore, MD), washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and diluted to a concentration of approximately 200 cells/μL in PBS. The setting for single cell dispensing of the HP D100 Single Cell Dispenser is based on cell size. At the gate, cells with a diameter of 10-15 µm are considered small cells, while the medium-size cells range from 15 to 17 µm. Jurkat cells were dispensed as small cells and HeLa cells as medium. All single cells were dispensed into individual wells in twin.tec LoBind 384-well PCR plates (Part No. 0030129547, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) then covered with a silicone sealing mat (ArcticWhite LLC, Bethlehem, PA) and  centrifuged immediately at 600 xg  for 1 min using a plate centrifuge (Part No. SC20, Southwest Science, Trenton, NJ). The Rapid-Digestion Trypsin/Lys-C kit (Part No. VA1061, Promega, Madison WI) with 0.05% DDM (Sigma Aldrich) served as the reagent mixture to accomplish cell lysis, protein denaturation and digestion in a single step as described previously3. This one-step sample preparation reagent was dispensed using the HP D100 Single Cell Dispenser with the requiring-surfactant cassette and with the fluid class "Aqueous + Brij 35". In the experiments using FACS presorting, 200 nL of the reagent mixture containing 1 ng of Trypsin and 1 ng of Lys-C was dispensed into each cell-containing microwell. We also evaluated proteome coverage when 500 nL of the 1-step mixture was dispensed. For these larger volumes, we tested mixtures containing 1 ng of each protease to match the protease amount contained in the 200 nL dispensing, as well as mixtures containing 2.5 ng of each protease to match the protease concentration from the 200 nL mixture. For the subsequent studies evaluating performance of a commercial LC column, we dispensed 500 nL of the one-step sample preparation reagent mixture that contained 1 ng of each protease. After cell and reagent dispensing, well plates were covered with sealing foil, centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 1 min, and incubated at 70 °C for 1 h in a humidified container. Finally, the well plate was cooled to 4 °C for 15 min, centrifuged at 1500 rpm, sealed with an aluminum sealing film (Part No. 6570 Corning NY), and stored at -20 °C prior to analysis. Analytical columns were prepared in-house using 30-µm-i.d. × 30-cm-long fused silica capillaries (Polymicro, Phoenix, AZ). Columns were packed with Dr. Maisch (Ammerbuch, Germany) ReproSil-Pur C18 particles having 1.9 µm diameter and 120 Å pore size. Microscale solid-phase extraction (SPE) columns were made from 100-µm-i.d. × 5-cm-long fused silica capillaries (Polymicro) prepared using the same chromatographic media as the analytical columns. Both columns were fritted with Kasil Frit Kit (Next Advance, Troy, NY) and polished using a Capil-lary Polishing Station (ESI Source Solutions, Woburn, MA). A 10-µm-i.d. nanoelectrospray emitter from MicrOmics Technologies (Spanish Fork, UT) was connected to the analytical column using a PicoClear union (New Objective, Woburn, MA). NanoLC separations were carried out using a modified UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Fisher) system with an UltiMate WPS-3000TPL autosampler as described previously4. The analytical flow rate was ~30 nL/min and the active gradient was ~50 min as described by Johnston et al.  To evaluate proteome profiling performance with a fully commercial LC system and columns, we also used the Acclaim PepMap100  column that was 15 cm long and had an internal diameter of 50 µm. The SPE column was prepared in-house as described above, but SPE columns with the same specifications are available commercially from CoAnn Technologies (Richland, WA). The ~50 min. separation gradient was the same as with the modified system as described above, but no flow splitting was utilized. The analytical flow rate was 100 nL/min and the flow rate for trapping (SPE) was 500 nL/min. MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher) equipped with Nanospray Flex ion source. The  electrospray potential was 2 kV, the inlet temperature was 200 °C and the RF lens was 50%. The MS1 resolution was 120,000 (at m/z 200) and the normalized AGC target was 300%. The MS1 scan range was m/z 375-1575,  Data-dependent acquisition was employed with an MS2 maximum injection time of 118 ms, and +2 to +4 charge state for selected precursor ions. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s, and the intensity threshold was 5.0e3.

### Data Protocol
For DDA and WWA experiments, raw files were searched using Proteome Discoverer (PD) (Thermo Scientific, version 3.0.1.13) with the CHIMERYS identification node using prediction model inferys_2.1_fragmentation as default settings. Database search included human (Uniprot version 2022-8-11) as well as common contaminants (PD, version 2018-10-26). Enzyme was set as Trypsin with maximum 2 missed cleavages. Other parameters included peptide lengths of 7-30 amino acids, a maximum of 3 modifications, and charges between 2 and 4. Fragment mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Carbamidomethyl (C) was fixed as a static modification by the CHIMERYS software. Results were filtered with Percolator node at 1% FDR. For MBR, retention time tolerance was set at 0.25 min with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Single-cell proteomics (SCP) can provide information that is unattainable through either bulk-scale protein measurements or single-cell profiling of other omes. Maximizing proteome coverage often requires custom instrumentation, consumables, and reagents for sample processing and separations, which has limited the accessibility of SCP to a small number of specialized laboratories. Commercial platforms have become available for SCP cell isolation and sample preparation, but the high cost of these platforms and the technical expertise required for their operation place them out of reach of many interested laboratories. Here, we assessed the new HP D100 Single Cell Dispenser for label-free SCP. The low-cost instrument proved highly accurate and reproducible for dispensing reagents in the range from 200 nL to 2 &#x3bc;L. We used the HP D100 to isolate and prepare single cells for SCP within 384-well PCR plates. When the well plates were immediately centrifuged following cell dispensing and again after reagent dispensing, we found that &#x223c;97% of wells that were identified in the instrument software as containing a single cell indeed provided the proteome coverage expected of a single cell. This commercial dispenser combined with one-step sample processing provides a very rapid and easy-to-use workflow for SCP with no reduction in proteome coverage relative to a nanowell-based workflow, and the commercial well plates also facilitate autosampling with unmodified instrumentation. Single-cell samples were analyzed using home-packed 30 &#x3bc;m i.d. nanoLC columns as well as commercially available 50 &#x3bc;m i.d. columns. The commercial columns resulted in &#x223c;35% fewer identified proteins. However, combined with the well plate-based preparation platform, the presented workflow provides a fully commercial and relatively low-cost alternative for SCP sample preparation and separation, which should greatly broaden the accessibility of SCP to other laboratories.

### Keywords
Single-cell proteomics, Exploris 480, Hp d100 single cell dispenser

### Affiliations
Brigham Young University
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University (lab head)

### Submitter
Ryan Kelly

### Lab Head
Dr Ryan T. Kelly
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University (lab head)


