### Accession
PXD010705

### Title
Characterization of cerebrospinal fluid via data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry

### Description
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is in direct contact with the brain and serves as a valuable specimen to examine diseases of the central nervous system through analyzing its components. These include the analysis of metabolites, cells as well as proteins. For identifying new suitable diagnostic protein biomarkers bottom-up data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mass spectrometry-based approaches are most popular. Drawbacks of this method are stochastic and irreproducible precursor ion selection. Recently, data-independent acquisition (DIA) emerged as an alternative method. It overcomes several limitations of DDA, since it combines the benefits of DDA and targeted methods like selected reaction monitoring (SRM). We established a DIA method for in-depth proteome analysis of CSF. For this, four spectral libraries were generated with samples from native CSF (n=5) CSF fractionation (15 in total) and substantia nigra fractionation (54 in total) applying to CSF DIA of three replicates. The DDA and DIA methods for CSF were conducted with the same nanoLC parameters using a 180 minute gradient. Compared to a conventional DDA method, our DIA approach both increased the number of identified protein groups with 1574 compared to DDA with 648 over 50 % with a comprehensive spectral library (generated with DDA measurements from five native CSF and 54 substantia nigra fractions) and decreased the coefficient of variation to 6 %, compared to 11 % with a DDA method. We also could show that a sample specific spectral library generated only from native CSF increased the identification reproducibility from three DIA replicates to 90 % (77 % with a DDA method). Moreover, by utilizing a substantia nigra specific spectral library for CSF DIA over 60 brain-originated proteins could be identified compared to only eleven with DDA. In conclusion, the here presented optimized DIA method substantially outperforms DDA and could develop into a powerful tool for biomarker discovery in CSF.

### Sample Protocol
native CSF samples were used for in-solution digestion. 20 µL of CSF (pool of 4 CSF samples from hydrocephalus patients) were mixed with the same volume of 0.2% RapiGest (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). After adding dithiotreitol (DDT) to a final concentration of 5 mM samples were incubated for 30 min at 60°C. For cysteine alkylation iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 15 mM and incubated for 30 min in the dark. Protein digestion was performed with trypsin (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 at 37°C overnight. On the next day the digestion was stopped and RapiGest precipitated by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5% by subsequent incubation for 45 min at 37°C. After centrifugation the supernatant was collected and the peptide concentration was determined by amino acid analysis (AAA) as described by Plum et al. 36. According to AAA 500 ng per sample were taken for MS analysis and spiked with 1 µl HRM calibration peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland).  Native CSF was measured with each setup on the already mentioned instrument with identical HPLC settings. Here, the Q Exactive HF was run in data-independent (DIA) mode, subdividing a mass range of 400 – 1000 m/z into 30 isolation windows with an equal width of 20 m/z and one full scan with a loop cycle of 10. The full MS was performed with a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 3e6, 80 ms maximum injection time). DIA was operated with a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z (AGC 1e6, auto maximum injection time, default charge state 2). This ended up in a cycle time of approx. 2.2 s. The .RAW files were converted into .HTRMS files by using the Raw to HTRMS Converter Professional provided by Biognosys. Those .HTRMS files were analyzed via Spectronaut 9.0.

### Data Protocol
The .RAW files were converted into .HTRMS files by using the Raw to HTRMS Converter Professional provided by Biognosys. Those .HTRMS files were analyzed via Spectronaut 9.0 in the “Review” perspective by applying the four different libraries in single experiments. Four different spectral libraries were generated (with mass spectrometry proteomics data from the DDA analysis  deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE39 partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD010698  for native CSF, PXD009624 for fractionated CSF and PXD010690 for substantia nigra) by using Spectronaut 9.0 (Biognosys). Therefore, different .MSF files from PD were uploaded to the “Prepare” perspective of Spectronaut and treated with the following settings: for identification only peptides with high confidence level (equals a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%) were considered and protein inference was performed by Spectronaut. Spectral Library Filters were set to no missed cleavage filters, no peptide charge filters, number of best fragment ions between 3 and 6 in a mass range of 300 – 1800 m/z. The first library (library A) consisted of five .MSF files of native CSF samples (5069 precursors). The second library (library B) was generated by using library A plus 15 .MSF files of analyzed CSF fractions (11556 precursors). The third library (library C) contained library A and additional 54 .MSF files originating from human substantia nigra analyses (67551 precursors). The fourth library (library D) contained all files from library B and additional 15 .MSF files of analyzed CSF fractions (69364 precursors). The following settings were applied: dynamic XIC RT Extraction Window, enabled Interference Correction, enabled Cross Run Normalization, quantitation on MS2 level, automatic Protein Inference Workflow and p-value normal distribution estimator. All results were filtered by a Q value of 0.01 at peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is in direct contact with the brain and serves as a valuable specimen to examine diseases of the central nervous system through analyzing its components. These include the analysis of metabolites, cells as well as proteins. For identifying new suitable diagnostic protein biomarkers bottom-up data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mass spectrometry-based approaches are most popular. Drawbacks of this method are stochastic and irreproducible precursor ion selection. Recently, data-independent acquisition (DIA) emerged as an alternative method. It overcomes several limitations of DDA, since it combines the benefits of DDA and targeted methods like selected reaction monitoring (SRM). We established a DIA method for in-depth proteome analysis of CSF. For this, four spectral libraries were generated with samples from native CSF ( n = 5), CSF fractionation (15 in total) and substantia nigra fractionation (54 in total) and applied to three CSF DIA replicates. The DDA and DIA methods for CSF were conducted with the same nanoLC parameters using a 180 min gradient. Compared to a conventional DDA method, our DIA approach increased the number of identified protein groups from 648 identifications in DDA to 1574 in DIA using a comprehensive spectral library generated with DDA measurements from five native CSF and 54 substantia nigra fractions. We also could show that a sample specific spectral library generated from native CSF only increased the identification reproducibility from three DIA replicates to 90% (77% with a DDA method). Moreover, by utilizing a substantia nigra specific spectral library for CSF DIA, over 60 brain-originated proteins could be identified compared to only 11 with DDA. In conclusion, the here presented optimized DIA method substantially outperforms DDA and could develop into a powerful tool for biomarker discovery in CSF. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifiers PXD010698, PXD010708, PXD010690, PXD010705, and PXD009624.

### Keywords
Data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry, Spectral library, Proteomics, Csf, Cerebrospinal fluid, Dia

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-Universität Bochum Zentrum für klinische Forschung (ZKF) Raum 1.055 Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum Germany
Ruhr University Bochum

### Submitter
Katalin Barkovits

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Marcus
Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-Universität Bochum Zentrum für klinische Forschung (ZKF) Raum 1.055 Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum Germany


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: hydrocephalus
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Q Exactive
- modification parameters:   Carbamidomethyl,   Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: Oxidation

