### Accession
PXD017278

### Title
Factor Inhibiting HIF catalyses two asparaginyl-hydroxylations in VNVN motifs of ankyrin proteins

### Description
The aspariginyl-hydroxylase activity of Factor Inhibiting HIF (FIH) is a key regulator of the transcriptional activity of the hypoxia inducible factor. FIH also catalyses the hydroxylation of asparaginyl- and other-residues in ankyrin repeat domain (ARD) containing proteins, including Apoptosis stimulating of p53 (ASPP) protein family members. ASPP2 is reported to undergo a single FIH catalysed hydroxylation at Asn-986. We report biochemical and crystallographic evidence showing FIH can catalyse the unprecedented post-translational hydroxylation of both asparaginyl-residues in “VNVN” and related motifs of ankyrin repeat domains in apoptosis-stimulating of p53 (ASPP) proteins (i.e. ASPP1, ASPP2 and iASPP) and the related ASB11 and p18-INK4C proteins. The results extend the substrate scope of FIH catalysis and may have implications for its role in the hypoxic response and, ASPP protein function.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins of interest were transfected as described above and immunprecipitated proteins were separated on gradient SDS PAGE gels (Life Technologies) and bands visualized using Instant Blue stain (Expedeon). Protein bands of interest were excised form the gel, then digested and analysed according to a previously described protocol using elastase digestion (Worthington Biochemicals). Digests were desalted (Sola, Thermo Pierce) and injected into a nUPLC-MS platform consisting of Dionex Ultimate 3000 and either Q-Exactive(QE) or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Peptides were separated on a nEASY column (50cm x 75µm) with a gradient of 5-35% ACN in 0.1% Formic Acid/5% DMSO in 60 minutes. MS data was acquired with a MS1 target of 4E5 ions (Q-Exactive: 3E6) and with a resolution of 120000 (QE:70000). Peptide ions were fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 35% (QE:28%), using CID (QE: HCD) fragmentation. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap (QE: Orbitrap) in rapid mode (QE Resolution: 17500). Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds (QE:27 seconds).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were imported into PEAKS7 with precursor tolerance set to 10ppm and fragment tolerance set to 0.5 Da for ion trap MS/MS spectra and 0.05 Da for Orbitrap MS/MS spectra. Data were searched against Uniprot/Swissprot human database (01/2015) and peptide FDR was adjusted to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The aspariginyl hydroxylase human factor inhibiting hypoxia-inducible factor (FIH) is an important regulator of the transcriptional activity of hypoxia-inducible factor. FIH also catalyzes the hydroxylation of asparaginyl and other residues in ankyrin repeat domain-containing proteins, including apoptosis stimulating of p53 protein (ASPP) family members. ASPP2 is reported to undergo a single FIH-catalyzed hydroxylation at Asn-986. We report biochemical and crystallographic evidence showing that FIH catalyzes the unprecedented post-translational hydroxylation of both asparaginyl residues in "VNVN" and related motifs of ankyrin repeat domains in ASPPs (i.e., ASPP1, ASPP2, and iASPP) and the related ASB11 and p18-INK4C proteins. Our biochemical results extend the substrate scope of FIH catalysis and may have implications for its biological roles, including in the hypoxic response and ASPP family function.

### Keywords
Hydroxylation, Hif, Aspp

### Affiliations
Head of Discovery Proteomics Facility
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Head of Discovery Proteomics Facility


