### Accession
PXD016097

### Title
Discovery of potential candidate proteins reprogramming spinal cord derived astrocytes into neurons by proteomic analysis

### Description
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a common but devastating trauma of the central nerve system. In this study, we reprogrammed cultured spinal-cord reactive astrocytes into neurons by Neurod1 expression. The mechanism of programmed conversion from astrocytes to neurons has not been clarified yet. Thus, we used label-free proteomics to identify differentially expressed proteins in Neurod1 over-expressed astrocytes and control group. A total of 1952 proteins were identified, including 92 significantly changed proteins. Among these proteins, 8 proteins were identified as candidates involving in the process of the reprogramming, based on their biological function and fold change in the bioinformatic analysis. Our study revealed that that Neurod1 can directly reprogram cultured spinal-cord reactive astrocytes into neurons, and several proteins that could play a significant role during the neuronal reprogramming were discovered.

### Sample Protocol
We extracted protein from each group (GFP and NeuroD1 groups) with lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1M Tris, pH = 7.6). Then protein was denatured at 95 °C for 5 min and then centrifuged at 12,000 g for 30 min. The supernatants were collected, and we determined protein concentration by tryptophan fluorescence assay as previous described. We followed the Filter Assisted Sample Preparation (FASP) procedure to prepare the peptides. Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer coupled with an easynanoLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Total peptides were loaded on 75μm × 150 mm fused silica column packed in-house with 3-μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads (120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and separated with a 90-min gradient at a flow rate of 300nL/min. Solvent A contained 100% H2O and 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B contained 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap Fusion was programmed in the data-dependent acquisition mode. An MS1 survey scan of 350–1500 m/z in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60000 was collected with an AGC target of 400000 and maximum injection time of 50ms. Precursor ions were filtered according to monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state (+ 2 to+ 6)and dynamic exclusion (45 s with a ±10 ppm window).The most intense precursors were subjected to HCD fragmentation with a duty cycle of 3s.The MS2 parameters were set as follows: 30% normalized collision energy, 15000 resolution, 50000 AGC target, 100ms maximum injection time, 1.6 m/z isolation width.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (http://maxquant.org/, 1.6.0.1). Carbamidomethyl cysteine was searched as a fixed modification, while N-acetylation of protein and oxidized methionine were set as variable modifications. Proteins were identified by searching the MS and MS/MS peptide data against the UniProt Mouse database (release time: August 2019). Trypsin was selected as the digestive enzyme. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed by MaxQuant in a way described previously. Protein abundance calculation was based on the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity). The p value of Log2LFQ intensity of each protein between the GFP group and Neurod1 group by two-tailed Student’s t test using the Perseus program, and p value <0.05 was considered as a significant difference in statistics. The STRING database was used to predict protein-protein interactions (PPI) and related biological processes. The medium confidence score (0.4) was chosen for searching more potential interactions. The PPI network was reconstructed in Cytoscape software (3.6.1).

### Publication Abstract
Our previous study has confirmed that astrocytes overexpressing neurogenic differentiation factor 1 (NEUROD1) in the spinal cord can be reprogrammed into neurons under in vivo conditions. However, whether they can also be reprogrammed into neurons under in vitro conditions remains unclear, and the mechanisms of programmed conversion from astrocytes to neurons have not yet been clarified. In the present study, we prepared reactive astrocytes from newborn rat spinal cord astrocytes using the scratch method and infected them with lentivirus carrying NEUROD1. The results showed that NEUROD1 overexpression reprogrammed the cultured reactive astrocytes into neurons in vitro with an efficiency of 13.4%. Using proteomic and bioinformatic analyses, 1952 proteins were identified, of which 92 were differentially expressed. Among these proteins, 11 were identified as candidate proteins in the process of reprogramming based on their biological functions and fold-changes in the bioinformatic analysis. Furthermore, western blot assay revealed that casein kinase II subunit alpha (CSNK2A2) and pinin (PNN) expression in NEUROD1-overexpressing reactive astrocytes was significantly increased, suggesting that NEUROD1 can directly reprogram spinal cord-derived reactive astrocytes into neurons in vitro, and that the NEUROD1-CSNK2A2-PNN pathway is involved in this process. This study was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Fujian Medical University, China (approval No. 2016-05) on April 18, 2016.

### Keywords
Label-free proteomic analysis, Reprogramming, Astrocytes, Neurons, Spinal cord injury

### Affiliations
Fujian medical university union hospital

### Submitter
wenhao chen

### Lab Head
Dr wenhao chen
Fujian medical university union hospital


