### Accession
PXD026615

### Title
Comprehensive and systematic characterization of novel nanodrug conjugate based on multi-functionalized magnetic iron-nanoparticles conjugated with cisplatin derivative: From the chemistry to the animal model

### Description
Nanodrugs need a completely characterization by both chemically and biological point of view. As nanoparticles have evolved as multi-functional systems combining different custom anchorages, their pharmacological involvements require more comprehensive analysis. In this work, we present the design and synthesis of novel iron-NPs conjugated with a cisplatin derivate and their biological evaluation by quantitative proteomics approches. To decipher detailed insights related to the NP interactions with environment (as protein corona) and pharmacodynamics functionalities of the nanodrugs conjugates, LC-MS/MS analysis was perform to stablish protein profile. Biocompatibility and animal model provided complete insights of the potential of multifunctional iron NPs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Corona assay The protein corona assay was carried out to determine which proteins adhered more or less strongly (hard- or softcorona) to the NPs, evaluating finally by LC-MS/MS. Hard and soft protein corona determination was obtained by successive centrifugations. SDS-PAGE separation.  A total of 30 μg proteins were run on a 4–20% gradient SDS-PAGE gel under reducing conditions. Gels were stained in a 0.5% (w/v) Coomassie Brilliant Blue solution and stored at 4 °C in an aqueous solution containing 1% (v/v) acetic acid, until analysis. In-gel digestion and nanoUPLC-MS/MS analysis. Each gel lane was cut into 5 fragments and digested with trypsin following the method of Shevchenko et al. with slight modifications. Briefly, gel pieces were destained with 15 mM potassium ferrocyanide and 50 mM sodium thiosulfate. Protein reduction and alkylation were performed with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 45 min and with 55 mM IAA at room temperature for 30 min, respectively. Proteins were digested with trypsin (6.25 ng/mL) at 37 °C for 18 h. The peptide solution was acidified with FA and desalted by using C18-Stage-Tips columns. The samples were partially dried and stored at −20 °C until analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Labeling for detection and identification of newly synthesized proteomes in the target cell lines. To label cells, 200 000 cells (Jurkat and Caco-2) were cultured 12 wells’ plate with methionine free medium for 60 min at 37 ºC to deplete methionine reserves. After this time, cells were exposed to azidohomoalanine (AHA) (35 μM) and the NPs (0.10 mg/mL) for 4 h. When incubation time was ended, cells were centrifugated (1200 rpm, 5 min) and the manufacturer’s instructions for “Click-iT™ Protein Enrichment Kit, for click chemistry capture of azide-modified proteins” ( Thermo Scientific, Rockford,IL, USA) were followed. Resin functionalized with an alkyne derivative provided allowed the capture and the trypsinization od nascent proteins. SDS-PAGE Separation A total of 20-25 μg of total protein (from hard or soft protein corona) were run on a 12% polyacrylamide precast Ready Gels (Mini-Protean TGX Precast Gels, Bio Rad Laboratories, Inc., USA) under reducing conditions for only 1 cm. Gels were stained in a 0.5% (w/v) Coomassie Bril-lant Blue solution. Polyacrylamide gels were then digitized with a gel reader and stored at 4°C in an aqueous solution containing 1% (v/v) acetic acid until analysis. LC-MS/MS characterization  Detection of Protein corona and detection and identification of newly proteomes Each gel lane was manually cutted and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) following the method described by Shevchenko et al., 1996, with slight modifications [19]. Briefly, Coomassie Blue gel plugs were detained with a working solution 1:1 (v/v) of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate-acetonitrile. Next, dehydrated plugs with acetonitrile were treated with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 56 °C for 45 min and subsequently alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Proteins were digested with formic acid and desalted by using C18-stage tips columns. The samples were partially dried and stored at -20°C until being analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Then, the trypsin digested proteins were analyzed by reversed-phase LC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap MS/MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). A nanoUPLC system (nanoAcquity, Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (NanoSpray flex, Proxeon, Thermo) was used for reversed-phase LC-MS/MS analy-sis. Peptides were dissolved in 0.5 % FA/ 3 % ACN and loaded onto a trapping column (nanoACQUITY UPLC 2G-V/M Trap Symmetry 5 μm particle size, 180 μm x 120 μm C18 column, Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a nanoACQUITY UPLC BEH 1.7 μm, 130 Å, 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) flow rate of 250 nL/min, gradient A formic acid 0.5 % and B: ACN, from 1 to 40 % B in 120 minutes. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in the positive on mole applying a data-dependent automatic switch between survey MS scan and tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) acquisition. Survey scans were acquired in the mass range of m/z 400 to 1600 with 30,000 resolution at m/z 400 with lock mass option enabled for the 445.120025 ions. The 20 most intense peaks having ≥2 change state and above the 500-intensity threshold were selected in the ion trap for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation with 35% normalized energy, 10 ms activation time, q=0.25, ±2 m/z precursor isolation width and wideband activation. Maximum injection time was 1000 and 50 ms for survey and MS/MS scans, respectively AGC was 1x106 for MS and 5x103 for MS/MS scans. Dy-namic exclusion was enabled for 90s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Data Analysis.  All raw files were converted to .mgf using Proteowizard [ref.]. Data files were searched using Comet via SearchGUI (v.3.2.10) against the Homo Sapiens; and PeptideShaker (v.1.16.2) against a custom database combining the NeXtProt database downloaded January 2020 with CrAP contaminant sequences (Uniprot_Rabbit_0009986_20180514; UniProt_Human_9606_20180202; UniProt_Bos_taurus_0009913_20180514).  Search parameters were set a follows carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminal as variable ones, precursor and fragments mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da mass tolerances for precursor and product ions, respectively, and fully tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages. Regarding AHA labeling Up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Met oxidation (+15.9949) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106) were specified as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.0125) as a fixed modification. In all AHA labelling experiments, AHA (-4.9863) and L-2,4-diaminobutanoate (-30.9768), a product of reduction of Aha, were specified as variable modifications for Met.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intracellular pathways, Protein labeling, Lc-ms/ms, Nanoparticles (nps), Protein corona, Cisplatin

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine and General Cytometry Service-Nucleus, CIBERONC CB16/12/00400, Cancer
Research Centre (IBMCC/CSIC/USAL/IBSAL), Spain

Department of Medicine and General Service of Cytometry, Cancer Research Centre-IBMCC, IBSAL. University of Salamanca-CSIC, Campus Miguel de Unamuno s/n, 37007 Salamanca, Spain

### Submitter
Ángela-Patricia Hernández

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Fuentes García
Department of Medicine and General Service of Cytometry, Cancer Research Centre-IBMCC, IBSAL. University of Salamanca-CSIC, Campus Miguel de Unamuno s/n, 37007 Salamanca, Spain


