### Accession
PXD022645

### Title
RNA-mediated activity-based protein profiling reveals dihydrouridine modification on human mRNA

### Description
Epitranscriptomic RNA modifications can regulate RNA activity, however there remains a major gap in our understanding of the scope of mRNA chemistry present in biological systems. Here, we develop RNA-mediated activity-based protein profiling (RNABPP), a chemoproteomic strategy relying upon metabolic RNA labeling with the mechanism-based inhibitor 5-fluorocytidine, mRNA interactome capture, and quantitative proteomics, to investigate pyrimidine-modifying enzymes in human cells. In addition to profiling 5-methylcytidine (m5C) methyltransferase activity on mRNA, metabolic deamination of 5-fluorocytidine to 5-fluorouridine allowed us to show that 5-methyluridine (m5U) is present on human mRNA and demonstrate that its formation is primarily mediated by the tRNA-modifying enzyme TRMT2A. Further, our approach uncovered DUS3L, the mammalian homolog of the yeast tRNA-dihydrouridine synthase DUS3, as a novel 5-fluoropyrimidine-reactive protein. We investigate the mechanism of protein-RNA crosslinking, which involves the conserved catalytic Cys residue, and use genetic knockdown combined with quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis to establish that DUS3L installs dihydrouridine (DHU) on human mRNA and small RNA. Finally, we find that DUS3L is important for cell proliferation and protein translation. Taken together, our work provides a general approach for profiling RNA modifying enzyme activity in vivo, and reveals the existence of new pathways for the epitranscriptomic regulation of mRNA behavior in human cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation  Samples were prepared mostly as previously described (PMID: 30151767). Samples were eluted in 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1mM EDTA by heating at 55C for 3min. The samples were dried using a vacuum evaporator at room temperature (RT) and taken up in 6M guanidine chloride in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.0. The samples were subsequently diluted to 2 M guanidine chloride in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.0 for overnight digestion with 20ng/uL Lys-C (Wako) at RT. The samples were further diluted to 0.5 mM guanidine chloride in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.0 and then digested with 20 ng/μL Lys-C and 10 ng/μL trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight.  The digested samples were dried using a vacuum evaporator at RT and taken up in 5ul of 200 mM EPPS pH 8.0. Then total material from each condition was labeled with 0.5 μL of 20 ug/μL tandem mass tags (TMT6-plex - Thermo Fisher Scientific). TMT samples were labeled for 2 h at RT. Labeled samples were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine solution. Samples from all conditions were combined into one tube, acidified with 5% phosphoric acid (pH <2) and subjected to a subsequent spin at 16,000 rcf for 10min at 4C. Supernatants were dried using a vacuum evaporator at room temperature. Dry samples were taken up in HPLC-grade water and stage-tipped for desalting (PMID: 17703201). The samples were resuspended in 1% formic acid to 0.5 ug/uL and analyzed with mass spectrometry.  Liquid Chromatography – Mass Spectrometry Method Approximately 2ug of sample was analyzed by LC-MS. LC-MS experiments were performed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The instrument was equipped with Easy-nLC 1200 HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each run, peptides were separated on a 100-μm i.d. microcapillary column, packed first with ∼0.5 cm of 5-μm BEH C18 packing material (Waters), followed by 30 cm of 1.7-μm BEH C18 (Waters) and then 30 cm of 1.7-μm BEH C18 (Waters). Separation was achieved by applying a 12% to 35% acetonitrile gradient in 0.125% formic acid and 2% DMSO over 90 min at 350 nL/min at 60 °C. Electrospray ionization was enabled by applying a voltage of 2.6 kV through a MicroTee at the inlet of the microcapillary column. We used the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with a TMT-MS2 method (PMID: 30609196).  The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode with a scan range of 400 to 2000 m/z with an RF lens (%) of 60, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 250% normalized target, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Charge states includes of 2+, 3+, 4+, 5+, and 6+. A dynamic exclusion window of 60 s with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm was used. The quadrupole filtered and collected ions at an isolation window of 1.5 Th for MS2 scans. Peptides were fragmented using a higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) collision energy of 32%, and a mass spectrum was acquired using the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000 with a standard AGC target of 5.0e4 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms. The mass range and scan range of the Orbitrap were set to normal and auto, respectively.

### Data Protocol
A suite of software tools developed in-house was used to convert mass spectrometry data from the Thermo RAW file to the mzXML format, as well as to correct erroneous assignments of peptide ion charge state and monoisotopic m/z (PMID: 21183079). Assignment of MS2 spectra was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm by searching the data against the human proteome reference dataset acquired from UniProt, including common contaminants like human keratins and trypsin (PMID: 24226387, PMID: 29425356). This forward database component was followed by a decoy component that included all listed protein sequences in reverse order (PMID: 17327847). Searches were performed using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance, in which both peptide termini were required to be consistent with trypsin or LysC specificity while allowing one missed cleavage. Fragment ion tolerance in the MS2 spectrum was set at 0.02 Th (TMT-MS2), TMT was set as a static modification of lysine residues and peptides’ N termini (+229.162932 Da), oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) was set as as a variable modification. An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.5% was achieved by applying the target decoy database search strategy (PMID: 17327847). Filtering was performed using a linear discrimination analysis with the following features: SEQUEST parameters XCorr and unique ΔXCorr, absolute peptide ion mass accuracy, peptide length, and charge state. Forward peptides within 3 SD of the theoretical m/ z of the precursor served as a positive training set; all reverse peptides served as a negative training set. Linear discrimination scores were used to sort peptides with at least seven residues and to filter with the desired cutoff. Furthermore, we performed a filtering step toward on the protein level by the “picked” protein FDR approach (PMID: 25987413). Protein redundancy was removed by assigning peptides to the minimal number of proteins which can explain all observed peptides, with above described filtering criteria (https://doi.org/10.1287/moor.4.3.233). We use isolation specificity filtering at 0.75 to filter co-isolation of other peptides. Signals of peptides for a protein are summed up to produce the protein signal. The relative signal across the channels for each protein is calculated by dividing the channel signal by the mean value across all channels. To correct for pipetting errors, the ratio in each channel is further normalized by the channel’s median value for a subset of proteins (SRSF3, SNRPE, SRSF10, SRSF1, SRSF4, CPSF1, SRSF7, SNRPB, SNRPF, SNRPD2, ZRANB2, POLRMT, TROVE2, FAM120A, SLTM, GEMIN5, MTPAP, MRPL43, SNRPD1) which are experimentally expected to be the same across the conditions (PMID: 30151768). The normalized values are then subjected to downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Rna modification, Metabolic rna labeling

### Affiliations
Wuhr Lab - Princeton University
Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA

### Submitter
Thao Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Wuhr
Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA


