### Accession
PXD020361

### Title
Aerobic and anaerobic hydrogen respiratory pathways in the extreme acidophile Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans

### Description
Hydrogen can be an important source of energy for chemolithotrophic acidophiles, especially in the deep terrestrial subsurface. Nevertheless, the current knowledge of microbial hydrogen utilization in acidic environments is minimal. A multi-omics analysis was applied on Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans growing aerobically and anaerobically (with ferric iron) on hydrogen as an electron donor, and a respiratory model proposed from the results obtained. In this model, both [NiFe] hydrogenases, cytoplasmic uptake and membrane-bound respiratory, oxidize molecular hydrogen to two protons and two electrons. The electrons are used to reduce membrane-soluble ubiquinone to ubiquinol. Genetically associated [FeS]-binding proteins mediate electron relay from the hydrogenases to the ubiquinone pool. Under aerobic conditions, reduced ubiquinol transfers electrons to either cytochrome aa3 oxidase via cytochrome bc1 complex and cytochrome c4 or the alternate directly to cytochrome bd oxidase, resulting in proton efflux together with the reduction of molecular oxygen to water. Under anaerobic conditions, reduced ubiquinol transfers electrons to outer membrane cytochrome c (ferric iron reductase) via cytochrome bc1 complex and a cascade of electron transporters (cytochrome c4, cytochrome c552, rusticyanin, and high potential iron-sulfur protein), resulting in proton efflux together with the reduction of ferric iron to ferrous iron. The proton gradient generated by molecular hydrogen oxidation maintains the membrane potential and allows the generation of ATP via ATP synthase and NADH via NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase. To a lesser extent, NADH can also be generated by another bidirectional cytoplasmic hydrogenase. ATP and NADH are further utilized in the Calvin–Benson–Bassham cycle for inorganic carbon uptake and assimilation. These results further clarify the role of extremophiles in biogeochemical processes and their impact on the composition and features of the deep terrestrial subsurface from the distant past to the present.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates for each condition were used for proteomic analyses. 200 μl of lysis buffer containing 8 M urea and 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) was added to each bacterial pellet of aerobically and anaerobically grown cells. The suspensions were homogenized by needle sonication (90  0.5 s pulses at 50 W; HD 2200, Bandelin) and then incubated for 60 min at room temperature. Homogenates were centrifuged at 14,000  g for 20 min at 4 °C and the supernatants (protein lysates) were stored at -80 °C. The protein concentration was determined by RC-DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad). One hundred μg of protein lysates were digested with trypsin (Promega; 1:30 trypsin:protein ratio) on 30 kDa Microcon columns (Merck Millipore) as previously described (Janacova et al., 2020). The eluted peptides were desalted on a C18 column (MicroSpin, Harvard Apparatus) (Bouchal et al., 2009), dried and stored at -80 °C. Prior to LC-MS analysis, the peptides were transferred into LC-MS vials using acidic extraction and concentrated in a vacuum concentrator to 25 μL (Hafidh et al., 2018). The peptide concentration was assessed using LC-UV analysis on the RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) based on the area under the UV chromatogram (214 nm) using an external calibration curve using in-house MEC cell line lysate digest (from 50 ng to 2000 ng per injection). One – two microliters of concentrated sample were spiked in with 2 μL of 10-fold diluted iRT peptide mix (Biognosys) for data dependent acquisition (DDA), or data independent acquisition (DIA), respectively. The sample volume was adjusted to 10 μL total volume by the addition of 0.5% formic acid and 0.001% PEG (Stejskal et al., 2013). Then, 5 μL of the 10-, or 5-fold diluted samples corresponding to approximately 0.5, or 1.0 μg of peptide material was injected onto a column for DDA, or DIA analyses, respectively. LC-MS/MS analyses of diluted peptide mixtures with spiked in iRT peptides were performed using an RSLCnano System coupled to a TOF Impact II mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). Before LC separation, the samples were concentrated online on the trap column (100 μm  20 mm) filled with 5 μm, 100 Å, C18 sorbent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham). The trapping and analytical columns were equilibrated before injecting the sample into the sample loop. The peptides were separated using an Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (3 µm particles, 100 Å, 75 μm  500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1 with the following LC gradient program, where the mobile phase A was 0.1% FA in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile: the proportion of mobile phase B was increased from the initial value of 1% to 56% over 120 min, raised to 90% between 120 and 130 min, and then held at 90% for 10 min. The analytical column's outlet was directly connected to a CaptiveSpray nanoBooster ion source (Bruker Daltonics). Each sample was analyzed in DDA mode for spectral library generation, and DIA mode for DIA-based quantification. In DDA mode, the NanoBooster was filled with acetonitrile, and then MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a 3 s cycle time. The mass range was set to 150–2200 m/z, and precursors were selected from 300 to 2000 m/z. The acquisition speeds of the MS and MS/MS scans were 2 Hz and 4–16 Hz, respectively, with the precise speed for MS/MS acquisitions being based on precursor intensity. For protein quantification in all samples in DIA mode, the NanoBooster was bypassed. MS and MS/MS data were acquired by performing survey MS scan followed by 64 MS/MS scans variable SWATH windows(Collins et al., 2017) between 400 and 1200 m/z (1 m/z overlap). The acquisition speed of MS/MS scans was 20 Hz, the speed of MS/MS spectrum acquisition depended on precursor intensity, and the cycle time did not exceed 3.5 s.

### Data Protocol
To create a spectral library, DDA data were searched in MaxQuant 1.5.8.3. (www.maxquant.org) against the genome sequence of the At. ferrooxidans CCM 4253 (GCA_003233765.1) complemented with the iRT protein database (Biognosys) and the internal database of common protein contaminants in Andromeda using the default settings for a Bruker qTOF-type mass spectrometer. In these searches, trypsin was the designated enzyme (cleaving polypeptides on the carboxyl side of lysine or arginine except when either is followed by proline), the maximum missed cleavage sites were set to 2, and the taxonomy was set as At. ferrooxidans. The PSM, protein, and site FDR thresholds were all set to 0.01 based on decoy database search. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 0.07 Da/0.006 Da (first search/main search) and 40 ppm, respectively. The permitted dynamic modifications were Oxidation (M); Acetyl (Protein N-terminus), and the only permitted static (fixed) modification was Carbamidomethyl (C). The spectral library was created in Spectronaut 11.0 (Biognosys), based on MaxQuant search results for all DDA analyses; it contained 14331 precursors representing 11409 peptides (of these, 11051 were proteotypic), 1620 protein groups and 1658 proteins. The spectral library file is available in the PRIDE dataset. Quantitative information was extracted from the DIA data using Spectronaut 11.0 for all corresponding proteins/peptides/transitions and all conditions, using an algorithm implemented in Spectronaut. Only proteotypic peptides detected with significant confidence (q < 0.01) at least three times across all DIA runs were included in the final dataset; this was ensured by using the "q-value 0.5 percentile" setting in Spectronaut. Local data normalization was applied between runs. Proteins with a |log2 fold change| > 0.58 and q < 0.05 (calculated using Student’s t-test as implemented in Spectronaut) were considered as significantly change.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans; acidophilic bacteria; iron reduction; hydrogen oxidation; hydrogenase; oxygen reduction; quantitative proteomics; respiratory pathways; rna sequencing; rubisco

### Affiliations
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Pavel Bouchal

### Lab Head
Dr Jiri Kucera
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Biochemistry


