### Accession
PXD024345

### Title
Multiplexed quantitative proteomics in an autoimmune mice model of myocarditis (EAM)

### Description
We performed a high-throughput, multiplexed quantitative proteomics analysis to determine protein abundance changes produced by BML-111 treatment in EAM and Ctrl mice. EAM was induced in 7 weeks-old BALB/c female mice by immunization at days 0 and 7 with a subcutaneous injection of 350 μg of murine cardiac myosin (MyHCα) in a 1:1 emulsion with complete Freund’s Adjuvant (SIGMA). MyHCα was isolated from hearts of Balb/c mice; control mice were injected with a 1:1 emulsion of physiological saline solution with complete Freund’s Adjuvant. Mice were treated daily for two weeks from day 7 by intraperitoneal injection with two complementary treatments: 1mg/Kg BML-111(Enzo Life Science) or its vehicle (2.5% ethanol). The proteomics analysis was performed in heart tissue protein extracts (four animals per group: Ctrl+Veh, EAM+Veh, Ctrl+BML and EAM+BML.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were obtained by tissue homogenization with ceramic beads (MagNa Lyser Green Beads apparatus, Roche, Germany) in extraction buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM iodoacetamide, 4% SDS, pH 8.5, according to the FASILOX method (Bonzon-Kulichenko et al., 2020). Protein digestion was performed using the filter-assisted sample preparation method (FASP, Expedeon, San Diego, USA) following a method previously described (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Peptides were subjected to multiplexed isobaric labeling with 10-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions.Peptide samples were taken up in 0.1% formic acid and applied to an Easy-nLC 1000 nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS/MS was acdquired with the Top15 data-dependent MS/MS scan method (TopN method).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified with the SEQUEST HT algorithm integrated in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). MS/MS scans were searched against a Mus musculus protein database supplemented with human keratin proteins and pig trypsin (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot 2020_09 Release). The MS/MS spectra were also searched against an inverted (decoy) database built from the target database. SEQUEST results were analyzed using the probability ratio method (Martinez-Bartolome et al., 2008). The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated after competition between the target and decoy results using the refined method (Navarro et al., 2009).Protein quantification and statistical and systems-biology analysis were performed using the weighted spectrum, peptide and protein (WSPP) (Navarro et al., 2014)and Systems Biology Triangle (SBT) (Garcia-Marques et al., 2016) models, using a software suite (SanXoT) as described (Trevisan-Herraz et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
Specialized proresolving mediators and, in particular, 5(S), (6)R, 7-trihydroxyheptanoic acid methyl ester (BML-111) emerge as new therapeutic tools to prevent cardiac dysfunction and deleterious cardiac damage associated with myocarditis progression. The cardioprotective role of BML-111 is mainly caused by the prevention of increased oxidative stress and nuclear factor erythroid-derived 2-like 2 (NRF2) down-regulation induced by myocarditis. At the molecular level, BML-111 activates NRF2 signaling, which prevents sarcoplasmic reticulum-adenosine triphosphatase 2A down-regulation and Ca<sup>2+</sup> mishandling, and attenuates the cardiac dysfunction and tissue damage induced by myocarditis.

### Keywords
Heart, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC) and CIBER de Enfermedades Cardiovasculares (CIBERCV), Madrid, Spain
Vascular Biology and Inflammation

### Submitter
Inmaculada Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús María Vázquez Cobos
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC) and CIBER de Enfermedades Cardiovasculares (CIBERCV), Madrid, Spain


