### Accession
PXD029051

### Title
label-free quantification proteomics of human aortic tissues by LC-MSMS

### Description
We profiled the proteome of human aotic tissues to idntified the different expressed proteins of thoracic aortic dissection

### Sample Protocol
All tissues were lysed in UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl) containing protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher), followed by mechanical grinding at a frequency of 60 Hz at 4 °C for 3 min. The lysate was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected as a whole extract. The protein concentrations were determined using the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher). Samples were then digested using the filter-aided sample preparation method.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (PD 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass tolerances were 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification; N-acetylation and oxidation of methionine were used as variable modifications. The false discovery rates were set to less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Aim:</b> Thoracic aortic dissection (TAD) is a high-risk vascular disease. The mortality rate of untreated TADs in 24 h was as high as 50%. Thus, rapid diagnosis of TAD in the emergency department would get patients to the right treatments to save their lives. <b>Methods:</b> We profiled the proteome of aortic tissues from TAD patients using a label-free quantification proteomics method. The differentially expressed proteins were screened and subjected to bioinformatics analysis. Candidate biomarkers were selected and validated in independent serum samples using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs). The diagnostic values were further predicted <i>via</i> receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. <b>Results:</b> A total of 1,141 differentially expressed proteins were identified in aortic tissues from 17 TAD patients and eight myocardial infarction (MI) patients. Six proteins were selected as candidate biomarkers for ELISAs in an independent training set of 20 serum samples (TAD = 10, MI = 10). Of these proteins, four with a <i>P</i>-value &lt; 0.01 were further validated in another independent set of 64 serum samples (TAD = 32, MI = 32) <i>via</i> ELISAs. ITGA2, COL2A1, and MIF had <i>P</i>-values &lt; 0.0001, and their areas under the curve (AUCs) were 0.801 (95% CI: 0.691-0.911), 0.773 (95% CI: 0.660-0.887), and 0.701 (95% CI: 0.574-0.828), respectively. <b>Conclusion:</b> ITGA2, COL2A1, and MIF were identified as promising biomarkers for discriminating TAD from emergency patients with severe chest pain. Biomarker-guided emergency triage could further shorten the time for patients to get more effective treatments.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Aotic

### Affiliations
Department of Vascular Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Zhijue Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Xinwu Lu
Department of Vascular Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China


