### Accession
PXD033522

### Title
Complexome profiling of mitochondria to study NDUFAF1 mediated complex I assembly in Yarrowia lipolytica

### Description
The aerobic yeast Yarrowia lipolytica is an established model organism to study mitochondrial protein complexes. Here we performed a complexome analysis of intact mitochondria to study the function of NDUFAF1 in the assembly of respiratory complex I. In the ndufaf1 deletion strain the PD module of the membrane arm accumulated but mature complex I was virtually absent.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and blue native electrophoresis (BNE) were essential done as described in (Wittig et al., 2006). After native electrophoresis, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid). Each lane was cut into 48 equal fractions. Fractions were collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) separated using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 30 % eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min and an additional gradient to 60% for 5 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v2.0.1.0) [Cox et al. 2008 ] using default settings. Proteins were identified using Yarrowia. lipolytica proteome database UniProtKB with 6,457 entries, released in February 2022 supplemented with the proteins NUUM (A0A1H6Q311), NEBM (NDUFC2, A0A1D8NGI5) and NIGM (NDUFB2, A0A1D8NFX6). The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 5%. Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. Heatmap and clustering was performed using NOVA (Giese et al. 2015).  Wittig I, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc. 1:418-28.   Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31:440-1.

### Publication Abstract
Respiratory complex I is a&#xa0;~1-MDa proton pump in mitochondria. Its structure has been revealed in great detail, but the structural basis of its assembly, in humans involving at least 15 assembly factors, is essentially unknown. We determined cryo-electron microscopy structures of assembly intermediates associated with assembly factor NDUFAF1 in a yeast model system. Subunits ND2 and NDUFC2 together with assembly factors NDUFAF1 and CIA84 form the nucleation point of the NDUFAF1-dependent assembly pathway. Unexpectedly, the cardiolipin remodeling enzyme tafazzin is an integral component of this core complex. In a later intermediate, all 12 subunits of the proximal proton pump module have assembled. NDUFAF1 locks the central ND3 subunit in an assembly-competent conformation, and major rearrangements of central subunits are required for complex I maturation.

### Keywords
Assembly, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, University Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Volker Zickermann
Institute of Biochemistry II, University Hospital, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.


