### Accession
PXD024053

### Title
BoLA-DRimmunopeptidomics in Theileria parva infected, bovine cell lines

### Description
The ability to maintain T.parva-infected cell lines as rapidly proliferating cells in vitro that express high levels of both MHCI and MHCII, makes this a particularly amenable system in which to apply MHCp elution analysis. Furthermore, the ability of T. parva-infected cells to recall antigen-specific T-cells without the need for supplementary APCs indicates that the peptides presented by T. parva are those that stimulate T-cell responses. We have utilised the repertoire of bovine derived peptides from MHCp elution  studies conducted on T. parva-infected cells to define the peptide binding motifs of a variety of BoLA-MHCI and BoLA-DR molecules and facilitated the development of novel more accurate peptide binding prediction algorithms.

### Sample Protocol
Brazilian Holstein-Friesian PBMC samples were obtained from frozen archived materials from animals within the herd at the University of Sao Paulo that had been included in previous experiments completed under approval from the Committee on the Ethics of Animals Research at the Nowavet Veterinary Clinical Studies CRO, Viçosa/MG, certificate numbers 56/2016 (approved on 03 August 2016) and 36/2017 (approved on 09 June 2017). PBMC used for the characterization of BoLA-DR presented peptides from ovalbumin were isolated from a Holstein-Friesian animal from the University of Edinburgh herd with sampling conducted under a license granted under the UK Animal (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986. The Theileria annulata- and Theileria parva-infected cell lines used in this study had been established and characterised as part of previous studies and were maintained using routine and well-established protocols (doi:10.1007/BF01404140).   Cells were harvested whilst in a log growth phase and trypan blue staining was used to verify that >95% of the cells were viable at the point of harvest. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and then lysed in buffer(1% IGEPAL, 15mM TRIS pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl and cOmplete protease inhibitor(Roche)) at a density of 2x108 cells/mL for 1 min, diluted with PBS 1:1 and solubilized for 45 min at 4°C. Lysates were cleared by two-step centrifugation at 500 g for 15 min followed by 15,000 g for 45 min at 4°C. BoLA-MHCI complexes were captured directly from the lysate using the pan anti-BoLA-MHCI antibody ILA-88 that was covalently conjugated to protein A sepharose immunoresin (GE healthcare) at a concentration of 5mg/ml. BoLA-DR complexes were captured from the lysate following a preliminary removal of BoLA-MHCI complexes (using BoLA-MHCI capture as described above) using a pan anti-BoLA-DR antibody (ILA-21) conjugated to protein A sepharose immunoresin at a concentration of 5mg/ml. Captured BoLA-MHCI and BoLA-DR complexes were washed sequentially using buffers of 50 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.0 containing 150 mM NaCl, then 400 mM NaCl, and finally 0mM NaCl prior to elution in 10% acetic acid.      Affinity column-eluted material was dried, re-suspended in 120 μl loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 1% acetonitrile in water) and loaded onto on a 4.6 x 50 mm ProSwiftTM RP-1S column (Thermo Scientific) for reverse-phase chromatography on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific).  Elution was performed using a 0.5 mL/min flow rate over 5 min on a gradient of 2 to 35% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid). Eluted fractions were collected from 1 to 8.5 min, for 30 s each. Protein detection was performed at 280 nm. Even and odd eluted fractions were pooled together, vacuum dried and stored at -80 °C until use.      Samples were dried and suspended in 20 μl loading buffer and analysed on an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system online coupled to either an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) or a QExactive-HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 75 μm x 50 cm PepMap C18 column using a 2h linear gradient from 5% buffer A to 35% buffer B at a flow rate of 250 nl/min (approx. 600 bar). Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer using a nano Easy Spray source (Thermo Scientific) at 2000V. Subsequent isolation and higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) was induced on the 20 most abundant ions per full MS scan with an accumulation time of 128 ms and an isolation width of 1.0 Da. All fragmented precursor ions were actively excluded from repeated selection for 8 s.

### Data Protocol
The sequence interpretations of mass spectrometry spectra were performed using a database containing all bovine UniProt entries combined with entry P01012 for chicken ovalbumin (total of 41610 entries) and 4084 entries for Theileria parva Muguga proteome (PMID: 32245418). The spectral interpretation was performed using de novo-assisted database search with PEAKS 10 (Bioinformatics Solutions), in 'no enzyme' mode, with mass tolerances of 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.03 Da for fragment ions. The data was further searched against 313 inbuild peptide modifications.

### Publication Abstract
MHC peptide binding and presentation is the most selective event defining the landscape of T cell epitopes. Consequently, understanding the diversity of MHC alleles in a given population and the parameters that define the set of ligands that can be bound and presented by each of these alleles (the immunopeptidome) has an enormous impact on our capacity to predict and manipulate the potential of protein Ags to elicit functional T cell responses. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis of MHC-eluted ligand data has proven to be a powerful technique for identifying such peptidomes, and methods integrating such data for prediction of Ag presentation have reached a high level of accuracy for both MHC class I and class II. In this study, we demonstrate how these techniques and prediction methods can be readily extended to the bovine leukocyte Ag class II DR locus (BoLA-DR). BoLA-DR binding motifs were characterized by eluted ligand data derived from bovine cell lines expressing a range of DRB3 alleles prevalent in Holstein-Friesian populations. The model generated (NetBoLAIIpan, available as a Web server at www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetBoLAIIpan) was shown to have unprecedented predictive power to identify known BoLA-DR-restricted CD4 epitopes. In summary, the results demonstrate the power of an integrated approach combining advanced mass spectrometry peptidomics with immunoinformatics for characterization of the BoLA-DR Ag presentation system and provide a prediction tool that can be used to assist in rational evaluation and selection of bovine CD4 T cell epitopes.

### Keywords
Bovine leukocyte antigen; theileria parva; mhc, Immunppeptidomics

### Affiliations
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Nicola Ternette

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Ternette
University of Oxford


