### Accession
PXD020487

### Title
Proteomics of Human Blood and Semen Exosomes: Set 2

### Description
Our analyses uncover enrichment of exosome-based protein signatures specific to blood and semen along with identification of tissue-dependent and -independent perturbations in blood and semen exosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes were purified from human plasma or semen samples with ExoQuick reagent. Protein samples were reduced, alkylated and trypcinized before the LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analysed by a 10-step MudPIT analysis in a Thermo-Fischer LTQ XL Orbiotrap. MS data acquisition was done in a data-dependent 6-event method (a survey FTMS scan [res. 30,000] followed by five data-dependent IT scans for five consequent most abundant ions).

### Data Protocol
Database searches were done with PEAKS (version Xplus) software against the forward and reverse human trypsin sequences (as downloaded from SwissProt). The parameters for database search: full tryptic digestion; up to 3 missed cleavage site; 20 ppm for peptide mass tolerance; 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance; cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57 Da) as fixed modification; methionine oxidation (+16 Da) as variable modification. The relative label free quantification (LFQ) of the identified proteins was performed with the Q module of the PEAKS software based on the extracted ion currents of the identified unique peptides’ parent ions or a spectral counting approach, and statistically significant changes have been confirmed with the Fisher’s exact test (p ≤ 0.005; Benjamini-Hochberg FDR < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Blood and semen are important body-fluids that carry exosomes for bioinformation transmission. Therefore, characterization of their proteomes is necessary for understanding body-fluid-specific physiologic and pathophysiologic functions. Using systematic multifactorial proteomic profiling, we characterized the proteomes of exosomes and exosome-free fractions from autologous blood and semen from three HIV-uninfected and three HIV-infected participants (total of 24 samples). We identified exosome-based protein signatures specific to blood and semen along with HIV-induced tissue-dependent proteomic perturbations. We validated our findings with samples from 16 additional donors and showed that unlike blood exosomes (BE), semen exosomes (SE) are enriched in clusterin. SE but not BE promote Protein&#xb7;Nucleic acid binding and increase cell adhesion irrespective of HIV infection. This is the first comparative study of the proteome of autologous BE and SE. The proteins identified may be developed as biomarkers applicable to different fields of medicine, including reproduction and infectious diseases.

### Keywords
Semen, Lc-ms/ms, Exosomes, Blood

### Affiliations
Meharry Medical College

### Submitter
Siddharth Pratap

### Lab Head
Dr Siddharth Pratap, PhD
Meharry Medical College


