### Accession
PXD035725

### Title
Characterisation of eggshell proteomes from the extinct Madagascar elephant bird

### Description
Characterisation of eggshell proteomes from the extinct Madagascar elephant bird

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction followed published protocols for ostrich eggshell proteomics analyses (Demarchi et al., 2016) at the Archaeobiomics laboratory at the University of Turin (Italy). Briefly, 30-35 mg of each of the eggshells (Table S15) were powdered using a clean agate pestle and mortar and bleached in sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl, 12% w/v) for 72 hours in order to isolate a stable fraction of intracrystalline molecules (Crisp et al., 2013). Bleached powders were rinsed in ultrapure water and methanol and demineralised in cold 0.6 M hydrochloridric acid (HCl). Solutions containing the organic extracts were ultrafiltered (Nanosep Centrifugal Devices, 3-kDa MWCO, Pall Laboratory) and resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (50 mM). Following reduction and alkylation of disulphide bonds with DTT and IAA, samples were split into two subsamples (“T” and “E”, where T=trypsin and E=elastase) and digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C by adding 4 μL trypsin (0.5 μg/μL; Promega, 2800 Woods Hollow Road Madison, WI 53,711 USA) for 'T' subsamples and 4 μL elastase (1 μg/μL; Worthington, Lakewood, NJ, USA) for 'E' subsamples. Digests were purified using C18 solid-phase extraction (Pierce zip-tip; Thermo-Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted peptides were evaporated to dryness before being sent for LC-MS/MS analyses.  Eluted and dried down peptides were received at the Novo Nordisk Centre for Protein Research (Copenhagen, Denmark) and suspended in 50 µL 80% acetonitrile (ACN) before combining both trypsin and elastase digested fractions to make 100 µL. Protein concentration was then determined by measuring the absorption at 205 nm (= the peptide bond) using a NanoDrop Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). Depending on concentration, 1.5-4 µL of peptide solution was then transferred to a 96-well MS plate, to equal about 0.75 µg of protein for each sample. 40% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) was added to make a total of 25 µl before using a SpeedVac (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) to concentrate the samples until ≈ 3 μL of solution was left. Samples were then resuspended with 5 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 5% ACN.   Samples analyzed by an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to a Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) on a 77 min gradient. The column was 15 cm (75 μm inner diameter), in-house laser pulled and packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany), and maintained at 40°C using an integrated column oven. Buffer A was milliQ water. The peptides were separated with increasing buffer B (80% ACN and 0.1% FA), going from 5% to 30%  in 50 min, 30% to 45% in 10 min, 45% to 80% in 2 min, held at 80% for 5 min before dropping back down to 5% in 5 min and held for 5 min. Flow rate was 250 nL/min. A wash-blank method using 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN was run in between each sample to hinder cross contamination.  The Q-Exactive HF-X was operated in data dependent top 10 mode. Spray voltage was 2 kV, S-lens RF level at 50, and heated capillary at 275°C. Full scan mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 over the m/z range 350–1400 with a target value of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. HCD-generated product ions were recorded with a maximum ion injection time set to 118 ms and a target value set to 2e5 and recorded at a resolution of 60,000. Normalized collision energy was set at 28% and the isolation window was 1.2 m/z with the dynamic exclusion set to 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Resulting .raw files were searched using PEAKS v.8.5 (Zhang et al., 2012). Parent ion and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively, with unspecific digestion. Deamidation of N and Q, as well as Oxidation of M, H, and W were set as variable PTMs. The thresholds for peptide and protein identification were set as follows: false discovery rate ≤ 0.5%, de novo sequences scores (ALC%) ≥ 80, unique peptides ≥ 2. The NCBI database (taxonomy restricted to Aves) was used for carrying out preliminary searches, and a database including common contaminants was included (Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins: https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Further searches were performed against XCA-1 and XCA-2 sequences from the B10K genomes project (https://b10k.genomics.cn/), annotated manually as described in Demarchi et al. (2022). The proteomics datasets have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the Proteomics Identifications Database (PRIDE; submission number TBA). Sequence reconstruction was carried out on the basis of the Spider output of the software PEAKS, taking into account both identified peptides (i.e., those fully matched to one of the reference sequences) and de novo only peptides (i.e., those software-reconstructed peptide sequences that cannot be matched fully but share at least seven amino acid residues with the reference sequence). Sequence reconstruction was performed manually, evaluating each peptide sequence and product ion spectrum. The protein structure of XCA-1 and XCA-2 was inferred using the ColabFold AlphaFold2 notebook  (Steinegger et al., n.d.; Jumper et al., 2021).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eggshell, Aepyornis, Mullerornis, Madagascar, Palaeoproteomics

### Affiliations
University of Turin
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology University of Turin  Italy

### Submitter
Beatrice Demarchi

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrice Demarchi
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology University of Turin  Italy


