### Accession
PXD043333

### Title
Oncogene EVI1 Drives Acute Myeloid Leukemia Via a Targetable Interaction  with CTBP2

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) driven by the activation of EVI1 due to chromosome 3q26/MECOM rearrangements is incurable with current chemotherapy regimens. Insight into the mechanism by which  EVI1 drives myeloid transformation is needed to target EVI1 in those leukemias. Here we demonstrate  recurrent interaction of CTBP1/2 with a unique PLDLS motif in EVI1, which is indispensable for leukemic  transformation of 3q26/MECOM rearranged AML. A PLDLS competitor construct outcompetes EVI1 to  CTBP1/2 binding and inhibits AML proliferation in xenotransplant models. This proof-of-concept study  opens the possibility to target one of the most incurable forms of AML using specific inhibitors directed to  EVI1/CTBP1/2 interaction. Our findings have important implications for other tumour types with aberrant  expression of EVI1 or other oncogenic transcription factors that also depend on CTBP1/2 interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were on-bead digested with sequencing grade trypsin (1:100 (w:w), Roche) overnight at room temperature. Protein digests were then desalted using a Sep-Pak tC18 Vac cartridge (Waters) and eluted with 80% acetonitrile (AcN). Peptides were then analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS as described below.  Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed on an EASY-nLC system (Thermo) coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer or an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (both Thermo), operating in positive mode and equipped with a nanospray source. Peptide mixtures were trapped on a ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 1.5 cm × 100 µm, packed in-house) at a flow rate of 8 µl/min. Peptide separation was performed on ReproSil C18 reversed phase column (Dr Maisch GmbH; column dimensions 15 cm × 50 µm, packed in-house) using a linear gradient from 0 to 80% B (A = 0.1% FA; B = 80% (v/v) AcN, 0.1 % FA) in 120 min and at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column eluent was directly sprayed into the ESI source of the mass spectrometer.  For data dependent acquisition (DDA): All mass spectra were acquired in profile mode. The resolution in MS1 mode was set to 120,000 (AGC target: 4E5), the m/z range 350-1400. Fragmentation of precursors was performed in 2 s cycle time data-dependent mode by HCD with a precursor window of 1.6 m/z and a normalized collision energy of 30.0; MS2 spectra were recorded in the orbitrap at 30,000 resolution. Singly charged precursors were excluded from fragmentation and the dynamic exclusion was set to 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: DDA raw data files were analyzed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 2.2.0.0, Tyanova et al. (2016)) for identification and relative quantification of proteins. ‘Match between runs’ was disabled and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids were required. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the Homo sapiens Uniprot database (version May 2022) concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences and a contaminant database listing typical background proteins. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant’s default settings for Orbitrap and ion trap spectra. The maximum precursor ion charge state used for searching was 7 and the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. Further modifications were cysteine carbamidomethylation (fixed) as well as methionine oxidation. The minimum number of peptides for positive protein identification was set to 2. The minimum number of razor and unique peptides set to 1. Only unique and razor non-modified, methionine oxidized and protein N-terminal acetylated peptides were used for protein quantitation. The minimal score for modified peptides was set to 40 (default value).  MS raw data and data for protein identification and quantification were submitted as supplementary tables to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data identifier PXD… [follows].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ctbp2, Interactomics, Evi1, Acute myeloid leukemia (aml)

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Erasmus MC


