### Accession
PXD003940

### Title
Phosphatase POPX2 exhibits dual regulatory functions in cancer metastasis

### Description
Cancer metastasis is a complex mechanism involving multiple processes. In an earlier study, we reported that the levels of serine/threonine phosphatase POPX2were positively correlated with cancer cell motility through modulating MAPK signaling. Surprisingly, here we found that POPX2 knockdown cells induced more numerous and larger tumor nodules in lungs in longer term animal studies. Interestingly, our analysis of DNA microarray data from cancer patient samples that are available on public databases shows that low POPX2 expression is linked to poor survival rate and patients with distant metastasis.These observations suggest that lower levels of POPX2 may favor tumor progression in later stages of metastasis.We hypothesize that POPX2 may do so by modulation of angiogenesis. Secretomeanalysis of POPX2-knockdown MDA-MB-231 cells using LC-MS/MS based SILAC quantitative proteomics and cytokine arrayshow that silencing of POPX2 leads to increased secretion of exosomes, which may in turn induce multiple pro-angiogenic cytokines.This study, combined with our earlier findings,suggeststhat a single ubiquitously expressed phosphatase POPX2 influences cancer metastasisvia modulating multiple biological processes including MAPK signaling and exosome-cytokine secretion.

### Sample Protocol
The control cells were cultured in RPMI1640 medium containing heavy arginine and heavy lysine, along with 10% (v/v) dialyzed fetal bovine serum and 100U/ml penicillin, and 100µg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen, CA, USA). The X2-shRNA1cells were maintained in RPMI1640 medium containing light arginine and light lysine, along with 10% (v/v) dialyzed fetal bovine serum, 100U/ml penicillin, and 100µg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen, CA, USA). All cells were grown in 37 oC humidified incubator supplemented with 5% CO2. The cells used in the experiments were grown up to seven passages to ensure full incorporation of heavy and light amino acids. The complete incorporation of heavy K8 and R6 into cellular proteins wereconfirmed by LC-MS/MS. Supplementary data 1 show complete SILAC labeling in controlcells with K8 and R6 SILAC reagents in three randomly selected peptideswith different abundances. When the cells were grown to 70% confluence, all cells were washed with 1×PBS for four times and serum free RPMI1640 medium once, followed by exposure to serum free medium for 6h to remove serum proteins. Cells were then exposed to fresh serum free medium for another 24h for secretome/CM collection. Protease inhibitor was added to the CM collected (400ml each) to minimize protein degradation.The CMwere centrifuged at 201g for 10min at 4oCand filtered (0.22µm pore size) to remove cell debris. TheCM were then concentrated to 200-300µl using 15ml ultra filterwith 10kDacut-off (Millipore) bycentrifugation at 3220g at 4oC. The concentrated CMwere collected into a sterile 1.5ml tube and stored at -80oC until use.  Conditioned mediawere dissolved in 10% SDS, along with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and phosSTOPphosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and dithiothreitol (Sigma). Protein concentration was determined by Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) protein assay. Equal amounts of protein (50µg each) from heavy and light samples were mixed at a 1:1 ratio and stored at -80oC for the following experiments. Proteins(~ 50µg) were separated on 4-12% NuPAGE gradient gel (Invitrogen). After SDS-PAGE, coomassieblue stainingwas adopted to visualize protein bands. The whole lane was cut into 10 fractions for in-gel digestion. The gel pieces were washed with destaining solution several times until the color totally disappear, followed by dehydration with 100% acetonitrile and vacuum dried. Subsequently, proteins were reduced with 10mMdithiothreitol at 56oC for 1h, followed by alkylation with 55 mMiodoacetamide at room temperature for 45min. Gel pieces were dehydrated again with 100% acetonitrile and vacuum dried. In-gel digestion was carried out by trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 1:100 (m/m), and at 37oC overnight. The supernatant was then transferred to a new 1.5ml tube and the peptides were extracted with extraction buffer (50% acetonitrile + 5% acetic acid). Gel pieces were vortexed for 10sec and sonicated for 30min. The supernatant was collected into the same tube. The extraction steps were repeated several times for complete peptide extraction. Peptides were vacuum dried and stored at -80oC until LC-MS/MS analysis. Three independent biological replicates (BR1, BR2 and BR3) were performed (Fig. 3A). The tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% fomic acid and each fraction was injected twice for technical replicates(TR1 and TR2) in LC-MS/MS. The peptides were separated and analyzed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher, MA) as previous described(25). Approximately 2 µg of peptide from each fraction was injected into an Acclaim peptide trap column (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA) via the DionexRSLCnano auto-sampler. Peptides were separated in aDionex EASY-Spray 75 µm × 10 cm column  packed with PepMap C18 3µm, 100 Å; (Thermo-Scientific, MA, USA) at 35oC. The flow rate was 300 nl min-1. Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in 5% acetonitrile) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) were used to establish a 60 min gradient. Peptides were then analyzed on Q-Exactive with an EASY nanospray source (Thermo Fisher, MA) at an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV. A full MS scan (350-1600 m/z range) was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set as 15 s. The resolution of the HCD spectra was set to 35,000 at m/z 200. The AGC settings of the full MS scan and the MS2 scanwere 3E6 and 2E5, respectively. The 10 most intense ions above the 2000 count threshold were selected for fragmentation in HCD with a maximum ion accumulation time of 120 msec. An isolation width of 2 was used for MS2. Single and unassigned charged ions were excluded from MS/MS. For HCD, the normalized collision energy was set to 28%. The underfill ratio was defined as 0.2%.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files of the six replicates (three biological replicates × two injections) were processed and searched as six experiments using MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8) (26, 27)and the Uniprot human protein database (downloaded on15July 2015, 90478 sequences, 35890546 residues) together with the common contaminant proteins. Standard search type with 2 multiplicity, 3 maximum labeled AAs and heavy labeled Lys8 and Arg6 were used for the SILAC quantitation. The database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine bundled with MaxQuant using the MaxQuant default parameters for Q-ExactiveOrbitrap mass spectrometer. Briefly, the first and main searches peptide mass tolerance were 20ppm and 4.5ppm respectively while the MS/MS match tolerance was 20 ppm with FTMS de-isotoping enabled. The absence of two trypsin cleavage sites per protein was allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M), and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modifications. The search was performed in the revert decoy mode with PSM FDR, protein FDR and site decoy fraction set to 0.01.  A total of 1766 proteins were identified in the secretome by Andromeda in MaxQuant with FDR < 1% (Supplementary data 2). Among these proteins, 1560 proteins were identified with at least two unique peptides. Of the 1560 proteins, MaxQuant reported SILAC ratio for 1453 proteins that were used for further analysis. The scatter plots of inter-technical replicates and inter- biological replicates were used to evaluate the technical and biological reproducibility of the experiments respectively (Supplementary data 2).

### Publication Abstract
Cancer metastasis is a complex mechanism involving multiple processes. Previously, our integrative proteome, transcriptome, and phosphoproteome study reported that the levels of serine/threonine phosphatase POPX2 were positively correlated with cancer cell motility through modulating MAPK signaling. Surprisingly, here we found that POPX2 knockdown cells induced more numerous and larger tumor nodules in lungs in longer term animal studies. Interestingly, our analysis of DNA microarray data from cancer patient samples that are available in public databases shows that low POPX2 expression is linked to distant metastasis and poor survival rate. These observations suggest that lower levels of POPX2 may favor tumor progression in later stages of metastasis. We hypothesize that POPX2 may do so by modulation of angiogenesis. Secretome analysis of POPX2-knockdown MDA-MB-231 cells using LC-MS/MS-based SILAC quantitative proteomics and cytokine array show that silencing of POPX2 leads to increased secretion of exosomes, which may, in turn, induce multiple pro-angiogenic cytokines. This study, combined with our previous findings, suggests that a single ubiquitously expressed phosphatase POPX2 influences cancer metastasis via modulating multiple biological processes including MAPK signaling and exosome cytokine secretion.

### Keywords
Exosome, Cytokine, Tumor angiogenesis, Silac mass spectrometry, Secretome, Popx2 phosphatase

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Nanyang Technological University School of Biological Science

### Submitter
Songjing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Cheng Gee Koh
Nanyang Technological University School of Biological Science


