### Accession
PXD044656

### Title
The alternative Nucleosome Remodeling Factor complex sustains acute myeloid leukemia by regulating the accessibility of insulator regions

### Description
Efficient treatment of Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) patients remains a challenge despite recent advances. Here using a CRISPRi screen targeting chromatin factors, we identified BPTF as an essential regulator of AML cell survival. We demonstrate that BPTF forms an alternative NURF chromatin remodeling complex with SMARCA5 and BAP18, which regulates the accessibility of a large set of insulator regions in leukemic cells. This ensures efficient CTCF binding and boundary formation between topologically associated domains that is essential for maintaining the leukemic transcriptional programs. We also demonstrate that the well-studied PHD2-BROMO chromatin reader modules of BPTF, while contributing to complex recruitment to chromatin, are dispensable for leukemic cell growth. Taken together, our results uncover how the alternative NURF complex contributes to leukemia and provide a rationale for its targeting in AML.

### Sample Protocol
For each of the four replicates of THP-1 cells transduced with either sgNegCtrl of sgBPTF KO sgRNA, 10 million cells were lysed in 50 mM EPPS, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, complete protease inhibitors and 25 U/mL of Benzonase. The lysate was kept on ice for 5 minutes to allow DNA digestion and cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 5 minutes and filtering through acropep advance 96-well 2 ml, 1 um glass fiber filter plate. Immunoprecipitation was performed for 1 hour at 4°C with anti-BPTF antibody (for details, see Table 9) in Eppendorf™ Deepwell™ Plates 96 with shaking at 1300 rpm. After immunoprecipitation, the beads were washed five times in wash buffer (50 mM EPPS, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl) and subjected to trypsin digestion for two hours at 37°C with 15 ul of 10 ng/μl LysC and 20 ng/μl Trypsin in 10 mM EPPS pH 8.5 on Orochem OF1100 plates. The digest was labelled with 4 μl 20 g/L TMTPro tags, as the manufacturer recommended. The material was fractionated by Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit, concatenating 2 fractions into a superfraction (e.g., 1 and 5). After fractionation, the samples were evaporated using a vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 20 ul 0.1% TFA and 4.5 ul was analyzed by Waters nanoAcquity M Class UPLC on 2 µm particle size, 75 um x 500 mm easyspray column in direct injection mode. The samples were separated using the following gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile): 0-7% in 5 min, 7-30% in 90 min, 30-50% in 20 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument using the MS3 SPS method with the settings recommended by the instrument manufacturer with the following modifications: 1. CID NCE for MS2 was set at 32; 2. HCD NCE for MS3 was set at 45; 3. C series exclusion was disabled, since the TMTPro reagent was not enabled in C-series exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software. A database search was performed with the Sequest HT search engine using the Homo Sapiens UniProt database containing only reviewed entries and canonical isoforms (retrieved on 14/06/2019). Oxidation (M) was set as a variable modification, while TMTPro was set as a fixed modification. A maximum of two missed cleavages were permitted. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. PSMs were validated by percolator with a 0.01 posterior error probability (PEP) threshold. Only PSMs with isolation interference < 25% and at least 5 MS2 fragments selected for MS3 matched to peptide sequence were considered. The quantification results of peptide spectrum matches were combined into protein-level quantitation using the MSstatsTMT R package (Choi et al., 2014) with at least 2 peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Efficient treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients remains a challenge despite recent therapeutic advances. Here, using a CRISPRi screen targeting chromatin factors, we identified the nucleosome-remodeling factor (NURF) subunit BPTF as an essential regulator of AML cell survival. We demonstrate that BPTF forms an alternative NURF chromatin remodeling complex with SMARCA5 and BAP18, which regulates the accessibility of a large set of insulator regions in leukemic cells. This ensures efficient CTCF binding and boundary formation between topologically associated domains that is essential for maintaining the leukemic transcriptional programs. We also demonstrate that the well-studied PHD2-BROMO chromatin reader domains of BPTF, while contributing to complex recruitment to chromatin, are dispensable for leukemic cell growth. Taken together, our results uncover how the alternative NURF complex contributes to leukemia and provide a rationale for its targeting in AML.

### Keywords
Human, Aml, Bptf

### Affiliations
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences proteomics and metabolomics core
Head of MRC LMS proteomics core

### Submitter
Pavel Shliaha

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Shliaha
Head of MRC LMS proteomics core


