### Accession
PXD022635

### Title
Persistent inflammatory stimulation drives the transition of MSCs to inflammatory CAFs that promote pro-metastatic characteristics in breast cancer cells

### Description
The pro-inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) and interleukin 1β (IL-1β) are expressed simultaneously and have tumor-promoting roles in breast cancer. In parallel, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) undergo transition at the tumor site to cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), which are generally connected to enhanced tumor progression. Here, we determined the impact of consistent inflammatory stimulation on stromal cell plasticity. MSCs that were persistently stimulated by TNFα+IL-1β (2-3 weeks) gained a CAF-like morphology, accompanied by prominent changes in gene expression, including in stroma/fibroblast-related genes. These CAF-like cells expressed elevated levels of vimentin and fibroblast activation protein (FAP) and demonstrated significantly increased ability to contract collagen gels. Moreover, they have gained the phenotype of inflammatory CAFs, as indicated by reduced expression of α smooth muscle actin (αSMA), increased proliferation and elevated expression of inflammatory genes and proteins, primarily inflammatory chemokines. These inflammatory CAFs released factors that enhanced tumor cell detachment, spreading and migration; the inflammatory CAF-derived factors elevated cancer cell migration by stimulating the chemokine receptors CCR2, CCR5 and CXCR1/2 and Ras-activating receptors, expressed by the cancer cells. Together, these novel findings demonstrate that chronic inflammation, per se, can induce MSC-to-CAF transition, leading to generation of tumor-promoting inflammatory CAFs.

### Sample Protocol
All chemicals were ordered from Sigma unless otherwise stated. Samples were loaded onto 3 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin columns. Volume was reduced to 25μL by centrifugation at 14,000g for 10min. 175μL 8M urea was added and centrifuged at 14,000g for 10min. Filters were reversed and centrifuged to extract the proteins. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 1hr at room temperature, and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in the dark for 45 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted to 2M urea with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were then subjected to digestion with trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37°C at 50:1 protein:trypsin ratio, followed by a second tryptic digestion for 4 hr. The digestions were stopped by addition of trifluroacetic acid (1% final concentration). Following digestion, peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB, μElution format (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The samples were vacuum dried and stored in -80˚C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.16 using the default parameters except the following: Enzyme  was set to Trypsin, LFQ min. ratio count = 1, Peptides for quantification = Unique and Match between runs was enabled . The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot human proteome database (March 2018 version) appended with common lab protein contaminants. The following modifications were defined for the search: Carbamidomethylation of C as a fixed modification and oxidation of M, N-term acetylation and carbamylation and hydroxy-P as variable ones. The LFQ intensities (Label-Free Quantification) were extracted and used for further calculations in Perseus v1.6.0.7. Decoy hits were filtered out, as well as proteins that were identified on the basis of a modified peptide only. The LFQ intensities were log transformed and only proteins that had at least 2 valid values in at least one experimental group were kept. Missing values were imputed and the data underwent further statistical analysis using a Student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
The pro-inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor &#x3b1; (TNF&#x3b1;) and interleukin 1&#x3b2; (IL-1&#x3b2;) are expressed simultaneously and have tumor-promoting roles in breast cancer. In parallel, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) undergo conversion at the tumor site to cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), which are generally connected to enhanced tumor progression. Here, we determined the impact of consistent inflammatory stimulation on stromal cell plasticity. MSCs that were persistently stimulated by TNF&#x3b1; + IL-1&#x3b2; (generally 14-18 days) gained a CAF-like morphology, accompanied by prominent changes in gene expression, including in stroma/fibroblast-related genes. These CAF-like cells expressed elevated levels of vimentin and fibroblast activation protein (FAP) and demonstrated significantly increased abilities to contract collagen gels. Moreover, they gained the phenotype of inflammatory CAFs, as indicated by the reduced expression of &#x3b1; smooth muscle actin (&#x3b1;SMA), increased proliferation, and elevated expression of inflammatory genes and proteins, primarily inflammatory chemokines. These inflammatory CAFs released factors that enhanced tumor cell dispersion, scattering, and migration; the inflammatory CAF-derived factors elevated cancer cell migration by stimulating the chemokine receptors CCR2, CCR5, and CXCR1/2 and Ras-activating receptors, expressed by the cancer cells. Together, these novel findings demonstrate that chronic inflammation can induce MSC-to-CAF conversion, leading to the generation of tumor-promoting inflammatory CAFs.

### Keywords
Breast cancer; cancer-associated fibroblasts; inflammation; interleukin 1β; mesenchymal stem cells; tumor necrosis factor α.

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science 
Shmunis School of Biomedicine and Cancer Research, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

### Submitter
Amir Prior

### Lab Head
Dr Adit Ben-Baruch
Shmunis School of Biomedicine and Cancer Research, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel


