### Accession
PXD041545

### Title
mTOR Inhibition Suppresses Salinomycin-Induced Ferroptosis in Breast Cancer Stem Cells by Ironing Out Mitochondrial Dysfunctions

### Description
Ferroptosis constitutes a promising therapeutic strategy against cancer by efficiently targeting the highly tumorigenic and treatment-resistant cancer stem cells (CSCs). We previously showed that the lysosomal iron-targeting drug Salinomycin (Sal) was able to eliminate CSCs by triggering ferroptosis. Here, in a well-established breast CSCs model (human mammary epithelial HMLER CD24low/CD44high), we identified that pharmacological inhibition of mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), suppresses Sal-induced ferroptosis. Mechanistically, mTOR inhibition modulates iron cellular flux and prevents the iron and ROS bursts induced by Sal. Besides, integration of multi-omics data identified mitochondria as a key target of Sal action. We demonstrated that mTOR inhibition prevents Sal-induced mitochondrial functional and structural alteration, and that Sal-induced metabolic plasticity is mainly dependent on the mTOR pathway. Overall, our findings provide experimental evidences on the detailed mechanisms of mTOR as a crucial effector of Sal-induced ferroptosis, and gives proof-of-concept that careful evaluation of such combination therapy (here mTOR and ferroptosis co-targeting) is required for effective treatment.

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on 20 µg of cell lysates according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were reduced with 20mM TCEP and alkylated with 50mM CAA (chloracetamide) for 15min at room temperature. Aqueous phosphoric acid was then added to a final concentration of 2.5% following by the addition of S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol, 100mM TEAB, pH7.1). Mixtures were then loaded on S-Trap columns. Five extra washing steps were performed for thorough SDS elimination. Samples were digested with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 1h. After elution, peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 50 µl of 2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA and quantified by Nanodrop. 400 ng of each sample was injected on a nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography) system coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) mass spectrometer. HPLC separation (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water; Solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was carried out at 250 nL/min using a packed emitter column (C18, 25 cm×75μm 1.6μm) (Ion Optics, Australia) using a gradient elution (2 to 13% solvent B during 41min; 13 to 20% during 23min; 20% to 30% during 5min; 30% to 85% for 5min and finally 85% for 5min to wash the column). Mass-spectrometric data were acquired using the parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method. The measurements were carried out over the m/z range from 100 to 1700 Th. The range of ion mobilities values from 0.75 to 1.25 V s/cm2(1/k0). The total cycle time was set to 1.17s and the number of PASEF MS/MS scans was set to 10.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data were analyzed using MaxQuant version 2.0.1.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database (release 02-2021, 20408 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 3 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously 56. The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities; protein quantification was obtained using at least 1 peptide per protein. Match between runs was allowed.  Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, profile plots and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0). Intensities were log2 transformed for statistical analysis. For statistical comparison, we set 4 groups, each containing 5 biological replicates. We then filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 5 valid values in at least one group. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 1.8 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We performed an ANOVA test, FDR<0.01, S0=1. Hierarchical clustering of proteins that survived the test was performed in Perseus on logarithmised LFQ intensities after Z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances.

### Publication Abstract
Ferroptosis constitutes a promising therapeutic strategy against cancer by efficiently targeting the highly tumorigenic and treatment-resistant cancer stem cells (CSCs). We previously showed that the lysosomal iron-targeting drug Salinomycin (Sal) was able to eliminate CSCs by triggering ferroptosis. Here, in a well-established breast CSCs model (human mammary epithelial HMLER CD24<sup>low</sup>/CD44<sup>high</sup>), we identified that pharmacological inhibition of the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), suppresses Sal-induced ferroptosis. Mechanistically, mTOR inhibition modulates iron cellular flux and thereby limits iron-mediated oxidative stress. Furthermore, integration of multi-omics data identified mitochondria as a key target of Sal action, leading to profound functional and structural alteration prevented by mTOR inhibition. On top of that, we found that Sal-induced metabolic plasticity is mainly dependent on the mTOR pathway. Overall, our findings provide experimental evidence for the mechanisms of mTOR as a crucial effector of Sal-induced ferroptosis pointing not only that metabolic reprogramming regulates ferroptosis, but also providing proof-of-concept that careful evaluation of such combination therapy (here mTOR and ferroptosis co-targeting) is required in the development of an effective treatment.

### Keywords
Iron homeostasis, Mitochondria, Ferroptosis, Metabolic reprogramming; breast cancer stem cells, Mtor pathway

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Platform Proteomic Necker Faculty of Medecine, University Paris Cité  SFR Necker INSERM US24

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Ida Chiara Guerrera
Platform Proteomic Necker Faculty of Medecine, University Paris Cité  SFR Necker INSERM US24


