### Accession
PXD019369

### Title
Adipocytes alter the ALL translational programme to enhance their dormancy and stress resistance.

### Description
We investigated the possibility that adipocyte mediated stress protection is accompanied by activation of a selective mRNA translation analogous to stress induced translational arrest. Nalm-6 cells were subjected at +24 and +48h under 3T3-L1 adipocyte co-culture to Pulsed Stable Isotope Chromatography-mass spectrometry (SILAC) based proteomic analysis to estimate protein translation rates over time relative to pre-adipocyte control conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Nalm-6 cells were co-cultured with 3T3-L1 adipocytes or pre-adipocytes for 24 or 48h. Subsequently cells were pulsed with either ‘heavy’ (H) or ‘medium’ (M) isotopic-labelled amino acids for 4 hrs. Cells were then isolated from co-culture, lysed in 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, sonicated and balanced following protein quantification. Equal amounts of the corresponding H & M lysates were then mixed together and subsequently trypsin digested using the Filter-Aided Sample preparation (FASP) method. Pooled peptides were then fractionated into seven peptide fractions using the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (84868, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturers’ instructions. Different fractions were then lyophilised and re-suspendend in 0.1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile, prior to analysis on a Q Exactive™ Plus Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, samples were resolved at a flow rate of 250 nl/min on an Easy-Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 123 min gradient of 3% to 35% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in Acetonitrile) against buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and the separated samples were infused into the mass spectrometer by electrospray. The spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature at 255oC. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive mode with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans (top 15 method). The scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375-1500 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000 for the MS scans and 17,500 for the MS/MS scans. Fragmented peaks were dynamically excluded for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched by Maxquant (version 1.6.3.3), against a FASTA file of the Human proteome, extracted from the Uniprot database (2019). Briefly, Multiplicity of 3 was used, with SILAC labelings of Arg10/Lys8 and Arg6/Lys4 as Heavy and Medium labels, respectively. Digestion mode was set to specific, with Trypsin chosen as the enzyme. A maximum of 2 mis-cleavages were allowed. Match between runs option (to and from) was enabled, with a match-time window of 1 min, and an alignment time window of 20 mins. Re-quantify option was disabled. Minimum ratio count of 1 (unique and razor peptide) was used for SILAC protein ratio calculations. All other Maxquant settings were kept as default. The H/M ratio values from the Protein Groups file were subsequently used for all downstream analysis, using Perseus (version 1.6.2.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Stress resistance, Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (all), Adipocyte niche

### Affiliations
Barts Cancer Institute
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London, EC1M 6BQ, UK.

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London, EC1M 6BQ, UK.


