### Accession
PXD003594

### Title
An increase in oxidative stress downstream of mTORC1 but not AKT causes a proliferative defect in cancer cells with acquired resistance to PI3K/mTOR inhibitors

### Description
Proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of MCF7 cells sensitive and resistant to the PI3K inhibitor GDC-0941. The analysis was done for parental and 3 resistant cell lines maintained in the presence or the absence of the drug. One of the resistant cell lines (G2) was also treated with vehicle or the kinase inhibitors GDC0941, MK-2206 and Ku-0063794 for 2h. The proteomics analysis of sensitive and resistant MCF7 cells in basal conditions and phosphoproteomics analysis of the G2 cells in the presence of inhibitors of the PI3K pathway were run in a nano flow ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC, nano Acquity, Waters) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The phosphoproteomics study of sensitive and resistant MCF7 cells in basal conditions was run in a Dionex UltiMate 3000  RSLCnano coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis Cells monolayers were washed twice with cold PBS supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (1 mM Na3VO4; 1 mM NaF) and lysed with urea lysis buffer (8 M Urea in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0) containing phosphatase inhibitors (1mM Na3VO4; 1mM NaF; 1 mM β-glycerol-phosphate; 2.5 mM Na4P2O7; 1 µM okadaic acid). After incubating 30 min on ice, cell extracts were scrapped and transferred to 2 mL low protein binding eppendorf tubes. After sonication (3 intermittent pulses, 15 sec each), insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 13,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C. Supernatants were transferred to new low protein binding eppendorf tubes and protein concentration was quantified by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein digestion for proteomics and phosphoprotemics Proteins (450 µg for phosphoproteomics and 200 µg for proteomics experiments) were reduced with 10 mM DTT during one hour and alkylated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide during 30 min. Final urea concentration was decreased to 2 M by adding 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0.  Protein overnight digestion was performed at 37°C with Immobilized tosyl-lysinechloromethyl ketone (TLCK)–trypsin [20 p-toluenesulfonyl-L-arginine methyl ester (TAME) units/mg]. Next day, samples were centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 5 min at 5°C to precipitate and remove trypsin beads. Peptide mixtures were desalted on Oasis-HLB cartridges (Waters, Manchester, UK) joined to a vacuum manifold. Briefly, peptides were loaded in the pre-activated (100% ACN) and pre-equilibrated (0.1% TFA; 2% ACN) columns. Peptides were eluted with 250 µL glycolic acid buffer (1 M glycolic acid; 80% ACN; 5% TFA) for phosphoenrichment procedure or with elution buffer (70% ACN; 0.1% TFA) for proteomics experiments.  Phosphopeptide enrichment  For phosphopeptide enrichment, sample volumes were normalized to 500 µL with glycolic acid buffer and incubated with 15 µg of TiO2 beads (50% slurry in 1% TFA) for 5 min. Sample slurries were loaded into  empty spin tips (spin tips were previously activated with 200 µL of ACN; Glygen). Phosphopeptides were sequentially washed by centrifugation (1,500 x g for 3 min) with 100 µL glycolic acid solution, 100 µL Ammonium acetate solution (100 mM ammonium acetate; 25% ACN) and 100 µL of 10% ACN. To recover phosphopeptides, four consequent elutions of 50 μL recovery buffer (5% NH4OH in 1% ACN) were performed and elutes were centrifugated at 13,000 x g for 2 min to remove non-soluble material. After freezing supernatants during 15 min on dry ice, samples were dried in speed-vac and kept at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from the MS/MS data was automated with Mascot Daemon 2.5.0. Mascot Distiller 2.5.1.0 was used to generate peaklist files (MGFs) and Mascot 2.5 search engine was used to match peaks to peptides comprised in proteins annotated in the SwissProt Database (SwissProt_2012Oct.fasta for proteomics or uniprot_sprot_2014_08.fasta for phosphoproteomics analysis) with a FDR of ~1%. For protein searches, two or five variable modifications for proteomics (PyroGlu on N-terminal Gln; and oxidation of Met) or phosphoproteomics analysis (previous 2 modifications plus Phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr), one fixed modification (carbamidomethyl Cys) and two trypsin miss cleavages were allowed. A mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the MS scans and 25 mmu for the MS/MS scans was permitted. For label-free peptide quantification, the in- house developed Pescal software was used to construct the XICs for all the peptides identified across all samples (Wilkes et al., 2015). The XIC windows were 7 ppm and 2 min.  Normalized peak areas from XICs were averaged between replicates and fold change between conditions was calculated. Statistical significance was assessed with a student’s t-Test

### Publication Abstract
Compounds targeting phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/mammalian target of rapamycin (PI3K/mTOR) signaling are being investigated in multiple clinical settings, but drug resistance may reduce their benefit. Compound rechallenge after drug holidays can overcome such resistance, yet little is known about the impact of drug holidays on cell biochemistry. We found that PI3K inhibitor (PI3Ki)-resistant cells cultured in the absence of PI3Ki developed a proliferative defect, increased oxygen consumption and accumulated reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to lactate production through hypoxia-inducible factor-1&#x3b1;. This metabolic imbalance was reversed by mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) inhibitors. Interestingly, neither AKT nor c-MYC was involved in mediating the metabolic phenotype, despite the latter contributing to resistant cells' proliferation. These data suggest that an AKT-independent PI3K/mTORC1 axis operates in these cells. The excessive ROS hampered cell division, and the metabolic phenotype made resistant cells more sensitive to hydrogen peroxide and nutrient starvation. Thus, the proliferative defect of PI3Ki-resistant cells during drug holidays is caused by defective metabolic adaptation to chronic PI3K/mTOR pathway inhibition. This metabolic imbalance may open the therapeutic window for challenge with metabolic drugs during drug holidays.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphoproteomics, Ltq-orbitrap, Pi3k resistance, Q-exactive plus, Metabolism, Tio2

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling
Barts Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Pedro Casado-Izquierdo

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R. Cutillas
Barts Cancer Institute


