### Accession
PXD043962

### Title
Protein profiling and assessment of amyloid beta levels in plasma in canine refractory epilepsy

### Description
Introduction: The relationship between epilepsy and cognitive dysfunction has been investigated in canines, and memory impairment was prevalent in dogs with epilepsy. There is some evidence that canines with epilepsy have greater amyloid-β (Aβ) accumulation and neuronal degeneration than healthy controls. The present study investigated plasma Aβ42 levels and performed proteomic profiling in dogs with refractory epilepsy and healthy dogs. Methods: In total, eight dogs, including four healthy dogs and four dogs with epilepsy, were included in the study. Blood samples were collected to analyze Aβ42 levels and perform proteomic profiling. Changes in the plasma proteomic profiles of dogs were determined by nano LC-MS/MS. Results and discussion: The plasma Aβ42 level was significantly higher in dogs with epilepsy (99 pg/mL) than in healthy dogs (5.9 pg/mL). In total, 155 proteins were identified, and of these, the expression of 40 proteins was altered in epilepsy. Among these proteins, which are linked to neurodegenerative diseases, 10 (25%) were downregulated in dogs with epilepsy, whereas 12 (30%) were upregulated. The expression of the acute phase proteins haptoglobin and α2-macroglobulin significantly differed between the groups. Complement factor H and ceruloplasmin were only detected in epilepsy dogs, suggesting that neuroinflammation plays a role in epileptic seizures. Gelsolin, which is involved in cellular processes and cytoskeletal organization, was only detected in healthy dogs. Gene Ontology annotation revealed that epilepsy can potentially interfere with biological processes, including cellular processes, localization, and responses to stimuli. Seizures compromised key molecular functions, including catalytic activity, molecular function regulation, and binding. Defense/immunity proteins were most significantly modified during the development of epilepsy. In Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway analysis, complement and coagulation cascades were the most relevant signaling pathways affected by seizures. The findings suggested that haptoglobin, ceruloplasmin, α2-macroglobulin, complement factor H, and gelsolin play roles in canine epilepsy and Aβ levels based on proteomic profiling. These proteins could represent diagnostic biomarkers that, after clinical validation, could be used in veterinary practice as well as proteins relevant to disease response pathways. To determine the precise mechanisms underlying these relationships and their implications in canine epilepsy, additional research is required.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection Eight plasma samples were collected from dogs at the Small Animal Teaching Hospital, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Mahidol University (Nakhon Pathom, Thailand). The cohort included four dogs diagnosed with idiopathic epilepsy and four healthy dogs. Idiopathic epilepsy was described as a condition in which dogs aged 6 months to 6 years old experienced their first seizure without any other underlying cause for the seizures according to basic diagnostic tools (according to the IVETF diagnostic Tier 1) (29). The sample collection protocol was approved by the Mahidol University Animal Care and Use Committee (AICUC: MUVS-2020-08-37). Blood samples were collected and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min. The first portion of the plasma sample was stored at −80°C for proteomic analysis, whereas the second portion was stored at −80°C to assess Aβ42 levels using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).  Sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) The concentrations of plasma proteins were measured using Bradford’s assay. Protein samples from each group were pooled. For protein identification using nano LC-MS/MS, 30 μg of pooled protein were loaded onto a 12% polyacrylamide gel. The protein bands on the gel were stained using Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and then de-stained using a solution of 30% ethanol in 10% acetic acid. The gel was scanned using a GS-710 scanner (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). For further analysis, the protein bands were divided into 11 segments per lane based and cut into pieces. Each individual piece was then subjected to tryptic digestion.  In-gel digestion Gel pieces were equilibrated using absolute acetonitrile and 50 mM NH4HCO3. Disulfide bonds were reduced using 4 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min at 60°C and alkylated in 250 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The gel pieces were dehydrated twice in absolute acetonitrile for 15 min each and allowed to air-dry. Next, the gel pieces were subjected to trypsin digestion in 50 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C. The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel using absolute acetonitrile. Finally, the peptide mixtures were dried using a speed vacuum and stored at −80°C until analysis by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Analysis of peptide patterns by nano LS-MS/MS Extracted peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid in LC/MS-grade water. Each sample was injected into the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide separation was performed using a C18 column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, whereas mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The eluent was then infused into a microTOF-Q mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA). The mass spectra from the mass spectrometry (MS) and tandem MS covered the mass ranges of m/z 400–2000 and m/z 50–1500, respectively.  Bioinformatics analysis A mascot generic file (.mgf) was generated using DataAnalysis 3.4 version software. Mascot Daemon version 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) was used to identify the proteins. Identification and quantification of the proteins were performed against an NCBInr database (March 02, 2023) specific for dogs. Protein abundance was determined by peptide count analysis using the emPAI value (30). Three biological replications were performed. Proteins with significantly different expression in the two groups were used to perform clustering analysis. A Venn diagram was used to illustrate differences in protein expression between the groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Beta amyloid, Epilepsy, Proteomics, Canine

### Affiliations
Faculty of Veterinary Science, Mahidol University 
Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

### Submitter
Sataporn Phochantachinda

### Lab Head
Dr onrapak reamtong
Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand


