### Accession
PXD022245

### Title
PTENε, a new isoform of PTEN, suppresses tumor metastasis through filopodia formation regulation.

### Description
PTEN is frequently mutated in a wide range of malignancies. Beyond suppressing tumorigenesis, PTEN is involved in multiple biological processes, and the complexity of PTEN function is partially attributed to PTEN family members including PTENα and PTENβ. Here, we report the identification of PTENε (also named as PTEN5), a novel N-terminal-extended PTEN isoform that suppresses tumor invasion and metastasis. We show that the translation of PTENε is initiated from the CUG816 codon within the 5’UTR region of PTEN mRNA. PTENε mainly localizes in the cell membrane, and physically associates with and dephosphorylates VASP and ACTR2, which govern filopodia formation and cell motility. We found that endogenous depletion of PTENε promotes filopodia formation and enhances the metastasis capacity of tumor cells. Overall, we identify a new isoform of PTEN with distinct localization and function compared to the known members of the PTEN family. These findings enrich the PTEN family constitution and advance our current understanding of the importance and diversity of PTEN functions.

### Sample Protocol
For in vitro PTENε identification experiments, the PTENε coding sequence (CUG513-UGA2240, PTENα initiation codon CUG513 mutated to CUC, PTENβ initiation codon AUU594 mutated to CUC and canonical PTEN initiation codon AUG1032 mutated to AUA) was subcloned with a C-terminal His-tag into a pFastBac1 vector for expression in Sf9 insect cells. His affinity chromatography was used for purification of PTENε-His before SDS-PAGE, and gel slices with a molecular weight corresponding to PTENε were digested in-gel by endoproteinase trypsin (Promega) following the block of lysine by propionylation.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated by online reversed-phase nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography (Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). The data-dependent mass spectra were acquired with the LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Raw files were searched by Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific) against the UniProt Human database supplemented with the N-terminal extended PTEN sequence (Appendix Supplementary Fig. S810a). Search parameters were set as follows: an enzyme with N-terminal semi-trypsin; up to two missed cleavages; carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification; methionine oxidation and peptide N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDR) were set at 0.01(Liang et al., 2014). For endogenous PTENε identification experiments in Hela, protein lysates of Hela cells were subjected to sequential immunoprecipitation with an anti-PTENα antibody raised in our laboratory (Liang et al., 2014). The bound proteins were separated with SDS-PAGE, and gel slices with a molecular weight corresponding to PTENε were treated in the same way as described above.  For endogenous PTENε identification experiments in mice, the FLAG-purified proteins from PtenFLAG tissues were treated in the same way as described above. Raw files were searched with Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific) against the UniProt Mouse database supplemented with the N-terminal extended PTEN sequence (Appendix Supplementary Fig. S810b). Peptide analysis of pull-down experiments was performed as previously described (Liang et al., 2017; Liang et al., 2014). In brief, proteins were digested by endoproteinase Trypsin (Promega) in gel following the manufacturer’s instructions. The following process was the same as described above. Raw files were searched by Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific) against the UniProt Human database. Search parameters were set as follows: an enzyme with Trypsin; up to two missed cleavages; carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification; methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDR) were set at 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alternative initiation/filopodia formation/ptenε/pten isoform/metastasis.

### Affiliations
peking university
Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing Key Laboratory of Tumor Systems Biology, Peking-Tsinghua Center of Life Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.

### Submitter
张 巧玲

### Lab Head
Dr Qiaoling Zhang
Institute of Systems Biomedicine, Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing Key Laboratory of Tumor Systems Biology, Peking-Tsinghua Center of Life Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.


