### Accession
PXD008834

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Candida albicans dnm1 mutant

### Description
Proteomic analysis of Candida albicans haploid dnm1 mutant and the wild type GZY803

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from C. albicans planktonic cultures at mid log phrase were extracted for iTRAQ analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein extraction were followed by in-gel trypsin digestion, sample clean up, iTRAQ labelling, and mass spectrometry analysis

### Publication Abstract
Candida albicans is a major fungal pathogen, accounting for approximately 15% of healthcare infections with associated mortality as high as 40% in the case of systemic candidiasis. Antifungal agents for C. albicans infections are limited, and rising resistance is an inevitable problem. Therefore, understanding the mechanism behind antifungal responses is among the top research focuses in combating Candida infections. Herein, the recently developed C. albicans haploid model is employed to examine the association between mitochondrial fission, regulated by Dnm1, and the pathogen's response to antifungals. Proteomic analysis of dnm1&#x394; and its wild-type haploid parent, GZY803, reveal changes in proteins associated with mitochondrial structures and functions, cell wall, and plasma membrane. Antifungal susceptibility testing revealed that dnm1&#x394; is more susceptible to SM21, a novel antifungal, than GZY803. Analyses of reactive oxygen species release, antioxidant response, lipid peroxidation, and membrane damages uncover an association between dnm1&#x394; and the susceptibility to SM21. Dynasore-induced mitochondrial inhibition in SC5314 diploids corroborate the findings. Interestingly, Dynasore-primed SC5314 cultures exhibit increased susceptibility to all antifungals tested. These data suggest an important contribution of mitochondrial fission in antifungal susceptibility of C. albicans. Hence, mitochondrial fission can be a potential target for combined therapy in anti-C. albicans treatment.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Itraq, Dnm1

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Faculty of Dentistry, National Univeristy of Singapore

### Submitter
Thuyen Truong

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. C. J. Seneviratne
Faculty of Dentistry, National Univeristy of Singapore


