### Accession
PXD031271

### Title
Impaired adipose-neuronal crosstalk in obesity

### Description
Label-free LC-MS/MS was used to characterise and quantify the secretory profiles of murine perivascular adipose tissue, canonical white adipose tissue, and brown adipose tissue.

### Sample Protocol
12-18w old male wildtype and ob/ob mice were kept under a controlled 12h dark/light cycle on standard chow diet. Interscapular brown adipose tissue, subcutaneous and visceral white adipose tissue, and perivascular adipose tissues from around the aortic arch, thoracic aorta and abdominal aorta were collected. Tissues were washed in PBS and incubated in phenol red- and serum-free DMEM/F12 medium for 24h. Supernatants were collected and concentrated using 3kDa MWCO centrifugal filters. Protein concentration was determined using BCA. An in-solution trypsin digestion was performed. Peptide purification was achieved using C18 spin columns. Peptides were analysed using LC-MS (UltiMate 3000 HPLC system coupled to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer).

### Data Protocol
Thermo .raw files were searched against a murine database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, May 2018, 16,970 proteins) using Mascot 2.6.0 embedded in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance at 0.8 Da. Trypsin was set as digesting enzyme with up to two missed cleavages being allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of lysine, methionine and proline were set as dynamic modifications. PSM confidence was assessed using Percolator. Resulting .msf files were loaded into Scaffold 4.8.7 and exported to .mgf peak list and .mzid identification files.

### Publication Abstract
While the endocrine function of white adipose tissue has been extensively explored, comparatively little is known about the secretory activity of less-investigated fat depots. Here, we use proteomics to compare the secretory profiles of male murine perivascular depots with those of canonical white and brown fat. Perivascular secretomes show enrichment for neuronal cell-adhesion molecules, reflecting a higher content of intra-parenchymal sympathetic projections compared to other adipose depots. The sympathetic innervation is reduced in the perivascular fat of obese (ob/ob) male mice, as well as in the epicardial fat of patients with obesity. Degeneration of sympathetic neurites is observed in presence of conditioned media of fat explants from ob/ob mice, that show reduced secretion of neuronal growth regulator 1. Supplementation of neuronal growth regulator 1 reverses this neurodegenerative effect, unveiling a neurotrophic role for this protein previously identified as a locus associated with human obesity. As sympathetic stimulation triggers energy-consuming processes in adipose tissue, an impaired adipose-neuronal crosstalk is likely to contribute to the disrupted metabolic homeostasis characterising obesity.

### Keywords
Adipose tissue, Mouse, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
King’s College London British Heart Foundation Centre, School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, James Black Centre, 125 Coldharbour Lane, London SE5 9NU, United Kingdom
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King’s College London British Heart Foundation Centre, School of Cardiovascular Medicine and Sciences, James Black Centre, 125 Coldharbour Lane, London SE5 9NU, United Kingdom


