### Accession
PXD026331

### Title
Synergistic interactions between Australian propolis and Doxorubicin against the MCF-7 breast adenocarcinoma cells: Multiomics study understanding the molecular mechanisms of action

### Description
The combination of natural products with standard chemotherapeutic agents offers a promising strategy to enhance the efficacy of standard chemotherapy by reducing their dosage and side effects. The standard chemotherapeutic drug for breast and other cancer types- doxorubicin(DOX), also known as Adriamycin (an anthracycline) has several disadvantages including severe side effects and development of drug resistance. Recently, we reported the broad spectrum pharmacological activity and potential markers of Australian propolis extract (AP-1). In the present study, we explored the synergistic interactions of  AP-1 with DOX against MCF-7 cells by implementing different synergy quantitation models. To identify the potential anticancer metabolites in AP-1, biochemometric and metabolomics-driven study was performed. Furthermore, we evaluated the molecular mechanisms involved by analysing the apoptotic profile (using flow cytometry and proteome array of 35 apoptotic proteins) and oxidative status (using reactive oxygen species detection) of the MCF-7 cells upon treatment with the most synergistic combination. The underlying synergistic mechanism against the MCF-7 cells was also studied using label-free quantification proteomics analysis. Five prenylated stilbenes were identified as the most discriminant metabolites in the most active AP-1 fraction, three of them previously isolated from AP-1 with IC50 values in the range 0.68-2.7 µM against the MCF-7 cells. Strong synergy was observed when AP-1 was combined with DOX in the ratio of 100:0.29 (w/w) as validated by different synergy quantitation models including combination index (CI), HSA, ZIP, LOEWE, and BLISS. AP-1 significantly enhanced the inhibitory effect of DOX (p < 0.05) against the MCF-7 cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner with significant reduction of ROS production (p < 0.05; compared to DOX alone). AP-1 also enhanced the apoptotic effect of DOX significantly after 24 h of treatment with a shift of DOX-induced necrosis to apoptosis. Significant upregulation of catalase, HTRA2/Omi, FADD together with TRAIL-mediated apoptosis, DR5 and DR4 (p < 0.05) was observed which contributed to the anti-proliferative activity of AP-1 against the MCF-7 cells. The enhancement of pro-apoptotic p27, PON2 and catalase with reduction of anti-apoptotic XIAP, HSP60 and HIF-1α may be associated with the improved apoptosis in the MCF-7 cells observed in the Annexin V-7AAD flow cytometry analysis of the synergistic combination compared to the mono treatments. Furthermore, a significant increase of antioxidant proteins including catalase and PON2 was observed upon treatment with the synergistic combination which may be associated with the parallel enhancement of apoptosis. Shotgun proteomics in the synergistic combination-treated cells identified 21 significantly dysregulated proteins involving the TP53/ATM-regulated non-homologous end-joining pathway and double-strand breaks repairs, recruiting the overexpressed BRCA1 and curtailed RIF1 encoded proteins. The overexpression of UPF2 was noticed after the treatment with the synergistic combination which could assist to overcome doxorubicin resistance-associated long non-coding RNA and decline the metastasis of the MCF-7 cells. In summary, we propose a promising AP-1 and DOX synergistic combination against the MCF-7 cells and highlighted the possible synergistic mechanisms of action together with the key prenylated metabolites of AP-1. Further in vivo and clinical studies are warranted on this synergistic combination.

### Sample Protocol
The cell lysates were quantified using Rapid GOLD BCA kit accoring to the manufacturer's protocol. 100 µg of protein samples were used for chemical and enzymatic sample processing according to the manufacturer protocol (EasyPep™ Mini MS Sample Prep Kit; ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). The final volume was adjusted to 100 µL using lysis buffer in a microcentrifuge tube. 50 µL of the reduction and alkylation solutions were added, gently mixed, and incubated at 95 °C using a heat block for 10 min. The samples are allowed to cool at RT, then 50 µL of the reconstituted trypsin/lys-C protease mixture was added to each sample and incubated with shaking at 37 °C for 3 h. After incubation, 50 µL of digestion stop solution was added and mixed gently. Peptides clean up columns were implemented to remove hydrophilic and hydrophobic contaminants where clean peptide samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 100 µL 0.1% formic acid in water for LC-MS analysis and carefully placed in Waters total recovery chromatography sample vials (Waters Corp, USA).

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI software (Waters Corporation, USA) was used to import and further process the MassLynx acquired data. Automatic selection of alignment reference among QC samples was set and peptides were identified against Uniprot human proteome database (October 2020 version) using ion accounting method with 250 kDa protein mass maximum. One fragment per peptide or one peptide per protein together with 3 fragments per protein were set as ion matching requirements using relative quantification implementing the Hi-N method (n = 3). Auto peptide and fragment tolerance and less than 4% FDR were set for search tolerance parameters. Peptides with absolute mass error > 20 ppm or single charged were further filtered out. Pairwise comparisons of the identified proteins in the treated groups were done against the control group for cytotoxic potential exploration, while the most synergistic combination samples were compared against both DOX and AP-1-treated samples for the elucidation of possible synergistic mechanisms. In each experimental design proteins with analysis of variance (ANOVA)-derived p-value ≤ 0.05 and q value ≤ 0.05 with fold change among ≥ 2 were considered significant and included for further pathway analyses. Differentially expressed proteins identified by the quantitative processing of the LC-MS/MS analysis of the proteome tryptic digestion were analysed by STRING , Reactome , g;profiler and IMPaLA to identify the relevant pathways responsible for the synergistic effect against the MCF-7 cells. The G:SCS algorithm was used for multiple testing correction in g:profiler platform with an adjusted p-value of 0.05 threshold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Mcf-7, Propolis, Proteomics, Breast cancer, Synergy, Doxorubicin

### Affiliations
University of New South Wales, Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Western Sydney University, Cairo University
NICM, Western Sydney University Faculty of pharmacy Cairo University

### Submitter
Muhammad Alsherbiny

### Lab Head
Dr Muhammad Alsherbiny
NICM, Western Sydney University Faculty of pharmacy Cairo University


