### Accession
PXD015520

### Title
The long non-coding RNA HOXB-AS3 regulates ribosomal RNA transcription in NPM1-mutated acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
In this work we dissect the functional role of the HOXB-AS3 long non coding RNA in patients with NPM1-mutated (NPM1mut) acute myeloid leukemia (AML). We show that HOXB-AS3 regulates the proliferative capacity of NPM1mut AML blasts in vitro and in vivo. HOXB-AS3 was found to interact with the ErbB3-binding protein 1 (EBP1) and guide EBP1 to the ribosomal DNA locus. Via this mechanism HOXB-AS3 regulates ribosomal RNA transcription and de novo protein synthesis. We propose that in the context of NPM1 mutations, HOXB-AS3 overexpression acts as a compensatory mechanism, which allows adequate protein production in leukemic blasts.

### Sample Protocol
RNA-protein complex pull-down experiments were conducted according to a modified version of the RAP-MS protocol published by McHugh et al1. In brief, AML blasts were crosslinked in batches of 20x106 cells via exposure to 8000 Joules/m2 of ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM LiCl, 0.5% dodecyl maltoside (DDM), 0.2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 0.1% sodium deoxycholate), sonicated and treated with DNAse I (Norgen Biotek). Lysates were mixed with hybridization buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 5 mM EDTA, 500 mM LiCl, 0.5% DDM, 0.2% SDS, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 4 M urea, 2.5 mM TCEP) and spun down in a table-top centrifuge (16,000xg, 10 minutes, 4˚C). The supernatants were pre-cleaned by incubation (intermittent shaking at 1100 rpm, 30 minutes, 37˚C) with streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (Dynabeads MyOne, Streptavidin C1, Life Technologies). After removal of beads, the lysates were incubated with biotinylated probes (2 μg of probes per 20x106 cells) that were complementary to either the HOXB-AS3 or the U1 transcripts. The sequences of the biotinylated probes are provided in Table S1. Probes and lysates were allowed to hybridize by incubation for 2 hours at 67˚C with intermittent shaking at 1100 rpm. Streptavidin-coated magnetic beads were used for the purification of complexes. The purified complexes were either treated with Proteinase K (New England Biolabs) to digest protein residues or with benzonase nuclease (EMD Millipore) to digest probes and captured RNA and release RNA-bound protein residues from the streptavidin beads. Proteinase K-treated eluates were mixed with elution buffer N-lauroylsarcosine-rich (NLS, Sigma-Aldrich) buffer, heated for 2 minutes at 95˚C and released from the magnetic beads. Eluted nucleic acids were captured by magnetic SILANE beads (Invitrogen, Dynabeads MyOne), treated with DNase I and re-suspended in RNase-free water. The isolated RNA was reversed transcribed into cDNA and analyzed with RT-qPCR, as described above.  Polypeptides in the benzonase endonuclease-treated samples were precipitated by overnight incubation with trichloroacetic acid (Ricca Chemical Company) and centrifugation (16,000xg, 10 minutes, 4˚C). Polypeptides were then digested with Trypsin (Promega) and Endopeptidase Lys-C (Wako) according to the instructions of the manufacturers, purified with HiPPR detergent removal columns (Life Technologies) and analyzed with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MSMS) on a Thermo Fusion Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer using 1 hour LC gradient. Peptides isolated from a total of at least 400x10e6 cells were used for each experiment.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analyses were performed in triplicates and the results were filtered for number and quality of identified peptides. Proteins with 2 or more individual peptides identified in at least 2 of the analyzed samples, and a quality score of ≥30 were considered as putative interactors. The identified potential interactors were further filtered on the basis of previously reported RNA-binding capacity2,3,and were analyzed comparatively to identify putative HOXB-AS3- and U1-specific protein interactors.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lncrna, Hoxb-as3, Acute myeloid leukemia, Ebp1

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center
The Ohio State University

### Submitter
Christopher Walker

### Lab Head
Dr Ramiro Garzon
Associate Professor, Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center


