### Accession
PXD000662

### Title
Proteomic profiling and characterization of differential allergens in the nematodes Anisakis simplex sensu stricto and A. pegreffii

### Description
The parasite species complex Anisakis simplex sensu lato (Anisakis simplex sensu stricto; (A. simplex s.s.), A. pegreffii, A. simplex C) is the main cause of severe anisakiasis (allergy) worldwide and is now an important health matter. In this study, the relationship of this Anisakis species complex and their allergenic capacities is assessed by studying the differences between the two most frequent species (A. simplex s.s., A. pegreffii) and their hybrid haplotype by studying active L3 larvae parasiting Merluccius merluccius.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
To submit the combined PMF and MS/MS data to MASCOT software v.2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK), GPS Explorer v4.9 was used, searching in the nonredundant NCBI protein database (NCBInr_20120817 (19922528 sequences; 6828478126 residues)). The following search parameters were used: enzyme, trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 1; carbamidomethyl cystein as fixed modification by the treatment with iodoacetamide; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine; mass tolerance for precursors was set to ±30 ppm and for MS/MS fragment ions to ±0.3 Da. The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥95% (p < 0.05) and only peptides with an individual ion score above the identity threshold were considered correctly identified. 

### Publication Abstract
The parasite species complex Anisakis simplex sensu lato (Anisakis simplex sensu stricto; (A. simplex s.s.), A. pegreffii, A. simplex C) is the main cause of severe anisakiasis (allergy) worldwide and is now an important health matter. In this study, the relationship of this Anisakis species complex and their allergenic capacities is assessed by studying the differences between the two most frequent species (A. simplex s.s., A. pegreffii) and their hybrid haplotype by studying active L3 larvae parasiting Merluccius merluccius. They were compared by 2D gel electrophoresis and parallel Western blot (2DE gels were hybridized with pools of sera from Anisakis allergenic patients). Unambiguous spot differences were detected and protein assignation was made by MALDI-TOF/TOF analysis or de novo sequencing. Seventy-five gel spots were detected and the corresponding proteins were identified. Differentially expressed proteins for A. simplex s.s., A. pegreffii, and their hybrid are described and results are statistically supported. Twenty-eight different allergenic proteins are classified according to different families belonging to different biological functions. These proteins are described for the first time as antigenic and potentially new allergens in Anisakis. Comparative proteomic analyses of allergenic capacities are useful for diagnosis, epidemiological surveys, and clinical research. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000662 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000662).

### Keywords
Allergens, Anisakis, Proteomics, Nematoda

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia Higuera

### Lab Head


