### Accession
PXD028007

### Title
The Proteogenomic Subtypes of Acute Myeloid Leukemia

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive blood cancer with poor prognosis. We performed a comprehensive proteogenomic analysis of bone-marrow biopsies from 252 uniformly treated AML patients to elucidate the molecular pathophysiology of AML in order to inform future diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. In addition to in-depth quantitative proteomics, our analysis included cytogenetic and mutation profiling, and RNA sequencing. This identified five proteomic AML subtypes, each reflecting specific biological features spanning genomic boundaries. Two of these subtypes were correlated with patient outcome, but none exclusively associated with specific genomic aberrations. Remarkably, one subtype (Mito-AML), which was only captured in the proteome, was characterized by high expression of mitochondrial proteins and showed poor outcome, with reduced remission rate and shorter overall survival upon treatment with intensive induction chemotherapy. Functional analyses revealed that Mito-AML is metabolically wired towards stronger complex Idependent respiration and is more responsive to treatment with the BCL2-inhibitor venetoclax.

### Sample Protocol
Samples enriched for CD34 positive cells from healthy donors  were lysed in 1% SDC buffer (1% SDC, 100mM Tris pH8.0, 10mM CAA, 40mM TCEP pH7.0), boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes and cooled on ice for 20 mins, followed by 10 cycles of sonication for 10 minutes (Branson probe sonifier output 3-4, 50% duty cycle, 10x 30 sec) and finally heated again at 95°C for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was estimated by BCA assay and 20µg from each sample were digested with LysC (1:100) and Trypsin (1:100) overnight using a thermoshaker (1200 rpm at 37°C). To stop the digestion, 5x volume isopropanol/1% TFA was added and vortexed vigorously. The peptides were desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips, washed once with isopropanol/1%TFA and once with 0.2% TFA. The peptides were eluted with 60µl of elution buffer (80%, 1.25% NH4OH). The dried eluates were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3%ACN, 0.3% TFA) and stored at -20°C until MS measurement.   Nano-flow LC-MS/MS proteome measurements All the samples were analyzed on nanoflow HPLC coupled to a high-resolution mass spectrometer. Briefly, peptides were loaded onto 50 cm reversed phase columns, packed in-house (75 μm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin Dr. Maisch GmbH). The column temperature was controlled at 60°C using a homemade column oven. An Easy-nLC 1200 system was connected to the mass spectrometer (Exploris 480, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano spray ion source, and binary buffer system, consisting of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN), was utilized for low pH peptide separation at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. For individual measurements, 400ng of peptide material was loaded and eluted over 120 min for patient samples or 140 min for cell lines. For a 120 min sample run, the gradient was stepwise increased from 5% to 30% buffer B over 105 min and stepped up to 60% over 5 min followed by wash in 95% over 10 min before re-equilibration in buffer A.   For experiments involving data-independent data acquisition (DIA), the Thermo Xcalibur (4.4.16.14) software was used for the Exploris 480 instrument. The instrument was operated with scan range set to 350-1450 m/z at a resolution of 60,000. The AGC was set to 3e6 at a maximum injection time of 54 ms. HCD (NCD 27%) was used for precursor fragmentation and fragment ions were analyzed in 32 DIA windows at a resolution of 30,000, while the AGC was kept at 3e6.

### Data Protocol
DIA raw files were analyzed using Spectronaut Pulsar (Biognosys, Cat. No. Sw-3001, version 13.10.191212) using the default settings for targeted DIA analysis. Data visulaization was done in R-studio

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Healthy controls, Cd34 cells, Proteome, Acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction.
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction.


