### Accession
PXD041989

### Title
grain proteomes from wild-type puroindoline and variants in wheat

### Description
To reveal the differences between soft wheat and hard wheat proteomes, three hard wheat varieties (MY26, GX3, and ZM1) with different puroindoline-encoding genes were compared with a soft wheat variety (CM605) with the wild-type puroindoline genotype. Specifically, proteomic methods (TMT) were used to screen for differentially abundant proteins (DAPs).

### Sample Protocol
One μg sample was injected into a C18 Nano-Trap column (4.5 cm × 75 μm, 3 μm). Peptides were separated in an analytical column (15 cm × 150 μm, 1.9 μm) using a linear gradient elution. The separated peptides were analyzed using the Q Exactive™ HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) combined with Nanospray Flex™ (electrospray ion source), with a spray voltage of 2.3 kV and an ion transport capillary temperature of 320 °C.

### Data Protocol
The proteins corresponding to the spectra from each run were identified by screening the IWGSC RefSeq v1.0 annotated wheat genome database using the search engine Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD 2.4; Thermo). The search parameters were as follows: mass tolerance for the precursor ion, 10 ppm; mass tolerance for the product ion, 0.02 Da; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation; dynamic modifications, oxidation of methionine and TMT plex; N-terminal modifications, acetylation, TMT plex, methionine loss, and methionine loss + acetylation.

### Publication Abstract
Premium wheat with a high end-use quality is generally lacking in China, especially high-quality hard and soft wheat. <i>Pina-D1</i> and <i>Pinb-D1</i> (<i>puroindoline</i> genes) influence wheat grain hardness (i.e., important wheat quality-related parameter) and are among the main targets in wheat breeding programs. However, the mechanism by which puroindoline genes control grain hardness remains unclear. In this study, three hard wheat puroindoline variants (MY26, GX3, and ZM1) were compared with a soft wheat variety (CM605) containing the wild-type puroindoline genotype. Specifically, proteomic methods were used to screen for differentially abundant proteins (DAPs). In total, 6253 proteins were identified and quantified via a high-throughput tandem mass tag quantitative proteomic analysis. Of the 208 DAPs, 115, 116, and 99 proteins were differentially expressed between MY26, GX3, and ZM1 (hard wheat varieties) and CM605, respectively. The cluster analysis of protein relative abundances divided the proteins into six clusters. Of these proteins, 67 and 41 proteins were, respectively, more and less abundant in CM605 than in MY26, GX3, and ZM1. Enrichment analyses detected six GO terms, five KEGG pathways, and five IPR terms that were shared by all three comparisons. Furthermore, 12 proteins associated with these terms or pathways were found to be differentially expressed in each comparison. These proteins, which included cysteine proteinase inhibitors, invertases, low-molecular-weight glutenin subunits, and alpha amylase inhibitors, may be involved in the regulation of grain hardness. The candidate genes identified in this study may be relevant for future analyses of the regulatory mechanism underlying grain hardness.

### Keywords
Puroindoline genotype, Lc-msms, Hardness, Wheat

### Affiliations
Crop Research Institute, Sichuan Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Peixun Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Peixun Liu
Crop Research Institute, Sichuan Academy of Agricultural Sciences


