### Accession
PXD015151

### Title
Histone Modification Analysis of Oligodendroglioma and Astrocytoma Brain Cancer Samples

### Description
WHO classification for tumors of the central nervous system strongly endorses molecular tests for the precise diagnosis of diffuse gliomas. While alterations in the DNA methylation status of gliomas are already well documented and used in specialised clinical centers to distinguish between brain tumor entities, changes to the epigenetic layer at the level of histone modifications are only poorly characterised. Here, we applied a recently developed data-independent acquisition (DIA) - mass spectrometry method to generate a comprehensive histone epi-proteomic map that documents the abundance of almost all characterized and many uncharacterized histone modifications to a series of IDH-mutant oligodendroglioma and astrocytoma samples. Our analysis documented significant abundance differences in almost one-third of the 144 quantified histone peptides. Among them are lower abundance levels of the polycomb repressive mark H3K27me3 in  oligodendroglioma samples compared to astrocytomas. We validated this finding by immunohistochemistry using the C36B11 antibody. Surprisingly, we observed inconsistencies with another widely applied H3K27me3 antibody (07-449), providing a warning flag for immunohistochemistry of brain cancers. An unbiased unsupervised clustering analysis of the proteomic dataset separated the two IDH-mutant glioma subtypes in full accordance to the EPIC DNA methylation classifier and the 1p/19q status. The clustering also revealed at least two histone epi-proteomic subgroups of oligodendroglioma, a feature not observable in the DNA methylation dataset. Our results indicate that histone epi-proteomic profiling at the depth of the current method has the capacity to identify clinically-relevant glioma sub-groups. In addition to being of use for diagnostic purposes, this could also provide novel insights in glioma biology and may identify new therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were processed as described in Feller et al. 2015 with modifications as described below. The 26 oligodendroglioma and astrocytoma samples were randomised and processed in batches of 6 - 8 samples throughout the workflow of sample preparation. Small pieces of nitrogen-frozen tissue samples, weighing about 1 mg, were transferred in a 2 ml low-binding Eppendorf tube placed on a metal block one ice. After 500 µl of ice-cold 0.2 M sulfuric acid were added samples were sonified in a VialTweeter 5 times for 10 seconds at 20 Watts (Hielscher Ultrasonics GmbH), with 45 s breaks for cooling-down. After sonification, samples were placed for 3 h on a Thermomixer at 800 rpm and 4 °C. To remove insoluble material, the sample was centrifuged for 15 min at 13,000 rpm and 4 °C. The supernatant containing the histones were transferred to a fresh 1,5 ml low-binding Eppendorf tube and trichloric acid (TCA, SIGMA) was added to a final concentration of 25 % to precipitate the histones. After keeping the TCA-containing samples at 4 °C over night, histones were pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 60 minutes at 4°C, followed by two washes with 0.5 ml ice-cold acetone containing 0.2 % HCl and two washes with 0.9 ml ice-cold acetone. Histone pellet was dried at room temperature, resuspended in 50 µl ddH2O and protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay.  Depending on the yield of the specific sample, 3 – 10 µg of histone sample were derivatised by chemical acetylation by reacting 5 µL of d6-acetic anhydride ((CD3CO)2O, SIGMA), 45 µL of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate and buffered with approximately 10 µl of 1:2 diluted ammonium hydroxide solution to keep the pH at 8. After the reaction mixture was vortexed and incubated at 37 °C for 45 minutes with shaking at 800 rpm in a Thermomixer, it was quenched with 35 µL of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate, the solution volume was reduced to 15 µL in a speed vac and the derivatisation procedure was repeated. After derivatisation at the protein level, the sample was resuspended to 50 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the pH was adjusted to pH 8, if necessary, with 1:2 diluted ammonium hydroxide solution or 10 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Histones were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at a trypsin : protein ratio of 1 : 20 at 37 °C.  Free peptide N termini were derivatised twice by reacting 5 µL of d6-acetic anhydride, 30 µL of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate and 10 - 15 µL of 1:2 diluted ammonium hydroxide solution to keep the pH at 8. After the reaction mixture was vortexed and incubated at 37 °C for 45 minutes with shaking at 800 rpm in a Thermomixer, it was quenched with 35 µL of 1 M ammonium bicarbonate, the solution volume was reduced to 15 µL in a speed vac and the derivatisation procedure was repeated. After derivatisation, peptides were evaporated in a speed vac at 37 °C to near dryness, resuspended in 20 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), the pH was adjusted with 50% TFA solution to pH 2 and the peptides were purified by a StageTip protocol using two discs of C18 followed by one disc of activated carbon (3 M Empore). After StageTip purification, the samples were evaporated in a speed vac to near dryness and stored until mass spectrometry acquisition. Before MS analysis, the histone peptides were resuspended in 20 µL of 0.1% TFA, and diluted 1:10 in 0.1% TFA supplemented with iRT reference peptides (Biognosis).

### Data Protocol
The MS-ready histone solution was separated on a reverse phase liquid chromatography column (Waters Acquity HSS T3, C18, 1.8 µM). The column was connected to a nanoflow UPLC (Waters M-Class) and peptides were electrosprayed in a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water and buffer B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted in a linear gradient with a flow rate of 300 nL per minute, starting at 1% B and ramping to 35% in 55 min, followed by an increase to 45% B in 5 min, followed by an increase to 65% in 3 min followed by an increase to 98% in 5 min and then holding at 98% B for another 10 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode, ion chromatograms were extracted with Skyline and data summarisation and statistical analysis was performed in R and Excel (Feller and Aebersold, manuscript in preparation). In brief, a spectral-chromatogram library was constructed using isotopically-labeled reference synthetic peptides and manually curated spectra from cellular histone preparations. To identify and quantify histone modifications, Thermo raw files were imported into the Skyline histone template and peak identification and ion chromatogram extraction was performed using the spectral-chromatogram library. All peak integrations were manually validated. Relative abundances of acetylated and methylated peptidoforms were calculated using the extracted ion chromatograms for all peptides that share the same sequence, including the unmodified peptide, according to the formulas described previously [1]. P-value adjustment was performed with the R function p.adjust using the method “fdr”. All quantified histone peptides are listed in the Supplementary Data File 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone epi-proteome, Brain cancer, Histone modifications, Astrocytoma, Oligodendroglioma

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich, Otto Stern Weg 3, 8093, Zürich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Christian Feller

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich, Otto Stern Weg 3, 8093, Zürich, Switzerland


