### Accession
PXD003086

### Title
Effect of cigarette smoke on microRNA expression in H292 lung cancer cells

### Description
Cigarette smoke has been associated with the development of various lung diseases including cancer. Dysregulation of miRNAs is known to affect protein expression which leads to diverse functional consequences. Investigating miRNA and protein expression in response to cigarette smoke exposure can lead to the identification of potential therapeutic and chemopreventive targets. We employed a SILAC-based quantitative proteomic analysis to identify proteins differentially expressed in response to cigarette smoke in H292 lung cancer cells. LC-MS/MS analysis led to the identification of 3,959 proteins, of which, 303 proteins were overexpressed and 112 proteins were found to be downregulated in cigarette smoke-treated H292 cells.

### Sample Protocol
H292 lung cancer cells were grown in DMEM medium and adapted to SILAC media. Cells grown in light media were treated with 0.1% cigarette smoke condensate for 12 months, while untreated cells were grown in 13C6-lysine/13C6-arginine-containing heavy media. The cells were then washed with cold PBS and lysed in HEPES lysis buffer, sonicated and centrifuged at 16,000 × g at 15°C for 20 min. The protein concentration was estimated using Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). Equal amounts of protein from each cell line were reduced using dithiothreitol at 60°C for 20 minutes. The reduced protein lysate was alkylated using iodoacetamide and incubated for 10 minutes in dark at room temperature. The samples were subjected to digestion with TPCK treated trypsin overnight at room temperature. The peptide mixture was acidified using 1 % triflouroacetic acid and desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridge. The extracted peptides were lyophilized and subjected to basic pH reverse phase chromatography (bRPLC). LC-MS/MS analysis was carried using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry obtained data was searched against Human RefSeq protein database (Version 65, containing 34,454 protein entries with common contaminants added) using SEQUEST and MASCOT search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer platform (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, GmbH). The search parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine and SILAC labeling (13C6) at lysine and arginine (6.02013 Da) as variable modifications. Trypsin was specified as a protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Modifications included. For MS data, monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da. The data were searched against decoy database and a 1% false discovery rate was set at the peptide level. Proteins with ratios greater than 2-fold were considered as upregulated where as those below 0.5-fold was considered to be downregulated.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic exposure to cigarette smoke markedly increases the risk for lung cancer. Regulation of gene expression at the post-transcriptional level by miRNAs influences a variety of cancer-related interactomes. Yet, relatively little is known on the effects of long-term cigarette smoke exposure on miRNA expression and gene regulation. NCI-H292 (H292) is a cell line sensitive to cigarette smoke with mucoepidermoid characteristics in culture. We report, in this study, original observations on long-term (12 months) cigarette smoke effects in the H292 cell line, using microarray-based miRNA expression profiling, and stable isotopic labeling with amino acids in cell culture-based quantitative proteomic analysis. We identified 112 upregulated and 147 downregulated miRNAs (by twofold) in cigarette smoke-treated H292 cells. The liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis identified 3,959 proteins, of which, 303 proteins were overexpressed and 112 proteins downregulated (by twofold). We observed 39 miRNA target pairs (proven targets) that were differentially expressed in response to chronic cigarette smoke exposure. Gene ontology analysis of the target proteins revealed enrichment of proteins in biological processes driving metabolism, cell communication, and nucleic acid metabolism. Pathway analysis revealed the enrichment of phagosome maturation, antigen presentation pathway, nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2-mediated oxidative stress response, and cholesterol biosynthesis pathways in cigarette smoke-exposed cells. In conclusion, this report makes an important contribution to knowledge on molecular changes in a lung cell line in response to long term cigarette smoke exposure. The findings might inform future strategies for drug target, biomarker and diagnostics innovation in lung cancer, and clinical oncology. These observations also call for further research on the extent to which continuing or stopping cigarette smoking in patients diagnosed with lung cancer translates into molecular and clinical outcomes.

### Keywords
Lung cancer, Mirna, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


