### Accession
PXD041842

### Title
Phosphoproteomic sequencing of Glycine max under alkali stress

### Description
Alkali stress is one of the most severe abiotic stresses affecting agricultural production worldwide. To understand the phosphorylation events in soybean in response to alkali stress, we performed the TMT labeling-based quantitative phosphoproteomic analyses on soybean leaf and root tissues under 50 mM NaHCO3 treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Soybean seedlings at V1 stage were treated with water or 50mM NaHCO3 for 0, 1, 3, 6 and 12 h respectively, and were separately harvested and mixed into twelve groups: leaf_control (1), leaf_control (2), leaf_control (3), leaf_alkali (1), leaf_ alkali (2), leaf_ alkali (3), root_control (1), root_control (2), root_control (3), root_alkali (1), root_ alkali (2) and root_ alkali (3). Then the protein samples were digested with trypsin according to FASP method, and the resultin peptides were desalted and redissolved after a freeze-drying process. Later, the peptides were labeled using TMT) reagents and phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 beads. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the enriched phosphopeptides were injected into an Easy-nLC1000, coupled online with a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. The MS data of each sample were acquired for 300–1800 m/z at the resolution of 70 k for over 120 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed by Mascot v2.2 and Proteome Discoverer v1.4 and searched against a Glycine max peptide database from Uniprot (UniProt_Glycine_max_85135_20211118.fasta).

### Publication Abstract
Sodium bicarbonate stress caused by NaHCO<sub>3</sub> is one of the most severe abiotic stresses affecting agricultural production worldwide. However, little attention has been given to the molecular mechanisms underlying plant responses to sodium bicarbonate stress. To understand phosphorylation events in signaling pathways triggered by sodium bicarbonate stress, TMT-labeling-based quantitative phosphoproteomic analyses were performed on soybean leaf and root tissues under 50 mM NaHCO<sub>3</sub> treatment. In the present study, a total of 7856 phosphopeptides were identified from cultivated soybeans (<i>Glycine max</i> L. Merr.), representing 3468 phosphoprotein groups, in which 2427 phosphoprotein groups were newly identified. These phosphoprotein groups contained 6326 unique high-probability phosphosites (UHPs), of which 77.2% were newly identified, increasing the current soybean phosphosite database size by 43.4%. Among the phosphopeptides found in this study, we determined 67 phosphopeptides (representing 63 phosphoprotein groups) from leaf tissue and 554 phosphopeptides (representing 487 phosphoprotein groups) from root tissue that showed significant changes in phosphorylation levels under sodium bicarbonate stress (fold change &gt;1.2 or &lt;0.83, respectively; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Localization prediction showed that most phosphoproteins localized in the nucleus for both leaf and root tissues. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses showed quite different enriched functional terms between leaf and root tissues, and more pathways were enriched in the root tissue than in the leaf tissue. Moreover, a total of 53 different protein kinases and 7 protein phosphatases were identified from the differentially expressed phosphoproteins (DEPs). A protein kinase/phosphatase interactor analysis showed that the interacting proteins were mainly involved in/with transporters/membrane trafficking, transcriptional level regulation, protein level regulation, signaling/stress response, and miscellaneous functions. The results presented in this study reveal insights into the function of post-translational modification in plant responses to sodium bicarbonate stress.

### Keywords
Alkali stress, Phosphoproteomics, Soybean

### Affiliations
Northeast Agricultural University
Key Laboratory of Soybean Biology of Chinese Education Ministry, Harbin 150030, China

### Submitter
QIANG LI

### Lab Head
Dr QIANG LI
Key Laboratory of Soybean Biology of Chinese Education Ministry, Harbin 150030, China


