### Accession
PXD008069

### Title
Proteomic changes in Oryza sativa leaves in response to MSP1 and flg22 treatments

### Description
Rice blast disease caused by Magnaporthe oryzae is one of the most damaging diseases affecting rice productivity. Previously, we reported a novel M. oryzae- secreted protein MSP1, which triggers cell death and pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-triggered immune (PTI) responses in rice. To investigate the MSP1 induced defense response in rice at the protein level, we employed a label-free quantitative proteomic approach, in parallel with the flg22, which is a wellknown elicitor. Proteomics analysis using the MaxQuant-Perseus platform led to the identification of 4087 proteins of which 417 showed significant differences (multiple sample test, ANOVA p<0.05) in response to MSP1 and/or flg22 treatments. Functional annotation of the differential proteins showed that proteins related to the primary metabolism, secondary metabolism and lipid metabolism were strongly down-regulated, while elevated proteins were mainly associated with the stress response, chromatin remodeling, post-translational modification of proteins and signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Rice seeds (Oryza sativa L. Dongjin) were sterilized in 0.05% Spotak solution (Bayer crop science, South Korea) overnight at 4°C, and then washed with distilled water five times. Sterilized seeds were placed on moist tissue paper and incubated at 28°C in the dark for germination. Germinated seeds were transferred to sterilized soil in a growth chamber (70% humidity, 25°C; a light and dark cycle of 14 and 10 hours, respectively). Four week-old rice leaves were sprayed with PBS (137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 4.3 mM Na2HPO4, 1.47 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.4) as control, 1 μM purified recombinant MSP1-His protein, or 1 μM synthetic bacterial flagellin peptide flg22 (LugenSci, South Korea). Treated leaves were harvested at 24 h post-treatment (hpt). For isolation of total proteins, 1 g of leaves were ground to fine powder using liquid nitrogen and homogenized in 10 mL of Tris-Mg/NP-40 buffer [0.5 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 2% (v/v) NP-40, 20 mM MgCl2) followed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. Protamine sulfate (PS) precipitation method was used for the enrichment of low-abundance proteins (LAPs). The collected supernatant after centrifugation was incubated with 0.1 % PS (w/v, in deionized water) on ice for 30 min. The extract was again centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C to separate PS-supernatant (PSS) and PS-pellet (PSP) fractions, as described earlier (Kim et al. 2013; Gupta et al. 2015). Proteins were precipitated from PS-supernatant fraction by TCA/acetone (12.5% TCA in 100% acetone (w/v) containing 0.07 % β–mercaptoethanol) precipitation and stored -20 °C in 80% until further analysis. For proteome analysis, proteins pellets, after TCA/acetone precipitation, were dissolved in 8 M urea containing 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5. Cysteines were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubation for 30 min. Subsequently, alkylation was performed by adding chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 14 mM and incubation for 30 min. The reaction was quenched by addition of DTT. The solution was diluted to a final concentration of 1 M urea with 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5 and proteins were digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio) at 37 °C overnight. Hydrolyzation was stopped by addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 0.5%. Peptides were desalted and pre-fractionated into three fractions using the Empore Styrene divinylbenzene Reversed Phase Sulfonate material (SDB-RPS, 3M). After elution, peptides were dried, redissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA, and adjusted to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µl. Peptides were separated with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) on a 16 cm C18 column (3 µm bead size) with a 120 min segmented linear gradient. Peptides were analyzed with a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with a Top15 method.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (ver. 1.5.3.12. MS/MS spectra were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the rice protein database (88, 647 entries) and 248 common contaminant proteins. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two-missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Allowed mass deviation was 4.5 ppm for peptides and 20 ppm for fragments. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Statistical analyses, hierarchical clustering analysis (HCL), and principal component analysis (PCA) were carried out using Perseus software (ver. 1.5.8.5)

### Publication Abstract
Previously, we reported a novel Magnaporthe oryzae- secreted protein MSP1, which triggers cell death and pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-triggered immune (PTI) responses in rice. To investigate the MSP1 induced defense response in rice at the protein level, we employed a label-free quantitative proteomic approach, in parallel with flg22 treatment, which is a well-known elicitor. Exogenous application of MSP1 to rice leaves induced an oxidative burst, MAPK3/6 activation, and activation of pathogenesis-related genes (DUF26, PBZ, and PR-10). MaxQuant based label free proteome analysis led to the identification of 4167 protein groups of which 433 showed significant differences in response to MSP1 and/or flg22 treatment. Functional annotation of the differential proteins showed that majority of the proteins related to primary, secondary, and lipid metabolism were decreased, while proteins associated mainly with the stress response, post-translational modification and signaling were increased in abundance. Moreover, several peroxidases and receptor kinases were induced by both the elicitors, highlighting their involvement in MSP1 and flg22 induced signaling in rice. Taken together, the results reported here contribute to our understanding of MSP1 and flg22 triggered immune responses at the proteome level, thereby increasing our overall understanding of PTI signaling in rice. BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: MSP1 is a M. oryzae secreted protein, which triggers defense responses in rice. Previous reports have shown that MSP1 is required for the pathogenicity of rice blast fungus, however, the exact mechanism of its action and its downstream targets in rice are currently unknown. Identification of the downstream targets is required in order to understand the MSP1 induced signaling in rice. Moreover, key proteins identified could also serve as potential candidates for the generation of disease resistance crops by modulating stress signaling pathways. Therefore, here we employed, for the first time, a label-free quantitative proteomic approach to investigate the MSP1 induced signaling in rice together with flg22. Functional annotation of the differential proteins showed that majority of the proteins related to primary, secondary, and lipid metabolism were decreased, while proteins related to the defense response, signaling and ROS detoxification were majorly increased. Thus, as an elicitor, recombinant MSP1 proteins could be utilized to inducing broad pathogen resistance in crops by priming the local immune responses.

### Keywords
Msp1, Label-free quantitative proteomics, Magnaporthe oryzae, Pamp-triggered immunity, Rice

### Affiliations
University of Muenster
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Plant Proteomics Group Carl von Linné Weg 10 50829 Cologne Germany

### Submitter
Iris Finkemeier

### Lab Head
Dr Iris Finkemeier
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Plant Proteomics Group Carl von Linné Weg 10 50829 Cologne Germany


