### Accession
PXD010701

### Title
Proteome analysis of human neutrophil granulocytes from patients with monogenic disease using data-independent acquisition

### Description
Neutrophil granulocytes are critical mediators of innate immunity and tissue regeneration.  Rare diseases of neutrophil granulocytes may affect their differentiation and/or functions.  However, there are very few validated diagnostic tests assessing the functions of neutrophil granulocytes in these diseases. Here, we set out to probe omics analysis as a novel diagnostic platform for patients with defective differentiation and function of neutrophil granulocytes. We analyzed highly purified neutrophil granulocytes from 68 healthy individuals and 16 patients with rare monogenic diseases. Cells were isolated from fresh venous blood (purity >99%) and used to create a spectral library covering almost 8000 proteins using strong cation exchange fractionation. Patient neutrophil samples were then analyzed by data-independent acquisition proteomics, quantifying 4154 proteins in each sample.

### Sample Protocol
Purified neutrophil samples were processed with the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method as follows: ~1e6 cells were lysed using 50 μl of SDS lysis buffer (0.5% SDS, 0.1 M DTT in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6) and sonicated for 30 sec using a Branson Ultrasonics 250A analog sonifier (10% duty cycle, energy level 1). Samples were then heated for 5 min at 95°C in a heating block. Subsequently, 150 μl of UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5) were added to the samples to a total volume of 200 μl, loaded onto 0.5 ml Microcon 30 kDa-cutoff Ultracel membrane filters (Merck, catalog number MRCF0R030) and spun down in an Eppendorf 5418 centrifuge for 20 min at 14.000 rcf. Next, 200 μl of UA buffer was added and the centrifugation repeated. Subsequently, 50 μl of IAA buffer (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA buffer) were added to the filters and incubated in darkness for 20 min at room temperature. Next, two washing steps using 150 μl and 200 μl of UA buffer were performed, each time spinning down the samples for 20 min at 14.000 rcf. As a final washing step, the samples were washed twice with 200 μl of ABC buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in ddH2O) and spun down as described above. The filters with washed samples were then transported to new collector tubes and MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher, catalog number 90057) in digestion buffer (1 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl 8.5) was added in 1:100 ratio. The filters were wrapped in parafilm to prevent drying and placed in a wet chamber for overnight digestion at 37°C. Finally, the samples were spun down for 15 min at 14.000 rcf, 50 μl of ABC buffer were added to the filters and the centrifugation step repeated. The samples were then acidified to pH ~2.5 using 20% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid). The peptide yield was estimated using Thermo Fisher NanoDrop 2000c.

### Data Protocol
Used SearchGUI with 5 search engines for spectral library search (DDA data). The spectral library has been processed by PeptideShaker and used in Biognosys Spectronaut 11. DIA raw files were used in Spectronaut 11 for protein identification and quantitation. Please refer to our manuscript for more details.

### Publication Abstract
Neutrophil granulocytes are critical mediators of innate immunity and tissue regeneration. Rare diseases of neutrophil granulocytes may affect their differentiation and/or functions. However, there are very few validated diagnostic tests assessing the functions of neutrophil granulocytes in these diseases. Here, we set out to probe omics analysis as a novel diagnostic platform for patients with defective differentiation and function of neutrophil granulocytes. We analyzed highly purified neutrophil granulocytes from 68 healthy individuals and 16 patients with rare monogenic diseases. Cells were isolated from fresh venous blood (purity &gt;99%) and used to create a spectral library covering almost 8000 proteins using strong cation exchange fractionation. Patient neutrophil samples were then analyzed by data-independent acquisition proteomics, quantifying 4154 proteins in each sample. Neutrophils with mutations in the neutrophil elastase gene <i>ELANE</i> showed large proteome changes that suggest these mutations may affect maturation of neutrophil granulocytes and initiate misfolded protein response and cellular stress mechanisms. In contrast, only few proteins changed in patients with leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) and chronic granulomatous disease (CGD). Strikingly, neutrophil transcriptome analysis showed no correlation with its proteome. In case of two patients with undetermined genetic causes, proteome analysis guided the targeted genetic diagnostics and uncovered the underlying genomic mutations. Data-independent acquisition proteomics may help to define novel pathomechanisms in neutrophil diseases and provide a clinically useful diagnostic dimension.

### Keywords
Primary immunodeficiency diseases, Whole exome sequencing, Systems medicine, Rare disease, Multi-omics analysis, Proteomics, Neutrophil granulocyte

### Affiliations
TU Berlin
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany; Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK

### Submitter
Piotr Grabowski

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany; Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, UK


