### Accession
PXD008871

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis provides novel insights into the regulation mechanism underlying the fruit ripening process in papaya (Carica papaya L.)

### Description
Papaya (Carica papaya L.) is a typical climacteric fruit, undergoing massive physico-chemical changes during ripening. Although papaya is widely cultivated and consumed, few studies have characterized the variations in metabolism during its ripening process at the proteasome level. Using an integrated approach involving Tandem Mass Tag labeling and liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry analysis, proteomes of papaya fruit at different ripening stages were investigated. A total of 3220 proteins were identified, of which 2818 were quantified. The differential accumulated proteins (DAPs) exhibited various biological functions and diverse subcellular localizations. Among the DEPs, most of the pathogen defense-related proteins were down-regulated, suggesting that disease resistance decreased during the ripening process. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes enrichment analysis revealed that various metabolic pathways were significantly altered, particularly in flavonoid and fatty acid metabolisms. The up-regulation of several flavonoid biosynthesis-related proteins may provide more raw materials for pigment biosynthesis, accelerating the color variation of papaya fruit. Thus, variations in the fatty acid metabolism-related enzymes were investigated. For example, a lipoxygenase, which catalyzes the conversion of ACC to ethylene, was significantly induced, suggesting a cross-talk between the lipoxygenase-mediated fatty acid metabolism and the hormone-controlled fruit ripening in papaya. Furthermore, the contents of several important fatty acids were determined, and increased unsaturated fatty acids may be associated with papaya fruit volatile formation. Our data may give an intrinsic explanation of the variations in metabolism during the ripening process of papaya fruit and serve as a comprehensive resource for investigating the regulation mechanism involved.

### Sample Protocol
Plant materials Two-year-old papaya trees of cultivar ‘Sunrise’ were planted in a 3 m × 3 m arrangement with standard drip irrigation and fertilizer applications. The experimental field was at Lingnan Normal University field experimental station in Zhanjiang City (Guangdong Province, China). The temperature was 25 ± 1 °C with a light/dark cycle of 12/12 h and 60–70% relative humidity. All papaya trees were watered once a week with a nutrient solution containing 1.425 mM NH4NO3, 0.323 mM NaH2PO4, 0.513 mM K2SO4, 0.998 mM CaCl2, 1.643 mM MgSO4, 0.009 mM MnCl2, 0.075 mM (NH4)6Mo7O24, 0.019 mM H3BO3, 0.155 mM CuSO4, 1 mM FeCl3, 0.070 mM citric acid and 0.152 mM ZnSO4. Three fruit groups at the color break stage (5% ≤ peel color ≤ 15% yellow) were harvested. The selected fruits were washed with deionized water, and then dipped in 0.2% (w/v) hypochloride solution for 15 min to eliminate potential microbes.  Physiological parameter measurements Measurements of the physiological parameters of papaya fruits were performed according to (Liu et al., 2016). Briefly, fruit firmness was determined using a hand-held fruit tester (GY-J, Top Instrument Co Ltd, Zhejiang, China). For total soluble solid measurement, 5.0 g of fruit pulp from three independent fruits was selected and ground using a mortar in 50.0 mL of distilled water. The homogenate was centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant used to measure total soluble solid content (%) with a hand-held refractometer (J1-3A, Guangdong Scientific Instruments, Guangzhou, China). The same diluted supernatant was titrated against 0.1 N NaOH until a faint pink color was obtained at the end point and titratable acidity was expressed as percentage citric acid. For respiration rate determination, three papaya fruits from each group were weighed and sealed in 2.4-L containers at 25 °C. The CO2 concentration in each container was measured using an infrared gas analyzer (Li-6262 CO2/H2O analyzer, LI-COR, USA).  Observation by light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy Fragments (0.5 cm long) of surface tissues were collected from whole fruit at different ripening stages. Samples were fixed in Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)50 for 48 h and transferred into 70% ethanol. Then, the tissue samples were dehydrated in a series of varied ethanol concentrations, permeated and embedded in wax. Next, tissue samples were sliced into 12-μm thick sections using a rotary microtome (Leica RM2255; Wetzlar, Germany) and spread on glass slides. The wax sections were eliminated in xylol:ethanol (1:1, v/v) solution for 5 min and rehydrated in a series of decreasing ethanol concentrations, including 100, 95, 85 and 70%, for 1 min each. The sample sections were stained with 3% safranin for 24 h and washed in a series of increasing ethanol concentrations of 70, 85 and 95% for 5 s each. Next, the sample sections were transferred into 1% fast green dye solution for 3 s, treated twice with 100% ethanol for 5 s each, and then transferred into xylol:ethanol (1:1, v/v) solution for 5 min. The slides were mounted with synthetic resin and observed under a LSM510 laser scanning system (Carl Zeiss, Wetzlar, Germany). Samples for scanning electron microscopy were prepared as above. Segments were gently dipped in xylol for 4 h at 45 °C to remove the wax. The samples were treated with xylol:ethanol (1:1, v/v) solution and 100% ethanol for 1 h and then put in tert-butyl alcohol. Finally, dried segments were metalized with gold. Observations were performed under a scanning electron microscope.

### Data Protocol
Database search The MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine v.1.5.2.8 (Cox et al., 2011). MS/MS data were searched against the papaya genome data (http://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was used as cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages. For precursor ions, the mass error was set to 10 ppm, and for fragment ions the mass error was set to 0.02 Da. For protein quantification, TMT 6-plex was selected in MaxQuant. For peptide and protein identification, the false discovery rate (FDR) threshold was adjusted to < 1% and the peptide ion score was set to ≥ 20.  Protein annotation Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of the proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.uniprot.org/). First, identified protein IDs were converted to UniProt ID and then mapped onto the GO database. The un-annotated proteins (by UniProt-GOA) were annotated using InterProScan software based on the protein sequence alignment method. The proteins with GO annotation were classified into three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function.  The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) was used to analyze protein metabolic pathways. First, the KEGG online tool KAAS (http://www.genome.jp/tools/kaas/) was used to produce the KEGG description of identified proteins. Then, the annotated proteins were mapped onto KEGG pathways using the KEGG online tool, KEGG mapper (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/mapper.html). The domain functional description of all identified proteins was produced by InterProScan based on protein sequence alignment method. Subcellular localization prediction of identified proteins was performed using the software wolfpsort (http://wolfpsort.seq.cbrc.jp/), which is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for eukaryotic sequence prediction.  Functional enrichment analysis Within the DEPs, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to analyze the GO and KEGG functional enrichments. Correction for multiple hypothesis tests was performed using the standard FDR control method. GO and KEGG categories with a corrected P-value < 0.05 were considered significant. K-means cluster was analyzed using the MeV software. For the bioinformatics analysis, including the GO-base and KEGG-base enrichment, all sequences in the database were used as the background. In order to meet the requirements of the hierarchical clustering method, the P-value was transformed into Z-score after log transformation using the following formula: Z sample-i=(log2(Signalsample-i)-Mean(Log2(Signal)of all samples))/(Standard deviation (Log2 (Signal)of all samples))  Fatty acid analysis Fatty acid methyl esters were prepared according to (He et al., 2016) with some minor alterations. A 40-mg fruit sample was put into a 15-mL tube. Then, 2 mL of a mixture of ethyl ether and n-hexane (1:1, v/v), 2 mL of 2 M KOH–methanol solution and 2 mL of methanol was added to the tube. The mixture solution was kept in a water bath at 50 °C for 30 min with shaking. When the solution was cool, 2 mL of deionized water was added to the tube. After separation, the upper layer was collected and loaded to gas chromatography coupled with MS (GC–MS) analysis using a VARIAN 1200L-GC–MS (Varian, Palo Alto, CA, USA) equipped with a silica capillary column (Agilent DB wax; 30 m × 0.25 mm × 0.25 μm). Helium at a constant flow rate of 0.8 mL/min was used as carrier gas. The oven temperature was held initially at 170 °C for 0.5 min, then raised to 230 °C at a rate of 5 °C/min and kept at 230 °C for 13 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the electron impact mode at 70 eV at a scan range of 30–450 m/z. The fatty acid methyl esters were positively identified by matching the data of their retention time and mass spectra with the National Institute of Standard Technology Library database provided by the GC–MS system.  Statistical analysis Significant differences between different sample groups were calculated using a one-way analysis of variance with a Tukey’s test at P < 0.01. All expression analyses were performed for three biological replicates. All reported values represent the averages of three replicates, and data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ripening, Papaya, Fatty acid, Differential expressed protein, Metabolism

### Affiliations
College of Life and Environmental Science, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China; Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Genetic Improvement and Quality Control of Medicinal Plants, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Chenyu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Chenjia Shen
College of Life and Environmental Science, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China; Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Genetic Improvement and Quality Control of Medicinal Plants, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China


