### Accession
PXD018867

### Title
Insights into the natural defences of a coral reef fish against gill ectoparasites: integrated metabolome and microbiome approach.

### Description
Understanding natural defence mechanisms against parasites can be a valuable tool for the development of innovative therapies. In this study, we investigated the interplay between the gill mucus metabolome and microbiome of Chaetodon lunulatus, a butterflyfish known to avoid gill monogeneans whilst living amongst closely related parasitized species. In an attempt to identify metabolites and OTUs potentially involved in parasite defence mechanisms, we studied the metabolome (LC-MS/MS) and microbiome of several sympatric butterflyfish species, including the only non-parasitized species C. lunulatus. After observing significant differences between the metabolome and microbiome of parasitized versus non-parasitized fish (PCoA, ANOSIM), we obtained the discriminant metabolites and OTUs using a supervised analysis. Some of the most important discriminant metabolites were identified as peptides, and three new β-subunit haemoblogin-derived peptides from C. lunulatus (CLHbβ-1, CLHbβ-2 and CLHbβ-3) were purified, characterised and synthesised. We also identified specific bacterial families and OTUs typical from low-oxygen habitats in C. lunulatus gill mucus. By using a correlation network between the two datasets, we found a Fusobacteriaceae strain exclusively present in C. lunulatus highly correlated to the peptides. Finally, we discuss the possible involvement of these peptides and Fusobacteriaceae in monogenean avoidance by this fish species.

### Sample Protocol
Optimised peptide extraction and peptides purification An acidic extraction was performed following the method described in Vidal-Dupiol et al. (2011) to obtain a peptide-enriched extract. Briefly, 10 mg of freeze-dried mucus were suspended in 1 mL of 2 M glacial acetic acid. The suspension was maintained in a 4°C water bath during sonication (Vibra- cellTM 75185, 50% power, three pulses of 30 s) and centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 20 min at 4°C, to remove the cellular debris. The obtained supernatant was immediately collected and prepurified by Solid Phase Extraction using a Strata C18 cartridge (500 mg/ 6 mL; Phenomenex, CA, USA) washed using acidified water (0.05 % TFA), and three successive elutions were performed with 10, 60, and 80% acetonitrile (MeCN) in acidified water. The fractions obtained were freeze-dried and reconstituted with 1 mL of H2O/MeCN (1:1 v/v). C. lunulatus and C. ornatissimus mucus samples were extracted in triplicates. Peptide sequence analysis First step: acid-extracted peptides were analysed using a LC-ESI-MS system with the chromatographic conditions described in Reverter et al. (FEMS Microbiol. Ecol., 2017) Second step: MALDI-MS analysis of the extracted peptides was done on a Bruker AutoFlex™ III (Bruker Daltonics, Germany). Samples were diluted 10-fold in acidified water (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) and 0.5μL of a given sample was mixed with 0.5μL of 4-HCCA (Sigma Aldrich, France) on a MALDI MTP 384 polished ground steel plate (Bruker Daltonics). Following co-crystallization, MALDI MS spectra were recorded in linear positive mode using FlexControl 4.0 software (Bruker Daltonics). The following instrument settings were used: 1.5kV of electric potential difference, dynamic range of detection of 600 to 18,000 Da, global attenuator offset of 46% with 200Hz laser frequency, and 2,000 accumulated laser shots per sample. A suppression mass gate up to m/z 600 to prevent detector saturation by clusters of the 4 -HCCA matrix. An external calibration of the mass spectrometer was performed using a standard mixture of peptides and proteins (Peptide Standard Calibration II and Protein Standard Calibration I, Bruker Daltonics) covering the dynamic range of analysis. Third step: NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were carried out using an Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC coupled with a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). The peptides were loaded onto a C18 PepMap100 precolumn (5 μm, 300 μm × 5 mm) at 10 μL min–1, and separated onto an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 column (75 μm × 250 mm, 3 μm 100 A) at 300 nL min–1, both maintained at 35°C (both columns from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides samples were eluted by a gradient of H2O/MeCN (A/B), both containing 0.1% formic acid, from 2% to 50% B in 31 min. For MS analysis, the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was used in positive mode and data-dependent acquisition. The voltage applied to the nano-tips was adjusted to produce 0.3 μA and the entrance capillary was maintained at 320 °C. The Q-Exactive Orbitrap acquired a full-range scan from 380 to 2000 m/z (70 000 resolution, AGC target 3.106, maximum IT 200 ms) and then fragmented the top ten-peptide ions in each cycle (range 200-2000 m/z, 17 500 resolution, AGC target 2.105, maximum IT 100 ms, intensity threshold 4.104, excluding charge-unassigned ions, Normalised Collision Energy at 27). Parent ions were then excluded from MS/MS for the next 10 s. The software Chromeleon Xpress and Xcalibur 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used to control the HPLC and the mass spectrometer, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Exact masses were calculated with the Xtract algorithm from Xcalibur software.  Characterisation of peptide sequence was initially performed by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific); the data submitted on Pride was reprocessed by version 2.4 to allow full submission. Homology searches of the amino acid sequence were performed on the Swissprot-UniprotKB database (November 2016, https://www.uniprot.org/) using Mascot and Sequest.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding natural defense mechanisms against parasites can be a valuable tool for the development of innovative therapies. We have previously identified a butterflyfish species (<i>Chaetodon</i> <i>lunulatus</i>) that avoids gill monogenean parasites while living amongst closely related parasitized species. The metabolome and microbiome of several sympatric butterflyfish species from the island of Moorea (French Polynesia) were previously described. In this study, we used the previously generated datasets in an attempt to identify metabolites and bacteria potentially involved in parasite defense mechanisms. We investigated the interplay between the gill mucus metabolome and microbiome of the non-susceptible <i>C.</i> <i>lunulatus</i> versus sympatric butterflyfish species that were always found parasitized in the Central and Eastern Indo-Pacific. After observing significant differences between the metabolome and bacteria of susceptible versus non-susceptible fish, we obtained the discriminant metabolites and operational taxonomic units (OTUs) using a supervised analysis. Some of the most important discriminant metabolites were identified as peptides, and three new peptides derived from &#x3b2;-subunit hemoglobin from <i>C.</i> <i>lunulatus</i> (CLHb&#x3b2;-1, CLHb&#x3b2;-2, and CLHb&#x3b2;-3) were purified, characterized and synthesized to confirm their structures. We also identified specific bacterial families and OTUs typical from low-oxygen habitats in <i>C.</i> <i>lunulatus</i> gill mucus. By using a correlation network between the two datasets, we found a <i>Fusobacteriaceae</i> strain exclusively present in <i>C.</i> <i>lunulatus</i> and highly correlated to the peptides. Finally, we discuss the possible involvement of these peptides and <i>Fusobacteriaceae</i> in monogenean avoidance by this fish species.

### Keywords
Chaetodon, Metabolomics, Fish mucus, Host-parasite interactions, Butterflyfish, Multi-omics, Microbiome

### Affiliations
CR Université Grenoble Alpes, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, INSERM U1209, CNRS UMR5309, La Tronche, France.
Plateforme BioPark of Archamps

### Submitter
Sebastien Voisin

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Bulet
CR Université Grenoble Alpes, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, INSERM U1209, CNRS UMR5309, La Tronche, France.


