### Accession
PXD027862

### Title
CSN5i-3 induces degradation of selective CRL substrate receptors and accumulation of CRL substrates

### Description
In this study, we used quantitative proteomics mass spectrometry with 16-plex TMT labeling to compare individual protein levels of DMSO and 1 μM CSN5i-3-treated K562 cells for 2, 8, and 24 hours. CSN5i-3 is a selective and potent inhibitor of Cop9 Signalosome (CSN), which regulates the activity of Cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases (CRLs). CSN5i-3 treatment resulted in reduced CSN activity, and consequently increased cullin neddylation and constitutively active CRL. Gene Ontology analysis of the changed proteins between DMSO- and CSN5i-3-treated samples showed the enrichment of CSN subunits, cell cycle and chromosome-related components, and phosphatase complex, which include multiple CSN subunits (e.g., CSN7B and CSN5), components of CRLs, especially CRL SRs (e.g., SKP2, ELOA and DCAF1/VPRBP), and known substrates of CRLs (e.g., MAGEA6, GLUL, and RHOB). Indeed, eight out of the top 20 most decreased proteins were CRL adaptor and substrate receptors, two out of the top 20 were E2 proteins (CDC34/UBE2R1 and UBE2R2), and two were CSN subunits. Eight out of the top 20 most increased proteins were reported CRL substrates.

### Sample Protocol
Washed pellets of 1 million cells were lysed on ice with 100µL lysis buffer (0.05% SDS/0.5 M TEAB) by vortexing, syringe titration with a 23G needle (30x), and tip sonication for 5 cycles of 5 sec at 20% power with a Fisher Scientific 550 Sonic Dismembrator. Lysates were then clarified at 16,000g for 10 min at 4°C, and the protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay. 20µg protein per sample was then brought to 40µL total volume with lysis buffer, followed by reduction with 3mM TCEP for 30 min at room temperature, alkylation with 10mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature, digestion with 1:100 LysC for 3 hr at room temperature, and digestion with 1:30 trypsin overnight at 37°C. 5µg peptides (11µL) per sample were then labelled with 50µg TMTpro reagents (in 5µL anhydrous acetonitrile) for 2 hr at room temperature. TMT reactions were quenched with 1µL 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature, combined, and lyophilized to dryness. The labelled peptides were then fractionated on an Accucore 150 x 2.1mm C4 column (Thermo cat. # 16526-152130) on an Agilent 1100 HPLC. 15 C4 fractions were concatenated into 5 final fractions, lyophilized, and resuspended in buffer A (2% ACN, 0.2% formic acid).  Fractions were then analyzed by LC-MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis was first performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) using the Byonic search algorithm (Protein Metrics) and a nonredundant Uniprot Human FASTA file (October 2019 download). Byonic search parameters were as follows: fully Tryptic peptides with no more than 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a maximum of 2 common modifications and 2 rare modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMTpro addition to lysine and peptide N-termini were static modifications. Methionine oxidation was set as a dynamic common modification (max of 2) while protein N-terminal acetylation, protein N-terminal Met-loss, protein N-terminal Met-loss plus acetylation, lysine acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were set as dynamic rare modifications (max of 1 each). Byonic protein-level FDR was set to 1%. Percolator FDRs were set at 0.001 (strict) and 0.01 (relaxed). Reporter ion quantification from ms2 spectra was based on S/N ratios, used a co-isolation threshold of 20% and an average reporter S/N threshold of 10. Normalization was performed on total peptide amount of all identified peptides. Consensus level peptide and protein FDR filters were set at 0.01 and minimum peptide length set at 6. Strict parsimony principle was set to true.

### Publication Abstract
Cop9 signalosome (CSN) regulates the function of cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases (CRLs) by deconjugating the ubiquitin-like protein NEDD8 from the cullin subunit. To understand the physiological impact of CSN function on the CRL network and cell proliferation, we combined quantitative mass spectrometry and genome-wide CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) and CRISPR activation (CRISPRa) screens to identify factors that modulate cell viability upon inhibition of CSN by the small molecule CSN5i-3. CRL components and regulators strongly modulated the antiproliferative effects of CSN5i-3, and in addition we found two pathways involved in genome integrity, SCF<sup>FBXO5</sup>-APC/C-GMNN and CUL4<sup>DTL</sup>-SETD8, that contribute substantially to the toxicity of CSN inhibition. Our data highlight the importance of CSN-mediated NEDD8 deconjugation and adaptive exchange of CRL substrate receptors in sustaining CRL function and suggest approaches for leveraging CSN inhibition for the treatment of cancer.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Cop9 signalosome, Crl, Mass spectrometry, Substrate receptor, Csn5i-3

### Affiliations
Caltech Proteome Exploration Lab
Caltech Proteome Exploration Laboratory

### Submitter
Brett Lomenick

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros D Garbis
Caltech Proteome Exploration Laboratory


