### Accession
PXD012811

### Title
Sirt2 inhibition reprograms T cell metabolism for optimal anti-tumor immunity: Sirt2 Interacting Proteins

### Description
Growing evidence indicates that metabolism is a key driver of T cell functions. A switch from oxidative phosphorylation to aerobic glycolysis is a hallmark of T cell activation and is required to meet metabolic demands of proliferation and effector functions. However, the mechanisms underlying the metabolic switch in T cells remain unclear. Here, we identify Sirt2 as a crucial immune checkpoint coordinating metabolic and functional fitness of T cells. Sirt2 is induced upon T cell activation and increases in late maturation stages. Sirt2 negatively regulates glycolysis by targeting key glycolytic enzymes. Remarkably, Sirt2 knockout T cells exhibit profound upregulation of aerobic glycolysis with enhanced proliferation and effector function and thus effectively reject tumor challenge in vivo. Furthermore, pharmacologic inhibition of Sirt2 in human tumor infiltrating lymphocytes demonstrated a similar phenotype. Taken together, our results demonstrate Sirt2 as an actionable target to reprogram T cell metabolism to augment immunotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of Sirt2 interacting targets, CD3+ purified T cells from WT mice spleens were cultured on anti-CD3 coated-plates. One day post-activation, cells were collected, washed with PBS and lysed in the IP lysis buffer. Immunoprecipitation assay was performed as described previously using Anti-Sirt2 (Sigma) for Sample C versus isotype control (Cell Signaling)for Sample A. The immunoprecipitated proteins were loaded onto 10% SDS-PAGE and separated by electrophoresis. The gel was excised into three bands according to the protein molecular weights band 1 (90-130kDa), band 2(54-90 kDa) and band 3 (30-54 kDa). In each band, the proteins were reduced with Tris (2-carboxy-ethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide. In-gel digestion with trypsin was carried out at 37ºC overnight. Ziptip C18 micropipette columns were used to desalt the tryptic peptides. A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex) coupled to an electrospray bench top orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments. The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (100 µm ID x 2 cm in length packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5µm particle size, 100Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 µm ID x 25 cm in length, 2 µm particle size, 100Å pore size, Dionex). The 90-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 60 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibration for 10 minutes. The flow rate on analytical column was 300 nl/min.  Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan using 15 second exclusion for previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, both MASCOT and SEQUEST search algorithms were used to identify proteins from IP samples. The results were summarized in Scaffold (proteomesoftware.com).

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulated metabolism is a key driver of maladaptive tumor-reactive T lymphocytes within the tumor microenvironment. Actionable targets that rescue the effector activity of antitumor T&#xa0;cells remain elusive. Here, we report that the Sirtuin-2 (Sirt2) NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent deacetylase inhibits T&#xa0;cell metabolism and impairs T&#xa0;cell effector functions. Remarkably, upregulation of Sirt2 in human tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) negatively correlates with response to TIL therapy in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Mechanistically, Sirt2 suppresses T&#xa0;cell metabolism by targeting key enzymes involved in glycolysis, tricarboxylic acid-cycle, fatty acid oxidation, and glutaminolysis. Accordingly, Sirt2-deficient murine T&#xa0;cells exhibit increased glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, resulting in enhanced proliferation and effector functions and subsequently exhibiting superior antitumor activity. Importantly, pharmacologic inhibition of Sirt2 endows human TILs with these superior metabolic fitness and effector functions. Our findings unveil Sirt2 as an unexpected actionable target for reprogramming T&#xa0;cell metabolism to augment a broad spectrum of cancer immunotherapies.

### Keywords
Sirtuin 2, T cell, Glycolysis, Metabolism, Interacting proteins

### Affiliations
Departments of Immunology and Radiation Oncology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Sungjune Kim, MD
Departments of Immunology and Radiation Oncology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


