### Accession
PXD012636

### Title
The protein expression landscape of the heart across humans and model organisms

### Description
Here we perform a global analysis of cardiac protein expression in humans and model organisms across cardiac chambers using quantitative mass spectrometry based proteomics. We measure >6,500 proteins in each species and create a global comparison of cardiac protein expression across species. The data was collected in an online database for access by cardiac researchers. This data will enable researchers to e. g. choose the best model organism for a scientific question at hand, facilitate transfer of knowledge between studies conducted in different model organisms and help to integrate knowledge of cardiac physiology and disease to point to new leads in cardiac research.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue Homogenization Frozen tissue biopsies were homogenized on a Precellys24 homogenizer (Bertin Technologies, France) in tissue incubation buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 5mM EDTA, 150mM NaCl, 10mM KCl, 1% Triton X-100, 5mM NaF, 5mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1mM Na-orthovanadate, containing 1x Roche complete protease inhibitor) with ceramic beads (2.8 and 1.4mm zirconium oxide beads, Precellys). Homogenates were incubated for 2h at 4°C (20rpm), centrifuged (15000g, 20min, 4°C) and soluble fractions transferred to chilled 1.5mL tubes. To remove surfactants prior to LC-MS/MS measurement, protein was precipitated by addition of acetone (at ratio 5:1 v/v), 1h incubation at -20°C and gentle centrifugation (400g, 1.5min). Supernatants were discarded and protein resuspended in Guanidine-HCl buffer (Gnd-HCl; 6MGnd-HCl, 50mM Tris HCl pH 8.5, 5mM NaF, 5mM beta-glycerophosphate, 1mM Na-orthovanadate, containing 1x Roche complete protease inhibitor). Disulfide bridges were reduced and cysteine moieties alkylated by addition of 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 10mM chloroacetamide (CAA) and incubation in the dark at room temperature for 15min.  Peptide preparation From each sample, up to 1mg protein was digested in-solution by addition of endoproteinase Lys-C (Trichem ApS, Denmark; 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio) for 1.5h at 30°C, 750rpm in the dark, followed by dilution (1:12 with 50mM Tris-HCl pH8) and digestion with trypsin overnight (14h) at 37°C, 750rpm (Life technologies, USA, 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio). The reactions were quenched by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 1% final conc.) and samples were centrifuged (14000g, 10min) to sediment debris. Soluble fractions were desalted and concentrated on C18 SepPak columns (Waters, USA). Peptides were eluted with 40% acetonitirle (ACN) followed by 60% ACN, and organic solvents subsequently evaporated by vacuum centrifugation.  Offline high pH fractionation of peptide samples Of each sample, 50-100ug peptide (in 10uL injection volume) was fractionated by micro-flow reverse-phase ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatograpy (UPLC) on an Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with an ACQUITY UPLC CSH C18 Column (130Å, 1.7 µm, 1 mm X 150 mm)  at 30μL/min flow rate essentially as previously described 8. The following 85min gradient elution program was used employing a binary pump connected to Solvent A (5mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), pH8) and B (100% ACN): 0-50 min: 4.5-22.5% B, 50-55 min: 22.5-63% B, 55-60 min: 63% B isocratic, 60-62 min: 63-81% B, 62-70 min: 81% B isocratic, 70-75 min: 81-4.5% B, followed by column re-equilibration at 4.5% B for 10 min. Outflow from 4-60 minutes was collected in 1-minute intervals into 12 concatenated fractions in the autosampler. Fractions were acidified by addition of 5μL 5% formic acid (FA) to avoid precipitation of ABC, and fraction volume was reduced by vacuum centrifugation. If not specified otherwise, chemicals and reagents were acquired from Sigma Aldrich, USA. Chromatography solvents were acquired from VWR, USA. LC-MS/MS measurements Fractionated peptide samples were analyzed by online reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled to a Q-Exactive HF quadrupole Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS, Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germnay). Peptide samples were brought to concentration of 0.2ug/uL (diluted in 5%ACN, 0.1% TFA) in 96-well microtiter plates and autosampled (5uL injection volume) into a nanoflow Easy-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark). Peptide samples were separated on 15cm fused-silica emitter columns pulled and packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in a 1h multi-step linear gradient (0.1% formic acid constant; 2-25%ACN in 45min, 25-45%ACN in 8min, 45-80%ACN in 3 min) followed by short column re-equilibration (80-5%ACN in 5min, 5%ACN for 2min). Column effluent was directly ionized in a nano-electrospray ionization source operated in positive ionization mode and electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. Full-MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired after accumulation of 3,000,000 ions in the Orbitrap (maximum fill time of 25ms) at 120,000 resolution. A data-dependent Top12 method then sequentially isolated the most intense precursor ions (up to 12 per full scan) for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in an octopole collision cell. MS/MS spectra of fragment ions were recorded at resolution of 30000 after accumulation of 100,000 ions in the Orbitrap (maximum fill time of 45ms).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software 35 version 1.5.3.30 (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Munich) and proteins identified with the built-in Andromeda search engine by searching MS/MS spectra against an in-silico tryptic digest of a database containing all reviewed SwissProt protein entries (downloaded on 7.3.2016). Raw files originating from fractionated samples of the same tissue biopsy were grouped for the search (resulting in 7 biological replicates for 3 cardiac chambers). The MS/MS spectra were searched with Carbamidomethly-Cysteine as fixed modification, as well as oxidation (M), acetylation of protein N-termini and Gln->pyro-Glu as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages and six variable modifications was allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids (default) and minimum Andromeda score required for modified peptides was 25, with minimum delta score of 6 (default). First search tolerance was 20ppm (default) and main search tolerance was 4.5ppm (default), requiring strict specificity of tryptic peptides. Due to the similarity of the samples the match-between-runs option was enabled with default parameters. False-discovery rate cutoffs were set to 1% on peptide, protein and site decoy level (default), only allowing high-quality identifications to pass. All peptides were used for protein quantification, and label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed in MaxQuant with fast LFQ option enabled. Protein identification results were further processed using the Perseus software suite.

### Publication Abstract
Delineating human cardiac pathologies and their basic molecular mechanisms relies on research conducted in model organisms. Yet translating findings from preclinical models to humans present a significant challenge, in part due to differences in cardiac protein expression between humans and model organisms. Proteins immediately determine cellular function, yet their large-scale investigation in hearts has lagged behind those of genes and transcripts. Here, we set out to bridge this knowledge gap: By analyzing protein profiles in humans and commonly used model organisms across cardiac chambers, we determine their commonalities and regional differences. We analyzed cardiac tissue from each chamber of human, pig, horse, rat, mouse, and zebrafish in biological replicates. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics workflows, we measured and evaluated the abundance of approximately 7,000 proteins in each species. The resulting knowledgebase of cardiac protein signatures is accessible through an online database: atlas.cardiacproteomics.com. Our combined analysis allows for quantitative evaluation of protein abundances across cardiac chambers, as well as comparisons of cardiac protein profiles across model organisms. Up to a quarter of proteins with differential abundances between atria and ventricles showed opposite chamber-specific enrichment between species; these included numerous proteins implicated in cardiac disease. The generated proteomics resource facilitates translational prospects of cardiac studies from model organisms to humans by comparisons of disease-linked protein networks across species.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Heart, Proteomics, Cardiac proteomics, Proteomes, Species

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Affiliated with The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.

### Submitter
Ulrike Leurs

### Lab Head
Dr Alicia Lundby
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Affiliated with The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen.


