### Accession
PXD017034

### Title
Identification of the intermolecular disulfide bonds between NPGPx and ZAP70

### Description
The tyrosine kinase, ζ-chain-associated protein of 70 kDa (ZAP70), is essential for T cell development and activation. However, it remains elusive whether a direct redox regulation affects ZAP70 activity upon TCR stimulation. Here, we showed that deficiency of non-selenocysteine containing phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase (NPGPx), a redox sensor, resulted in T cell hyperproliferation and elevated cytokine productions. Through proteomic approaches, ZAP70 is identified as the key interacting protein of NPGPx through disulfide bonding. Here we utilized the MS/MS spectra to identify the cysteine residues in ZAP70 for NPGPx-mediated regulation. Combined molecular approaches, our results elucidate a delicate redox mechanism that NPGPx serves as a modulator to curb ZAP70 functions in maintaining T cell homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
3XFlag-tagged ZAP70 was prepared from transduced 293T cells through immunoprecipitation by M2 beads. The M2-bound purified ZAP70 was incubated with 20 nM oxidized recombinant NPGPx (amino acids 19-187) WT or C2S2 mutant at 25℃ for 1 hr, following washed by wash buffer (50 mM Tris pH7.5, 450 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, protease inhibitor cocktail) for 5 times. The beads were added with sample buffer without reducing agent and boiled at 95℃ for 10 mins. The supernatant was separated on a 6% non-reducing SDS-PAGE gel, followed stained by InstantBlue (Expedeon). The protein bands of interest were excised for in-gel digestion with trypsin and chymotrypsin, following analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were converted to the mgf format and analyzed by MassMatrix (http://www.massmatrix.net) to identify disulfide bonds.

### Publication Abstract
Emerging evidences implicate the contribution of ROS to T cell activation and signaling. The tyrosine kinase, &#x3b6;-chain-associated protein of 70&#x202f;kDa (ZAP70), is essential for T cell development and activation. However, it remains elusive whether a direct redox regulation affects ZAP70 activity upon TCR stimulation. Here, we show that deficiency of non-selenocysteine containing phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase (NPGPx), a redox sensor, results in T cell hyperproliferation and elevated cytokine productions. T cell-specific NPGPx-knockout mice reveal enhanced T-dependent humoral responses and are susceptible to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Through proteomic approaches, ZAP70 is identified as the key interacting protein of NPGPx through disulfide bonding. NPGPx is activated by ROS generated from TCR stimulation, and modulates ZAP70 activity through redox switching to reduce ZAP70 recruitment to TCR/CD3 complex in membrane lipid raft, therefore subduing TCR responses. These results reveal a delicate redox mechanism that NPGPx serves as a modulator to curb ZAP70 functions in maintaining T cell homeostasis.

### Keywords
Zap70, Npgpx, Disulfide bond

### Affiliations
National Taiwan Ocean University

### Submitter
Pang-Hung Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr Pang-Hung Hsu
National Taiwan Ocean University


