### Accession
PXD033012

### Title
Regionally defined proteomic profiles of human cerebral tissue and organoids reveal conserved molecular modules of neurodevelopment

### Description
Cerebral organoids have emerged as faithful humanoid avatars for modeling neurodevelopmental and pathological processes. Additionally, they serve as powerful discovery platforms for less characterized neurobiological programs. Towards this prospect, we leveraged mass spectrometry-based proteomics to molecularly profile precursor and neural compartments of both human-derived organoids and mid-gestation fetal brain tissue, to define overlapping programs. Our analysis included precursor-enriched transcriptional regulatory proteins that were not found to be differentially expressed in previous transcriptomic datasets. To highlight the discovery potential of this resource, we show that RUVBL2 is preferentially expressed in the SOX2-positive compartment of organoids and chemical inactivation leads to precursor cell displacement and apoptosis. To explore clinicopathological correlates of this cytoarchitectural disruption, we interrogated clinical datasets, and identified rare de novo genetic variants involving RUVBL2 in patients with neurodevelopmental impairments. Together, our study demonstrates how cell-type specific profiling of organoids can help nominate previously unappreciated genes in neurodevelopment and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Eight formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) fetal autopsy brains within the peak fetal neurogenic time period (14-16 gestational weeks) were microscopically examined by board-certified neuropathologists for normal pathology. All samples were obtained from archived tissue stores in Mount Sinai Hospital following approval from the Research Ethics Board. All fetal brain sections had their dorsal subventricular zone (DSVZ), medial ganglionic eminence (MGE), lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE), cortex (CX), subplate (SP), striatum (STRIA), and spinal cord (SC) removed, while five of the fetal brains were additionally dissected for matching cerebellar white matter (CBWM) and cerebellar cortex (CBCX) regions. 5µm sections were prepared of each block, deparaffinized in a xylene and ethanol gradient, before staining with H&E. Using the H&E section, specific regions were noted and cored using a 0.7 mm diameter coring needle. 2-4 cores were removed per region and rehydrated in descending concentrations of xylene and ethanol as follows: 100% ethanol x 15 minutes, 100% xylene x 15 minutes, 100% ethanol x 10 minutes, 95% ethanol x 10 minutes, 70% ethanol x 7 minutes, and 50% ethanol x 20 minutes. At each rehydration step, tubes were inverted 10 to 15 times, allowed to rest for the allotted time, and centrifuged (10,000 x g for 3 minutes) before moving to the next alcohol grade. Samples were then placed in 300µL of tissue lysis buffer (0.175% Rapigest in 100mM TEAB, 200mM TCEP) and sonicated in four cycles (15 seconds each cycle) at a 3.5 amplitude setting (Qsonica XL-2000 Sonicator). Lysates were incubated on a heat block first at 95°C for 90 minutes, then at 80°C for 60 minutes, with brief mixing every 15 minutes. Heated lysates were then centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 20 minutes and the sample supernatants were removed to be quantitated with the Pierce Coomassie protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher). 15µg of protein from each sample was reduced in 5mM DTT and alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide in 100mM TEAB for 60 minutes in the dark. Samples were then trypsin-digested in a 1:50 ratio of enzyme to substrate and placed in a 37°C incubator overnight with constant shaking. Following enzymatic digestion, 1% trifluoroacetic acid was added to end the reaction and samples were centrifuged at 15,000 x g to remove the detergent containing precipitate. The supernatant was aspirated and set aside for mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometry RAW files were uploaded into MaxQuant Andromeda search engine (www.coxdocs.org) against a Human SwissProt protein database (July, 2019 version) The following parameters were used for the search: trypsin/P enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed; oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation was set to variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set to fixed modification. The protein level false-discover rate (FDR) was set at 1%; match between runs and LFQ minimum-ratio count was set to 1. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD028911 for the organoid dataset and PXD028920 for fetal brain tissue dataset. Based on the number of proteins identified by MS/MS, the total number of proteins identified and the overall quantitative distribution of the identified proteins (normal vs. skewed), a quality control step was conducted to identify potential suboptimal outlier samples and exclude them from downstream analysis. The SOX2-YFP+ week 8 samples did not meet either of these quality control standards and were therefore removed from our final dataset to avoid potential bias. The YFP negative samples for the organoid dataset were only used as controls for the enrichment step in mass spectrometry and they were also excluded for primary analysis. Analysis of proteomic data was performed by Perseus software platform (www.coxdocs.org, version 1.6.07) and contaminants, proteins only identified by site and reverse identifications were filtered out of the data set. For regional protein module identifications in the organoid data set only proteins present in 50% samples in total were included for performing statistical tests. LFQ values were Log2 transformed and samples with missing values for a given protein were assigned a random value using the imputation principle (downshift 1.75, width 0.4) as previously described (Djuric et al., 2017). All graphs in the manuscript, PCA and hierarchical clustering were performed using this imputed data set unless otherwise stated. To average the technical replicates for PCA and heatmap analysis, values were averaged except when there was a missing from a technical replicate in which the non-zero numerical value was taken. Of the eight fetal brains, six cerebral regions (CX, DSVZ, MGE, LGE, STR, and SP) were extracted. Five of the eight fetal brains had matching cerebellar (CBWM and CBCX) and spinal cord (SC) tissue, of which those regions were also removed and included in the analysis as housekeeping samples. MaxQuant-processed data for these regions were imported into Perseus software for statistical analysis. Contaminants, proteins only identified by site, and reverse identifications were filtered out of data sets. Proteins identified in at least 50% of the samples per regional group were retained for statistical testing, while all other analyses used proteins identified in at least one of the samples per regional group. LFQ values were log2-transformed and missing values were replaced with values from a normal distribution using an imputation algorithm (width: 0.3, downshift: 1.8). Each sample’s protein distribution was viewed as a histogram and removed if imputed values affected the normalcy of the curve. Following this preprocessing, the remaining samples and proteins were used for all statistical analyses unless otherwise stated. Entire proteomic profiles were used to carry out principal component analyses, multiple group comparisons (ANOVAs), and unpaired Welch’s t-tests. Hierarchical clustering with Spearman correlation distance (average linkage) was conducted on Z-score transformed LFQ values of ANOVA-significant proteins. To determine regional enrichment, protein clusters pre-processed by k-means and defined by Spearman correlation distance were averaged and plotted on a box-and-whisker plot. Average Z-score transformed LFQ values of individual candidate regional markers were also plotted with a box-and-whisker graph. Enriched GO terms were determined using a Fisher exact test of ANOVA-significant proteins (enrichment factors >1.3 or <0.8).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Neurodevelopment, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Princess Margaret Hospital University of Toronto University Health Network
Mt. Sinai Hospital

### Submitter
Ugljesa Djuric

### Lab Head
Dr Phedias Diamandis
Princess Margaret Hospital University of Toronto University Health Network


