### Accession
PXD002310

### Title
Proteogenomics of Parhyale hawaiensis ovaries

### Description
Proteogenomics of Parhyale hawaiensis ovaries to define the core-proteome of female reproductive tissues from crustacean amphipods

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA, spectral counts were compared with PatternLab.

### Publication Abstract
Ovaries were taken from five sexually mature amphipods: Gammarus fossarum, Gammarus pulex, Gammarus roeseli, Hyallela azteca and Parhyale hawaiensis. The soluble proteome extracted from individual pair of ovaries from five biological replicates was trypsin digested and the resulting peptides were analyzed by high resolution tandem mass spectrometry. The spectra were assigned with four protein sequence databases with different specificities: a RNAseq-derived G. fossarum database; a RNAseq-derived P. hawaiensis database; both originating from ovaries transcriptome; the Daphnia pulex database derived from whole-genome sequencing and the NCBInr database. The best interpretation was obtained for most animals with the specific RNA-seq protein database previously established by means of RNAseq carried out on G. fossarum. Proteins identified in the five amphipod species allow defining the core-proteome of female reproductive tissues of the Senticaudata suborder. The data accompanying the manuscript describing the database searches and comparative analysis Trapp et al., 2015 [1] have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD002253 (G. fossarum), PXD002254 (G. pulex), PXD002255 (G. roeseli), PXD002256 (H. Azteca), and PXD002257 (P. hawaiensis).

### Keywords
Shotgun proteomics; yolk proteins; female reproductive organ; conserved proteins

### Affiliations
Li2D
CEA-Marcoule, DSV-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, DSV-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


