### Accession
PXD009206

### Title
Dose- and time-dependent effects of triethylene glycol dimethacrylate on the proteome of human THP-1 monocytes

### Description
Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA) is commonly used in polymer resin-based dental materials. This projected investigated molecular mechanisms of TEGDMA toxicity by identifying time- and dose dependent effects on the proteome of human THP-1 monocytes. Effects of different concentrations (0.07mM-5mM) and exposure times (0-72h) of TEGDMA on cell viability, proliferation, and morphology were determined by a real-time viability assay, automated cell counting, and electron microscopy, and laid the fundament for choice of exposure scenarios in the proteomic experiments. Cells were metabolically labelled (SILAC), and exposed to 0.3mM or 2.5mM TEGDMA for 6h or 16h prior to LC-MS/MS analyses. Regulated proteins were analysed with the STRING database. Cells exposed to 0.3mM TEGDMA showed increased viability, and time-dependent upregulation of proteins associated with stress/oxidative stress, autophagy, and cytoprotective functions. Cells exposed to 2.5mM TEGDMA showed diminished viability, and a protein expression profile associated with oxidative stress, DNA-damage, mitochondrial dysfunction and cell-cycle inhibition. Altered expression of immune genes was observed in both groups.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 cells were metabolically labelled by cultivation in RPMI-1640/10% FBS medium for SILAC and prepared according to the SILAC Protein Quantitation Kit protocol (Thermo Fischer Scientific) for eight cell doubling prior to TEGDMA exposure. Experimental state and stable isotope labels were swapped to account for systematic errors due to metabolic incorporation of the heavy and light amino acid (label-swap). Cell numbers were counted prior to mixing to ensure a 1:1 mix of 12C and 13C labelled cells. Culture mediums were discarded and cells were washed 3 times with PBS in order to only process intracellular proteins from intact cells. Cell were lysed in NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (4X). The samples were denatured for 30 min at 95ºC and protein concentration measured with the Millipore Direct detect protein chip. Around 50 μg protein/sample were loaded onto a Novex gel with NuPAGE buffer and run at 200V for 20 min, before fixation for 60 min in 40% methanol, 10% acetic acid, and 50% Milli-Q water. Proteins were visualized with SimplyBlue SafeStain and cut for proteomics analysis. Gel pieces were subjected to in gel reduction, alkylation, and tryptic digestion using 6 ng/μl trypsin (V511A, Promega, Wisconsin, USA) (33). OMIX C18 tips (Varian, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA) were used for sample cleanup and concentration. Peptide mixtures containing 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC1000 system and EASY-Spray column (C18, 2µm, 100 Å, 75µm, 50cm). Peptides were fractionated using a linear 2-100% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % formic acid over 200 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The separated peptides were analysed using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Data was collected in data dependent mode using a top10 method. Raw files from the Q-Exactive MS were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.0). Statistical validation of protein regulation was done using the Perseus 1.5.6.0 software.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from the Q-Exactive MS were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.0). SILAC pairs were quantitated in MaxQuant and proteins were identified by the built in Andromeda search engine using the Uniprot Homo sapiens (Human) database (Nov2016). Main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and MS/MS mass tolerance to 20 ppm. A false discovery rate (FDR) ration of 0.01 were needed to give protein identification. At least 2 peptides had to be quantitated to give a quantitation value.   Statistical validation of protein regulation was done using the Perseus 1.5.6.0 software (29).  Proteins significantly regulated in two biological replicates were further analyzed with the STRING database. Gene ontology analysis of biological processes (herby referred to as GO enrichment analysis) were conducted for the 0.3mM and 2.5mM TEGDMA treatment groups at both 6h and 16h.

### Publication Abstract
Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA) is commonly used in polymer resin-based dental materials. This study investigated the molecular mechanisms of TEGDMA toxicity by identifying its time- and dose-dependent effects on the proteome of human THP-1 monocytes. The effects of different concentrations (0.07-5&#xa0;mM) and exposure times (0-72&#xa0;h) of TEGDMA on cell viability, proliferation, and morphology were determined using a real-time viability assay, automated cell counting, and electron microscopy, and laid the fundament for choice of exposure scenarios in the proteomic experiments. Solvents were not used, as TEGDMA is soluble in cell culture medium (determined by photon correlation spectroscopy). Cells were metabolically labeled [using the stable isotope labeled amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) strategy], and exposed to 0, 0.3 or 2.5 mM TEGDMA for 6 or 16&#xa0;h before liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses. Regulated proteins were analyzed in the STRING database. Cells exposed to 0.3&#xa0;mM TEGDMA showed increased viability and time-dependent upregulation of proteins associated with stress/oxidative stress, autophagy, and cytoprotective functions. Cells exposed to 2.5&#xa0;mM TEGDMA showed diminished viability and a protein expression profile associated with oxidative stress, DNA damage, mitochondrial dysfunction, and cell cycle inhibition. Altered expression of immune genes was observed in both groups. The study provides novel knowledge about TEGDMA toxicity at the proteomic level. Of note, even low doses of TEGDMA induced a substantial cellular response.

### Keywords
Thp1, Methacrylate, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Dentistry, UiT - The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway
University of Tromsø

### Submitter
Jack-Ansgar Bruun

### Lab Head
Dr Ulf Örtengren
Department of Clinical Dentistry, UiT - The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway


