### Accession
PXD028702

### Title
Protein dysregulation during T cell activation in multiple sclerosis patients compared to healthy controls

### Description
Using liquid chromatography combined with tandem mass spectrometry, we want to use quantitative proteomics of CD4+ T cells from relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) patients and healthy controls. Cells were left unstimulated or stimulated through the T cell receptor (TCR) in vitro allowing us to disentangle potential CD4+ T cell specific differences induced by T cell activation This will provide novel insights into disease mechanisms of MS.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples were collected from 20 untreated female RRMS patients, and 20 healthy controls. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated from whole blood using density gradient centrifugation before negative selection of CD4+ T cells with EasySep™ Human CD4+ T Cell Isolation Kit. Cell purity was measured by flow cytometry, before aliquots of CD4+ T cells were frozen with dimethyl sulfoxide in liquid nitrogen until usage. Live CD4+ T cells stored in liquid nitrogen were thawed and left unstimulated in X-VIVO 15 medium, or stimulated in 96-well plates coated with 5 µg/ml anti-CD3 (mouse anti-human CD3, Clone OKT3, eBioscience™ by Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Diego, CA, USA) in X-VIVO 15 medium supplemented with 2 µg/ml anti-CD28 (purified NA/LE mouse anti-human CD28). Cells were cultured at a starting density of 1 million cells/ml for 24 h at 37°C and 5 % CO2. Cell pellets of 200 000 cells from each sample were kept at -80°C until preparation for mass spectrometry analyses. The frozen cell pellets were solubilized in 40 μl ice-cold RIPA buffer containing 1 % NP40, 50 mM TrisHCl pH 7.6, 0.5 % sodium deoxycholate, 0.1 % SDS, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 x cOmplete™ EDTA-free protease inhibitor, followed by four cycles of ultra-sonification in ice-cold water with 30 sec on and 30 sec off to fragment/shear DNA. Protein concentration were determined using the BCA assay, before reduction (10 mM dithiothreitol) and alkylation (30 mM iodoacetamide) of cysteine of 6µg of proteins. Digestion of proteins was accomplished using the SP3 protocol (Hughes, et al. Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation for proteomics experiments. Nat Protoc. 2019;14(1):68-85) with Trypsin protease. Desalted samples (0.5µg) were injected and peptides separated during a 3 hour LC run (Ultimate 3000 RSLC system) using a 50 cm analytical column (PepMap RSLC, 50 cm x 75 µm ID EASY-spray column), packed with 2 µm C18 bead. Peptides eluted during a 135 min gradient elution (from 8% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% formic acid (FA) to 35% ACN/0.1% FA) and were detected after electrospray ionization using tandem mass spectrometry (a quadrupole–orbitrap instrument, the QExactive HF). The mass spectrometer was operated in the DDA-mode (data-dependent-acquisition) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. MS spectra were acquired in the scan range 375-1500 m/z with resolution 120 000 at m/z 200, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time (IT) of 50ms. The 12 most intense eluting peptides above intensity  threshold 50 000 counts, and charge states 2 to 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value (AGC) of 1e5 and a maximum IT of 110 ms in the C-trap, and isolation width maintained at 1.6 m/z (offset of 0.3 m/z), before fragmentation in the HCD (Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation) cell. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28 %, and fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30 000 at m/z 200, with first mass fixed at m/z 100. One MS/MS spectrum of a precursor mass was allowed before dynamic exclusion for 25s with “exclude isotopes” on. Lock-mass internal calibration (m/z 445.12003) was used.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were analyzed by the Proteome Discoverer™ software version 2.4, and peak lists were searched against the human SwissProt FASTA database (version May 2020), and a common contaminants database by Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 search engines. Methionine oxidation and acetylation on protein N-terminus were added as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as fixed modification. False discovery rate (Percolator) was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides (minimum length of six amino acids) and was determined by searching the reversed database. Trypsin was set as digestion protease, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Mass recalibration was performed prior to peptide identification using precursor and fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. The main search was then conducted with an allowed mass deviation tolerance for precursors and fragments of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Retention time alignment and detection of precursor features across samples were done using the Minora Feature Detector node in Proteome Discoverer™. Additional bioinformatic analysis were performed using the R software version 4.0.4.Differences in protein abundances upon T cell activation were assessed using a paired two-tailed Student’s t-test. Principal component analysis (PCA) plots were generated using protein intensities of differentially expressed proteins as variables. For validation analysis, 100 discovery cohorts were simulated by randomly selecting ten MS samples and ten healthy control samples and the differentially expressed proteins identified in these simulated cohorts were used as input for performing PCA in the remaining samples. QIAGEN´s Ingenuity® pathway Analysis, IPA,  was used for functional interpretation of significantly expressed proteins, and a Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction value below 0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autoimmunity, Multiple sclerosis, T cell activation, Proteomics, Disease susceptibility genes

### Affiliations
Oslo University Hospital
Department of Mechanical, Electronics and Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Technology, Art and Design, OsloMet - Oslo Metropolitan University, Postboks 4, St. Olavs Plass, 0130 Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Tone Berge

### Lab Head
Dr Tone Berge
Department of Mechanical, Electronics and Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Technology, Art and Design, OsloMet - Oslo Metropolitan University, Postboks 4, St. Olavs Plass, 0130 Oslo, Norway


