### Accession
PXD031236

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analyses the tetraploid Citrus wilsonii enhanced drought tolerance

### Description
In this study, 17 plants of tetraploid “Zhique” were firstly identified by screening 570 natural seedlings of Citrus wilsonii Tanaka. These tetraploid plants showed different morphology and exhibited significantly increased drought tolerance than the diploids via determination of leaf water potential, relative water content and electrolyte leakage. Large number of genes involved in photosynthesis-responsive were differentially expressed in tetraploids under drought stress by global transcriptome analysis, which was consistent with the detection of photosynthesis indicator including photosynthetic rate, stomatal conductance, chlorophyll and so on. Compared with diploids, phosphorylation modification also plays an important role in the tetraploids after drought stress through the transcriptional and protein level analysis. Additionally, the genes involved in the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and starch and sucrose metabolism pathways were enriched in both  tetraploids and diploids in response to water deficient. Importantly, tetraploids significantly take priority over the diploid via regulating plant hormone signal transduction, especially improving the levels of 3-indoleacetic acid, abscisic acid and salicylic acid and reducing gibberellic A3 and jasmonic acid contents.  Collectively, our data reveals that synergistic regulation photosynthesis, phosphorylation modification and plant hormones accumulation contribute to drought tolerance of autotetraploid in Citrus wilsonii.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteomic analyses using tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeled proteomic coupled immobilized metal-ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) enrichment The leave samples were collected from 4-month-old seedlings of Citrus wilsonii tetraploid with or without drought stress.Three parallel replicates were set up for the control group (TC) or drought stress group (TD), and 0.5 g leaves were removed from each sample. The protein preparation, trypsin digestion, TMT labeling and peptide fractionation as well as liquid chromatography(LC)-mass spectrometry(MS)/mass spectrometry(MS) analysis and protein identification were performed by PTM BIO Company (Hangzhou, China) according to the method described by Jiang et al.(2021). Phosphopeptide enrichment was on the IMAC resin (PHOS-SelectTM Iron Affinity Gel, Sigma-Aldrich) and the detailed operation methods refered to Jean et al. (2014). Approximately 0.5 g of frozen mixed leaves from the control or cold stress group was ground into powder in liquid nitrogen and extracted with 5 ml lysis buffer (1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 50 μM PR-619, 3 μM toluenesulfonic acid, 50 mM N-acetyl-L-methionine and 2 mM ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added before the mixture was vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4 ◦C, 10 min, 5000 g), the upper phenol phase was transferred to anew centrifuge tube. Proteins were precipitated by adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at − 20 ◦C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation at 4 ◦C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by three washes with ice-cold acetone. Protein (20 μg) from each sample was mixed with 5× loading buffer and boiled for 5 min. Protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Beyotime, China). In order to check the extraction quality of proteins from the leaf samples, 12.5% sodium dodecyl sulfatepolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and coomassie blue R-250 staining were carried out. The protein band is clear and uniform, which could meet the requirements of subsequent protein identification by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The resulting mass spectrometry /mass spectrometry data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Mascot 2.3 database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as a variable modification. The false discovery rate was adjusted to <1%, and the minimum score for peptides was set >40. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of the proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ GOA/). The Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG) of proteins (http://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/) database was used for the functional classification of the DAPS. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathways using a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test (p < 0.05) to test the enrichment of the DAPS against all identified proteins. The database accession of all  DAPS were searched against the string database version 10.5 for proteinprotein interactions (a confidence score > 0.7), and the interaction network from string database was visualized using R package“networkD3”.  The data from the physiological and chemical studies were subjected to analyses of variance, and the least significant differences of means were determined with Duncan’s test (significance criterion, α = 0.05) using SigmaPlot12.5. All results were given as the mean ± standard error of at least three biological replicates. DAPS were filtered with the threshold value of protein expression fold change and p-value.

### Publication Abstract
Polyploidy varieties have been reported to exhibit higher stress tolerance relative to their diploid relatives, however, the underlying molecular and physiological mechanisms remain poorly understood. In this study, a batch of autotetraploid <i>Citrus wilsonii</i> were identified from a natural seedling population, and these tetraploid seedlings exhibited greater tolerance to drought stress than their diploids siblings. A global transcriptome analysis revealed that a large number of genes involved in photosynthesis response were enriched in tetraploids under drought stress, which was consistent with the changes in photosynthetic indices including P<sub>n</sub>, gs, T<sub>r</sub>, C<sub>i</sub>, and chlorophyll contents. Compared with diploids, phosphorylation was also modified in the tetraploids after drought stress, as detected through tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeled proteomics. Additionally, tetraploids prioritized the regulation of plant hormone signal transduction at the transcriptional level after drought stress, which was also demonstrated by increased levels of IAA, ABA, and SA and reduced levels of GA3 and JA. Collectively, our results confirmed that the synergistic regulation of photosynthesis response, phosphorylation modification and plant hormone signaling resulted in drought tolerance of autotetraploid <i>C. wilsonii</i> germplasm.

### Keywords
Citrus; drought stress;tetrploid; phosphorylation

### Affiliations
School of Biological Science and Engineering, School of Chemical and Environmental Sciences, Shaanxi University of Technology, Hanzhong 723000, PR China
Shaanxi University of Technology

### Submitter
jinglong jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Jinglong Jiang
School of Biological Science and Engineering, School of Chemical and Environmental Sciences, Shaanxi University of Technology, Hanzhong 723000, PR China


