### Accession
PXD022200

### Title
Astrocyte conditioned media-dependent Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase interactome in mouse hippocampal neuron cell line Ht22

### Description
Astrocytes can support neuronal survival through a range of secreted signals that protect against neurotoxicity, oxidative stress, and apoptotic cascades.  To identify proteins contributing to protective intracellular neuronal signalling originating from astrocytes, endogenous PI3K was immunoprecipitated from Ht22 cells exposed to primary astrocyte conditioned media (ACM) or cell free media (CFM), followed by iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Ht22 cells in 15cm dishes at 70% confluency were incubated for 1 hour with either astrocyte conditioned media or cell free media, then fixed with 0.5% formalin in PBS for 10 minutes.  Fixation was stopped with 150 mM Glycine in 150 mM Tris for 10 min. Cell lysates were collected in 0.2% NP40 (v/v), containing 150 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, with protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail.   Cell lysates were precleared with 25 microliters of Protein A Sepharose slurry (GE Healthcare) for 3 hours then 300 microliter volumes were treated with 25 microliters of antibody (4257S, Cell Signalling Technology) solution at 4 degrees Celsius overnight. Lysate-antibody mixtures were mixed with 25 microliters of protein A Sepharose slurry for 3 hours at 4 degrees Celsius, centrifuged for 3 minutes at 1000 rpm, washed with 500 mM NaCl, washed twice with lysis buffer then with 10 mM HEPES.  Protein was eluted using 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid in 20% acetonitrile (v/v). For the negative control, the antibody was incubated with its blocking peptide at 1:1 v/v ratio for 2 hours at room temperature then used as described above. Eluates were dried under vacuum.  Seven (three biological replicates of CFM-treated, three biological replicates of ACM-treated, one negative control) affinity capture eluates were dried then diluted in 9M urea.  Subsequently, 1 M tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) was added to adjust the pH to 8.0, and the solution made to 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 30 minutes at 60 degrees Celsius.  Next, 4-vinylpyiridine was added to 10 mM for 1 hour at room temperature.  The urea concentration was brought to 1.25 M by dilution with 500 mM TEAB, then porcine trypsin (Thermo Scientific) was added prior to 37 degrees Celsius overnight incubation.  Isobaric labeling of the tryptic digests with an iTRAQ 8plex reagent set (Sciex) was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol.   The iTRAQ modified digests were pooled and the mixture purified in parallel on a C18 Bond Elut OMIX column (Agilent Technologies) at pH 2 and on a high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher) from which fractions were collected at 12.5%, 17.5%, 22.5% and 50% acetonitrile (v/v).  All purified samples were dried in a centrifugal evaporator then reconstituted in water containing 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (v/v) then analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.  Two technical replicates of the pH 2 C18 preparation and one technical replicate of each high pH reversed phase fraction were run. Peptide sequence information was generated from MS and MS2 scans while quantitative iTRAQ reporter ion information was generated from MS3 scans of the ten most abundant product ions in each MS2 spectrum. Data were acquired in four hour runs on an EASY-nLC 1000-Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer platform (Thermo). The analytical column was a 25 cm long Acclaim PepMap RSLC 100 of 75 micrometer inner diameter with 2 micrometer, 100 Å pore C18 particles operated at 300 nl/minute over an acetonitrile gradient. Each run was divided into scan cycles up to 3 seconds long, each starting with an Orbitrap precursor ion MS scan and as many linear ion trap product ion (MS2) scans and Orbitrap MS3 scans as possible.  Collision induced dissociation (CID) and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) were used for MS2 and MS3 respectively. The Orbitrap resolution was set to 60,000 for both MS and MS3.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was conducted with Mascot (Version 2.4; Matrix Science) and Sequest HT search engines within Proteome Discoverer software (Version 1.4; Thermo Scientific) using the mouse international protein index (IPI) database (Version 3.87, 59534 entries).   The search was constrained to peptides with fully tryptic cleavage and up to two missed cleavages per peptide, fixed iTRAQ 8-plex modification at amino-termini and lysine residues, fixed pyridylethylation at cysteine residues, precursor mass deviation within 20 ppm and product ion mass deviation up to 0.4 Da.  Deamidation at asparagine or glutamine, oxidation at methionine, and phosphorylation at serine, threonine or tyrosine were allowed variable modifications.  The false discovery rate was fixed at 0.05 and determined by Percolator with validation based on q-value in Proteome Discoverer or with the PEAKS algorithm. iTRAQ reporter ion signals were extracted from MS3 spectra in the QUANTITATION algorithm of PEAKS and the Reporter Ions Quantifier in Proteome Discoverer.  Reporter Ions Quantifier integration tolerance was 20 ppm and integration was based on the most confident centroid.  Included in protein quantification were PSMs scoring above false discovery rate cut offs.

### Publication Abstract
Astrocytes can support neuronal survival through a range of secreted signals that protect against neurotoxicity, oxidative stress, and apoptotic cascades. Thus, analyzing the effects of the astrocyte secretome may provide valuable insight into these neuroprotective mechanisms. Previously, we characterized a potent neuroprotective activity mediated by retinal astrocyte conditioned media (ACM) on retinal and cortical neurons in metabolic stress models. However, the molecular mechanism underlying this complex activity in neuronal cells has remained unclear. Here, a chemical genetics screen of kinase inhibitors revealed phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) as a central player transducing ACM-mediated neuroprotection. To identify additional proteins contributing to the protective cascade, endogenous PI3K was immunoprecipitated from neuronal cells exposed to ACM or control media, followed by MS/MS proteomic analyses. These data pointed toward a relatively small number of proteins that coimmunoprecipitated with PI3K, and surprisingly only five were regulated by the ACM signal. These hits included expected PI3K interactors, such as the platelet-derived growth factor receptor A (PDGFRA), as well as novel RNA-binding protein interactors ZC3H14 (zinc finger CCCH-type containing 14) and THOC1 (THO complex protein 1). In particular, ZC3H14 has recently emerged as an important RNA-binding protein with multiple roles in posttranscriptional regulation. In validation studies, we show that PI3K recruitment of ZC3H14 is necessary for PDGF-induced neuroprotection and that this interaction is present in primary retinal ganglion cells. Thus, we identified a novel non-cell autonomous neuroprotective signaling cascade mediated through PI3K that requires recruitment of ZC3H14 and may present a promising strategy to promote astrocyte-secreted prosurvival signals.

### Keywords
Brain, Neuroprotection, Neuron, Immunoprecipitation, Pi3k, Interactome, Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, Orbitrap, Astrocyte, Itraq

### Affiliations
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases,  Faculty of Medicine,  University of Toronto
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Declan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Gerold Schmitt-Ulms
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases,  Faculty of Medicine,  University of Toronto


