### Accession
PXD010292

### Title
Detection and quantification of ANXA6 in blood-EVs from breast cancer patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy

### Description
Annexin 6 (ANXA6) is a calcium-binding, membrane-associated protein involved in membrane trafficking and cell signalling. Furthermore, ANXA6 has been recently associated to cancer progression and metastasis. The goal of the project was to assess the content of ANXA6 in EVs isolated from the plasma of 6 breast cancer patients undergoing anthracycline/taxane-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
Using an IRB-approved sample collection protocol at the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, subjects were consented for serial venous blood collections. All subjects had 20 ml blood samples (10 ml each in Streck tubes) collected prior to the initiation of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (on the first day of treatment), which consisted of four cycles of every two week dose-dense doxorubicin at 60 mg/m2 and cyclophosphamide at 600 mg/m2 (AC) followed by four cycles of every two week paclitaxel at 175 mg/m2 (T). A second 10 ml sample was collected prior to starting paclitaxel (on the day of the first paclitaxel infusion) and on the day of the last cycle of paclitaxel. All samples were centrifuged in the Streck tubes tubes at room temperature for 10 min at 1600 (±150) g. The supernatant of the Streck tubes is then transferred to one fresh 10 ml centrifuge tube without disturbing the cellular layer using a disposable serological pipette or disposable bulb pipette. The plasma was then centrifuged in the 10 ml centrifuge tube at room temperature for 10 min at 3000 (±150) g. The supernatant from the second centrifugation is then transferred to one fresh 10 ml centrifuge tube without disturbing the cellular layer using a disposable serological pipette or disposable bulb pipette. 1 ml plasma aliquots are then made with a pipette and placed into 2 ml pre-labeled cryogenic vials. The samples were then kept on dry ice and transferred to a -70°C or colder freezer. Circulating EVs were purified from plasma using sequential centrifugations. Briefly, blood was centrifuged at 500xg for 5 min, 2000xg for 15 min, and 10000xg for 20 min, at 4°C to remove cells, debris and large vesicles. The plasma was eventually ultracentrifuged at 134000xg for 70 min at 4°C using a Beckman ultracentrifuge and a SW55Ti rotor. The pellet containing the EVs was washed in 4.5 ml of PBS and the EVs ultracentrifuged once more at 134,000xg for 70 min at 4°C. The purified EVs were resuspended in 50 µl of PBS and stored at −80°C until use. EVs from human plasma (1 μg from each patient and time point) and from in vitro cultured MDA-MB-231 (1 μg, used as control for ANXA6 detection) were separated on a denaturing 4-12% polyacrylamide gradient gel. Gel slices were excised in the area predicted to contain Annexin6 (ranging from around 60 to 85 kDa MW), eluted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Briefly, each sample was digested as described (Chopra et al. J Proteomics 2013). Peptides were desalted using StageTips and dried in a vacuum concentrator. For LC-MS/MS analysis, resuspended peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system connected in-line with an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) and SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer v.1.4. against a human Uniprot protein database. Data were further processed and inspected in ScaffoldTM 4.8.4 (Proteome Software). Normalized to total spectra quantitative values were utilized to compare the protein profile in purified EVs. The minimum number of peptides detected was set at 2. The normalization scheme in Scaffold adjusts the sum of the selected quantitative value for all proteins in the list within each MS sample to a common value: the average of the sums of all MS samples present in the experiment. This is achieved by applying a scaling factor for each sample to each protein or protein group adjusting in this way the selected value to a normalized “quantitative value”. Data (both as normalised quantitative values and exclusive unique peptide count) were extracted from Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
Cytotoxic chemotherapy is an effective treatment for invasive breast cancer. However, experimental studies in mice also suggest that chemotherapy has pro-metastatic effects. Primary tumours release extracellular vesicles (EVs), including exosomes, that can facilitate the seeding and growth of metastatic cancer cells in distant organs, but the effects of chemotherapy on tumour-derived EVs remain unclear. Here we show that two classes of cytotoxic drugs broadly employed in pre-operative (neoadjuvant) breast cancer therapy, taxanes and anthracyclines, elicit tumour-derived EVs with enhanced pro-metastatic capacity. Chemotherapy-elicited EVs are enriched in annexin A6 (ANXA6), a Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent protein that promotes NF-&#x3ba;B-dependent endothelial cell activation, Ccl2 induction and Ly6C<sup>+</sup>CCR2<sup>+</sup> monocyte expansion in the pulmonary pre-metastatic niche to facilitate the establishment of lung metastasis. Genetic inactivation of Anxa6 in cancer cells or Ccr2 in host cells blunts the pro-metastatic effects of chemotherapy-elicited EVs. ANXA6 is detected, and potentially enriched, in the circulating EVs of breast cancer patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Anxa6, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
EPFL
Head, Angiogenesis and Tumor Microenvironment Lab The Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC)  School of Life Sciences Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne, Switzerland)

### Submitter
Chiara  Cianciaruso

### Lab Head
Dr Michele De Palma
Head, Angiogenesis and Tumor Microenvironment Lab The Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC)  School of Life Sciences Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) (Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne, Switzerland)


