### Accession
PXD034864

### Title
(LCMS)/MS studies of prefrontal cortex synaptosomal fractions in Eef2 HET mice - eEF2 in the prefrontal cortex regulates excitatory synaptic transmission and social novelty behavior.

### Description
To investigate the protein expression changes at the synapse induced by Eef2 reduction, we performed (LCMS)/MS-based proteomic analysis in crude synaptosome preparations from the PFC of WT and Eef2 HET mice.

### Sample Protocol
The PFC crude synaptosome fraction prepared from 3 WT and 3 HET mice were used for the proteomic analysis. The digested peptides of each sample were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile) and then separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Solvent B (0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile) was applied with a liner gradient of 6–80% over 90 min at 500 nL/min flow rate. The peptides were injected into the NSI for ionization followed by analysis in Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer. The ion source voltage applied was 2.3 kV, the FAIMS compensation voltage (CV) was −45V, −65V. The peptide precursor and its secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by high-resolution Orbitrap. The scanning range was set to 400–1200 m/z for the primary mass, and the scanning resolution was set at 60000. The fixed starting point of the secondary mass was 110 m/z, the secondary scanning resolution was set to 15000, and TurboTMT was set to Off. The data-dependent scanning (DDA) program was used for data acquisition. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4 ions/s.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data were aligned using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4.1.15) against the RefSeq database (Mus_musculus_10090_SP_20210721.fasta, 17089 sequences). The anti-database was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and a common contamination library was added to the database to eliminate the influence of contaminating proteins in the identification results. The restriction method was Trypsin (Full). The number of cut sites was 2. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acid residues. The maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 3. The mass error tolerance of the primary precursor ion was set to 10 ppm, which of the secondary fragment ion was 0.02 Da. Set Carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, and set Oxidation (M), Acetyl (N-terminus), Met-loss (M), and Met-loss+acetyl (M) as variable modifications. The FDR for protein, peptide, and PSM identification was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of mRNA translation is essential for brain development and function. Translation elongation factor eEF2 acts as a molecular hub orchestrating various synaptic signals to protein synthesis control and participates in hippocampus-dependent cognitive functions. However, whether eEF2 regulates other behaviors in different brain regions has been unknown. Here, we construct a line of Eef2 heterozygous (HET) mice, which show a reduction in eEF2 and protein synthesis mainly in excitatory neurons of the prefrontal cortex. The mice also show lower spine density, reduced excitability, and AMPAR-mediated synaptic transmission in pyramidal neurons of the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC). While HET mice exhibit normal learning and memory, they show defective social behavior and elevated anxiety. Knockdown of Eef2 in excitatory neurons of the mPFC specifically is sufficient to impair social novelty preference. Either chemogenetic activation of excitatory neurons in the mPFC or mPFC local infusion of the AMPAR potentiator PF-4778574 corrects the social novelty deficit of HET mice. Collectively, we identify a novel role for eEF2 in promoting prefrontal AMPAR-mediated synaptic transmission underlying social novelty behavior.

### Keywords
(lcms)/ms, Synaptosome, Prefrontal cortex, Eef2

### Affiliations
Jinan University
JNU-HKUST Joint Laboratory for Neuroscience and Innovative Drug Research, College of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong, China.

### Submitter
Xuanyue Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Shi
JNU-HKUST Joint Laboratory for Neuroscience and Innovative Drug Research, College of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, Guangdong, China.


