### Accession
PXD009161

### Title
Nrf2 sequesters Keap1 preventing podosome disassembly

### Description
Nrf2 is a transcription factor playing an essential role in stress response. A knowledge of the significance of Nrf2 in cell function has not, as yet, reached out beyond transactivation of gene expression. This paper shows that GDF-15 and SDF-1-induced angiogenesis strongly depends on Nrf2 presence, but is not related to its transcriptional activity. We propose, that Nrf2 serves as a protein restraining Keap1, its known transcriptional repressor. Deficiency of Nrf2 protein available for Keap1 leads to overabundance of RhoGAP1, the protein regulating Cdc42 activity, and impairs podosome assembly, thereby indisposing actin rearrangements, preventing migration and angiogenesis. These activities can be rescued by concomitant deletion of RhoGAP1 or Keap1. We suggest that a new Nrf2 function of a Keap1 scavenger implies revising the established murine model of Nrf2 deficiency as a transcriptional knock out (tKO) mouse. The N-terminal fragment of Nrf2, containing Neh2 domain binding Keap1, is present in these animals. Thus, regarding the function of Nrf2 as a protein sequestering Keap1, both published and unpublished data on Nrf2-Keap1 duet may gain new interpretation.

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry analysis. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 100 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced with 0.5 M (5 mM f.c.) TCEP for 1 h at 60°C, blocked with 200mM MMTS (10mM f.c.) for 10 min at RT and digested overnight with 10 ng/ml trypsin (CAT NO V5280, Promega) at 37°C. Finally, to stop digestion trifluoroacetic acid was added at a final concentration of 0.1%. Mixture was centrifuged at 4°C, 14 000 g for 30 min, to remove solid remaining. MS analysis was performed by LC-MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS2 mode, and data were acquired in the m/z range of 300-2000. Peptides were separated by a 180 min linear gradient of 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 35% solution B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The measurement of each sample was preceded by three washing runs to avoid cross-contamination. The final MS washing run was searched for the presence of cross-contamination between samples.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with the Max-Quant (Version 1.6.0.1) platform using mode match between runs (Cox and Mann, 2008). The reference human proteome database from UniProt was used (downloaded on 2017.08.20). Label-Free-Quantification (LFQ) intensity values were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). Statistic analysis was performed using Scaffold 4 ProteomeSoftware.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cells

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 7, 30-387 Krakow, Poland

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Grochot-Przeczek
Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Gronostajowa 7, 30-387 Krakow, Poland


