### Accession
PXD016981

### Title
Deeply mining a universe of peptides Encoded by Long Noncoding RNAs

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are generally defined as RNA transcripts longer than 200 nucleotides that are not translated into proteins. Recently, many small open reading frames (smORFs) embedded in lncRNA scripts have been verified to be able to encode functional polypeptides (namely lncRNA-SEPs here). Although collaborative analysis by advanced genomics, bioinformatics and proteomics largely drives SEPs discovery, the poor predictability, diminutive size and low abundance still challenge systematic identification of SEPs from different biological samples. Here, we took advantage of the NONCODE database that deposited with the most complete collection and annotation of lncRNA transcripts from different species to build a database that to maximally collect all putative small ORFs from human and mouse lncRNA transcripts. Two effective and complementary polypeptides enrichment strategies (30 kDa MWCO filter and C8 SPE column) were also integrated to further improve the discovery of novel lncRNA-SEPs. These efforts led to the discovery of 362 lncRNA-SEPs from 8 human cell lines and 238 lncRNA-SEPs from 3 mouse cell lines and 8 mouse tissues. 18 out of these lncRNA-SEPs were verified experimentally by multiple technologies including in vitro expression, immunoblotting and parallel reaction monitoring-based mass spectrometry (PRM-MS) in 293T cells. Further bioinformatic analysis reveals that the physical and chemical properties of these novel lncRNA-SEPs, such as amino acid composition and codon usage, are varied from canonical proteins. Intriguingly, nearly 70% of the identified lncRNA-SEPs were found to be initiated with non-AUG start codons. Collectively, the efficient workflows presented in this study enables us identify 600 novel lncRNA-SPEs from multiple cell lines and tissues, which should represent the largest number of MS-detected lncRNA-encoding SEPs ever reported to date. These novel lncRNA-SEPs not only could provide new clues for the annotation of the noncoding elements in the genome, but also could serve as a valuable resource for the functional characterization of individual lncRNA-SEPs.

### Sample Protocol
Total cell lysates were extracted from 1×107 cells in 1mL of lysis buffer (8M urea/ 100mM NH4HCO3) containing protease inhibitor cocktail Tablets (Roche). lncRNA-SEPs were extracted and enriched using two different methods: (1) 30 kD MWCO filter method: ~1×107 cells (or ~ 200mg tissues) were resuspended (or homogenized) in 500µL ice-cold H2O containing protease inhibitor cocktail Tablets. After sonicated three times for 5s (Scientz-ⅡD), the mixture was heated at 95℃ for 5 min and then cooled down in liquid nitrogen for a few seconds. Subsequently, 0.1 N ice-cold HCl was added to the sample to a final concentration of 10mM and incubated on ice for 10 min. After centrifugation at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4℃ in a bench-top centrifuge, the supernatant was filtered through a 30 kD MWCO filter (Millipore) and the flow through was collected and evaporated to dryness by vacuum centrifugation at 4℃. The pellet was dissolved in 8M urea/ 100mM NH4HCO3. (2) C8-SPE method was slightly modified from previous described method: ~1×107 cells (or ~ 200mg tissues) were resuspended (or homogenized) in 1mL lysis buffer (50 mM HCl, 0.1% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.05% Triton X-100) containing protease inhibitor cocktail Tablets. lncRNA-SEPs were enriched by Bond Elute C8 silica cartridges (Agilent Technologies) and eluted with 25%, 50%, 75% ACN in TEAF buffer. Enriched lncRNA-SEPs were precipitated with chloroform/methanol method. Subsequently, the precipitate was dissolved in 8M urea/ 100mM NH4HCO3. Proteins/SEPs were reduced with 10mM DTT (37 ℃, 1 h), alkylated with 20mM IAM (room temperature, 45 min in the dark). Then proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme/protein) overnight at 37 ℃ in less than 2M urea/100mM NH4HCO3. Formic acid was added to the digested samples with 5% final concentration to stop the reaction. For samples of no digestion, samples were concentrated to less than 100µl in low temperature and then desalted with C18 ZipTip (Millpore). Digested peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS which combined an Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw data were analyzed with Proteome Discovery (version 1.4) using SEQUEST HT search engine. Data were searched against the UNIPROT protein database (updated on 02-2018) and in-house putative SEP database of corresponding species. For the data of digested peptides, all full-tryptic and semi-tryptic peptides with maximum two missed cleavages were considered as candidate peptides. For the data derived from non-digested samples, no enzyme was chosen. Other common searching parameters were set as follows: the mass tolerance of precursor and product ions were set as 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; Carbamidomethylation on cysteine and acetylation on any N-terminal were considered as static modifications; Oxidation on methionine was selected as dynamic modification; For annotated proteins and SEPs identification, 1% FDR was allowed and no less than one peptide with high confidence was detected.

### Publication Abstract
Advancements in omics-based technologies over the past few years have led to the discovery of numerous biologically relevant peptides encoded by small open reading frames (smORFs) embedded in long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) transcripts (referred to as microproteins here) in a variety of species. However, the mechanisms and modes of action that underlie the roles of microproteins have yet to be fully characterized. Herein, we provide the first experimental evidence of abundant microproteins in extracellular vesicles (EVs) derived from glioma cancer cells, indicating that the EV-mediated transfer of microproteins may represent a novel mechanism for intercellular communication. Intriguingly, when examining human plasma, 48, 11 and 3 microproteins were identified from purified EVs, whole plasma and EV-free plasma, respectively, suggesting that circulating microproteins are primarily enriched in EVs. Most importantly, the preliminary data showed that the expression profile of EV microproteins in glioma patient diverged from the health donors, suggesting that the circulating microproteins in EVs might have potential diagnostic application in identifying patients with glioma.

### Keywords
Enrichment, Seps, Lncrna, Mass spectrometry, Smorf

### Affiliations
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Qing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Fuquan Yang
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


