### Accession
PXD023686

### Title
Longitudinal proteomic profiling discovered early prognostic and surrogate markers in COVID-19

### Description
In managing patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), early identification of those at high risk and real-time monitoring of disease progression to severe COVID-19 is a major challenge. We aimed to identify early prognostic protein markers and to discover surrogate protein markers that effectively reflect the clinical progression of the disease. We performed in-depth proteome profiling on 137 sera, longitudinally collected from 25 patients with COVID-19 (non-severe patients, n = 13; patients who progressed to severe COVID-19, n = 12). We identified 11 potential biomarkers, including the novel markers IGLV3-19 and BNC2, as early prognostic indicators of severe COVID-19. These potential biomarkers are mainly involved in biological processes associated with humoral immune response, interferon signalling, acute phase response, lipid metabolism, and platelet degranulation. We further revealed that the longitudinal changes of 40 proteins persistently increased or decreased as the disease progressed to severe COVID-19. These 40 potential biomarkers could effectively reflect the clinical progression of the disease. This study supports the development of protein biomarkers, which might enable better predicting and monitoring progression to severe COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
The serum samples were used to perform data-independent acqusition (DIA) quantification proteomic analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q exactive plus Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) equipped with an EASY nano-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The DIA data of individual samples were analysed with Spectronaut 13 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). First, the DIA raw files were converted into an htrm format using the GTRMS Converter provided by Spectronaut. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with the mProphet approach and set to 1% at the peptide precursor level and 1% at the protein level. The proteins were inferred by the software, and the quantification information was acquired at the protein level by using the q-value < 0.01 criteria, which was used for subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
In managing patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), early identification of those at high risk and real-time monitoring of disease progression to severe COVID-19 is a major challenge. We aimed to identify potential early prognostic protein markers and to expand understanding of proteome dynamics during clinical progression of the disease. We performed in-depth proteome profiling on 137 sera, longitudinally collected from 25 patients with COVID-19 (non-severe patients, n = 13; patients who progressed to severe COVID-19, n = 12). We identified 11 potential biomarkers, including the novel markers IGLV3-19 and BNC2, as early potential prognostic indicators of severe COVID-19. These potential biomarkers are mainly involved in biological processes associated with humoral immune response, interferon signalling, acute phase response, lipid metabolism, and platelet degranulation. We further revealed that the longitudinal changes of 40 proteins persistently increased or decreased as the disease progressed to severe COVID-19. These 40 potential biomarkers could effectively reflect the clinical progression of the disease. Our findings provide some new insights into host response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, which are valuable for understanding of COVID-19 disease progression. This study also identified potential biomarkers that could be further validated, which may support better predicting and monitoring progression to severe COVID-19.

### Keywords
Human, Covid19, Serum, Dia

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


