### Accession
PXD018411

### Title
FLEXIQuant-LF: Robust Regression to quantify protein modification extent in label-free proteomics data

### Description
Improvements in LC-MS/MS methods and technology have enabled the identification of thousands of modified peptides in a single experiment. However, protein regulation by post-translational modifications (PTMs) is not binary, making methods to quantify the modification extent crucial to fully understand the role of PTMs. Here, we introduce FLEXIQuant-LF, a software tool for large-scale identification of differentially modified peptides and quantification of their modification extent without prior knowledge of the type of modification. We developed FLEXIQuant-LF using label-free quantification of unmodified peptides and robust linear regression to quantify the modification extent of peptides. As proof of concept, we applied FLEXIQuant-LF to data-independent-acquisition (DIA) data of the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) during mitosis. The unbiased approach of FLEXIQuant-LF to assess the modification extent in quantitative proteomics data provides a novel platform to better understand the function and regulation of PTMs in new experiments and reanalyzed data. The software is available at https://github.com/SteenOmicsLab/FLEXIQuantLF.

### Sample Protocol
Sample generation and co-IP HeLa S3 cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA) were grown in DMEM media (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% FBS (Invitrogen), 2 mM l-glutamine (Invitrogen), 100 μg/ml penicillin and streptomycin mix (Invitrogen). For S phase, cells were treated with 2 mM thymidine (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at 80% confluency for 20 hours and cultured for 8 hours in media without thymidine. For M phase, thymidine-treated cells were cultured for 3 hours in fresh media and treated with 100 ng/ml nocodazole (Sigma) and were collected at 4 h, 8 h and 10 h time points. Cells were washed with PBS and lysed in 1x RIPA lysis buffer (Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX) supplemented with 1 M DTT (Sigma), 10% glycerol, protease and phosphatase inhibitors (HALT, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) using a bead beater homogenizer (Precellys, Rockville, MD). Cell lysate volumes of 300 µl with 2-3 mg protein were precleared with 20 μl Affi-Prep Protein A beads (Biorad, Hercules, CA) and 20 μg mouse IgG (Santa Cruz) for 2 h at 4°C with end-on-end rotation. Affi-Prep Protein A beads were washed twice with 6 volumes of buffer A (10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4), 120 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton-X), twice with 6 volumes of buffer B (10 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, 120 mM NaCl, 300 mM KCl, 0.1% Triton-X) and then once more with 6 volumes of buffer A. Freshly prepared beads (20 μl) conjugated with 20 μg CDC27 antibody (AF3.1, Santa Cruz) were incubated with precleared lysates for 2 h at 4°C with end-over- end rotation. As control, the experiment was repeated using beads without conjugated antibody (controls). The beads were washed as described above. The immunoprecipitate was eluted from beads by boiling in 1x Laemmli buffer with β-mercaptoethanol.   Sample preparation/digestion The samples were separated on a 4-12% SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen) in 1x MES buffer (Invitrogen) and the excised band was subjected to in-gel digestion. In brief, proteins were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin. After extraction of the peptides with acetonitrile, peptides were dried down and resuspended in a buffer containing 5% formic acid/5% acetonitrile/90% water. HRM calibration peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) were added to the samples prior to analysis according to manufacturer instructions.  Spectral library generation To generate a spectral library, we analyzed each sample once using a standard data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method on a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framingham, MA) coupled online to a nanoLC system (Sciex/Eksigent, Dublin, CA), equipped with an LC-chip system (cHiPLC nanoflex, Eksigent, trapping column: Nano cHiPLC trap column 200 μm x 0.5 mm Reprosil C18 3 μm 120 Å, analytical column: Nano cHiPLC column 75 μm x 15 cm Reprosil C18 3 μm 120 Å). Peptides were separated by a linear gradient from 95% buffer A (0.2% FA in water) / 5% buffer B (0.2% FA in ACN) to 70% buffer A / 30% buffer B within 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent TOP50 mode with the following settings: MS1 mass range 300-1,700 Th with 250 ms accumulation time; MS2 mass range 100-1,700 Th with 50 ms accumulation time and following MS2 selection criteria: UNIT resolution, intensity threshold 100 cts; charge states 2-5. Dynamic exclusion was set to 17 s. SWATH sample acquisition The SWATH data were acquired using the same mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600, Sciex) and LC-setup as described for the DDA samples. The mass spectrometer was operated in SWATH mode covering the mass range from 400 to 1,000 Th with 75 windows (8 Th width with 1 Da overlap). The accumulation time was set to 40 ms. Additionally, an MS1 scan was acquired in the mass range from 400-1,000 Th with an accumulation time of 250 ms, resulting in a cycle time of 3.3 s. The samples were acquired in triplicates.

### Data Protocol
DDA data analysis The DDA data were searched with MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8) (38) against the human UNIPROT database (only reviewed entries, downloaded on Oct. 31st, 2014) using the .WIFF files without additional file conversion. The protein sequence database was appended with common laboratory contaminants (cRAP, version 2012.01.01) and the iRT fusion protein sequence (39) (Biognosys) resulting in 20,296 entries. The following settings were applied: trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages; mass tolerances set to 0.1 Da for the first search and 0.01 for the main search. Oxidation of M (+15.995 Da), phosphorylation of S, T, Y (+79.966 Da) and acetylation of N-TERM (+42.011 Da) were selected as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021 Da) was selected as a static modification. FDR was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein level. The default settings were used for all other search parameters. Finally, a spectral library based on the MaxQuant search results was generated in Spectronaut 7.0 (Biognosys) using the following settings: Q value cut-off of 0.01, and a minimum of 3 and a maximum of 6 fragment ions.  To improve PTM identification output, the DDA data were also searched in Protein Pilot (v4.5.1, Sciex) using the same database described above and the following settings: sample type – identification, cys alkylation – iodoacetamide, digestion – trypsin, instrument – TripleTOF 5600, special factors – phosphorylation emphasis and gel-based ID, ID focus – biological modifications, search effort – thorough ID. For the ProteinPilot searches, it is not necessary to select the instrument mass accuracy, number of missed cleavages or the PTMs. The search results were filtered by a peptide FDR of 1%.  SWATH data analysis All SWATH data were directly analyzed in Spectronaut 7.0 (Biognosys) (40) without any file conversion using the previously generated spectral library. The following settings were applied in Spectronaut 7.0: peak detection – dynamic iRT, correction factor 1; dynamic score refinement and MS1 scoring – enabled; interference correction and cross run normalization (total peak area) – enabled. Peptides were grouped according to the protein grouping by MaxQuant during generation of the spectral library. Spiked-in HRM peptides were used in the analysis for retention time and m/z calibration. The m/z tolerance was in the range of 12 ppm and the median extraction window was 4 min. All results were filtered by a Q value of 0.05 (equivalent to an FDR of 5% at the peptide level). All other settings were set to default. Protein intensities were calculated by summing the peptide peak areas (sum of fragment ion peak areas as calculated by Spectronaut) from the Spectronaut output file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ptm identification, Dda, Ptm quantification, Peptide modification, Modification stochiometry, Software, Open source, Dia, Mass spectrometry, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, USA Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, USA
Boston Children's Hospital; Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Christoph Schlaffner

### Lab Head
Dr Hanno Steen
Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, USA Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, USA


