### Accession
PXD031627

### Title
Proteome-wide structural changes measured with limited proteolysis-mass spectrometry: an advanced protocol for high-throughput applications.

### Description
Proteins regulate biological processes by changing their structure or abundance to accomplish a specific function. In response to any perturbation or stimulus, protein structure may be altered by a variety of molecular events, such as post translational modification, protein-protein interaction, aggregation, allostery, or binding to other molecules. The ability to probe these structural changes in thousands of proteins simultaneously in cells or tissues can provide valuable information about the functional state of a variety of biological processes and pathways. Here we present an updated protocol for LiP-MS, a proteomics technique combining limited proteolysis with mass spectrometry, to detect protein structural alterations in complex backgrounds and on a proteome-wide scale (Cappelletti et al., 2021; Piazza et al., 2020; Schopper et al., 2017). We describe advances in the throughput and robustness of the LiP-MS workflow and implementation of data-independent acquisition (DIA) based mass spectrometry, which together achieve high reproducibility and sensitivity, even on large sample sizes.  In addition, we introduce MSstatsLiP, an R package dedicated to the analysis of LiP-MS data for the identification of structurally altered peptides and differentially abundant proteins. Altogether, the newly proposed improvements expand the adaptability of the method and allow for its wide use in systematic functional proteomic studies and translational applications.

### Sample Protocol
Experiment 2 (yeast + human alpha-synuclein, peptide mixture): the experiment was performed with the BY4742 wild-type strain in shake-flask cultures. Cultures were obtained in YPD medium, pelletting cells at OD 0.8. Monomeric alpha-synuclein (M) and amyloid-like fibrils (F) of alpha-synuclein were obtained as described before (Feng et al., 2014). Each alpha-synuclein conformation was split into a control sample, which was subjected to only tryptic digestion (to quantify protein abundance changes), and a LiP sample, which was subjected to double-protease digestion step with Proteinase K, a nonspecific protease, followed by complete digestion with trypsin (to quantify peptide changes due to protein structural changes). Limited proteolysis was achieved incubating alpha-synuclein preparations with 1:100 (w/w) of Proteinase K for 5 min at 25°C. Digestion reactions were stopped by heating LiP samples for 5 min at 98°C in a thermocycler followed by denaturation with 5% sodium deoxycholate. The same procedure was applied to control samples with water added instead of Proteinase K. Both LiP and control samples were then subjected to reduction with 5mM TCEP, alkylation with 40mM Iodoacetamide and complete tryptic digestion with trypsin 1:100 (w/w) for 16 h at 37°C. The peptide mixtures were acidified with formic acid and desalted with Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges or 96 wells elution plates. The final desalted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides obtained from the digestion of monomeric (M) and fibrillar (F) α-Synuclein were spiked into a yeast lysate digest at 5 pmol/ug (M1 and F1) lysate and 20 pmol/ug lysate (M2 and F2) and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
LC-MSMS data was acquired on a Thermo Lumos Tribrid instrument in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode for library generation and in data-independent (DIA) mode for label-free peptide quantification. The DDA raw files were searched with ProteomeDiscoverer 2.2(SEQUEST HT) against a yeast uniprot database (release 2017/01/06), including the sequence of the human alpha-Synuclein. The search results were filtered by ProeomeDiscoverer at 1% FDR and then imported into Spectronaut 13 to generate the spectral library that was then used to extract the DIA raw files in Spectronaut 13 as well. The Spectronaut results were exported as report and further processed for statistical analysis with MSstatsLiP.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins regulate biological processes by changing their structure or abundance to accomplish a specific function. In response to a perturbation, protein structure may be altered by various molecular events, such as post-translational modifications, protein-protein interactions, aggregation, allostery or binding to other molecules. The ability to probe these structural changes in thousands of proteins simultaneously in cells or tissues can provide valuable information about the functional state of biological processes and pathways. Here, we present an updated protocol for LiP-MS, a proteomics technique combining limited proteolysis with mass spectrometry, to detect protein structural alterations in complex backgrounds and on a proteome-wide scale. In LiP-MS, proteins undergo a brief proteolysis in native conditions followed by complete digestion in denaturing conditions, to generate structurally informative proteolytic fragments that are analyzed by mass spectrometry. We describe advances in the throughput and robustness of the LiP-MS workflow and implementation of data-independent acquisition-based mass spectrometry, which together achieve high reproducibility and sensitivity, even on large sample sizes. We introduce MSstatsLiP, an R package dedicated to the analysis of LiP-MS data for the identification of structurally altered peptides and differentially abundant proteins. The experimental procedures take 3 d, mass spectrometric measurement time and data processing depend on sample number and statistical analysis typically requires ~1 d. These improvements expand the adaptability of LiP-MS and enable wide use in functional proteomics and translational applications.

### Keywords
Yeast, Structural proteomics, Shotgun proteomics, Lip-ms, Alpha-synuclein

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
ETH

### Submitter
Valentina Cappelletti

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Picotti
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.


