### Accession
PXD024890

### Title
Goat Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) responses to infection vary with Peste des Petits Ruminants Virus virulence

### Description
Peste des Petits Ruminants (PPR) is a highly infectious disease caused by a virus of the genus Morbillivirus (PPRV), infecting mainly sheep and goat. Susceptibility of host can vary widely with host breed and virus strain. The mechanisms underlying this variability are not well understood. Here, we carried out the first comparative in vitro study on goat peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) infected with PPRV strains of different virulence, vaccine strain (N75/1), low- (IC89), and high-virulent strain (MA08). Goat PBMCs were infected by the different strains and stimulated with Concanavalin A (Con A), and proteome changes of these cells were evaluated during the infection. The level of PPRV replication was assessed first by RT-qPCR quantification of viral N mRNA and by labelling the viral N protein inside the cells with specific antibodies and analysed by flow cytometry. The dynamics of PBMC sub-populations were also evaluated by flow cytometry. Our results showed that viral replication is critical for PPRV inhibitory effect on PBMCs proliferation. Highly virulent MA08 strain reached a higher level of replication in ConA-stimulated PBMCs and induced higher mortality compared to other strains. Low-virulent IC89 strain showed the lower replication level and cell proliferative inhibitory capacities. Differences in immune genes expression levels were assessed using RNAseq analysis and protein expression was compared using mass spectrometry. Analysis of these data provided the transcriptional and proteome landscape of PBMCs infected with these strains. The possible association between the transcriptional and proteome landscape and changes in immune cell subpopulations dynamics was explored.

### Sample Protocol
Goat PBMCs were seeded into ninety-six well plates at a density of 2.5 105 cells per well and were inoculated with the different strains at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.001. After 1h of absorption, infected PBMCs were washed with 1X PBS and maintain in DMEM supplemented with 2% of FBS and Concanavalin A (ConA, 2.5 µg/ml). PBMCs not infected underwent the same treatment and were used as a control. Three replicates (wells) of PPRV- and not-infected cultures of PBMCs were harvested at 24, 48, 72, 96 and 120 hours post infection (hpi). After harvest, the PBMCs were washed and collected in the DIGE buffer at several times.  DIGE buffer was composed by 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)-dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS) and 30 mM TrisHCL. This buffer was used to lyse the cells and keep the protein structure intact.  Proteins from cellular extracts were reduced with a solution of 20 mM DTT supplemented with 40 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3, then incubated for 10 min at 95°C followed by 30 min incubation at room temperature in the dark.  The proteins were acidified with a final concentration of 1.2 % phosphoric acid and diluted with 6 volumes of S-Trap buffer [90 % Ethanol, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.1] to aggregate proteins in colloidal particles. The samples were then transferred into S-Trap Mini Spin columns (Protifi), trapped in filter by two centrifugations at 4,000 × g for 30 sec, washed three time with 400 μL of S-Trap buffer, and centrifuged at 4,000 × g for 30 sec. Proteolysis was initiated with the addition into the S-Trap cartridge of 125 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 supplemented with 2 μg of trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega), followed by a 60 min incubation at 47°C. Peptide elution was conducted with: (i) 80 μL TEAB 50 mM, (ii) 0.2 % formic acid (HCOOH) in H2O, and (iii) 80 μL of 50 % acetonitrile (CH3CN) and 0.2 % formic acid final concentration, with centrifugations at 4,000 × g for 1 min between each elution buffer. Eluates were pooled, lyophilized in a speed vacuum. The resulting peptides were analyzed online by nano-flow HPLC-nanoelectrospray ionization using a Qexactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, U3000-RSLC).

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed using the MaxQuant environment (v.1.6.10.43) and Andromeda for database search with label-free quantification (LFQ), match between runs and the iBAQ algorithm enabled. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Statistical analysis was performed using the Perseus software (v 1.6.10.43). Proteins were considered statistically significant using a t-test by setting the randomization number at 250, the False Discovery Rate at 0.05 and the S0 at 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
Peste des petits ruminants (PPR) is an acute transboundary infectious viral disease of small ruminants, mainly sheep and goats. Host susceptibility varies considerably depending on the PPR virus (PPRV) strain, the host species and breed. The effect of strains with different levels of virulence on the modulation of the immune system has not been thoroughly compared in an experimental setting so far. In this study, we used a multi-omics approach to investigate the host cellular factors involved in different infection phenotypes. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from Saanen goats were activated with a T-cell mitogen and infected with PPRV strains of different virulence: Morocco 2008 (high virulence), Ivory Coast 1989 (low virulence) and Nigeria 75/1 (live attenuated vaccine strain). Our results showed that the highly virulent strain replicated better than the other two in PBMCs and rapidly induced cell death and a stronger inhibition of lymphocyte proliferation. However, all the strains affected lymphocyte proliferation and induced upregulation of key antiviral genes and proteins, meaning a classical antiviral response is orchestrated regardless of the virulence of the PPRV strain. On the other hand, the highly virulent strain induced stronger inflammatory responses and activated more genes related to lymphocyte migration and recruitment, and inflammatory processes. Both transcriptomic and proteomic approaches were successful in detecting viral and antiviral effectors under all conditions. The present work identified key immunological factors related to PPRV virulence <i>in vitro</i>.

### Keywords
Proteomics morbillivirus, Immune response, Peste des petits ruminants virus, Virulence, Goat, Pbmc

### Affiliations
AnimalS health Territories Risks Ecosystems (ASTRE Unit CIRAD), France
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Functional Proteomics Platform FPP

### Lab Head
Dr Arnaud Bataille
AnimalS health Territories Risks Ecosystems (ASTRE Unit CIRAD), France


