### Accession
PXD022031

### Title
Comparative Proteomics between Brucella abortus 2308 and Genetically Marked Vaccine A19ΔvirB12 Reveal Attenuation Mechanism and Supplementary Differential Diagnosis Antigens

### Description
Brucella abortus is an important zoonotic pathogen that causes severe economic loss to husbandry and poses a threat to human health. The B. abortus A19 live vaccine has been extensively used to prevent bovine brucellosis in China. However, A19 has the limitation of diagnosis interference and residual virulence for the host. In this study, a novel genetically marked vaccine, A19ΔvirB12, was generated and evaluated. The results indicated that A19ΔvirB12 was able to provide effective protection against B. abortus 2308 (S2308) challenge in mice and vaccinated sera can be distinguished from infected sera. However, previous studies have found that the accuracy of the serological detection method based on VirB12 protein needs to be improved. Therefore, we attempted to identify potential supplementary antigens with differential diagnosis function using label-free quantitative proteomics. Eighteen proteins identified only in S2308 were screened, and 7 of them were predicted to have high probability of antigenicity. In addition, 12 virulence factors were upregulated in S2308. The upregulation pathways of S2308 were significantly enriched in quorum sensing, ATP-binding cassette transporter, and metabolism. Several proteins related to cell division were significantly downregulated, while some proteins involved in transcription were upregulated in S2308.

### Sample Protocol
Protein sample preparation for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis Whole cell protein samples of virulent S2308 and A19ΔvirB12 strain were used for proteome analysis. All operations related to live Brucella were carried out in BSL-3 labs, and each sample had 3 biological replicates. Protein samples were prepared as described previously with some modifications[15]. Briefly, bacteria were cultured to logarithmic and stationary phases. The logarithmic and stationary phase of the virulent S2308 were named Logw and Staw, respectively, while the logarithmic and stationary-phase A19ΔvirB12 vaccine strain were named Logv and Stav, respectively. The pH values of all culture media were adjusted to 7.0. Cells were harvested and centrifuged at 7,000×g for 15 min at 4°C and washed three times with sterile PBS buffer. The bacteria were resuspended in lysis buffer and lysed by ultrasonication. The remaining debris were removed by centrifugation at 1,2000×g for 30 min at 4°C, and then the supernatant was collected and stored at −80°C before trypsin digestion. The BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) was used to measure protein concentration. Dithiothreitol (DDT) was added as a reductant to a final concentration of 5 mM and the sample was incubated at 56°C for 30 min. After reduction, the solution was alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin was added to the alkylated protein solution at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin: protein, w/w) at 37°C overnight. Finally, trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:100 (trypsin: protein, w/w) for another 4 h.  HPLC Separation and LC–MS/MS analysis Peptides produced by trypsin digestion were separated by high pH reversed-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particle size, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Peptides were fractionated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile under alkaline conditions (pH =9.0) into 60 fractions. These fractions were then merged into four fractions and dried under vacuum.  Peptides were dissolved using buffer A (containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile) and then separated via EASY-nLC 1200 ultra HPLC system. The gradient comprised an increase from 8% to 16% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) for approximately 30 min, 18% to 32% for 25 min, and to 80% in 2 min, and hold at 80% for the last 3 min. The flow rate was maintained at 400 nl/min. After separation, peptides were subjected to NSI source and then analyzed using tandem MS/MS in Q ExactiveTM Plus. The electrospray voltage applied was set to 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range of the full scan was set from 350 to 1,800, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using the NCE setting 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control was set at 5E4. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database searching A Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) was employed for processing the resulting MS/MS data. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt B. abortus (3,023 sequences) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was designated as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Alkylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and variable modifications were oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N-terminal of protein, and deamidation of asparagine. The FDR was adjusted to <1%.   Bioinformatics analyses InterProScan software (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) was used for gene ontology (GO) annotation. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathways. The Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG) (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/) system software program was used to determine the functional distribution of proteins.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Brucella abortus</i> is an important zoonotic pathogen that causes severe economic loss to husbandry and poses a threat to human health. The <i>B. abortus</i> A19 live vaccine has been extensively used to prevent bovine brucellosis in China. However, it is difficult to distinguish the serological response induced by A19 from that induced by natural infection. In this study, a novel genetically marked vaccine, A19&#x394;virB12, was generated and evaluated. The results indicated that A19&#x394;virB12 was able to provide effective protection against <i>B. abortus</i> 2308 (S2308) challenge in mice. Furthermore, the safety and protective&#xa0;efficacy of A19&#x394;virB12 have been confirmed in natural host cattle. Additionally, the VirB12 protein allowed for serological differentiation between the S2308 challenge/natural infection and A19&#x394;virB12 vaccination. However, previous studies have found that the accuracy of the serological detection based on VirB12 needs to be improved. Therefore, we attempted to identify potential supplementary antigens with differential diagnostic functions by combining label-free quantitative proteomics and protein chip technology. Twenty-six proteins identified only in S2308 were screened; among them, five proteins were considered as potential supplementary antigens. Thus, the accuracy of the differential diagnosis between A19&#x394;virB12 immunization and field infection may be improved through multi-antigen detection. In addition, we explored the possible attenuation factors of <i>Brucella</i> vaccine strain. Nine virulence factors were downregulated in A19&#x394;virB12. The downregulation pathways of A19&#x394;virB12 were significantly enriched in quorum sensing, ATP-binding cassette transporter, and metabolism. Several proteins related to cell division were significantly downregulated, while some proteins involved in transcription were upregulated in S2308. In conclusion, our results&#xa0;contribute to the control and eradication of brucellosis and provide insights into the mechanisms underlying the attenuation of A19&#x394;virB12.

### Keywords
B. abortus; a19δvirb12; proteomics; differential diagnosis; attenuation mechanism

### Affiliations
Shenyang Agricultural University

### Submitter
Jianghua Yang

### Lab Head
Dr zeliang Chen
Shenyang Agricultural University


