### Accession
PXD019083

### Title
A selective autophagy pathway for endocytic protein condensates

### Description
Autophagy eliminates cytoplasmic content selected by autophagy receptors, which link cargoes to the membrane bound autophagosomal ubiquitin-like protein Atg8/LC3. Here, we discover a selective autophagy pathway for protein condensates formed by endocytic proteins. In this pathway, the endocytic yeast protein Ede1 functions as a selective autophagy receptor. Distinct domains within Ede1 bind Atg8 and mediate phase separation into condensates. Both properties are necessary for an Ede1-dependent autophagy pathway for endocytic proteins, which differs from regular endocytosis, does not involve other known selective autophagy receptors, but requires the core autophagy machinery. Cryo-electron tomography of Ede1-containing condensates – at the plasma membrane and in autophagic bodies – shows a phase-separated compartment at the beginning and end of the Ede1-mediated selective autophagy pathway. Our results imply an important role of autophagy in surveillance of membraneless compartments

### Sample Protocol
To analyse the Atg8 interactome for the different yeast strains, four biological replicates of cells were grown at 30 °C in 200 ml YPD medium each. At OD 1.0, cells were incubated for 3 h with 100 nM rapamycin. Yeast cells were subsequently collected by centrifugation and lysates were prepared by cell disruption on a multitube bead-beater (MM301 from Retsch GmbH) in lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 7.5, 150 mM KOAc, 1% NP-40, 5% glycerol, 10 mM N-Ethylmaleimide, 1 mg/ml Pefabloc SC (Roche), and EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete Tablets, Roche)) with zirconia/silica beads. The extracts were cleared by centrifugation at 2000 g for 10 min. Supernatants were incubated with GFP-Trap_M matrix (ChromoTek GmbH) for 1 h on a rotary wheel at  4 °C. Magnetic beads were washed 2 times with lysis buffer and 4 times with washing buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mg/ml Pefabloc SC (Roche), and EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete Tablets, Roche)) to remove any residual detergent. The supernatants from the beads were removed and the beads were incubated with a buffer containing 4 M urea and 20 mM DTT in 25 mM Tris pH 8.0 buffer for 10 minutes followed by incubation with 40 mM chloroacetamide for 20 minutes for alkylation of cysteines. The sample was diluted to final concentration of 1 M urea with digestion buffer (25 mM Tris pH 8.0) and vortexed. The sample was digested for 2 h with 0.5 ug of endoproteinase lysine-C (Wako chemicals) and then digested with 0.5 µg of trypsin (Promega) overnight. The digested peptides were purified using StageTip. Peptides were loaded on a 15 cm column (inner diameter = 75 microns) packed with C18 reprosil three micron beads (Dr Maisch GmbH) and directly sprayed into a LTQ-Orbitrap XL instrument operated in a data-dependent fashion. Up to top five precursors were selected for fragmentation by CID and analyzed in the iontrap.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.15. Peak lists generated were searched against a yeast ORF database using Andromeda search engine built into Maxquant. Proteins were quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm. Analysis was performed using Perseus version 1.5.4.2 as described before.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy eliminates cytoplasmic content selected by autophagy receptors, which link cargo to the membrane-bound autophagosomal ubiquitin-like protein Atg8/LC3. Here, we report a selective autophagy pathway for protein condensates formed by endocytic proteins in yeast. In this pathway, the endocytic protein Ede1 functions as a selective autophagy receptor. Distinct domains within Ede1 bind Atg8 and mediate phase separation into condensates. Both properties are necessary for an Ede1-dependent autophagy pathway for endocytic proteins, which differs from regular endocytosis and does not involve other known selective autophagy receptors but requires the core autophagy machinery. Cryo-electron tomography of Ede1-containing condensates, at the plasma membrane and in autophagic bodies, shows a phase-separated compartment at the beginning and end of the Ede1-mediated selective autophagy route. Our data suggest a model for autophagic degradation of macromolecular protein complexes by the action of intrinsic autophagy receptors.

### Keywords
Liquid-liquid phase separation, Atg8, Selective autophagy, Ede1

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Florian Wilfling

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Wilfling
MPI of Biochemistry


