### Accession
PXD023651

### Title
A2M bait region engineering - autoconjugation product cross-link identification and PRM quantification

### Description
In-gel digest of a cross-linked product band was used to identify an internal isopeptide cross-link formed in A2M TR K704 upon bait region cleavage by trypsin.  PRM was used to quantify the thiol ester in native PAGE bands of A2M nEXT and EXT mutants.

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands were excised, digested by pepsin at pH 3 overnight at 37 degrees, and stage tipped on homemade C18 columns. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a DDA method to identify the A2M TR K704 crosslink and using a targeted method to quantify the intact thiol ester in A2M nEXT and EXT.

### Data Protocol
The K704 crosslink was manually identified.  The thiol ester abundance was calculated using Skyline on the basis of MS2 fragment ions.

### Publication Abstract
Human &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub>-macroglobulin (A2M) is an abundant protease inhibitor in plasma, which regulates many proteolytic processes and is involved in innate immunity. A2M's unique protease-trapping mechanism of inhibition is initiated when a protease cleaves within the exposed and highly susceptible "bait region." As the wild-type bait region is permissive to cleavage by most human proteases, A2M is accordingly a broad-spectrum protease inhibitor. In this study, we extensively modified the bait region in order to identify any potential functionally important elements in the bait region sequence and to engineer A2M proteins with restrictive bait regions, which more selectively inhibit a target protease. A2M in which the bait region was entirely replaced by glycine-serine repeats remained fully functional and was not cleaved by any tested protease. Therefore, this bait region was designated as the "tabula rasa" bait region and used as the starting point for further bait region engineering. Cleavage of the tabula rasa bait region by specific proteases was conveyed by the insertion of appropriate substrate sequences, e.g., basic residues for trypsin. Screening and optimization of tabula rasa bait regions incorporating matrix metalloprotease 2 (MMP2) substrate sequences produced an A2M that was specifically cleaved by MMPs and inhibited MMP2 cleavage activity as efficiently as wild-type A2M. We propose that this approach can be used to develop A2M-based protease inhibitors, which selectively inhibit target proteases, which might be applied toward the clinical inhibition of dysregulated proteolysis as occurs in arthritis and many types of cancer.

### Keywords
Protein engineering, Prm, Cross-link, A2m, Protease inhibitor

### Affiliations
Aarhus University
MBG, Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Seandean Harwood

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
MBG, Aarhus University, Denmark


