### Accession
PXD000992

### Title
Chicken uterine fluid protein description and quantification

### Description
Gallus gallus avian eggshell is a biomineral composed of 95% of calcium carbonate on calcitic form and of 3.5% of an extracellular organic matrix (proteins, polysaccharides and proteoglycans). The calcification process occurred in the lumen of the uterus into the acellular uterine fluid, and is divided in three stages (initial, growth and terminal), where the concentration and the nature of proteins varies depending on stages. We have used mass spectrometry methodologies to identify and quantify proteins secreted into the uterine fluid proteins during the three stages of biomineralization.

### Sample Protocol
Eighteen individual uterine fluid samples were used for the quantification. Six uterine fluids collected at the initial same stages were pooled in equal amount for each stage (initial (I), growth (G) and terminal (T) stages samples). The three pooled samples (I, G and T) were applied on a 4-20% SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was performed on a short time period until samples were concentrated in a narrow band. The three bands corresponding to the three stages were stained with Coomassie blue and excised before to be in-gel digested. An equal amount of proteins from uterine fluids collected at each stage of shell calcification were pooled together for the description. Proteins were separated on a 4-20 % SDS-PAGE gel. Proteins on gels were stained with Coomassie blue and the 20 visible bands were excised. After reduction and alkylation, proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin and peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using LTQ velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to MGF with Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.2; Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, USA). Precursor mass range of 350-5000 Da and signal to noise ratio of 1.5 were the criteria used for generation of peak lists. In order to identify the proteins, the peptide and fragment masses obtained were matched automatically against IPI chicken (version 3.81) and against the chordata section of nr NCBI database (1601319 sequences, downloaded on 2012/03/22) and UniprotKB SwissProt (535248 sequences, downloaded on March 2012). MS/MS ion searches were performed using MASCOT Daemon and search engine (version 2.3; Matrix Science, London, UK). The parameters used for database searches include trypsin as a protease with allowed two missed cleavage, carbamidomethylcysteine (+57 Da), oxidation of methionine (+16) and N-terminal protein acetylation (+42) as variable modifications. The tolerance of the ions was set to 5 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for fragment ion matches

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Description, Quantification, Lc-ms/ms, Chicken, Uterine fluid

### Affiliations
INRA-Nouzilly-PRC
Equipe Fonction et Régulation des Protéines de l'Oeuf (FRPO) UR83 Recherches Avicoles INRA Val de Loire 37380 NOUZILLY

### Submitter
G HARICHAUX

### Lab Head
Dr Joel Gautron
Equipe Fonction et Régulation des Protéines de l'Oeuf (FRPO) UR83 Recherches Avicoles INRA Val de Loire 37380 NOUZILLY


