### Accession
PXD023779

### Title
CCDC88B affinity proteomic analysis

### Description
The CCDC88B gene (11q13) is a risk factor for several chronic inflammatory diseases in humans, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), multiple sclerosis and psoriasis. A Ccdc88b mutation in mice conveys protection against pathological inflammation in experimental models of microbial (cerebral malaria) and autoimmune (experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis) of neuroinflammation and colitis. At the cellular level, loss of Ccdc88b function is phenotypically expressed as a migratory defect in vivo, and a cell mobility defect in vitro in mutant dendritic cells and lymphocytes. At the molecular level, CCDC88B belongs to a family of protein scaffold associated with the cytoskeleton and that feature protein:protein interactions domains. We used a co-immunoprecipitation / mass spectrometry-based approach to identify physical interactions of CCDC88B from mouse thymocytes and BI-141 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation for SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry analyses. Initial anti-CCDC88B co-immunoprecipitations from mouse primary thymocytes were carried out essentially as previously described [PMID: 28060343], using: (i) 200 mg of cryomilled thymocytes; (ii) 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100, 200 mM NaCl; and (iii) a purified anti-CCDC88B antibody [6] coupled to Dynabeads M270 Epoxy in-house (adapted from [PMID: 21536766]). To prepare thymocytes around 3g of mice thymi were harvested, passed through a 70µm cell strainer using a syringe plunger and washed with PBS. Cell suspensions were then centrifuged inside a syringe, the supernatant was removed, and the pellet was injected directly into liquid nitrogen. An anti-CCDC88B co-immunoprecipitation based interaction screen [PMID: 25938370] was carried out on BI-141 T cells at ~50 mg per reaction. From this screen, three conditions were selected for further anti-CCDC88B co-immunoprecipitations, in triplicate, and label-free quantitative (LFQ) MS analysis from mouse primary thymocytes and BI-141 T cells: (i) 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 200 mM NaCl, 0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100; (ii) 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM deoxy-Big CHAP; (iii) 200 mM ammonium acetate, pH 7.0, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100.   Sample workup for LC-MS/MS. Co-immunoprecipitated fractions were eluted in 1.1x NuPAGE sample loading buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific #NP007) at 70 °C, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and run as 4-6 mm gel-plugs, prior to  Coomassie G-250 staining, peptide workup and LC-MS-MS (essentially as described in [PMID: 17406544; PMID: 31106238]). Gel plugs were excised, cut into 1 mm cubes, de-stained, and digested overnight with enough 3.1 ng/μl trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, #V5280) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to cover the pieces. Peptides were extracted from the gel in two incubations of one hour each with 1.7% v/v formic acid, 67% v/v acetonitrile at room temperature with agitation. After partial evaporation by vacuum centrifugation to remove acetonitrile, digests were desalted on Stage Tips [PMID 12585499]. Stage Tip eluates were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, loaded onto an Easy-Spray column (ES800, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and gradient-eluted (Solvent A = 0.1% v/v formic acid in water, Solvent B = 0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile, flow rate 300 nl/min) into an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) acquiring data-dependent CID fragmentation spectra.

### Data Protocol
MS Data Analysis. RAW files were submitted to MaxQuant [PMID: 19029910; PMID: 27809316] for protein identification and LFQ. Searches were performed against mouse protein sequences, exogenous contaminants, and a decoy database of reversed protein sequences. LFQ was performed separately for each of three buffer conditions.

### Publication Abstract
CCDC88B is a risk factor for several chronic inflammatory diseases in humans and its inactivation causes a migratory defect in DCs in mice. CCDC88B belongs to a family of cytoskeleton-associated scaffold proteins that feature protein:protein interaction domains. Here, we identified the Rho/Rac Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factor 2 (ARHGEF2) and the RAS Protein Activator Like 3 (RASAL3) as CCDC88B physical and functional interactors. Mice defective in Arhgef2 or Rasal3 show dampened neuroinflammation, and display altered cellular response and susceptibility to colitis; ARHGEF2 maps to a human Chromosome 1 locus associated with susceptibility to IBD. Arhgef2 and Rasal3 mutant DCs show altered migration and motility in vitro, causing either reduced (Arhgef2) or enhanced (Rasal3) migratory properties. The CCDC88B/RASAL3/ARHGEF2 complex appears to regulate DCs migration by modulating activation of RHOA, with ARHGEF2 and RASAL3 acting in opposite regulatory fashions, providing a molecular mechanism for the involvement of these proteins in DCs immune functions.

### Keywords
Mouse, Neuroinflammation, Colitis, Thymus

### Affiliations
The Rockefeller University

### Submitter
John LaCava

### Lab Head
Dr John LaCava
The Rockefeller University


