### Accession
PXD022398

### Title
Proteomic characterization of the pellicle of Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is an obligate intracellular parasite. The ability to invade cells and proliferate successfully is given by the machinery found in the pellicle of the parasite, the pellicle is a complex of three membranes. Despite the importance of the pellicle in the biology of Toxoplasma, its protein composition had not been reported. The proteins of the isolated pellicle fraction were digested with trypsin and chymotrypsin, for their identification and quantification in the case of those digested with trypsin and only identification in the case of those digested with chymotrypsin. Samples were resolved, and peptides were separated using a UHPLC ACQUITY M-Class. Spectral data were acquired in an MS with electrospray ionization and ion mobility separation Synapt G2-Si operated with data-independent acquisition and ion mobility spectrometry using the high-definition multiplexed MS/MS mode. We used the Hi3 method to quantify absolutely every protein detected. In the isolate of pellicle digested with trypsin a total of 548 proteins were identified and absolutely quantified using the internal standard and the intensity of the most abundant peptides per protein with Progenesis QI software and the database UP000002494. Among identified proteins, 11 corresponded to IMC, 11 were related to SAG (SRS), 15 to plasma membrane and glideosome and 13 to cytoskeleton (CK). In the chymotrypsin-digested pellicle sample a total of 137 proteins were identified and 22 of them were proteins that were not identified in the trypsin-digested sample. Due to the characteristics of the SRS proteins, they have a role in generating the host's immune response or are involved in adhesion, motility and invasion. The 11 proteins found with the analysis of E. mass. Study of these SRS proteins to determine their role in the dynamic events of the parasite, such as adhesion and motility as well as in the generation of the immune response, is important in the search for therapies against toxoplasmosis

### Sample Protocol
To resolve proteins for mass spectrometry, total samples were loaded in 10% SDS-PAGE and run until they entered a distance of 10 mm in the separation gel. The gel was stained and fixed, for 18 h at room temperature with gentle agitation, with a coomassie solution containing 45 % methanol, 10 % acetic acid, 45 % water and 0.25 g of Coomassie R-250 blue dye (Bio-Rad Laboratories, United Kingdom) and then destained with 50% methanol, 10 % acetic acid, and  40 % water for 2 h. Gel bands stained were sliced with new scalpel blades and put in a 1.5 tube with 200 μl of 10% methanol and stored at 4 °C until protein identification. Bands containing all the proteins were cut and digested according to the modified protocol of Shevchenko et al., 2006. As an internal standard, tryptic digested alcohol dehydrogenase 1 (ADH1) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (UniProt accession: P00330) was added to peptide samples to obtain a final concentration of 25 fmol.µL-1. Then, 4.5 µL of digested peptides (112.5 fmol of internal standard) of each condition were injected by triplicate into Symmetry C18 Trap V/M precolumn (Waters, Milford, MA); 180 μm X 20 mm, 100 Å pore size, 5 μm particle size desalted using as a mobile phase A, 0.1% formic acid (FA) in H2O and mobile phase B, 0.1% FA in acetonitrile (ACN) under the followed isocratic gradient: 99.9% mobile phase A and 0.1% of mobile phase B at a flow of 5 μl.min-1 during 3 min. Afterward, peptides were loaded and separated on an HSS T3 C18 Column (Waters, Milford, MA); 75 μm X 150 mm, 100 Å pore size, 1.8 μm particle size; using an UHPLC ACQUITY M-Class (Waters, Milford, MA) with the same mobile phases (mentioned above) under the followed gradient: 0 min 7% B, 30.37 min 40% B, 32.03 to 35.34 min 85% B, 37 to 42 min 7% B, at a flow of 400 nL.min-1 and 45 °C as column temperature. The spectral data were acquired in a mass spectrometer with electrospray ionization (ESI) and ion mobility separation (IMS) Synapt G2-Si (Waters, Milford, MA) operated with data-independent acquisition (DIA) and ion mobility spectrometry using high-definition multiplexed MS/MS (HDMSE) mode. The tune page for the ionization source was set with the following parameters: 2.75 kV in the capillary, 30 V in the sampling cone, 30 V in the source offset, 70 °C for the source temperature, 0.5 Bar for the nano flow gas and 150 L.hr-1 for the purge gas flow. Two chromatograms were acquired (low and high-energy chromatograms) in positive mode in the range of m/z 50-2000 with a scan time of 500 ms. No collision energy was applied to obtain the low-energy chromatogram, while for the high-energy chromatograms, the precursor ions were fragmented in the transfer using a collision energy ramp of 19-55 V. Chymotrypsin digestion was done following a similar methodology to trypsin digestion, with the following modifications: 50 uL of chymotrypsin 25 ng/uL, 10 mM CaCl2 dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) were added to the gel bands, then the digestion was carried out overnight on a thermal shaker (Eppendorf) at 25 ºC. For chymotrypsin-digested peptides the data analysis was performed as with trypsin, the only modification was that chymotrypsin was programmed as the cutting enzyme (instead of trypsin) and without considering the absolute quantification.

### Data Protocol
Generated *.raw files (in HDMSE mode) containing MS and MS/MS spectra were analyzed, deconvoluted, compared and absolutely quantified using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software against the *.fasta database, concatenated with its reversed database. The parameters used for protein identification were: trypsin as the cleaving enzyme and one missed cleavage allowed; carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), amidation (carboxyl-terminal), deamidation (Q, N) or phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modifications; peptide and fragment tolerance were set to automatic, minimum fragment ion matches per peptide: 2, minimum fragment ion matches per protein: 5, minimum peptide matches per protein: 1, and false discovery rate less than 4%. The average of the intensity of the three most abundant peptides per protein (Hi3) was used for absolute quantitation according to the method described by Silva et al, 2006. Synapt G2-Si was calibrated with [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide, [M+2H]2+ = 785.84261 at less than 1.5 ppm

### Publication Abstract
Toxoplasma gondii is one of the most successful intracellular parasites in the world. The dynamic, adhesion, invasion, and even replication capabilities of Toxoplasma are based on dynamic machinery located in the pellicle, a three membrane complex that surrounds the parasite. Among the proteins that carry out these processes are inner membrane complex (IMC) proteins, gliding-associated proteins (GAP), diverse myosins, actin, tubulin, and SRS proteins. Despite the importance of the pellicle, the knowledge of its composition is limited. Broad protein identification from an enriched pellicle fraction was obtained by independent digestion with trypsin and chymotrypsin and quantified by mass spectrometry. By trypsin digestion, 548 proteins were identified, while by chymotrypsin digestion, additional 22 proteins were identified. Besides, a group of "sequences related to SAG1" proteins (SRS) were detected together with unidentified new proteins. From identified SRS proteins, SRS51 was chosen for analysis and modeling as its similarities with crystallized adhesion proteins, exhibiting the presence of a spatial groove that is apparently involved in adhesion and cell invasion. As SRS proteins have been reported to be involved in the activation of the host's immune response, further studies could consider them as targets in the design of vaccines or of drugs against Toxoplasma. SIGNIFICANCE: To date, the proteomic composition of the pellicle of Toxoplasma is unknown. Most proteins reported in Toxoplasma pellicle have been poorly studied, and many others remain unidentified. Herein, a group of new SRS proteins is described. Some SRS proteins previously described from pellicle fraction have adhesion properties to the host cell membrane, so their study would provide data related to invasion mechanism and to open possibilities for considering them as targets in the design of immunoprotective strategies or the design of new pharmacological treatments.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Srs, Pellicle, Mass spectrometry, Protein quantification, Adhesion

### Affiliations
Biochemistry Department, Cinvestav-IPN
Cinvestav-IPN

### Submitter
Emmanuel Rios-Castro

### Lab Head
Dr Ricardo Mondragón Flores
Biochemistry Department, Cinvestav-IPN


