### Accession
PXD035675

### Title
study on the ppGpp-mediated stringent response of E. coli during nutrient downshift

### Description
There are three projects including AE155LQ, RE161LQ, RE235LQ. AE155LQ is about the proteomes of wild type cells (WT) and E. coli RelA* OE strain during exponential growth in glucose cAA medium. E1 & E2 corresponds to the wild type cells (two biological replicate samples) and E3 & E4 corresponds to RelA* OE data (two biological replicate samples). RE161LQ is about the time-course proteome of wild type (four samples including WT_0, WT_20, WT_40 and WT_80) vs relA-deficient strain (relA_0, relA_1.5 h, relA_3 h and relA_4.5 h) during AA downshift.  RE235Q is about the time-course proteome of wild type (three samples including WT_0, WT_60, WT_160) vs relA-deficient strain (three samples including relA_0, relA_60 and relA_160) during carbon downshift.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic studies, ~30 ml exponential culture of E. coli (OD600~0.3) was transferred into a pre-cooled 50 ml centrifuge tube (Nest Biotech), and collected by centrifuge (4 °C, 8500 rpm for 5 min). The cell pellets were washed twice by PBS and stored at -80 °C freezer prior to proteomic analysis. The mass spectrometry-based proteomics was based on 4D label-free approach(Meier et al., 2018), which was performed by Jingjie PTM Biolabs (Zhou Hang), as generally described below. The experimental procedure of 4D label-free method was described as below: the cell pellets were subject to ultra-sonication in lysis buffer (8 M Urea 8 M urea, 1% Triton X-100, 10 mM DTT, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail and 2 mM EDTA). The cell debris was then removed by centrifuge (4℃, 12000 g) for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred into a new centrifuge tube for protein concentration measurement using BCA kit. Protein samples were next subject to trypsin digestion. For digestion, protein samples were first pelleted by 20% TCA at 4°C for 2 h and then collected with centrifuge (4500 g) for 5 min. The precipitate was washed for twice using pre-cooled acetone and further added with 200 mM TEAB. Trypsin was then added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for digestion overnight. The solution was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column. Solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and Solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) were used for following peptides separation and UPLC procedures. The peptides were dissolved in solvent A and separated by the NanoElute UPLC system. The flow setting of UPLC is as follows: 0-43 min, 6%~22%B; 43-55 min, 22%~30%B; 55-58 min, 30%~80%B; 58-61 min, 80%B; flow rate: 450 nL/min. After the separation by UPLC, the peptide was set into Capillary ionization source for ionization and further analyzed by timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry system. The electrospray voltage applied was set at 1.6 to 1.8 kV. Both the original peptide ion and its secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by high-resolution TOF. The m/z scan range was 100 to 1700 for full scan. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the SwissProt Escherichia_coli_strain_K12_83333_PR_20210624.fasta. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Timely adaptation to nutrient downshift is crucial for bacteria to maintain fitness during feast and famine cycle in the natural niche. However, the molecular mechanism that ensures the timely adaption of bacterial growth to nutrient downshift remains poorly understood. Here, we quantitatively investigated the adaptation of Escherichia coli to various kinds of nutrient downshift. We found that relA deficient strain, which is devoid of stringent response, exhibits a significantly longer growth lag than wild type strain during adapting to both amino acid downshift and carbon downshift. Quantitative proteomics show that increased (p)ppGpp level promotes the growth adaption of bacteria to amino acid downshift via triggering the proteome resource re-allocation from ribosome synthesis to amino acid biosynthesis. Such type of proteome re-allocation is significantly delayed in the relA-deficient strain, which underlies its longer lag than wild type strain during amino acid downshift. During carbon downshift, a lack of stringent response in relA deficient strain leads to disruption of the transcription-translation coordination, thus compromising the transcription processivity and further the timely expression of related catabolic operons for utilizing secondary carbon sources. Our studies shed light on the fundamental strategy of bacteria to maintain fitness under nutrient-fluctuating environments.

### Keywords
Ppgpp; rela mutant; e. coli

### Affiliations
Central China Normal University
School of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, Hubei province, China

### Submitter
Xiongfeng  Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Xiongfeng Dai & Manlu Zhu
School of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, Hubei province, China


