### Accession
PXD039998

### Title
EP300 promotes ferroptosis via HSPA5 acetylation in pancreatic cancer

### Description
Ferroptosis is a form of regulated cell death characterized by oxidative injury-induced lipid peroxidation. However, the detailed protein post-translational modification regulatory mechanism of ferroptosis remains largely unknown. Here, we report that E1A binding protein P300 (EP300) acetyltransferase promotes ferroptosis in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells via the acetylation of heat shock protein family A (Hsp70) member 5 (HSPA5, also known as GRP78 or BIP) on the site of K353. Acetylated HSPA5 loses its ability to inhibit lipid peroxidation and subsequent ferroptotic cell death. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of EP300-mediated HSPA5 acetylation on K353 increases PDAC cell resistance to ferroptosis. Moreover, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) limits HSPA5 acetylation and subsequent ferroptosis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed at 4°C in ice-cold RIPA buffer (P0013D, Beyotime), and cell lysates were cleared by brief centrifugation (15000 rpm, 15 min). Concentrations of proteins in the supernatant were determined using the BCA assay. The samples containing equal amounts of proteins were precleared with protein A agarose beads (4°C, 2 h) before immunoprecipitation. After incubation with a variety of irrelevant IgG or specific antibodies, the mixture was gently shaken with protein A agarose beads for 2 h or overnight at 4°C. Following incubation, agarose beads were washed extensively with PBST (0.5%Triton X-100 + PBS), and proteins were eluted by boiling in a 1× loading buffer.The strip was washed by ddH2O for 3 times, followed by 150μL decolorizing solution, washed for 4 times, and then washed with 300ul 25mM ammonium bicarbonate, 50% acetonitrile and 100% acetonitrile for 2 times in turn. Finally, the glue was dehydrated until the glue turned white. Add 50μl of 10mM DTT solution in 56℃ water bath for reduction for 30min. When the temperature drops to room temperature, add the same volume of 50 mM IAA solution for photoproof alkylation for 15 min. Then wash the rubber strip with 300ul of 25mM ammonium bicarbonate, 50% acetonitrile and 100% acetonitrile for two times, and finally dehydrate the rubber until the rubber block turns white. Add 0.01ug /ul proteomic grade trypsin 15-20ul, add 50 mM NH4HCO3 solution containing 10% ACN 30-40ul to cover the ice after full absorption and transparency; Digest overnight in 37℃ water bath. After enzymatic hydrolysis, the supernatant was transferred to another new EP tube, and 100µL extraction solution (67% acetonitrile, containing 2% formic acid) was added into the remaining rubber blocks, held at 37℃ for 30 min, followed by ultrasound for 15 min, centrifugation, combined supernatant, centrifugal concentration and drying, to be analyzed by mass spectrometry.The lyophilized peptide fractions were re-suspended in ddH2O containing 0.1% formic acid, and 2ul aliquots of which was loaded into a nanoViper C18 (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75μm×2 cm) trap column. The online Chromatography seperation was performed on the Easy nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher). The trapping, desalting procedure were carried out with a volumn of 20 μL 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid). Then, an elution gradient of 5-38% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 60 min was used on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75μm×25 cm C18-2 μm 100 Å). DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mass spectrum techniques were used to acquire tandem MS data on a ThermoFisher Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, USA) fitted with a Nano Flex ion source. Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 1.9 kV, and an interface heater temperature of 275℃. For a full mass spectrometry survey scan, the target value was 3 × 106 and the scan ranged from 350 to 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. For the MS2 scan, only spectra with a charge state of 2-5 were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 28. The MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap in rapid mode with an AGC target of 8,000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set for 25 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed for protein identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation using PEAKS Studio 8.5. The local false discovery rate at PSM was 1.0% after searching against Homo sapiens database with a maximum of two missed cleavages.The following settings were selected: Oxidation (M), Acetylation (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Pyro-glu from E, Pyro-glu from Q for variable modifications as well as fixed Carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Ferroptosis is a form of regulated cell death characterized by oxidative injury-induced lipid peroxidation. However, the detailed protein post-translational modification regulatory mechanism of ferroptosis remains largely unknown. Here, we report that E1A binding protein P300 (EP300) acetyltransferase promotes ferroptosis in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells via the acetylation of heat shock protein family A (Hsp70) member 5 (HSPA5), also known as GRP78 or BIP) on the site of K353. Acetylated HSPA5 loses its ability to inhibit lipid peroxidation and subsequent ferroptotic cell death. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of EP300-mediated HSPA5 acetylation on K353 increases PDAC cell resistance to ferroptosis. Moreover, histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) limits HSPA5 acetylation and subsequent ferroptosis. Collectively, these findings not only identify regulatory pathways for HSPA5 acetylation during ferroptosis, but also highlight promising strategies to increase ferroptosis sensitivity in PDAC cells.

### Keywords
Human, Pdac, Ip-ms, Cell

### Affiliations
The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University

### Submitter
Yuan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jiao Liu
The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University


