### Accession
PXD033166

### Title
Qualitative PTM characterization of  raw and roasted peanut allergens from aqueous extracts by HRMS

### Description
Project is related to immunoproteomic profiling of soluble fractions of raw and roasted peanut. It is still unknown which peanut extract is more allergenic, the raw or roasted version and part of the answer could be in revealing differences between PTM profiles of the raw and roasted peanut.

### Sample Protocol
Peanut extracts (PEs) were prepared for MS analysis with trypsin digestion as previously described, carried out via in-gel (Shevchenko, Tomas, Havlis, Olsen, & Mann, 2006) and in-solution routes (Smiljanic et al., 2017). For in-gel digestion, protein bands were resolved on 12% PAA gels and excised at positions corresponding to the four major peanut allergens. Proteins in excised bands had their disulfide bridges reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol and cysteines alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. In-gel prepared samples were digested with proteomics-grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) in a 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio, overnight at 37 ℃.  All digested samples were analyzed by nLC-MS/MS, briefly, peptides were chromatographically separated using the EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Germany) using A: 0.1% formic acid in water and B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as the mobile phase. Samples were chromatographically resolved using a 5 – 70% – 95% B gradient over the course of 80 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were analyzed using LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Germany) in a data-dependent mode with the 10 most intense precursors subjected to fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Peanut proteins were identified using the PEAKS X platform (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada). Signature MS/MS spectra were searched using the PEAKS DB algorithm against a combined database consisting of UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org/) Arachis hypogaea entries (taxon ID 3818, 98981 sequences, accessed 18/10/2019) and common Repository of Adventitious Protein database entries (http://www.thegpm.org/) (116 sequences, accessed 18/10/2019). The list of all identified peanut proteins (Table S1) consists of protein groups with at least two unique peptides, with contaminant hits filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) are covalent changes occurring on amino acid side chains of proteins and yet are neglected structural and functional aspects of protein architecture. The objective was to detect differences in PTM profiles that take place after roasting using open PTM search. We conducted a bottom-up proteomic study to investigate the impact of peanut roasting on readily soluble allergens and their PTM profiles. Proteomic PTM profiling of certain modifications was confirmed by Western blotting with a series of PTM-specific antibodies. In addition to inducing protein aggregation and denaturation, roasting may facilitate change in their PTM pattern and relative profiling. We have shown that Ara h 1 is the most modified major allergen in both samples in terms of modification versatility and extent. The most frequent PTM was methionine oxidation, especially in roasted samples. PTMs uniquely found in roasted samples were hydroxylation (Trp), formylation (Arg/Lys), and oxidation or hydroxylation (Asn). Raw and roasted peanut extracts did not differ in the binding of IgE from the serum of peanut-sensitised individuals done by ELISA. This study provides a better understanding of how roasting impacts the PTM profile of major peanut allergens and provides a good foundation for further exploration of PTMs.

### Keywords
Modifications, Peanut, Allergens, Roasting, Ptm profiling

### Affiliations
University of Belgrade - Faculty of chemistry
Tanja Cirković Velickovic, Professor, University of Belgrade - Faculty of Chemistry,  Department of Biochemistry and Centre of Excellence for Molecular Food Sciences;  Member of Serbian Academy of Sceinces and Arts; Ghent University Global Campus, Incheon, South Korea; aculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University,Belgium.

### Submitter
Teodora Djukic

### Lab Head
Dr Tanja Cirkovic Velickovic
Tanja Cirković Velickovic, Professor, University of Belgrade - Faculty of Chemistry,  Department of Biochemistry and Centre of Excellence for Molecular Food Sciences;  Member of Serbian Academy of Sceinces and Arts; Ghent University Global Campus, Incheon, South Korea; aculty of Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University,Belgium.


