### Accession
PXD029525

### Title
Proteomic characterization of Prostate cancer cell lines

### Description
Proteomic characterization of prostate cancer cell lines after drug treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and protein digestion  PCa cells were washed twice with PBS and then harvested by centrifuge at 1200 rpm for 5 min. Then the cell pellets were re-suspended in RIPA buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors (Halt Protease Inhibitor and 0.5M EDTA; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were lysed in a sonicator bath for 20 min (20 cycles: 30s ON, 30s OFF; Bioruptor; Diagenode), and lysates were centrifuged at 12,000RPM for 30 min at 4ºC. Protein-containing supernatants were collected for downstream digestion. Protein concentration of whole cell lysates was measured by bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), while AR IP samples were measured on a DS-11-FX (DeNovix) at 280 nm. A total of 100 µg of proteins were digested for downstream proteome analyses. Solubilized proteins were precipitated using ice-cold methanol and centrifuged down at 12,000RPM for 20 min at 4ºC. Protein pellets were re-suspended in 100 mM tris buffer containing 100 mM dithiothreitol and 4% w/v sodium-dodecyl-sulphate (SDS, pH 8.0), heated at 95ºC for 30 min at 600 rpm. An 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.0) solution was added to dilute SDS, samples were loaded on 30 KDa molecular filters (Millipore SigmaAldrich) and centrifuged at 12,000RPM for 20 min. Filters were washed twice with 8 M urea buffer and incubated in 50 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea buffer for 30 min (in the dark). Filters were washed four times (28 M urea buffer, 250 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 8.0), and proteins were digested with trypsin (enzyme–protein ratio 1:50) at 37ºC for 16 h under agitation (650 rpm). Filters were then centrifuged at 12,000RPM for 20 min to extract tryptic peptides.  Strong anion exchange peptide fractionation Tryptic peptide mixtures were fractionated for downstream MS analysis using strong anion exchange (SAX). Digested peptides were dried, then re-suspended in Britton and Robinson Universal Buffer (BRUB; 20 mM phosphoric acid, 20 mM boric acid, and 20 mM acetic acid in ultrapure water) pH 11 and loaded on SAX (Sigma-Aldrich) stage tips combined with C18 filters (Sigma-Aldrich). SAX filter-containing tips were used to elute peptides onto C18 tips (Sigma-Aldrich) using BRUB at decreasing pH: 8, 6, 5, 4, and 3. C18 tips were then washed with 0.1% formic acid (FA) solution, and peptides eluted with 0.1% FA and 80% acetonitrile in ultrapure water. SP3 peptide purification was subsequently performed on dried eluates. SP3 beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added to peptides, peptides were captured by adding a volume of 200 µL acetonitrile and eluted with 2% DMSO in water. Supernatants were dried and stored at -80ºC until MS analysis. High resolution mass spectrometry Digested peptide mixtures were injected into a reverse phase EasySpray (Thermo Fisher Scientific) analytical column (ID 75 µm×50 cm C18 2 µm 100 Å particle size). Gradient was run using LCMS-grade water with 0.1% (FA (solvent A) and 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% FA (solvent B) for 120 min. Gradient was run as follows over a 350 uL/min flow-rate: 90 min 10–30% solvent B, 20 mins 30–45% solvent B, 1 min 45–95% solvent B, and 9.5 mins 95% solvent B. Eluting peptides were subjected to a 1.8 kV spray voltage. Full scans were acquired at 60,000 resolution and the 15 most intense ions were fragmented using high-energy induced collision dissociation, whose spectra were collected at 15,00 resolution. Precursor ions with charge 1 and >6 and with intensities lower than 1.7E4 were excluded from triggering fragmentation. Ion accumulation time was set to 60 msec. Automatic gain control was set to 1E5. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 sec. Thermo RAW files were acquired using Xcalibur software (version 4.1).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometry data MS analysis-derived RAW files were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0) and MS spectra searched using the Andromeda search engine. The Uniprot-Swissprot human proteome database (version download: 2020.02.24) was used for database search. Selected protease was trypsin. Carbamidomethylation of Cys residues was selected as fixed modification. Met oxidation and acetylation of N-terminal residues were selected as variable modifications. The Label-free Quantification (LFQ) option was selected. Identification of peptides resulting from missed cleavages was allowed. Precursor ion tolerance was 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches, respectively. Match-between-run option was enabled, and settings left to default. MaxQuant search-derived protein intensities were used for statistical analyses. Protein tables were filtered for protein q-value (<0.01), contaminant (excluded), reverse sequences (excluded), and unique peptides (at least 1).  Statistical analysis AR IP and proteome tables were filtered for missing data (cutoff: 30%), and log2 transformed. Pseudocount (value: 0.1) was applied to the protein table prior to log2 transformation). Differential expression was assessed by Welch-corrected t-test (AR IP) and DeqMS (peptide identification-adjusted linear model; proteome). Pathway enrichment between conditions (treated vs untreated) was performed using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) against the Hallmarks database (version 5.2). Settings were as follows: permutation type, gene set; scoring, classic; metric, t test. Other parameters were kept to default settings. False discovery rate cutoff to call significant pathways was set to 0.25. Normalized enrichment scores were plotted to define enrichment levels. All data were analyzed in R (version 3.6).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Label-free, Mass spectrometry, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Università Luigi Vanvitelli
Lund University

### Submitter
Tommaso De Marchi

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia Altucci
Università Luigi Vanvitelli


