### Accession
PXD025179

### Title
Interactome of the circadian clock protein PERIOD2 in human U2OS osteosarcoma cells after the resetting of the circadian clock

### Description
Circadian rhythms are a series of endogenous autonomous 24-hour oscillations generated by the circadian clock. At the molecular level, the circadian clock is generated by a transcription-translation feedback loop, where BMAL1 and CLOCK transcription factors of the positive arm activate the expression of CRYPTOCHROME and PERIOD (PER) genes of the negative arm as well as the circadian clock-regulated genes. In this project, we aimed at finding the interactome of PER2 protein in human U2OS osteosarcoma cell line using proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) technique. U2OS clones overexpressing PER2-BioID2 or BioID2 were treated with dexamethasone in order to reset the circadian rhythm, and cells were then incubated in biotin-containing media for 12 hours to label the proteins in close proximity of PER2-BioID2. Samples were collected after 36 and 48 hours of the resetting to identify the labeled proteins by mass spectrometry. In addition to known interactors such as CRY1 and CRY2, many novel interactors were identified. In summary, we obtained a network of PER2 interactome and confirmed some of the novel interactions using classical the co-immunoprecipitation method.

### Sample Protocol
Stable U2OS-PER2-BioID2 or U2OS-BioID2 cells were seeded in fifteen 100-mm plates at 40% confluency and the circadian rhythms of the cells were synchronized after 24 hours of seeding by treating cells with dexamethasone for 1 hour. After 24 and 36 hours of the resetting, cells were incubated in media supplemented with 50 micromolar biotin for 12 hours to allow biotinylation. Samples were collected at 36 and 48-hour after the resetting of the circadian clock as representative opposite phases of the circadian clock. Cell pellets were lysed in 750 microliters of RIPA lysis buffer with sonication, and lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 13,300 rpm at 4°C for 15 minutes. For enrichment of biotinylated material, 250 microliters of streptavidin-coated magnetic beads  were washed twice with 1 mL of RIPA lysis buffer on DynaMagTM-2 magnetic rack. Beads were incubated with clarified lysates with an overnight rotation at 4°C. The beads were subsequently washed; once with 1mL of RIPA lysis buffer, once with 1mL of 1 M KCl, once with 1 mL of 0.1 M Na2CO3, once with 1 mL of 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris.HCl pH 8.0, and twice with 1 mL RIPA lysis buffer. The beads were then resuspended in 1mL of 10 mM Tris.HCl pH 7.4. To identify the biotinylated proteins by mass spectrometry, the on-bead tryptic digestion protocol was performed for each sample at the Koç University Proteomics Facility (KUPAM). Istanbul, Turkey.

### Data Protocol
he data sets were searched against the human UNI-PROT database version 2016. Raw files were analyzed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer versions 1.4 and 2.3 using Sequest HT and Mascot search engines for protein identification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification, and acetylation (protein N-termini) and oxidation of methionine were used as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic peptides. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and both peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 0.01. The other parameters were used with default settings. SAINTexpress version 3.6.3 was used as a statistical tool to calculate the probability of each potential protein-protein interaction using default parameters and background contaminants. Proteins with Saint Score bigger than 0.5 and BFDR value less than 0.05 were mapped into an interactome network and a relative subnetwork was identified in high confidence using OmicsIntegrator with optimized parameters of ɥ=0.07 , β=150 , ω=3, D=10. The protein interaction network was visualized using Cytoscape 3.7.2. The Gene Ontology cellular component annotation  was used to find out already known protein interactions within the interactomes and to distribute the protein hits in terms of subcellular localization. GO annotation analysis of the proteins which have Saint score bigger than 0.5 and BFDR value less than 0.05 was performed using g:Profiler. Functional enrichment analysis was performed using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.7.

### Publication Abstract
Circadian rhythms are a series of endogenous autonomous 24-h oscillations generated by the circadian clock. At the molecular level, the circadian clock is based on a transcription-translation feedback loop, in which BMAL1 and CLOCK transcription factors of the positive arm activate the expression of CRYPTOCHROME (CRY) and PERIOD (PER) genes of the negative arm as well as the circadian clock-regulated genes. There are three PER proteins, of which PER2 shows the strongest oscillation at both stability and cellular localization level. Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) or interactome of the circadian clock proteins have been investigated using classical methods such as two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, immunoprecipitation-coupled mass spectrometry, and yeast-two hybrid assay where the dynamic and weak interactions are difficult to catch. To identify the interactome of PER2 we have adopted proximity-dependent labeling with biotin and mass spectrometry-based identification of labeled proteins (BioID). In addition to known interactions with such as CRY1 and CRY2, we have identified several new PPIs for PER2 and confirmed some of them using co-immunoprecipitation technique. This study characterizes the PER2 protein interactions in depth, and it also implies that using a fast BioID method with miniTurbo or TurboID coupled to other major circadian clock proteins might uncover other interactors in the clock that have yet to be discovered.

### Keywords
Circadian clock, Bioid, Protein−protein interactions, Period2, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Gebze Technical University, 41400, Kocaeli, Turkey
Istanbul

### Submitter
Ali Yurtseven

### Lab Head
Dr Nuri Ozturk
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Gebze Technical University, 41400, Kocaeli, Turkey


