### Accession
PXD010805

### Title
Dynamic proteomics reveals unexpected plasticity of cellular proteome

### Description
In proteomics, the changes occurring in cellular proteomes upon drug treatment are used to identify the drug targets and the mechanism of action. However, proteomes of cultured cells undergo also natural alteration associated with changes in the media, attaining a degree of confluence as well as due to cell division, metabolic and circadian cycles. These changes are implicitly assumed to be minimal.  In this study, we tested this assumption experimentally by comparing the proteome dynamics of untreated HCT116 and A375 cancer cells during 48 h. Time series revealed considerable growth-related proteome changes. The magnitude of these variations reveals an unexpected plasticity of the cellular proteome and reinforces the need, generally accepted in theory but not always followed in practice, to use a time-matched control when measuring drug-induced proteome changes.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 and A375 cells were seeded at 150 000 cells per wells in 6 well plates in triplicate 24h prior to the start of the experiment and then cells were collected at 0 (start of the experiment), 12, 24, 36 and 48h into 1% SDS, 8M urea and 50 mM Tris and sonicated on ice using a Branson probe sonicator (3 s on, 3 s off pulses, 45 s, 30% amplitude). Protein concentration was measured using BCA assay and 50 µg of protein for each samples were reduced using 5 mM DTT at RT for 1h followed by alkylation using 15 mM IAA in the dark at RT for 1h. The reaction was quenched with 10 mM DTT and the samples were precipitated using methanol chloroform. The dried protein pellets were resuspended into 8M urea, 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5, the urea concentration was lowered to 4M by adding 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5 and LysC digestion was conducted at a 1:100 (LysC/protein, w/w) overnight at RT. Then urea concentration was reduced to 1M and trypsin digestion was conducted at a 1:100 ratio (Trypsin/protein, w/w) at RT for 6h. TMT10 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) reagents were resuspended into dry ACN at a concentration of 20 µg/µl and 200 µg were added to each sample (4 times the peptide quantity according to manufacturer’s protocol). The samples were labeled in triplicates following the same scheme: TMT126 = A375 0h, TMT127N = A375 12h, TMT127C = A375 24h, TMT128N = A375 36h, TMT128C = A375 48h, TMT129N = HCT116 0h, TMT129C = HCT116 12h, TMT130N = HCT116 24h, TMT130C = HCT116 36h and TMT131 = HCT116 48h. The ACN concentration in the samples was adjusted to 20% and the labeling was conducted at RT for 2h and quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine (ThermoFischer Scientific) for 15 min at RT. The samples were then combined into 3 (replicates AC1, 2 and 3) and dried using Speedvac to eliminate the ACN. Then samples were acidified to pH < 3 using TFA and desalted using SepPack (Waters). Finally, samples were resuspended into 20 mM NH4OH and 150 µg of each sample were used for off-line fractionation.  Samples were off-line high-pH reversed-phase fractionated using an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) equipped with a XBridge Peptide BEH 25 cm column of 2.1 mm internal diameter, packed with 3.5 µm C18 beads having 300 Å pores (Waters). The mobile phase consisting of buffer A (20 mM NH4OH) and buffer B (100% ACN). The gradient started from 1% B to 23.5% in 42 min, then to 54% B in 9 min, 63% B in 2 min and stayed at 63% B for 5 min and finally back to 1% B and stayed at 1% B for 7 min. This resulted in 96 fractions that were concatenated into 24. Samples were then dried using Speedvac and resuspended into 2% ACN and 0.1% FA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-spray column, with a 75 µm internal diameter, packed with 2 µm PepMap C18 beads, having 100 Å pores (Thermo Fischer Scientific). An Easy-nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used programmed to a 90 min optimized [4] LC gradient. The two mobile phases consisted of buffer A (98% milliQ water, 2% ACN and 0.1% FA) and buffer B (98% ACN, 2% milliQ water and 0.1% FA). The gradient started with 5% B for and increased to 10% B in 5 min, 26% B in 90 min, 90% B in 5 min, and finally stayed at 90% B for 10 min. The injection was set to 5 µL corresponding to approximately 1 µg of peptides.  Mass spectra were acquired on a Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The Fusion acquisition was performed in a data dependent manner with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes using the maximum speed of the instrument, fragmenting up to 20 peptides per cycle starting from the most abundant ion (top-20 method). MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 with a target value of 1.106 or maximum integration time of 50 ms. The m/z range was from 400 to 1600. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD), and the energy was set at 40%. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 with the target value of 1.105 ions and a maximum integration time of 105 ms. Isolation window and first fixed mass were set at 1.4 m/z units and m/z 105, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3). Reporter ion MS2 was selected as the type of quantification with TMT10 and reporter mass tolerance of 0.003 Da. Acetylation of N-terminal, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of the cysteine was selected as fixed modification. The Andromeda search engine was using Uniprot database (human version 2018_06, 93614 entries) with the precursor mass tolerance for the first searches and the main search set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively.  Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with up to two missed cleavages allowed; the peptide minimal length was set to seven amino acids.  Default parameters were used for the instrument setting. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides and proteins.  “Match between runs” option was used with a time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; time series; proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Division of Chemistry I, Head MBB, Biomedicum, Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Pierre Sabatier

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Division of Chemistry I, Head MBB, Biomedicum, Karolinska Institutet


