### Accession
PXD033861

### Title
Human RBM33_HNSC_LC-MS/MS in project "RBM33 Acts as an m6A Reader Required for ALKBH5-mediated m6A Demethylation"

### Description
To identify the potential RBM33 interaction proteins, we established UM-SCC-1 cells stably expressing pCDH-Strep-Vec, or Strep-RBM33. After strep-tactin beads enrichment of RBM33 and its ascociated proteins, all the pull-downed proteins are subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
5 million of UM-SCC-1 cells stably expressing strep-Vec or strep-RBM33 were used for strep-tactin beads enrichment. 10% of whole cell lysate was used as an input and 90% for the enrichment. After coomassie blue staining, the gels were cut and subjeced to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The database name for these analysis is the uniprot_human_2021_20210107 database. Search Engine is Mascot(Version: 2.7.0.1)and the software uased for data analysis is Scaffold: Version: Scaffold_4.8.1.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of RNA substrate selectivity of m<sup>6</sup>A demethylase ALKBH5 remains elusive. Here, we identify RNA-binding motif protein 33 (RBM33) as a previously unrecognized m<sup>6</sup>A-binding protein that plays a critical role in ALKBH5-mediated mRNA m<sup>6</sup>A demethylation of a subset of mRNA transcripts by forming a complex with ALKBH5. RBM33 recruits ALKBH5 to its m<sup>6</sup>A-marked substrate and activates ALKBH5 demethylase activity through the removal of its SUMOylation. We further demonstrate that RBM33 is critical for the tumorigenesis of head-neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). RBM33 promotes autophagy by recruiting ALKBH5 to demethylate and stabilize DDIT4 mRNA, which is responsible for the oncogenic function of RBM33 in HNSCC cells. Altogether, our study uncovers the mechanism of selectively demethylate m<sup>6</sup>A methylation of a subset of transcripts during tumorigenesis that may explain demethylation selectivity in other cellular processes, and we showed its importance in the maintenance of tumorigenesis of HNSCC.

### Keywords
Rbm33 hnsc lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Department of Medicine, UF Health Cancer Center, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

### Submitter
Fang Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhijian Qian
Department of Medicine, UF Health Cancer Center, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.


