### Accession
PXD025629

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 infects human pancreatic β-cells and elicits β-cell impairment

### Description
Emerging evidence points towards an intricate relationship between the pandemic coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and diabetes. While diabetes is associated with an increased risk of severe COVID-19, new-onset type 1 diabetes (T1D) has been observed in COVID-19 patients, convoluting diabetes as both a risk factor and consequence of COVID-19. Understanding the mechanistic relationship between COVID-19 and T1D is an urgent and critical public health challenge. One pressing question is whether insulin-producing pancreatic β-cells can be infected by SARS-CoV-2, as T1D is a direct consequence of β-cell depletion. Here, we find that the SARS-CoV-2 receptor, ACE2 and its related entry factors, TMPRSS2, NRP1, and TRFC, are expressed in β-cells, with the latter two selectively present within β-cells. We discover that SARS-CoV-2 has selective cellular tropism for human pancreatic β-cells both ex vivo and in patients with COVID-19. We demonstrate that SARS-CoV-2 infection lowers the abundance of insulin within the pancreas, attenuates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, and induces β-cell apoptosis. Finally, phosphoproteomic and pathway analysis suggests a SARS-CoV-2 stimulated signature for induction of apoptosis-associated signaling pathways in β-cells, similar to that seen in T1D. Taken together, our study demonstrates that SARS- CoV-2 can directly cause pancreatic islet impairment by killing β-cells, providing a mechanistic explanation for why T1D develops in COVID-19 patients.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated human islet cells were treated with SARS-CoV-2 spike protein for 15, 30 minutes or with vehicle (water) for 30 minutes. Cells were harvested, lysed, reduce, and alkylated using 100 μl of lysis buffer (6M Guanidine Hydrochloride, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM TCEP, 10 mM CAA) and boiled 60ºC for 1 hour. Proteins were precipitated by adding 100 μl methanol, vortexed, 50 μl chloroform, vortexed, 100 μl water, vortexed, and centrifuged at 13,000g for 2 minutes. The top aqueous layer was removed, 200 μl of methanol was added, vortexed, and centrifuged at 13,000g for 3 minutes. Methanol was removed and dried proteins were resuspended using 200mM HEPES pH 8.5. Proteins were digested using Trypsin/Lys-C overnight at 37ºC 250 RPM. Sample was acidified using TFA and cleaned using stage tips. Stage tips were created using 5 layers of C18 filters packed into a P200 tip. The stage tips were activated using methanol, equilibrated twice with equilibration buffer (5% ACN, 0.5% TFA). Sample were bound, washed twice with equilibration buffer, and eluted using elution buffer (50% ACN, 0.1% FA). Eluted samples were dried using a Speed-Vac and resuspended using Binding/Wash Buffer in High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific, A32992). The peptides were enriched for phosphopeptides according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted samples were eluted and resuspended using Solution A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA). Samples were analyzed using the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) (Meier et al., 2018), an ion-mobility spectrometry quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer. Specifically, a nanoElute (Bruker Daltonics) high pressure nanoflow system was connected to the timsTOF Pro. Peptides were delivered to a reversed phase analytical column (10 cm x 75 μm i.d., Bruker 1866154). Liquid chromatography was performed at 50 °C and peptides were separated on the analytical column using a 48 min gradient (solvent A: 2% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B: 0.1% FA, in ACN) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. A linear gradient from 2-35 % B was applied for 45 min, followed by a step to 95% B for 1.5 min and 3 min of washing at 95% B. The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode with the following settings: Mass Range 100 to 1700m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.85 V·s/cm2, End 1.3 V·s/cm2, Ramp time 100ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1700, Dry Gas 3 l/min, Dry Temp 200°C, PASEF settings: 4 MS/MS, charge range 0-5, active exclusion for 0.04 min, Scheduling Target intensity 20000, Intensity threshold 500, CID collision energy 10eV.

### Data Protocol
Bruker raw data files were processed using Byonic software (Protein Metrics, Inc) to identify peptides and proteins using the NCBI Homo sapiens refseq protein database. Data were searched with 20 ppm error tolerance for precursor and 40 ppm for fragment ions using QTOF/HCD fragmentation type. Besides standard variable modifications, we searched for S/T/Y phosphorylation and set 1 % FDR for protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Emerging evidence points toward an intricate relationship between the pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and diabetes. While preexisting diabetes is associated with severe COVID-19, it is unclear whether COVID-19 severity is a cause or consequence of diabetes. To mechanistically link COVID-19 to diabetes, we tested whether insulin-producing pancreatic &#x3b2; cells can be infected by SARS-CoV-2 and cause &#x3b2; cell depletion. We found that the SARS-CoV-2 receptor, ACE2, and related entry factors (TMPRSS2, NRP1, and TRFC) are expressed in &#x3b2; cells, with selectively high expression of NRP1. We discovered that SARS-CoV-2 infects human pancreatic &#x3b2; cells in patients who succumbed to COVID-19 and selectively infects human islet &#x3b2; cells in&#xa0;vitro. We demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 infection attenuates pancreatic insulin levels and secretion and induces &#x3b2; cell apoptosis, each rescued by NRP1 inhibition. Phosphoproteomic pathway analysis of infected islets indicates apoptotic &#x3b2; cell signaling, similar to that observed in type 1 diabetes (T1D). In summary, our study shows SARS-CoV-2 can directly induce &#x3b2; cell killing.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Human, Beta-cells, Pancreas

### Affiliations
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive CCSR 3205b Stanford, CA 94305-5175 USA
Stanford University

### Submitter
Janos Demeter

### Lab Head
Dr Jackson, Peter, K.
Baxter Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology Department of Microbiology & Immunology Stanford University School of Medicine 269 Campus Drive CCSR 3205b Stanford, CA 94305-5175 USA


