### Accession
PXD036289

### Title
Revealing the effect of SARS-CoV-2 spike stabilisation on receptor binding dynamics with single molecule mass photometry

### Description
Here we show using mass photometry how proline substitutions, commonly used for SARS-CoV-2 spike stabilisation and vaccine design, directly impedes ACE2 receptor interactions via dynamics of open and closed states. Conformational changes and ACE2 binding were influenced by spike variant and temperature, but independent of site-specific N-glycosylation.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 5 µg protein was loaded and run on an SDS-PAGE. Gel bands were excised and washed sequentially with HPLC grade water followed by 1:1 (v/v) MeCN/H2O. Gel bands were dried (via vacuum centrifuge), treated with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100mM NH4HCO3 and incubated for 45 minutes at 56°C with shaking. DTT was removed and 55mM iodoacetamide (in 100mM NH4HCO3) was added and incubated for 30 minutes in the dark. All liquid was removed and gels were washed with 100mM NH4HCO3/MeCN as above. Gels were dried and 12.5 ng/µl trypsin, chymotrypsin or alpha lytic protease was added separately and incubated overnight at 37°C. Samples were then washed and (glyco)peptides were extracted and pooled with sequential washes with 5% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in H2O and MeCN. Dried samples were reconstituted in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and run by LC-MS.  Samples were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a 75 µm × 2 cm pre-column and separated on a 75 µm × 15 cm Pepmap C18 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A was 0.1% FA in H2O and buffer B was 0.1% FA in 80% MeCN with 20% H2O. A 40min linear gradient (0% to 40% buffer B) was used. To maximise glycopeptide identification two MS acquisition methods were utilised. First, a universal HCD identification method was used. Data was collected in data-dependent acquisition mode with a mass range 300 to 2000 m/z and at a resolution of 120000. For MS/MS scans, HCD normalized energy was set to 30% with orbitrap detection at a resolution of 30000. Secondly, a triggered EThcD method was used. Data was collected in data-dependent acquisition mode with a mass range 350 to 1800 m/z and at a resolution of 120000 including charge states 2-8. Triggering MS HCD scans, collision energy mode was set to fixed at a collision energy of 28% and orbitrap resolution 30000. EThcD was triggered upon the detection of glycopeptide-specific oxonium ions (HexNac: 204.0867 m/z, HexNac fragment: 138.0545 m/z and HexNacHex: 366.1396 m/z) with a 15 ppm mass tolerance, and data was collected using the orbitrap at a resolution of 30000.

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptide data was analysed with Byonic (Protein Metrics). Digestion was set to RK, TASV and FYWML for trypsin, alpha-lytic and chymotrypsin digests, respectively and fully specific with a maximum of two miss cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation (57.02 Da) was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation (15.99 Da), deamidation (0.98 Da) and Gln -> pyro-glutamate (-17.03 Da) were set as variable modification. The Byonic in-built common human N-linked (132 glycans) and O-linked glycan (9 glycans) databases were used to identify glycopeptides.     Byonic output files were imported into Byologic for quantification (Protein Metrics). A minimum Byonic threshold score of 100 was used for glycopeptide identification. All glycopeptide assignments were manually validated. For quantification, the extracted ion chromatogram intensities for each glycopeptide and unoccupied peptides were summed and plotted relative to the total intensity for each glycosite.

### Publication Abstract
Here we show using mass photometry how proline substitutions, commonly used for SARS-CoV-2 spike stabilisation in vaccine design, directly affects ACE2 receptor interactions <i>via</i> dynamics of open and closed states. Conformational changes and ACE2 binding were influenced by spike variant and temperature, but independent of site-specific <i>N</i>-glycosylation.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Spike, Ace2, Glycoproteomics, Glycomics, Mass photometry

### Affiliations
Kavli Institute for Nanoscience Discovery, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, OX1 3TA.

### Submitter
Sean Burnap

### Lab Head
Dr Weston Struwe
Physical and Theoretical Chemistry Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, OX1 3TA.


