### Accession
PXD038323

### Title
Symbiont proteome data of whiteflies

### Description
To examined the effect of the antibiotic treatment on protein expression of symbionts in the whitefly. Proteome analysis showed that 23 Hamiltonella proteins were down-regulated in Hamiltonella-cured (–HBt) compared to Hamiltonella-infected (+HBt) whiteflies (Dataset S1A,B), this data including all protein data of Bemisia tabaci and its symbionts. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). The tandem mass spectra were searched against genome database of Portiera, Hamiltonella and Rickettsia in B. tabaci MEAM1 (http://www.whiteflygenomics.org/cgi-bin/bta/index.cgi) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathway using KEGG online service tools KAAS. Then each protein was mapped to the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper.

### Sample Protocol
4-D label free Proteomics analysis was performed as previously described (Wang et al., 2019) and proteomics analysis was supported by Jingjie PTM BioLabs. The +HBt and –HBt whiteflies at day 0-7 after emergence were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 mol/L urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than mol/L. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Then, the tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). The tandem mass spectra were searched against genome database of Portiera, Hamiltonella and Rickettsia in B. tabaci MEAM1 (http://www.whiteflygenomics.org/cgi-bin/bta/index.cgi) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathway using KEGG online service tools KAAS. Then each protein was mapped to the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website.

### Publication Abstract
Nutritional symbionts influence host reproduction, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are largely unclear. We previously found that the bacteriocyte symbiont Hamiltonella impacts the sex ratio of the whitefly Bemisia tabaci. Hamiltonella synthesizes folate by cooperation with the whitefly. Folate deficiency by Hamiltonella elimination or whitefly gene silencing distorted whitefly sex ratio, and folate supplementation restored the sex ratio. Hamiltonella deficiency or gene silencing altered histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) level, which was restored by folate supplementation. Genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation-seq analysis of H3K9me3 indicated mitochondrial dysfunction in symbiont-deficient whiteflies. Hamiltonella deficiency compromised mitochondrial quality of whitefly ovaries. Repressing ovary mitochondrial function led to distorted whitefly sex ratio. These findings indicate that the symbiont-derived folate regulates host histone methylation modifications, which thereby impacts ovary mitochondrial function, and finally determines host sex ratio. Our study suggests that a nutritional symbiont can regulate animal reproduction in a way that differs from reproductive manipulators.

### Keywords
Symbiont; proteome; whiteflies

### Affiliations
Shenyang Agricultural University

### Submitter
Yalin Yao

### Lab Head
Dr Yalin Yao
Shenyang Agricultural University


