### Accession
PXD018789

### Title
Retargeting from CR3 to the LFA-1 receptor uncovers the adenylyl cyclase enzymetranslocating segment of Bordetella adenylate cyclase toxin

### Description
The Bordetella adenylate cyclase toxinhemolysin (CyaA) and the α-hemolysin (HlyA) of Escherichia coli both belong to the family of cytolytic pore-forming Repeats in ToXin (RTX) cytotoxins. HlyA preferentially binds the αLβ2 integrin LFA-1 (CD11a/CD18) of leukocytes and can promiscuously bind and permeabilize also a variety of other cells. CyaA bears an Nterminal adenylyl cyclase enzyme (AC) domain linked to a pore-forming RTX cytolysin (Hly) moiety and binds the complement receptor 3 (CR3, αMβ2, CD11b/CD18 or Mac-1) of myeloid phagocytes, penetrates their plasma membrane and delivers into cytosol the AC enzyme. We constructed a set of CyaA/HlyA chimeras and show that the CyaC-acylated segment and the CR3-binding RTX domain of CyaA can be functionally replaced by the much shorter HlyCacylated and LFA-1-binding RTX moiety of HlyA. Instead of binding CR3, a CyaA1710/HlyA411-1024 chimera bound the LFA-1 receptor and effectively delivered the AC enzyme into Jurkat lymphoblastoma T cells. At high chimera concentrations (25 nM), the interaction with LFA-1 was not required for CyaA1-710/HlyA411-1024 binding to CHO cells. However, interaction with the LFA-1 receptor strongly enhanced the specific capacity of the bound CyaA1-710/HlyA411-1024 chimera to penetrate cells and deliver the AC enzyme into their cytosol. Hence, interaction of the acylated RTX moiety of HlyA with LFA-1 promoted a productive membrane interaction of the chimera. These results allow to delimit the residues 400 to 710 of CyaA as the 'AC translocon' sufficient for translocation of the AC enzyme polypeptide across the plasma membrane of target cells

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.2) to reach 4 M concentration of urea and digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, modified sequencing grade) at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50 for 6 h at 30 °C. The 2nd portion of trypsin was added to a final ratio of trypsin:protein of 1:25 and the reaction was carried out for another 6 h at 30 °C. When the reaction was complete, the concentration of the resulting peptides was adjusted by 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 0.1 mg/ml and 5 µl of the sample were injected into the LC-MS system. The LC separation was performed using a desalting column (ZORBAX C18 SB-300, 0.1 × 2 mm) at a flow rate of 40 µl/min (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) of 0.1% FA and a separation column (ZORBAX C18 SB300, 0.2 × 150 mm) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min (Agilent 1200, Santa Clara, CA) of water/acetonitrile (MeCN) (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) gradient: 0-1 min 0.2% formic acid (FA), 5% MeCN; 5 min 0.2% FA, 10% MeCN; 35 min 0.2% FA, 50% MeCN; 40 min 0.2% FA, 95% MeCN; 40–45 min 0.2% FA, 95% MeCN. A capillary column was directly connected to a mass analyzer. The MS analysis was performed on a commercial solariX XR FTMS instrument equipped with a 15 T superconducting magnet and a Dual II ESI/MALDI ion source (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Mass spectra of the samples were obtained in the positive ion mode within an m/z range of 150-2000. The accumulation time was set at 0.2 s, LC acquisition was 45 min with 5 min delay and one spectrum consisted of accumulation of four experiments. The instrument was operating in survey LC-MS mode and calibrated online using Agilent tuning mix, which results in mass accuracy below 2 ppm

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed by the SNAP v2.0 algorithm of the DataAnalysis 4.4 software package (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) generating list of monoisotopic masses from deconvoluted spectra. The parameters were set as follows: export m/z range of 150-2000, maximum charge state of 8, S/N threshold of 0.75 and absolute intensity threshold 5x105. The extracted experimental data were searched against the FASTA of single corresponding toxin molecule (CyaA: UniProtKB- P0DKX7, HlyA: UniProtKB - P08715, chimeric proteins: assembled from CyaA and HlyA according to the highlighted residue positions of individual molecules) using the home-built Linx software (http://peterslab.org/MSTools/). The Linx algorithm was set for fully tryptic restriction with maximum of 3 missed cleavages and variable modification for methionine oxidation along with lysine acylation ranging from C12 to C18 including monosaturated and hydroxylated variants. The mass error threshold was set to ± 2 ppm and all assigned peptides used for quantification were verified manually. The acylation status of lysine residues was determined by comparison of relative intensity ratio between acylated peptide ions and its unmodified counterparts. Only lysine residues at positions 564, 690 and 860, 983 according to the sequence of the full-length HlyA or CyaA proteins, respectively, were investigated. All peptide sequences including post-translational modifications along with corresponding FASTA formats used within search algorithm are listed in supplementary table

### Publication Abstract
The <i>Bordetella</i> adenylate cyclase toxin-hemolysin (CyaA) and the &#x3b1;-hemolysin (HlyA) of <i>Escherichia coli</i> belong to the family of cytolytic pore-forming Repeats in ToXin (RTX) cytotoxins. HlyA preferentially binds the &#x3b1;<sub>L</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrin LFA-1 (CD11a/CD18) of leukocytes and can promiscuously bind and also permeabilize many other cells. CyaA bears an N-terminal adenylyl cyclase (AC) domain linked to a pore-forming RTX cytolysin (Hly) moiety, binds the complement receptor 3 (CR3, &#x3b1;<sub>M</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>, CD11b/CD18, or Mac-1) of myeloid phagocytes, penetrates their plasma membrane, and delivers the AC enzyme into the cytosol. We constructed a set of CyaA/HlyA chimeras and show that the CyaC-acylated segment and the CR3-binding RTX domain of CyaA can be functionally replaced by the HlyC-acylated segment and the much shorter RTX domain of HlyA. Instead of binding CR3, a CyaA<sub>1-710</sub>/HlyA<sub>411-1024</sub> chimera bound the LFA-1 receptor and effectively delivered AC into Jurkat T cells. At high chimera concentrations (25 nm), the interaction with LFA-1 was not required for CyaA<sub>1-710</sub>/HlyA<sub>411-1024</sub> binding to CHO cells. However, interaction with the LFA-1 receptor strongly enhanced the specific capacity of the bound CyaA<sub>1-710</sub>/HlyA<sub>411-1024</sub> chimera to penetrate cells and deliver the AC enzyme into their cytosol. Hence, interaction of the acylated segment and/or the RTX domain of HlyA with LFA-1 promoted a productive membrane interaction of the chimera. These results help delimit residues 400-710 of CyaA as an "AC translocon" sufficient for translocation of the AC polypeptide across the plasma membrane of target cells.

### Keywords
Integrin, Rtx toxin, Ac domain translocation, Acyltransferase, Fatty acyl, Acylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i.
Institute of Microbiology, Czech Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
David Jurnečka

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Peter Sebo, PhD.
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i.


