### Accession
PXD034602

### Title
PTX3 structure determination using a hybrid cryo-electron microscopy and AlphaFold approach offers insights into ligand binding and complement activation

### Description
Pattern recognition molecules (PRMs) form an important part of innate immunity and respond to infection and damage via triggering processes such as inflammation. The pentraxin family of soluble PRMs comprises long and short pentraxins, with the former containing unique N-terminal regions unrelated to other proteins or each other. No high-resolution structural information exists about long pentraxins, unlike the short pentraxins where there is an abundance of both X-ray and cryo-electron microscopy (cryoEM) derived structures. This study presents for the first time a high-resolution structure of the prototypical long pentraxin, PTX3. CryoEM yielded a 2.5 Å map of the C-terminal pentraxin domains that revealed a radically different quaternary structure compared to other pentraxins, comprising a glycosylated D4 symmetrical octameric complex stabilised by an extensive disulfide network. The cryoEM map indicated α-helices that extended N-terminal of the pentraxin domains that were not fully resolved. AlphaFold was used to predict the remaining N-terminal structure of the octameric PTX3 complex, revealing two long tetrameric coiled coils with two hinge regions, which was validated using classification of cryoEM 2D averages. The resulting hybrid cryoEM/AlphaFold structure allowed mapping of ligand binding sites, such as C1q and FGF2, as well as rationalisation of previous biochemical data. Given the relevance of PTX3 in conditions ranging from COVID-19 prognosis, cancer progression and female infertility, this structure could be used to inform the understanding and rational design of therapies for these disorders and processes.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel trypsin digestion and MS analysis: In-gel trypsin digestion was performed using a Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker). Prior to digestion, proteins were first reduced and alkylated using dithiothreitol (10 mM) and iodoacetamide (50 mM), respectively. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel slices, lyophilized, dissolved in solvent A (95/3/0.1 water/acetonitril/formic acid (FA) v/v/v) and subsequently analyzed by on‐line C18 nano-HPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and a LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (15 cm × 50 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 um). The gradient was run from 2-40% solvent B (20/80/0.1 water/acetonitrile/ FA v/v/v) in 30 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼5 μm, and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The LUMOS mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS (top-20 mode) with a normalised collision energy of 35 % and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the Orbitrap. In the master scan (MS1) the resolution was 120,000 with a scan range m/z 300-2000. Dynamic exclusion after n=1 with exclusion duration of 10 s was applied. For MS/MS, precursors were isolated with the quadrupole with an isolation width of 1.2 Th. The MS2 scan resolution was 30,000. During acquisition a ProductIonTrigger was set on the HexNAc oxonium ion at m/z 204.087. Upon detection of the oxonium ion, additional fragmentation of the same precursor was executed with HCD normalised collision energies of 25, 32 and 39 %, respectively, using the stepped collision energy mode, i.e. one additional MS/MS scan was recorded.

### Data Protocol
For (glyco)peptide identification, MS/MS spectra were searched against the human database (20205 sequences, downloaded from Uniprot on April 8, 2020) with Byonic (Protein Metrics, version 3.10.10). Precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment tolerance at 20 ppm. Cleavage C-terminal of K and R was selected (fully specific) and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed.  As a fixed modification carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected while acetylation at the protein N-term, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. For glycopeptide assignment the “N-glycan 309 mammalian no sodium” modification list, as standardly available in Byonic was used. Only glycopeptides with a Byonic score >300 were further selected.

### Publication Abstract
Pattern recognition molecules (PRMs) form an important part of innate immunity, where they facilitate the response to infections and damage by triggering processes such as inflammation. The pentraxin family of soluble PRMs comprises long and short pentraxins, with the former containing unique N-terminal regions unrelated to other proteins or each other. No complete high-resolution structural information exists about long pentraxins, unlike the short pentraxins, where there is an abundance of both X-ray and cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM)-derived structures. This study presents a high-resolution structure of the prototypical long pentraxin, PTX3. Cryo-EM yielded a 2.5-&#xc5; map of the C-terminal pentraxin domains that revealed a radically different quaternary structure compared to other pentraxins, comprising a glycosylated D4 symmetrical octameric complex stabilized by an extensive disulfide network. The cryo-EM map indicated &#x3b1;-helices that extended N terminal of the pentraxin domains that were not fully resolved. AlphaFold was used to predict the remaining N-terminal structure of the octameric PTX3 complex, revealing two long tetrameric coiled coils with two hinge regions, which was validated using classification of cryo-EM two-dimensional averages. The resulting hybrid cryo-EM/AlphaFold structure allowed mapping of ligand binding sites, such as C1q and fibroblast growth factor-2, as well as rationalization of previous biochemical data. Given the relevance of PTX3 in conditions ranging from COVID-19 prognosis, cancer progression, and female infertility, this structure could be used to inform the understanding and rational design of therapies for these disorders and processes.

### Keywords
Ptx3

### Affiliations
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA, Leiden, The Netherlands
LUMC/UVIC

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J. Hensbergen
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, 2333 ZA, Leiden, The Netherlands


