### Accession
PXD034398

### Title
LncRNA EPR-induced METTL7A1 modulates target gene translation

### Description
EPR is a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) that controls cell proliferation in mammary gland cells by regulating gene transcription. Here, we report on Mettl7a1 as a direct target of EPR. We show that EPR induces Mettl7a1 transcription by rewiring three-dimensional chromatin interactions at the Mettl7a1 locus. Our data indicate that METTL7A1 contributes to EPR-dependent inhibition of TGF-β signaling. METTL7A1 is absent in tumorigenic murine mammary gland cells and its human ortholog (METTL7A) is downregulated in breast cancers. Importantly, re-expression of METTL7A1 in 4T1 tumorigenic cells attenuates their transformation potential, with the putative methyltransferase activity of METTL7A1 being dispensable for its biological functions. We found that METTL7A1 localizes in the cytoplasm whereby it interacts with factors implicated in the early steps of mRNA translation, associates with ribosomes, and affects the levels of target proteins without altering mRNA abundance. Overall, our data indicates that METTL7A1 —a transcriptional target of EPR— modulates translation of select transcripts.

### Sample Protocol
we performed immunoaffinity purification of proteins interacting with FLAG-tagged METTL7A1 in NMuMG-METTL7A1 cells followed by Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis whose results were filtered through highly stringent criteria (see Materials and Methods). We selected 87 interactors (59 were absent in immunocomplexes from mock cells and 28 displayed a ≥ 4-fold enrichment in immunocomplexes from NMuMG-METTL7A1 when compared to mock cells). Metascape analysis (http://metascape.org) revealed enrichment in factors involved in RNA metabolism, mRNA translation, and cytoskeleton organization among METTL7A1 interactors (Figure 6A). Strikingly, the analysis of protein-protein interactions performed by using the online STRING tool (24) showed that the vast majority (~9390%) of identified METTL7A1 molecular partners belong to a single large cluster (Supplementary Figure S4A). Then, we performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments that confirmed METTL7A1 interaction with factors implicated in translation initiation (including EIF3A, EIF4B, EIF2S1, EIF4E, DDX3X, FMR1, CYFIP1, PABPC1) and with RNA binding proteins (including HNRNPM, IPO5, and SYNCRIP)

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific) and Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science) searching against the UniProtKB Mouse complete proteome database (80894 entries), assuming a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm; the specified enzyme was trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavage allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modifications; oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 4.4.3, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted when probability, calculated using Scaffold Local FDR algorithm, was greater than 95%. Protein identifications were accepted when probability was greater than 99% and proteins contained at least 4 identified peptides. We arbitrarily considered only peptides that were either absent in the immunocomplexes from mock cells or, when present, at least 4 times more represented in NMuMG-METTL7A1 than in mock cells. Proteins that share similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
EPR is a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) that controls cell proliferation in mammary gland cells by regulating gene transcription. Here, we report on Mettl7a1 as a direct target of EPR. We show that EPR induces Mettl7a1 transcription by rewiring three-dimensional chromatin interactions at the Mettl7a1 locus. Our data indicate that METTL7A1 contributes to EPR-dependent inhibition of TGF-&#x3b2; signaling. METTL7A1 is absent in tumorigenic murine mammary gland cells and its human ortholog (METTL7A) is downregulated in breast cancers. Importantly, re-expression of METTL7A1 in 4T1 tumorigenic cells attenuates their transformation potential, with the putative methyltransferase activity of METTL7A1 being dispensable for its biological functions. We found that METTL7A1 localizes in the cytoplasm whereby it interacts with factors implicated in the early steps of mRNA translation, associates with ribosomes, and affects the levels of target proteins without altering mRNA abundance. Overall, our data indicates that METTL7A1-a transcriptional target of EPR-modulates translation of select transcripts.

### Keywords
Lncerna, Translation, Rna binding protein

### Affiliations
Ospedale Policlinico San Martino IRCCS
Gene Expression Regulation Laboratory, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, 16132 Genova, Italy

### Submitter
Roberto Gherzi

### Lab Head
Dr Roberto Gherzi
Gene Expression Regulation Laboratory, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, 16132 Genova, Italy


