### Accession
PXD034821

### Title
Short-term administration of common anesthetics does not dramatically change the endogenous peptide profile in the rat pituitary

### Description
To identify and quantify the relative abundances of cell-cell signaling peptides in different physiological states, LC-MS-based peptidomics workflows are commonly utilized on freshly dissected tissue. In such animal experiments, the administration of general anesthetics is an important step for many research projects. However, acute anesthetic administration may rapidly change the measured abundance of transmitter molecules and metabolites which may confound experimental results. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of short-term (< 5 min) anesthetic administration on the measured abundance pituitary peptides, as evaluated by a typical peptidomics workflow. To accomplish this goal, we compared peptide abundances in the rat pituitary following administration of 5% isoflurane, 200 mg/kg sodium pentobarbital, or no anesthetic administration using a label-free peptidomics protocol.

### Sample Protocol
All animal methods were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Nebraska (Project #2113).   Sprague Dawley rats, aged ~2 months, weight = 225 ± 24 g, were obtained from Charles River Laboratories. A total of 32 animals (17 females, 15 males) were assigned to one of three groups: “No Anesthesia” group (10 animals, 50% female/male), “5% Isoflurane” group (11 animals, 55% female/male), or “200 mg/kg Sodium Pentobarbital” group (11 animals, 55% female/male). Animal sacrifices were performed over the course of 4 consecutive days, with 2-3 animals from each group sacrificed per day. For animals in the “No Anesthesia” group, animals were sacrificed by rapid decapitation and the pituitary was immediately extracted, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored on dry ice or -80 °C until processing. For animals in the “5% Isoflurane” group, animals were placed in a 3.2 L anesthesia chamber and administered 5% isoflurane in oxygen at 1.5 L/min. For animals in the “200 mg/kg Sodium Pentobarbital” group, animals were administered 200 mg/kg Fatal-Plus (diluted to 39 mg/mL for animal injection) by intraperitoneal injection. For both anesthetic groups, animals were monitored for loss of righting reflex and toe pinch test was used to confirm loss of consciousness. Upon negative toe pinch, animals were sacrificed by rapid decapitation and the pituitary was immediately extracted, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored on dry ice or -80 °C until processing.  Tissues were processed on the same day as isolation. For peptide extraction, frozen tissues were homogenized in 400 μL of ice-cold acidified acetone (40:6:1 acetone: water: con. HCl) using manual homogenization with a plastic pestle in microcentrifuge tubes, followed by sonication for 10 min and vortexing. Samples were then centrifuged at 15,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C, and the supernatant was transferred to a clean tube and stored on ice. The remaining pellet was then subjected to the second stage of peptide extraction by adding 400 μL of acidified water (0.25% acetic acid in water). The tissue was again subjected to manual homogenization with a plastic pestle followed by sonication for 10 min and vortexing. Samples were centrifuged at 15,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C, and the supernatant was combined with the acidified acetone extracts. The combined extracts were dried via a vacuum concentrator for at least 4 h to remove both water and acetone. Dried samples were redissolved in 300 μL of 5% acetonitrile (ACN)/water with 0.1% formic acid (FA) and centrifuged at 15,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C to remove insoluble material. The resulting supernatant was passed through an Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL centrifugal filter unit (30 kDa), centrifuging at 14,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. The device was washed with 2 × 200 μL 5% ACN/water with 0.1% FA to ensure low molecular weight species passed through the filter. The resulting filtrate containing low molecular weight compounds was dried by vacuum concentrator. The dried peptide extracts were then redissolved in 200 μL of 5% ACN/water with 0.1% FA and desalted via C18 SPE. The resulting desalted peptide extracts were dried via vacuum concentration and stored at -20 °C until further analysis.  To prepare samples for LC-MS and LC-MS/MS analysis, dried and desalted peptide extracts were dissolved in 12 μL of 3% ACN/water with 0.1% FA, and the total protein concentration was estimated by BCA assay. Each sample was diluted with 3% ACN/water with 0.1% FA to 33 ng/μL total protein. To account for batch effects, sample injection order was randomized and injections of pooled quality control (QC) samples were included at regular intervals. Prepared peptide extracts (6 μL of the above solution, ~200 ng total protein) were injected onto a Waters ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system coupled to a Waters Xevo G2-XS quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer with Waters Z spray NanoLockSpray nano-electrospray ionization source. For nano-LC separations, the mobile phase Solvent A was composed of water and 0.1% formic acid, and Solvent B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were first loaded onto a Waters nanoEase M/Z symmetry C18 trap column for online desalting, using a loading solvent of 1% B and a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 10 min. Separations were then performed using a Waters nanoEase-C18 column with a flow rate of 0.35 μL/min, column compartment temperature of 35 °C, and the autosampler compartment temperature of 8 °C. Peptides were separated using the following gradient: 0 – 40 min, 3 – 40% B; 40 – 44 min, 40 – 85% B; 44 – 48 min, 85% B; 48 – 50 min, 85 – 3% B; 50 – 60 min, 3% B. MS and MS/MS (collision-induced dissociation fragmentation) analysis was performed in positive ion mode with a mass range of 100–2000 m/z. For each MS scan, 5 precursor ions were selected for MS/MS using data-dependent acquisition based on a peak intensity threshold of 5000. The MS scan time was 0.5 s, and the MS/MS scan time was 1 s.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS data were processed using PEAKS Studio X Pro software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) with the rat SwissProt reference proteome from UniProt used as a database for peptide identifications. For peptide identifications, the parent mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm, the fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.1 Da, and the false discovery rate (FDR) threshold was set to 1%. The following PTMs were included as variable modifications: acetylation (N-terminus), amidation (C-terminus), oxidation (M), pyroglutamylation (E or Q), and phosphorylation (S, T, or Y). To calculate peptide peak areas, PEAKS Q Module for label-free quantification was used, and the PEAKS Q Module’s ID-transfer was used to reduce false missing values using a mass error tolerance of 20.0 ppm and a retention time shift tolerance of 0.5 minutes. All identified peptides and peak areas (sum of peak areas for each charge state) were normalized to total ion current (TIC) and exported from the PEAKS Q Module. Peptides were then manually inspected to identify any ambiguous identifications during the ID-transfer step for peptides with similar m/z and retention times, and peptides with ambiguous assignments or with <5 total MS2 identifications were filtered out. Data were batch corrected using the statTarget R package, where a peptide was considered present if it was measured in at least 50% of the samples per group, and was present in pooled QC samples. Peptides deemed absent were omitted after batch correction, leaving 164 peptides “present” for analysis. Signal imputation was performed using k-nearest neighbor (knn; k=10) method. Present peptides were then log2 transformed and normalized using EigenMS. Data preprocessing was prepared using the R statistical software version 4.0.3. Differential peptides were assessed using parametric (t-test) and non-parametric (Wilcoxon rank-sum) statistical tests to account for the degree, direction, and difference between two groups. For both statistical tests, the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure was applied to correct for multiple hypothesis testing. Peptides were considered differential when they passed with a BH-corrected p-value less than 0.05 in both statistical tests. The fold change (FC) was calculated for each peptide to quantify the magnitude difference between the two groups. In this statistical analysis, three pairs of comparisons were performed, i.e., “5% Isoflurane” vs “No Anesthesia”, “200 mg/kg Sodium Pentobarbital” vs “No Anesthesia”,  and “200 mg/kg Sodium Pentobarbital” vs “5% Isoflurane”. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed using R package pcaMethods and partial least squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) was performed used R package ropls.

### Publication Abstract
Cell-cell signaling peptides (e.g., peptide hormones, neuropeptides) are among the largest class of cellular transmitters and regulate a variety of physiological processes. To identify and quantify the relative abundances of cell-cell signaling peptides in different physiological states, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-based peptidomics workflows are commonly utilized on freshly dissected tissues. In such animal experiments, the administration of general anesthetics is an important step for many research projects. However, acute anesthetic administration may rapidly change the measured abundance of transmitter molecules and metabolites, especially in the brain and endocrine system, which would confound experimental results. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of short-term (&lt;5 min) anesthetic administration on the measured abundance of cell-cell signaling peptides, as evaluated by a typical peptidomics workflow. To accomplish this goal, we compared endogenous peptide abundances in the rat pituitary following administration of 5% isoflurane, 200 mg/kg sodium pentobarbital, or no anesthetic administration. Label-free peptidomics analysis demonstrated that acute use of isoflurane changed the levels of a small number of peptides, primarily degradation products of the hormone somatotropin, but did not influence the levels of most other peptide hormones. Acute use of sodium pentobarbital had negligible impact on the relative abundance of all measured peptides. Overall, our results suggest that anesthetics used in pituitary peptidomics studies do not dramatically confound observed results.

### Keywords
Rat, Pituitary, Anesthesia, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry University of Nebraska-Lincoln  Lincoln, NE 68588 USA
University of Nebraska-Lincoln

### Submitter
James Checco

### Lab Head
Dr James Checco
Department of Chemistry University of Nebraska-Lincoln  Lincoln, NE 68588 USA


