### Accession
PXD008573

### Title
Bacillus velezensis strain GH1-13 LC-MS/MS

### Description
Bacillus velezensis strain GH1-13 isolated from a rice paddy soil in Korea has been reported to promote plant growth and inhibit some pathogens. It contains a plasmid pBV71, thought to be of benefit to the strain, but there is no information on its effect. In order to elicit the plasmid effect on gene expression, mRNA and protein levels were analyzed at various stages of bacterial growth. Comparative gene expression profiles between the plasmid-containing and plasmid-free cells revealed that strain GH1-13 activated a transient stress response in the exponential phase. It showed early activation of expression of sigma W operon, liaIHGFSR operon, and transcription regulators for transition state, associated with carbon catabolite repression and secondary metabolite biosynthesis of acetoin, bacillaene, and macrolactin.

### Sample Protocol
A pooled sample of cells in three culture flasks at a specific stage was washed twice with 25 mM Tris/HCl buffer (pH 8.0) at 4 °C. Cell pellets were mixed with 1 volume of 0.5 mm glass beads (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK) and 3 volumes of 25 mM Tris/HCl buffer (pH 8.0) containing 6 M urea, 2% CHAPS and 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and cells were disrupted by five 50 s-cycles in a Biospec bead beater. After removing debris by centrifugation using a Beckman 70Ti rotor at 40,000 rpm and 4 °C for 1 h, protein concentrations of whole cell lysates were determined using a Bradford reagent and bovine serum albumin standard (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Ten μg protein sample was treated with 10 mM DTT to reduce disulfide bond at 60 °C for 15 min, and cooled at room temperature before alkylation of cysteine with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 2 h in the dark. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 2 M trichloroacetic acid for 1 h, centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 min, and washed twice with ice-cold 80% acetone. Air-dried proteins were treated overnight with 0.5 μg of a sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.0) at 37 °C, and digested again overnight with 0.5 μg trypsin. Tryptic peptides were acidified by addition of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, and loaded onto a pre-conditioned MCX 1cc column (Waters Co., Milford, MA) to fractionate peptides by a stepwise elution with 5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, and 80% acetonitrile in 1.5% ammonia solution. Peptides were dried in vacuo, dissolved in 0.1% trifloroacetic acid, and cleaned up using ZipTip C18 tips (Millipore, Carrigtwohill, Ireland).

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples dissolved in 0.4% acetic acid were analyzed on a Thermo Velos Pro mass instrument equipped with nanoLC systems and reversed-phase Magic C18AQ columns (75 μm × 75 mm), operated at 0.3 μL min-1. The chromatographic conditions were a 90-min linear gradient from 5% to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid solution, followed by 20 min column wash with 80% acetonitrile concentration and 10 min re-equilibration to the initial condition. Full-scan survey was performed between m/z 300 and 2,000, followed by data-dependent MS2 scans of the 7 most intense ions from the survey scan. The acquired tandem mass spectrometry data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 and Scaffolder version 4.4.5 using a protein database deduced from the chromosome and plasmid sequences of B. velezensis strain GH1-13 and the common protein contaminants in mass spectrometry. The SEQUEST search options for tandem mass spectra were average mass (m/z); at maximum 1 miscleavage site of trypsin digestion; precursor mass tolerance, 1.5 Da; fragment mass error, 1 Da; static modifications for carbamidomethylation of cysteine; protein probability >99%; and false-discovery rate (FDR) <0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmid pbv71, Whole cell proteome, Growth stage, Bacillus velezensis

### Affiliations
Catholic University of Daegu School of Medicine
Daegu Catholic University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Yong-Hak Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Yong-Hak Kim
Daegu Catholic University School of Medicine


