### Accession
PXD014126

### Title
Quantitative LC-MSMS of human muscle cells after electrical pulse stimulation

### Description
We hypothesized that muscle contraction produces a cellular stress signal capable to increase lipolysis to sustain fuel availability during exercise. The aim of the present study was to identify novel exercise-regulated myokines, aka exerkines, able to promote lipolysis in human adipocytes. To this end, human primary myotubes from lean healthy volunteers were submitted to electrical pulse stimulation to mimic either acute intense or chronic moderate exercise. Conditioned media experiments with hMADS adipocytes were performed. Unbiased proteomic and ELISA analyses were applied in conditioned media and human plasma samples. Real-time qPCR was performed in cultured myotubes and muscle biopsy samples.

### Sample Protocol
After cultivation, differentiated myotubes were subjected to electrical pulse stimulation using a C‐Pace EP multichannel culture pacer (IonOptix, Dublin, Ireland) for 3h (EPS3; acute intense exercise model) with a protocol consisting of 24 ms pulses at 10 V, with a frequency of 0,5 Hz, or for 24h (EPS24; chronic moderate exercise model) with a protocol consisting of 2 ms pulses at 10 V, with a frequency of 0,1 Hz. After completion of electrical pulse stimulation, conditioned media (CM) were collected for proteomic screening. Culture media from two control groups without electrical pulse stimulation were also considered, being collected after 3h and 24h (C3 and C24). After of proteins from culture media (N=4 per group), protein samples were electrophoresed (SDS-PAGE gels) to obtain five separated protein bands. After colloidal Coomassie blue staining, protein bands were excised then proteins were in-gel reduced and alkylatedn then digested with trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gels, and analyzed on a UPLC-system (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled to a quadrupole-Tof hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive plus; ThermoFisher Scientific). The platform was controlled by XCalibur software (v. 3.0.63; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The solvent system consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). Each sample was first concentrated/desalted on a trap column (Symmetry C18, 180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm; Waters) at 1% B at a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 3 min. Afterwards, peptides were eluted from the separation column (BEH 130 C18, 75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm; Waters) maintained at 60°C using a 80-min gradient from 1-35% B at a flow rate of 450 nl/min. The Q Exactive Plus instrument was operated in positive ion mode with source temperature set to 250°C and spray voltage set to 1.8 kV. Full scan MS spectra [mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 300–1800] were acquired at a resolution of 140,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and an automatic gain control target value of 3x106 charges with the lock-mass option enabled (m/z 445.12002). The 10 most intense precursors per full scan were isolated using a m/z 2 window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 27 eV). Dynamic exclusion of already-fragmented precursors was set to 60 s. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms, and an automatic gain control target value of 1x105.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (v.1.5.8.3). Peak lists were created using default parameters and searched using the Andromeda search engine (revert mode) implemented in MaxQuant against a protein database created using the MSDA software suite. The database contained human protein sequences (Swiss-Prot; https://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/; Taxonomy ID: 9606; 20,195 entries),which were downloaded in October 2017. Sequences of common contaminants like keratins and trypsin (247 entries) were added to the database (contaminants.fasta included in MaxQuant). The first search was performed using a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and the main search with a tolerance of 5 ppm after recalibration. Fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered as fixed and oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N termini as variable modifications during the search. A maximum number of 1 missed cleavages and a false discovery rate of 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (minimum length of 7 aa) and proteins was accepted during identification. Regarding quantification, data normalization and protein abundance estimation was performed using the label-free quantification. option offered in MaxQuant using a minimal ratio count of one. “match between runs” was enabled using a 1.5-min time window after retention time alignment using a 20-min time window. Both unmodified and modified (acetylation of protein N termini and oxidation of methionine residues) peptides were considered for quantification whereas shared peptides were excluded. All other MaxQuant parameters were set as default. Proteins identified with only one unique peptide were not considered for quantification. Only proteins with 3 of 4 valid values per group as well as the ones absent (i.e., 0 valid values) in samples from a given group were kept for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
We hypothesized that skeletal muscle contraction produces a cellular stress signal, triggering adipose tissue lipolysis to sustain fuel availability during exercise. The present study aimed at identifying exercise-regulated myokines, also known as exerkines, able to promote lipolysis. Human primary myotubes from lean healthy volunteers were submitted to electrical pulse stimulation (EPS) to mimic either acute intense or chronic moderate exercise. Conditioned media (CM) experiments with human adipocytes were performed. CM and human plasma samples were analyzed using unbiased proteomic screening and/or ELISA. Real-time qPCR was performed in cultured myotubes and muscle biopsy samples. CM from both acute intense and chronic moderate exercise increased basal lipolysis in human adipocytes. Growth and differentiation factor 15 (GDF15) gene expression and secretion increased rapidly upon skeletal muscle contraction. GDF15 protein was upregulated in CM from both acute and chronic exercise-stimulated myotubes. We further showed that physiological concentrations of recombinant GDF15 protein increased lipolysis in human adipose tissue, while blocking GDF15 with a neutralizing antibody abrogated EPS CM-mediated lipolysis. We herein provide the first evidence to our knowledge that GDF15 is a potentially novel exerkine produced by skeletal muscle contraction and able to target human adipose tissue to promote lipolysis.

### Keywords
Human myotubes, Myokines, Exercise, Adipose tissue, Lc-msms, Secretome, Lipolysis

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


