### Accession
PXD009188

### Title
Single methyl group positioning opens new chemical space for EPH receptor kinase inhibition

### Description
EPHrin receptors (EPH) are transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases. Their extracellular domains bind specifically to ephrin A/B ligands, and this binding modulates the intracellular kinase activity. EPHs are key players in bidirectional intercellular signalling, controlling cell morphology, adhesion and migration. They are increasingly recognized as cancer drug targets. We analysed the binding of the patented Novartis inhibitor NVP-BHG712 (NVP) to EPHA2 and EPHB4. Unexpectedly, all tested commercially available NVP samples were regioisomers NVPiso with a single methyl group binding to an adjacent nitrogen atom compared to the patented compound. The two compounds of identical mass reveal different binding modes. Further, both, in vitro and in vivo experiments show that the isomers differ in their kinase affinity and selectivity.

### Sample Protocol
96-well plate Kinobeads competition assays have been performed as described previously. [PMID 25660469, 29191878] Briefly, 5 mg mixed protein lysate (K 562, MV 4-11, SK N BE(2) and COLO 205) was pre-incubated with compound dilutions in DMSO (0, 3, 10, 30, 100, 300, 1000, 3000, 30000 nM final concentrations) for 45 min at 4 °C. Subsequently, lysate was incubated with 35 ul settled and equilibrated Kinobeads for 30 min at 4 °C. DMSO control lysate was recovered for the pulldown of pulldown experiment. Beads were washed and bound proteins were eluted with 40 ul 2x LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE, Invitrogen) containing 50 mM DTT. Reduced disulfide bridges were alkylated using 55 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were concentrated and desalted by a short SDS-PAGE using a 4-12% gel (NuPAGE, Invitrogen) and in-gel digested according to standard procedures.Peptides were then measured via LC-MS/MS on a nanoLCUltra 1D+ (Eksigent) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite. Up to 15 precursorer where subjected to fragmentation by HCD in a data dependent setup. A kinase peptide inclusion list was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30), searching against a human Uniprot reference database (version 22.03.2016, only canonical entries, annotated with PFAM) with Andromeda. Label free quantification and match between runs were enabled. Search results were filtered for 1% peptide and protein FDR, contaminants and reverse identifications. For consistent peptide identification and protein grouping, the MS data for each compound was supplemented with 15 standard DMSO controls. Each compound was analyzed separately.

### Publication Abstract
Erythropoietin-producing hepatocellular (EPH) receptors are transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases. Their extracellular domains bind specifically to ephrin A/B ligands, and this binding modulates intracellular kinase activity. EPHs are key players in bidirectional intercellular signaling, controlling cell morphology, adhesion, and migration. They are increasingly recognized as cancer drug targets. We analyzed the binding of NVP-BHG712 (NVP) to EPHA2 and EPHB4. Unexpectedly, all tested commercially available NVP samples turned out to be a regioisomer (NVPiso) of the inhibitor, initially described in a Novartis patent application. They only differ by the localization of a single methyl group on either one of two adjacent nitrogen atoms. The two compounds of identical mass revealed different binding modes. Furthermore, both in vitro and in vivo experiments showed that the isomers differ in their kinase affinity and selectivity.

### Keywords
Selectivity profiling, Eph receptor, Kinase inhibitor, Kinobeads

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany

### Submitter
Stephanie Wilhelm 

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany


