### Accession
PXD038229

### Title
First identification of a large set of serine hydrolases by activity-based protein profiling in dibutyl phthalate-exposed zebrafish larvae

### Description
Despite the involvement of several serine hydrolases (SHs) in the metabolism of xenobiotics such as dibutyl phthalate (DBP), no study has focused on mapping this enzyme class in zebrafish, a model organism frequently used in ecotoxicology. Here, we survey and identify active SHs in zebrafish larvae and search for biological markers of SH type after exposition to DBP. Zebrafish were exposed to 0, 5, and 100 µg/L DBP from 4 to 120 h post-fertilization. A significant decrease in vitellogenin expression level of about 2-fold compared to the control was found in larvae exposed to 100 µg/L DBP for 120h. The first comprehensive profiling of active SHs in zebrafish proteome was achieved with an activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) approach. Among 49 SHs identified with high confidence, one was the carboxypeptidase ctsa overexpressed in larvae exposed to 100 µg/L DBP for 120h. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that a carboxypeptidase has been identified as deregulated following exposure to DBP. The overall results indicate that targeted proteomics approaches such as ABPP can therefore be an asset for understanding the mechanism of action related to xenobiotics in ecotoxicology.

### Sample Protocol
Labelling with dB-FP and affinity purification. The ActivX Desthiobiotin-FP (dB-FP) probe was used for labelling and affinity purification of zebrafish proteome (from soluble and insoluble fractions). For each affinity purification with dB-FP, the same starting protein amount was used, i.e. 650 µg for the soluble fraction and 150 µg for the insoluble fraction, due to the small number of organisms used for the exposure experiments. Briefly, the proteins were incubated with 2 µM dB-FP (in 2 % DMSO v/v) or 2% DMSO (no-probe control) at 25°C for 60 minutes with occasional gentle mixing. The proteins were then denatured with 0.5% w/v SDS at 95°C for 5 minutes, then allowed to cool down to room temperature before being precipitated with cold acetone to remove excess probe. Precipitation was performed by adding 4 volumes of cold acetone to each sample and then incubated at -20°C for 60 minutes. The samples were then centrifuged at maximum speed (21000 x g) for 10 minutes at 4°C. Pellets were taken up with PBS containing 0.05% w/v SDS, 1 mL for the soluble fraction and 300 μL for the insoluble (membrane) fraction. Streptavidin beads (DynabeadsTM MyOneTM Streptavidin C1) were washed (3 times with PBS, 150 mM NaCl) and then added to the soluble (50 µL) and insoluble (10 µL) denatured samples. They were then incubated overnight at 4°C and 6 rpm on an orbital shaker (Hula-Mixer, Invitrogen Thermo Fisher). The paramagnetic beads were washed twice with the washing solution (PBS, 150 mM NaCl) and one last time with PBS. Protein targets attached to the beads were eluted by heating the beads at 95°C for 5 minutes with an eluting solution (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 2% w/v SDS and 10 mM TCEP). The eluted enzyme targets were stored at -20°C until analysis by mass spectrometry at the Proteom’IC core facility. LC-MS/MS sample preparation. The eluted proteins were digested by “Strap” Micro Spin Column (from ProtiFi) using 1µg trypsin (sequencing-grade from Promega) mostly according to manufacturer’s instruction with modifications: The totality of the sample was denatured v/v with a solution containing 4% w/v SDS (GE Healthcare), 400 mM TEAB (Sigma Aldrich), 20 mM TCEP (Sigma Aldrich) and 100 mM Chloro-acetamide (Fluka) for 5 min at 95°C. The samples were acidified with 12% phosphoric acid at 1:10 (acid : protein volume ratio). 6 volumes of Strap Binding Buffer (90% v/v Methanol, 100 mM TEAB) were added. The resulting protein suspension was transferred to the Strap filter. After centrifugation and wash with the same buffer, the filter was incubated with 1µg of Trypsin in 100 µL of 50 mM TEAB at 37°C overnight. Resulting peptides were dried by speed-vacuum (speed-vac.from Eppendorf), then solubilized in 10 μL of 0.1% v/v TFA containing 10 % v/v acetonitrile (ACN).

### Data Protocol
Analyses were performed on a Dionex U3000 RSLC nano-LC- system (Thermo Fisher scientific) coupled to a TIMS-TOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany). One μL was loaded, concentrated and washed for 3 min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Aurora C18 reverse phase resin (1.6 μm particle size, 100Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length mounted to the Captive nanoSpray Ionisation module, (IonOpticks, Middle Camberwell Australia) in a 60 min. run time with a gradient ranging from 99% of solvent A containing (v/v) 0.1% formic acid in milliQ-grade H2O to 40% of solvent B containing 80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid in mQH2O. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in DDA PASEF mode with a 1.1 s./cycle, with Timed Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) mode enabled and a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans in PASEF mode. This enabled a recurrent loop analysis of a maximum of the 120 most intense nLC-eluting peptides which were CID-fragmented between each full scan every 1.1 s. Ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer were set to 50 ms each and the ion mobility range was set from 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2 to 1.6 Vs cm-2. Precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated in positive mode with the PASEF mode set to « on » in the 100-1700 m/z range by synchronizing quadrupole switching events with the precursor elution profile from the TIMS device. The cycle duty time was set to 100%, accommodating as many MS/MS in the PASEF frame as possible. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded from the TIMS stage by tuning the TIMS using the otof control software, (Bruker Daltonik GmbH). Precursors for MS/MS were picked from an intensity threshold of 2.500 arbitrary units (a.u.) and refragmented and summed until reaching a ‘target value’ of 20.000 a.u taking into account a dynamic exclusion of 0.40 s elution gap.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the involvement of several serine hydrolases (SHs) in the metabolism of xenobiotics such as dibutyl phthalate (DBP), no study has focused on mapping this enzyme class in zebrafish, a model organism frequently used in ecotoxicology. Here, we survey and identify active SHs in zebrafish larvae and search for biological markers of SH type after exposure to DBP. Zebrafish were exposed to 0, 5, and 100 &#xb5;g/L DBP from 4 to 120 h post-fertilization. A significant decrease in vitellogenin expression level of about 2-fold compared to the control was found in larvae exposed to 100 &#xb5;g/L DBP for 120 h. The first comprehensive profiling of active SHs in zebrafish proteome was achieved with an activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) approach. Among 49 SHs identified with high confidence, one was the carboxypeptidase ctsa overexpressed in larvae exposed to 100 &#xb5;g/L DBP for 120 h. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that a carboxypeptidase has been identified as deregulated following exposure to DBP. The overall results indicate that targeted proteomics approaches, such as ABPP, can, therefore, be an asset for understanding the mechanism of action related to xenobiotics in ecotoxicology.

### Keywords
Zebrafish larvae, Serine hydrolases, Proteomics, Dibutyl phthalate, Activity-based protein profiling

### Affiliations
Université de Lorraine, LIEC, UMR7360, Campus Bridoux, Metz, F-57070, France
3p5-proteom'ic plateform

### Submitter
Virginie Salnot

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Battaglia
Université de Lorraine, LIEC, UMR7360, Campus Bridoux, Metz, F-57070, France


