### Accession
PXD020527

### Title
C. acnes CNS catheter infection elicits modest early inflammatory changes but long term alterations in the CSF proteome

### Description
Shunt infections lead to grave neurologic morbidity for patients especially when there is a delay in diagnosis. C. acnes is the third most common cause of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shunt infection and is underdiagnosed due to the difficulty in culturing this fastidious, slow growing pathogen. Currently the gold standard for diagnosis of CSF shunt infections is microbiologic culture, however, in the case of C. acnes diagnostic cultures may be falsely negative. Therefore, new diagnostic methods are needed. To investigate potential CSF biomarkers of C. acnes CSF shunt infection we adapted a previously published rat model of CSF shunt infection to C. acnes. We found elevated levels of IL-1β, IL-6, CCL2 and IL-10 in the CSF and brain tissues of animals implanted with C. acnes infected catheters compared to sterile controls at day 1 post-infection. We found modest increases in neutrophils in the CSF and to a greater extend the brain tissue of animals with C. acnes infection which mirrors the clinical findings in C. acnes shunt infection. Mass spectrometry revealed that the CSF proteome is altered during C. acnes shunt infection and changes over the course of infection with an acute phase and pathogen neutralization response at day 1 post-infection to a more biosynthetic and metabolic response at day 28 post-infection relating to healing. Collectively, these results demonstrate that it is possible to distinguish C. acnes infection from sterile post-operative inflammation and CSF proteins could be useful in a diagnostic strategy for this pathogen that is difficult to diagnose.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were excised from SDS-PAGE gel, destained, reduced with tris-carboxyethylphosphine, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were eluted from the gel and concentrated to 20 µl by vacuum centrifugation and analyzed using a high-resolution mass spectrometry nano-LC-MS/MS Tribrid system, Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ coupled with UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Around 1 µg of peptides was run by the pre-column (Acclaim PepMap™ 100, 75µm × 2cm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) and the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap™ RSCL, 75 µm × 15 cm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific). The samples were eluted using a 105-min linear gradient of ACN (5-45 %) in 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Sciences, London, UK, vs 2.6.). Mascot was set up to search the SwissProt database (selected for Rat, 2019_6, 8082 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Parameters on MASCOT were set as follows: Enzyme: trypsin, Max missed cleavage: 2, Peptide charge: 1+, 2+ and 3+, Peptide tolerance: ± 0.6 Da, Fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C),Variable modifications: oxidation (M), MS/MS tolerance: ± 0.6 Da, Quantitation: Label free, Instrument: ESI-TRAP. MASCOT results were exported as .mgf files, in case if needed for publishing. MASCOT .dat results files were further processed with Scaffold, which allows multiple search results to be condensed into a single result file.  Scaffold (vs 4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller A. et al, Anal Chem 2002;74(20):5383- 92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii A. et al, Anal Chem 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. For the purpose of label free quantitation, the results were displayed as Total Spectrum Counts. Spectral counting counts the number of spectra identified for a given peptide.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Cutibacterium acnes</i> is the third most common cause of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shunt infection and is likely underdiagnosed due to the difficulty in culturing this pathogen. Shunt infections lead to grave neurologic morbidity for patients especially when there is a delay in diagnosis. Currently, the gold standard for identifying CSF shunt infections is microbiologic culture. However, <i>C. acnes</i> infection often results in falsely negative cultures; therefore, new diagnostic methods are needed. To investigate potential CSF biomarkers of <i>C. acnes</i> CSF shunt infection we adapted a rat model of CSF catheter infection to <i>C. acnes.</i> We found elevated levels of interleukin-1&#x3b2; (IL-1&#x3b2;), IL-6, chemokine ligand 2, and IL-10 in the CSF and brain tissues of animals implanted with <i>C. acnes-</i>infected catheters compared to sterile controls at day 1 postinfection. This coincided with modest increases in neutrophils in the CSF and, to a greater extent, in the brain tissues of animals with <i>C. acnes</i> infection, which closely mirrors the clinical findings in patients with <i>C. acnes</i> shunt infection. Mass spectrometry revealed that the CSF proteome is altered during <i>C. acnes</i> shunt infection and changes over the course of disease, typified at day 1 postinfection by an acute-phase and pathogen neutralization response evolving to a response consistent with wound resolution at day 28 compared to a sterile catheter placement. Collectively, these results demonstrate that it is possible to distinguish <i>C. acnes</i> infection from sterile postoperative inflammation and that CSF proteins could be useful in a diagnostic strategy for this pathogen that is difficult to diagnose.

### Keywords
Biomarker, Cytokine, Csf, Proteome, Inflammation, C. acnes, Shunt infection

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center 982162 Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, NE 68198-2162
University of Nebraska at Omaha

### Submitter
Ishwor Thapa

### Lab Head
Dr Gwenn L. Skar
University of Nebraska Medical Center 982162 Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, NE 68198-2162


