### Accession
PXD007759

### Title
Cytoplasmic Proteomics for Temozolomide Resistance in Glioblastoma

### Description
TMZ resistance is one of the main reasons why treatment of glioblastoma (GBM) fails. In order to investigate the underlying mechanism associated with TMZ resistance, we conducted a cytoplasmic proteome research of U87 cells treated with TMZ for 1 week. A total of 162 DEPs including 66 up-regulated proteins and 96 down-regulated proteins were identified.

### Sample Protocol
The human glioblastoma cell line U87 cells was purchased from the American type culture collection (ATCC, America) and cultivated in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Gibco, Grand Island, NY) supplemented with 10% FBS, and cultured at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. TMZ was purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA), and diluted in Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (Solarbio inc, Beijing, China) to a stock solution of 200 mM TMZ. Immediately before use in cell culture, the stock was diluted in media to a concentration of 200μM. The same concentration of DMSO was added into the control group. Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions were generated according to the protocol as follows: Collected 2 × 107 cells, and suspended in 300-500 μl RLN lysis buffer (Qiagen, Germany) with 1% PMSF, keep on ice for 20 min; Centrifuged for 10 min at 3000 × g,  4 °C, the clear upernatant was the cytoplasmic extractions; Washed the nucleus precipitate with RLN lysis buffer for 3 timesand the supernatant discarded; Suspended the nucleus precipitate in 100 μl RIPA lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, America) with 1% PMSF, sonication on ice for 1 min; The suspension was centrifuged at 12000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C, the clear supernatant was the nuclear extractions. The validation of purity of the extractions was indicated for Western blots probed with antibodies against two fractionation controls (Histone H3 for nucleus extraction, Beyotime, China, dilution 1:1000; GAPDH for cytoplasma extraction, JetwayBiotechCo.,Ltd, China; dilution 1:2000 ). Digestion of protein (250 μg for each sample) was performed according to the FASP procedure described by Wisniewski, Zougman et al. The resultant peptides of trypsin digestion were desalted by solid phase extraction using C18 Empore disc cartridges (Supelco/Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany), then concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 5 μg peptide was loaded onto a the C18-reversed phase column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 120 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 25 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. MS experiments were performed triply for three Biologic repetitions.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS spectra search were processed using a freely available software suit, MaxQuant (version. 1.3.0.5). MS data were searched against the UniProtKB database. An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of Trypsin and allowed maximal two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20ppm for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were defined as variable modifications for database searching. The cutoff of global false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. The MaxLFQ label-free quantification method a retention time alignment and identification transfer protocol (“match-between-runs” feature in MaxQuant) described in, was applied and a novel algorithm was used to extract the maximum possible quantification information. Protein aboundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity).

### Publication Abstract
TMZ resistance remains one of the main reasons why treatment of glioblastoma (GBM) fails. In order to investigate the underlying proteins and pathways associated with TMZ resistance, we conducted a cytoplasmic proteome research of U87 cells treated with TMZ for 1 week, followed by differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) screening, KEGG pathway analysis, protein-protein interaction (PPI) network construction, and validation of key candidate proteins in TCGA dataset. A total of 161 DEPs including 65 upregulated proteins and 96 downregulated proteins were identified. Upregulated DEPs were mainly related to regulation in actin cytoskeleton, focal adhesion, and phagosome and PI3K-AKT signaling pathways which were consistent with our previous studies. Further, the most significant module consisted of 28 downregulated proteins that were filtered from the PPI network, and 9 proteins (DHX9, HNRNPR, RPL3, HNRNPA3, SF1, DDX5, EIF5B, BTF3, and RPL8) among them were identified as the key candidate proteins, which were significantly associated with prognosis of GBM patients and mainly involved in ribosome and spliceosome pathway. Taking the above into consideration, we firstly identified candidate proteins and pathways associated with TMZ resistance in GBM using proteomics and bioinformatic analysis, and these proteins could be potential biomarkers for prevention or prediction of TMZ resistance in the future.

### Keywords
Glioblastoma; temozolomide resistance; subcellular proteomics

### Affiliations
The Laboratory for Precision Neurosurgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China
Department of Neurosurgery, Nanfang hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515,China

### Submitter
Yawei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yawei, Liu
The Laboratory for Precision Neurosurgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China


