### Accession
PXD010217

### Title
Off-target based drug repurposing opportunities for tivantinib in acute myeloid leukemia

### Description
GSK3alpha has been identified as a new target in the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). However, most GSK3 inhibitors lack specificity for GSK3alpha over GSK3beta and other kinases. We have previously shown in lung cancer cells that GSK3alpha and to a lesser extent GSK3beta are inhibited by the advanced clinical candidate tivantinib (ARQ197), which was designed as a MET inhibitor. Thus, we hypothesized that tivantinib would be an effective therapy for the treatment of AML. Here, we show that tivantinib has potent anticancer activity across several AML cell lines and primary patient cells. Tivantinib strongly induced apoptosis, differentiation and G2/M cell cycle arrest and caused less undesirable stabilization of beta-catenin compared to the pan-GSK3 inhibitor LiCl. Subsequent drug combination studies identified the BCL-2 inhibitor ABT-199 to synergize with tivantinib. Interestingly, the addition of ABT-199 to tivantinib completely abrogated tivantinib induced beta-catenin stabilization. Tivantinib alone, or in combination with ABT-199, downregulated anti-apoptotic MCL-1 and BCL-XL levels, which likely contribute to the observed synergy. Importantly, tivantinib as single agent or in combination with ABT-199 significantly inhibited the colony forming capacity of primary patient AML bone marrow mononuclear cells. In summary, tivantinib is a novel GSK3alpha/beta inhibitor that potently kills AML cells and tivantinib single agent or combination therapy with ABT-199 may represent attractive new therapeutic opportunities for AML.

### Sample Protocol
Tivantinib and ampicillin (control) were immobilized on NHS-activated sepharose beads for fast flow resin (GE Healthcare). Coupling of the drug to the bead was monitored using LC-MS analysis (14 minutes 5-95% MeOH gradient). Then, beads were blocked with ethanolamine overnight. An aliquot (5 mg) of protein from the total cell lysate was added to the beads. After in-gel tryptic digest, peptides were analyzed using a nanoflow ultra-high performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a nanoelectrospray source-equipped bench top hybrid orbitrap mass spectrometer (QExactive Plus, Thermo, San Jose, CA). Samples were loaded on a pre-column (2 cm x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed with 2% ACN/0.04% TFA for 8 minutes. Peptides were eluted onto an analytical column (C18, 75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Dionex) applying a 90 minute gradient using LC-MS solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and LC-MS solvent B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA). Solvent B was held at 5% for 8 minutes, increased from 5% to 38.5% over 60 minutes and from 38.5% to 90% in 7 minutes where it was held for 5 minutes to wash the column. Solvent B was decreased from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and the column was re-equilibrated for 10 minutes. The flow rate on the analytical column was set to 300 nL/minute. In each cycle, 16 MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner using a 60 second exclusion window. A lock mass correction was applied using a background ion (m/z 445.12003).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Mascot 2.5.1 (matrixscience.com) against the UniProt human database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were included as possible modifications. Fragment ion m/z tolerance was set to 0.05 Da and parent/precursor m/z tolerance to 20 ppm. Maximum missed cleavages were set to 2.

### Publication Abstract
GSK3&#x3b1; has been identified as a new target in the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). However, most GSK3 inhibitors lack specificity for GSK3&#x3b1; over GSK3&#x3b2; and other kinases. We have previously shown in lung cancer cells that GSK3&#x3b1; and to a lesser extent GSK3&#x3b2; are inhibited by the advanced clinical candidate tivantinib (ARQ197), which was designed as a MET inhibitor. Thus, we hypothesized that tivantinib would be an effective therapy for the treatment of AML. Here, we show that tivantinib has potent anticancer activity across several AML cell lines and primary patient cells. Tivantinib strongly induced apoptosis, differentiation and G2/M cell cycle arrest and caused less undesirable stabilization of &#x3b2;-catenin compared to the pan-GSK3 inhibitor LiCl. Subsequent drug combination studies identified the BCL-2 inhibitor ABT-199 to synergize with tivantinib while cytarabine combination with tivantinib was antagonistic. Interestingly, the addition of ABT-199 to tivantinib completely abrogated tivantinib induced &#x3b2;-catenin stabilization. Tivantinib alone, or in combination with ABT-199, downregulated anti-apoptotic MCL-1 and BCL-XL levels, which likely contribute to the observed synergy. Importantly, tivantinib as single agent or in combination with ABT-199 significantly inhibited the colony forming capacity of primary patient AML bone marrow mononuclear cells. In summary, tivantinib is a novel GSK3&#x3b1;/&#x3b2; inhibitor that potently kills AML cells and tivantinib single agent or combination therapy with ABT-199 may represent attractive new therapeutic opportunities for AML.

### Keywords
Aml, Drug pulldowns, Tivantinib

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix, PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center


