### Accession
PXD007178

### Title
Unravelling MYO9A pathophysiology in CMS allows the identification of a therapeutic intervention concept

### Description
Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a group of rare, inherited disorders characterised by compromised function of the neuromuscular junction (NMJ), manifesting with fatigable muscle weakness. Mutations in MYO9A were previously identified as causative for CMS but the precise pathomechanism remained to be characterised. Based on the role of MYO9A as a negative regulator of RhoA and an actin-based molecular motor, loss of MYO9A was hypothesised to affect the neuronal cytoskeleton, thus leading to impaired vesicular protein transport within the neuron. MYO9A-depleted NSC-34 cells (mouse motor neuron-derived cells) were used to assess the effect on the cytoskeleton revealing altered expression of a number of cytoskeletal proteins important for neuronal cell structure and intracellular transport. Based on these findings, the effect on vesicular protein transport was determined using a vesicular recycling assay revealing impaired recycling of neuronal relevant growth factor receptor. In addition, an unbiased approach utilising proteomic profiling of control and MYO9A-depleted NSC-34 cells was utilised to identify key players of the pathophysiology. Proteomic data support a role for defective vesicular transport and identified affected proteins which are also involved in the manifestation of other neuromuscular disorders. Prompted by the clear indication of perturbed protein transportation, further proteomics-based secretomic analysis of NSC-34 cells have been performed to identify whether secretion is similarly affected. Indeed,  this led to the identification of a potential therapeutic target, agrin. Zebrafish lacking MYO9A orthologues (myo9aa/ab) were treated with "Agrin Biologic", an agrin compound, and amelioration of defects in neurite extension and in movement of the zebrafish was observed. Our combined data not only allow new insights into the pathophysiology of CMS and show that loss of MYO9A affects the neuronal cytoskeleton, leading to impaired transport and vesicular recycling of proteins, but on a more general note also represent a successful biomedical approach: from the identification of the underlying pathomechanism to the definition of a therapeutic intervention concept.

### Sample Protocol
Three Myo9A-depleted NSC34 and three NSC34 control cell pellets were used comparative proteome profile, each pellets contained approximately 1mg cells. More concretely, each cell pellet was lysed and briefly sonicated in 300 µL of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), supplemented with complete mini EDTA-free and phosphoStop (both from Roche). Following the centrifugation step of cellular extract at 13,500 x g and 4 °C for 30 min, supernatant was collected and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific). Afterwards, protein cysteines were reduced with dithiothreitol (F.c 10 mM DTT) at 56 °C for 30 minutes, followed by alkylation of new generated free thiols with iodoacetamide (F.c. 30 mM IAA) at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 30 min.  The secretome samples were proceeded in the same manner as the global samples but with an additional step of ethanol precipitation prior the lysing step. More precisely, the secretome was incubated with 10 x ethanol (v/v) for 4 hours at -20 °C, and subsequently, centrifuged at 18.000 xg, 4 °C for 30 minutes. After collecting at the bottom of the tubes, proteins were resuspended in 300 µL of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 1 % SDS, supplemented with complete mini EDTA-free and phosphoStop, and went through a normal lysis as well as carbamidomethylation procedure as the global samples.  Sample preparation and proteolysis were performed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Briefly, 100 µg of protein was diluted 10-fold with freshly prepared 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) buffer and placed onto a 30 kDa weight cut-off (MWCO) centrifugal device (Pall Corporation, Nanosep). The device was centrifuged at 13,500 g at RT for 20 min for all of the centrifugation steps. First, three washing steps were carried out to eliminate residual SDS. Afterwards, three more centrifugation steps were performed with 100 µL of 50 mM aminobicarbonate (ABC, NH4HCO3) (pH 7.8) to exchange the buffer. Lastly, 100 µL of proteolysis buffer comprising of 4 µg trypsin (Promega, Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade) in 0.2 M GuHCl, 2 mM CaCl2 and 50 mM ABC (pH 7.8), was added to the device and incubated at 37°C for 14 h. Following the collection of newly generated tryptic peptides by centrifugation with 50 µL of 50 mM ABC and 50 µL of ultra-pure water, the peptides were acidified to completely inactivate trypsin by adjusting the pH to less than 3 with 10 % TFA (v/v). Prior subjection to MS analysis, the digestion efficiency was controlled by reversed-phased Ultimate 3000 RSLC 200 µm x 5 cm.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS and label-free analysis of global Myo9A-depleted NSC34. LC-MS/MS and label-free analysis of secretome Myo9A-depleted NSC34.

### Publication Abstract
Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a group of rare, inherited disorders characterized by compromised function of the neuromuscular junction, manifesting with fatigable muscle weakness. Mutations in MYO9A were previously identified as causative for CMS but the precise pathomechanism remained to be characterized. On the basis of the role of MYO9A as an actin-based molecular motor and as a negative regulator of RhoA, we hypothesized that loss of MYO9A may affect the neuronal cytoskeleton, leading to impaired intracellular transport. To investigate this, we used MYO9A-depleted NSC-34 cells (mouse motor neuron-derived cells), revealing altered expression of a number of cytoskeletal proteins important for neuron structure and intracellular transport. On the basis of these findings, the effect on protein transport was determined using a vesicular recycling assay which revealed impaired recycling of a neuronal growth factor receptor. In addition, an unbiased approach utilizing proteomic profiling of the secretome revealed a key role for defective intracellular transport affecting proper protein secretion in the pathophysiology of MYO9A-related CMS. This also led to the identification of agrin as being affected by the defective transport. Zebrafish with reduced MYO9A orthologue expression were treated with an artificial agrin compound, ameliorating defects in neurite extension and improving motility. In summary, loss of MYO9A affects the neuronal cytoskeleton and leads to impaired transport of proteins, including agrin, which may provide a new and unexpected treatment option.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Myo9a, Nsc34

### Affiliations
ISAS
Project Leader „Tissue Proteomics“  Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.  Otto-Hahn-Str.6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany

### Submitter
Vietxuan Phan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. rer. nat. Andreas Roos
Project Leader „Tissue Proteomics“  Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.  Otto-Hahn-Str.6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany


