### Accession
PXD011032

### Title
SILAC-labeled proteins in ribosome samples

### Description
we developed a novel method combining axon-pSILAC17 with axonal ribosome purification. In this method, we first labeled newly synthesized proteins with heavy amino acids (AAs) in somaless axons cultured in a Boyden chamber. Approximately 2000 eyes were cultured for each experiment to obtain sufficient axonal material. Then, axonal ribosomes were purified using a sucrose cushion and ultracentrifugation, followed by identification of newly synthesized proteins with mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
1D gel bands were transferred into a 96-well PCR plate. The bands were cut into 1mm2 pieces, destained, reduced (DTT) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) and subjected to enzymatic digestion with chymotrypsin overnight at 37°C. After digestion, the supernatant was pipetted into a sample vial and loaded onto an autosampler for automated LC-MS/MS analysis.  All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300nL/min and a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2μm particle size, 100A pore size, 75μm i.d. x 50cm length). Peptides were loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5μm particle size, 100A pore size, 300μm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10μL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 30 minutes.  The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 70000 and was scanned between m/z 380-1500. Data-dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, NCE:25%) in the HCD collision cell and measurement of the resulting fragment ions was performed in the Orbitrap analyser, set at a resolution of 17500. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion window of 20 seconds was employed.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Maxquant (version 1.6.1.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008) with default settings. MS/MS spectra were searched against the X. laevis protein sequences from Xenbase (xlaevisProtein.fasta). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. The minimal peptide length allowed was set to seven amino acids. Global false discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. The match-between runs and re-quantify options were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ribosome, Xenopus laevis, Axon, Silac

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK.

### Submitter
Toshiaki Shigeoka

### Lab Head
Dr Christine E. Holt
Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3DY, UK.


