### Accession
PXD025730

### Title
Insight in the quorum sensing-driven lifestyle of the non-pathogenic Agrobacterium tumefaciens 6N2 and the interactions with the yeast Meyerozyma guilliermondii

### Description
Analysis of proteins under the influence of the quorum sensing (QS) system in the nonpathogenic Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain 6N2, and the influence of the bacterial QS system in the proteome of the yeast Meyerozyma guilliermondii strain 6N.

### Sample Protocol
A. tumefaciens strains 6N2 (pME6000) and 6N2 (pME6863), and M. guilliermondii strain 6N were precultured aerobically overnight in NB broth at 30 ºC. Precultures were centrifuged at 7,000 g, supernatants were discarded and cell pellets were resuspended in sterile NB broth. Cell suspensions were utilized to prepare pure and dual cultures. 250 mL flasks containing 20 mL of NB broth were inoculated independently at an initial ~107 CFU mL-1 for 6N2 (pME6000) and 6N2 (pME6863) and ~106 CFU mL-1 for the yeast, or in the combinations A. tumefaciens 6N2 (pME6000) + M. guilliermondii 6N and A. tumefaciens 6N2 (pME6863) + M. guilliermondii 6N. Flasks were incubated aerobically at 30 ºC for 24 h until late exponential growth phase, and then cultures were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min and washed twice with PBS buffer. Protein extracts were obtained with YPX (Yeast Protein Extraction Kit, EXPEDEON) commercial kit. Protein concentrations were determined with the QuantiPro BCA (SigmaAldrich). Protein extracts were precipitated with acetone at -20°C. Protein pellets were resuspended in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and digested by trypsin (12,5 µg mL-1, Promega) overnight at 37°C. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-nLC system (both from Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separations were performed with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 precolumn (2 cm, 75 µm i.d., 3 µm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 µm i.d., 2 µm, 100 Å), 300 nL min-1 flow, gradient rising from 95% solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% solvent B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 98 min followed by a column regeneration for 23 min giving a total run time of 2 hours. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap in full ion scan mode at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200) with a mass range of m/z 375–1500. Fragments were obtained by Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 28 %, an isolation width of 1.4 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a data-dependent mode in which the 20 most intense precursor ions were fragmented, with a dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds and a resolution of 17,500. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 ms for MS acquisition and 45 ms for MS/MS acquisition. Three independent samples were analyzed for each culture condition: single culture of A. tumefaciens 6N2 (pME6000) (samples ATQSpos); single culture of A. tumefaciens 6N2 (pME6863) (samples ATQSneg); single culture M. guilliermondii 6N (samples Mg6N); dual culture of A. tumefaciens 6N2 (pME6000) and M. guilliermondii 6N (samples ATQSposMg6N); and A. tumefaciens 6N2 (pME6863) and M. guilliermondii 6N (samples ATQSnegMg6N).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an in-house Mascot search server (Matrix Science, Boston, MA; version 2.5.1). The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragments. The following modifications were used in variable modifications: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY), acetylation (N-term) and carbamidomethylation (C) in fixed modification. The maximum number of missed cleavages by trypsin was limited to two. MS/MS data were analyzed with an ad hoc database composed of proteins obtained from the annotation of the A. tumefaciens strain 6N2 genome, and proteins from M. guilliermondii ATCC 6260 obtained from UniProt. Peptide identifications were validated by using a False Discovery Rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01 calculated with the Percolator algorithm. Peptides and proteins abundance variations were measured by using Progenesis QI for proteomics software (version 4.0, Waters) and a hi-3 method for which the 3-most-abundant peptides were considered for each protein quantification. Protein abundances variations were validated if corresponding calculated p-values were below 0.05. Quantification of A. tumefaciens and M. guilliermondii proteins were considered only after a normalization based exclusively on respectively A. tumefaciens and M. guilliermondii proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Agrobacterium tumefaciens is considered a prominent phytopathogen, though most isolates are nonpathogenic. Agrobacteria can inhabit plant tissues interacting with other microorganisms. Yeasts are likewise part of these communities. We analyzed the quorum sensing (QS) systems of A. tumefaciens strain 6N2, and its relevance for the interaction with the yeast Meyerozyma guilliermondii, both sugarcane endophytes. We show that strain 6N2 is nonpathogenic, produces OHC8-HSL, OHC10-HSL, OC12-HSL and OHC12-HSL as QS signals, and possesses a complex QS architecture, with one truncated, two complete systems, and three additional QS-signal receptors. A proteomic approach showed differences in QS-regulated proteins between pure (64 proteins) and dual (33 proteins) cultures. Seven proteins were consistently regulated by quorum sensing in pure and dual cultures. M. guilliermondii proteins influenced by QS activity were also evaluated. Several up- and down- regulated proteins differed depending on the bacterial QS. These results show the QS regulation in the bacteria-yeast interactions.

### Keywords
Quorum sensing; endophytic; interaction; pure culture; dual culture

### Affiliations
PROIMI, CONICET (Planta Piloto de Procesos Industriales Microbiológicos), Av. Belgrano y Pje. Caseros, Tucumán, Argentina.
Planta Piloto de Procesos Industriales Microbiológicos (PROIMI - CONICET)

### Submitter
Carlos Nieto Peñalver

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos Nieto-Peñalver
PROIMI, CONICET (Planta Piloto de Procesos Industriales Microbiológicos), Av. Belgrano y Pje. Caseros, Tucumán, Argentina.


