### Accession
PXD029980

### Title
Mice tPVAT proteome profiling using high-throughput comparative proteomic analysis based on TMT labeling

### Description
High-throughput comparative proteomic analysis based on TMT labeling combined with LC-MS/MS were performed on an in vivo Ang II infusion mice model to obtain a comprehensive view of the protein ensembles associated with thoracic PVAT (tPVAT) dysfunction induced by Ang II. In total, 5,037 proteins were confidently identified, of which 4,984 proteins were quantified. Compared with saline group, 145 proteins were upregulated and 146 proteins were downregulated during Ang II-induced tPVAT pathogenesis. Bioinformatics analyses revealed that the most enriched GO terms were annotated as gene silencing, monosaccharide binding, and extracellular matrix. In addition, some novel proteins potentially associated with Ang II infusion were identified, such as acyl-CoA carboxylase α, very long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase (ACSVL), uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1), perilipin, RAS protein-specific guanine nucleotide-releasing factor 2 (RasGRF2), and hypoxia inducible factor 1α (HIF-1α). Ang II could directly participate in the regulation of lipid metabolism, transportation, and adipocyte differentiation by affecting UCP1 and perilipin. Importantly, the key KEGG pathways were involved in fatty acid biosynthesis, FABP3-PPARα/γ, RasGRF2-ERK-HIF-1α, RasGRF2-PKC-HIF-1α, and STAT3-HIF-1α axis.

### Sample Protocol
One hundred micrograms peptide mixture of each sample was labeled using TMT reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific). Labeled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography using the AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare). The dried peptide mixture was reconstituted and acidified with buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0) and loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL 4.6 x 100 mm column (5 µm, 200 Å, PolyLC Inc, Maryland, U.S.A.). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of 0% buffer B (500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0) for 25 min, 0–10% buffer B during 25-32 min, 10%-20% buffer B during 32-42 min, 20-45% buffer B during 42-47 min, 45%–100% buffer B during 47-52 min, 100% buffer B during 52-60 min, and buffer B was reset to 0% after 60min. The elution was monitored by absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The collected fractions were desalted on C18 Cartridges and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation.   Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60/90 min. The peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data for each sample were searched using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software for identification and quantitation analysis. Upregulated genes and downregulated genes were used to conduct a cluster analysis, a subcellular localization analysis, a Gene Ontology (GO) analysis, a Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway and enrichment analysis, and a protein-protein interaction (PPI) analysis.Cluster 3.0 (http://bonsai.hgc.jp/~mdehoon/software/cluster/software.htm) and Java Treeview software (http://jtreeview.sourceforge.net) were used to performing hierarchical clustering analysis. Euclidean distance algorithm for similarity measure and average linkage clustering algorithm (clustering uses the centroids of the observations) for clustering were selected when performing hierarchical clustering. A heat map was often presented as a visual aid in addition to the dendrogram. CELLO (http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/) which is a multi-class SVM classification system, was used to predict protein subcellular localization. The protein sequences of the selected differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were locally searched using the NCBI BLAST+ client software (ncbi-blast-2.2.28+-win32.exe) and InterProScan to find homologue sequences, then GO terms were mapped and sequences were annotated using the software program Blast2GO. The GO annotation results were plotted by R scripts. Following annotation steps, the studied proteins were blasted against the online KEGG database (http://geneontology.org/) to retrieve their KEGG orthology identifications and were subsequently mapped to pathways in KEGG. Enrichment analysis were applied based on the Fisher’ exact test, considering the whole quantified proteins as background dataset. Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing was further applied to adjust derived p-values. And only functional categories and pathways with p-values under a threshold of 0.05 were considered as significant. The PPI information of the studied proteins was retrieved from IntAct molecular interaction database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact/) by their gene symbols or STRING software (http://string-db.org/). The results were downloaded in the XGMML format and imported into Cytoscape software (http://www.cytoscape.org/, version 3.2.1) to visualize and further analyze functional protein-protein interaction networks. Furthermore, the degree of each protein was calculated to evaluate the importance of the protein in the PPI network.

### Publication Abstract
Perivascular adipose tissue (PVAT) homeostasis plays an important role in maintaining vascular function, and PVAT dysfunction may induce several pathophysiological situations. In this study, we investigated the effect and mechanism of the local angiotensin II (Ang II) on PVAT. High-throughput comparative proteomic analysis, based on TMT labeling combined with LC-MS/MS, were performed on an in vivo Ang II infusion mice model to obtain a comprehensive view of the protein ensembles associated with thoracic PVAT (tPVAT) dysfunction induced by Ang II. In total, 5037 proteins were confidently identified, of which 4984 proteins were quantified. Compared with the saline group, 145 proteins were upregulated and 146 proteins were downregulated during Ang II-induced tPVAT pathogenesis. Bioinformatics analyses revealed that the most enriched GO terms were annotated as gene silencing, monosaccharide binding, and extracellular matrix. In addition, some novel proteins, potentially associated with Ang II infusion, were identified, such as acyl-CoA carboxylase &#x3b1;, very long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase (ACSVL), uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1), perilipin, RAS protein-specific guanine nucleotide-releasing factor 2 (RasGRF2), and hypoxia inducible factor 1&#x3b1; (HIF-1&#x3b1;). Ang II could directly participate in the regulation of lipid metabolism, transportation, and adipocyte differentiation by affecting UCP1 and perilipin. Importantly, the key KEGG pathways were involved in fatty acid biosynthesis, FABP3-PPAR&#x3b1;/&#x3b3;, RasGRF2-ERK-HIF-1&#x3b1;, RasGRF2-PKC-HIF-1&#x3b1;, and STAT3-HIF-1&#x3b1; axis. The present study provided the most comprehensive proteome profile of mice tPVAT and some novel insights into Ang II-mediated tPVAT dysfunction and will be helpful for understanding the possible relationship between local RAS activation and PVAT dysfunction.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Tpvat, Mice, Ang ii

### Affiliations
Nantong University

### Submitter
Wenjuan Yao

### Lab Head
Dr Wenjuan Yao
Nantong University


