### Accession
PXD039583

### Title
Glycosite mapping and structural dynamics of TIM family immune checkpoints enabled by mucinase SmE

### Description
Mucin-domain glycoproteins are densely O-glycosylated and play key roles in a host of biological functions. In particular, the T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin-domain containing family of proteins (TIM-1, 3, 4) decorate immune cells and act as key checkpoint inhibitors in cancer. However, their dense O-glycosylation remains enigmatic both in glycoproteomic landscape and structural dynamics, primarily due to the challenges associated with studying mucin domains. Here, we present a mucinase (SmE) and demonstrate its ability to selectively cleave along the mucin glycoprotein backbone, similar to others of its kind. Unlike other mucinases, though, SmE harbors the unique ability to cleave at residues bearing extremely complex glycans, which enabled improved mass spectrometric analysis of several mucins, including the entire TIM family. With this information in-hand, we performed molecular dynamic (MD) simulations of TIM-3 and 4 to demonstrate how glycosylation affects structural features of these proteins. Overall, we present a powerful workflow to better understand the detailed molecular structures of the mucinome.

### Sample Protocol
All proteins were first digested with either SmE, IMPa (New England BioLabs, P0761), or OgpA (Genovis, G2-OP1-020), prior to any further processing. All solutions were prepared using MS grade water (Thermo Scientific, 51140). For the structural characterization and mapping of TIM-4 and TIM-1 as well as the analysis of GP1b, 6-8 µg of protein were used for each digest. All other digests were performed using 2 µg of protein. Each glycoprotein was digested with the O-glycoproteases in a total volume of approximately 15 µL of fresh 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) (Honeywell Fluka, 40867) overnight at 37 °C. Digestions with SmE were conducted at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:10, while IMPa and OgpA were digested according to commercial instructions. When sialidase was used, it was added alongside the glycoproteases at concentrations in accordance with the manufacturer protocol (New England BioLabs, P0720).   After mucinase digestion, dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma Aldrich, D0632) was added to a concentration of 2mM and allowed to react at 65 °C for 20 min followed by alkylation in 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma Aldrich, I1149) for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature. For samples where presence of N-glycosylation interfered with identification of O-glycosylation, a PNGase (New England BioLabs, P0705) digestion was performed. These included the characterization of C1-Inh, and secondary files for TIM1 and TIM3 the concentrated enzyme was diluted 1:10 and 1 µL of the diluted stock was used for each 2 µg of protein. After PNGase treatment, the protein was buffer exchanged into 50 mM AmBic using 10 kDa MWCO filters (Merck Millipore, UFC501024).  Proteins with fewer sites of glycosylation (i.e. Fetuin, TIM-3, and C1-Inh) underwent an additional digestion was performed by adding sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, V5111) in a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio for 6 hours at 37 °C. All reactions were quenched by adding 1 µL of formic acid (Thermo Scientific, 85178) and diluted to a volume of 200 µL prior to desalting. Desalting was performed using 10 mg Strata-X 33 µm polymeric reversed phase SPE columns (Phenomenex, 8B-S100-AAK). Each column was activated using 500 µL acetonitrile (ACN) (Honeywell, LC015) followed by of 500 µL 0.1% formic acid, 500 µL 0.1% formic acid in 40% ACN, and equilibration with two additions of 500 µL 0.1% formic acid. After equilibration, the samples were added to the column and rinsed twice with 200 µL 0.1% formic acid. The columns were transferred to a 1.5 mL tube for elution by two additions of 150 µL 0.1% formic acid in 40% ACN. The eluent was then dried using a vacuum concentrator (LabConco) prior to reconstitution in 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid.   Samples were analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, 4 µL was injected onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 column packed with 2 cm of 5 µm C18 material (Thermo Fisher, 164564) using 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A). Peptides were then separated on a 15 cm PepMap RSLC EASY-Spray C18 column packed with 2 µm C18 material (Thermo Fisher, ES904) using a gradient from 0-35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid with 80% acetonitrile) in 60 minutes. Full scan (MS1) spectra were collected at a resolution of 60,000, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e5, and a mass range from 300 to 1500 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 7 s, and exclusion duration of 7 s. Only charge states 2 to 6 were selected for fragmentation. MS2s were generated at top speed for 3 s in order of intensity. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was performed on all selected precursor masses with the following parameters: isolation window of 2 m/z, 29% normalized collision energy, orbitrap detection (resolution of 7,500), maximum inject time of 50 ms, and a standard AGC target. An additional electron transfer dissociation (ETD) fragmentation of the same precursor was triggered if 1) the precursor mass was between 300 and 1,500 m/z and 2) 3 of 8 HexNAc or NeuAc fingerprint ions (126.055, 138.055, 144.07, 168.065, 186.076, 204.086, 274.092, and 292.103) were present at ± 0.1 m/z and greater than 5% relative intensity. Two files were collected for each sample: the first collected an ETD scan with supplemental energy (EThcD) while the second collected a scan without supplemental energy. Both used charge-calibrated ETD reaction times, 100 ms maximum inject time, and standard injection targets. EThcD parameters were as follows: Orbitrap detection (resolution 7,500), calibrated charge-dependent ETD times, 15% nCE for HCD, maximum inject time of 150 ms, and a standard precursor injection target. For the second file, dependent scans were only triggered for precursors below 1000 m/z, and data were collected in the ion trap using a normal scan rate.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using O-Pair search with MetaMorpheus against directed databases containing the protein of interest. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for MS1’s and 20 ppm for MS2’s. Methionine oxidation and asparagine deamidation were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The default O-glycan database was used except for analysis of GP1bɑ, where the database was based on the known glycomic profile. Files initially underwent a nonspecific search in order to determine the cleavage specificity of SmE. After the motif was determined, files generated using only an O-glycoprotease digestion were searched with semi-specific cleavage N-terminal to serine and threonine and six allowed missed cleavages. Files that had an additional protease treatment were searched with the same parameters, but also allowed cleavage C-terminal to arginine or lysine. Results were filtered to a q value less than 0.01 and manually validated using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For glycoproteomic mapping, an in-house program was then used to detect abundant glycosylated species that were not identified by the database search. The peptide sequence and associated glycosylation in these spectra were determined manually. Relative abundances were obtained by generating extracted ion chromatograms and determining area under the curve.

### Publication Abstract
Mucin-domain glycoproteins are densely O-glycosylated and play critical roles in a host of biological functions. In particular, the T cell immunoglobulin and mucin-domain containing family of proteins (TIM-1, -3, -4) decorate immune cells and act as key regulators in cellular immunity. However, their dense O-glycosylation remains enigmatic, primarily due to the challenges associated with studying mucin domains. Here, we demonstrate that the mucinase SmE has a unique ability to cleave at residues bearing very complex glycans. SmE enables improved mass spectrometric analysis of several mucins, including the entire TIM family. With this information in-hand, we perform molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of TIM-3 and -4 to understand how glycosylation affects structural features of these proteins. Finally, we use these models to investigate the functional relevance of glycosylation for TIM-3 function and ligand binding. Overall, we present a powerful workflow to better understand the detailed molecular structures and functions of the mucinome.

### Keywords
Checkpoint inhibitor, Molecular dynamics, O-glycosylation, Tim-1, Mucinase, Mucin domain, Tim-4, Tim-3, O-glycoprotein, Immune checkpoint, Mucin, O-glycoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Mucinome, T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin-domain containing, O-glycoprotease, Cancer

### Affiliations
Yale University, Department of Chemistry
Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA

### Submitter
Alexandra Steigmeyer

### Lab Head
Dr Stacy A. Malaker
Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, USA


