### Accession
PXD039849

### Title
Interaction proteomics of yeast Sac1-ALFA

### Description
Interaction proteomics of yeast Sac1-ALFA compared to untagged control strains

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analysis was performed as described previously55. Briefly, cells were grown in SDC medium containing either light or heavy lysine (30 µg/ml). Main cultures were inoculated in 500 ml SDC medium containing light or heavy lysine (30 µg/ml) from a pre-culture to an OD600 0.1 and grown over day to an OD600 0.8. The same amount of OD units from both cultures were harvested at 4,000 rpm, at 4 °C for 5 min, resuspended in ALFA pull-down buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM potassium acetate, 5% glycerol, 1x FY and 1 mM PMSF) and frozen in a drop-by-drop fashion in liquid nitrogen. Cells were lysed with 500 µl acid-washed glass beads in 500 µl ALFA pull-down buffer using the FastPrep (MP biomedi-cals). After a centrifugation step at 1,000 g and 4 °C for 10 min, GDN was added to a final concentration of 1 % and the supernatants of light and heavy lysine cultured strains were in-cubated for 1.5 h at 4 °C on a turning wheel. Supernatants were spun down at 14,000 rpm at 4 °C for 10 min and incubated on a turning wheel at 4 °C with 12.5 µl in ALFA pull-down buff-er equilibrated ALFA beads (NanoTag Biotechnologies). The beads were washed in total six times first with pull-down buffer and then with washing buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM potassium acetate, 5% glycerol). Beads of light and heavy lysine cultured strains were combined during the last washing step. Proteins on the beads were reduced, alkylated and digested with LysC at 37 °C overnight following the protocol of the iST Sample Preparation Kit (PreOmics) for protein digestion. Dried peptides were resuspended in 10 µl LC-Load and 5 µl were used to perform reversed-phase chromatography on a Thermo Ultimate 3000 RSLC-nano system connected to a QExactivePLUS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source. Peptides were separated on a PepMap RSLC C18 easy spray column (2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an inner diameter of 75 µm and a column temperature of 40 °C. Elution of peptides from the column was realized via a linear gradient of acetonitrile from 12-35% in 0.1% formic acid for 80 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min following a 20 min increase to 60% and finally 10 min to reach 90% buffer B.  Eluted peptides were directly electro sprayed into the mass spectrome-ter. Mass spectra were acquired on the Q ExactivePlus in a data-dependent mode to auto-matically switch between full scan MS and up to ten data-dependent MS/MS scans. The maximum injection time for full scans was 50 ms, with a target value of 3,000,000 at a resolu-tion of 70,000 at m/z 200. The ten most intense multiply charged ions (z≥2) from the survey scan were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 Th and fragment with higher energy collision dissociation (Olsen et al., 2007) with normalized collision energies of 27. Target values for MS/MS were set at 100,000 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. To avoid repetitive sequencing, the dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set at 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Resulting data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0, www.maxquant.org/) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011), the R software package (www.r-project.org/; RRID:SCR_001905) and Perseus (V2.0.7.0, www.maxquant.org/perseus) 56.

### Publication Abstract
Sphingolipids are structural membrane components that also function in cellular stress responses. The serine palmitoyltransferase (SPT) catalyzes the rate-limiting step in sphingolipid biogenesis. Its activity is tightly regulated through multiple binding partners, including Tsc3, Orm proteins, ceramides, and the phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate (PI4P) phosphatase Sac1. The structural organization and regulatory mechanisms of this complex are not yet understood. Here, we report the high-resolution cryo-EM structures of the yeast SPT in complex with Tsc3 and Orm1 (SPOT) as dimers and monomers and a monomeric complex further carrying Sac1 (SPOTS). In all complexes, the tight interaction of the downstream metabolite ceramide and Orm1 reveals the ceramide-dependent inhibition. Additionally, observation of ceramide and ergosterol binding suggests a co-regulation of sphingolipid biogenesis and sterol metabolism within the SPOTS complex.

### Keywords
Silac, Sac1, Ipms

### Affiliations
University of Osnabrueck; DEpartment of Biology/Chemistry
Osnabrück University Department of Biology/Chemistry Bioanalytical Chemistry section

### Submitter
Florian Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Fröhlich
Osnabrück University Department of Biology/Chemistry Bioanalytical Chemistry section


