### Accession
PXD009026

### Title
DNA mismatch repair activity of MutLalpha is regulated by CK2-dependent phosphorylation of MLH1

### Description
Mass spectrometry based PTM phosphorylation analysis to study regulation mechanism of MUTL alpha, a heterodimer consisting of MLH1 and PMS2 and a key player in DNA mismatch repair (MMR). It could be demonstrated that phosphorylation of MLH1 by Casein Kinase II (CK2) at amino acid position 477 can switch off MMR activity in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of MUTL alpha from Calyculin treated HEK293T cells following  1D SDS PAGE,tryptic in-gel digestion and capillary LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis using LTQ OrbitrapXL MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis using LTQ Orbitrap XL MS (50 min. acquiring time, 150 - 2000 m/z) following ProteomeDiscoverer (version 1.1) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) settings: 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.8 Da fragment tolerance; charge states 1+ to 4+, MASCOT: SwissProt (Homo sapiens, fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications: Ammonia-loss (N-term C), Oxidation (HW) (M); Phospho (ST) (Y).

### Publication Abstract
MutL&#x3b1;, a heterodimer consisting of MLH1 and PMS2, is a key player of DNA mismatch repair (MMR), yet little is known about its regulation. In this study, we used mass spectrometry to identify phosphorylated residues within MLH1 and PMS2. The most frequently detected phosphorylated amino acid was serine 477 of MLH1. Pharmacological treatment indicates&#x200e; that Casein kinase II (CK2) could be responsible for the phosphorylation of MLH1 at serine 477 in vivo. In vitro kinase assay verified MLH1 as a substrate of CK2. Most importantly, using in vitro MMR assay we could demonstrate that p-MLH1<sup>S477</sup> lost MMR activity. Moreover, we found that levels of p-MLH1<sup>S477</sup> varied during the cell cycle. In summary, we identified that phosphorylation of MLH1 by CK2 at amino acid position 477 can switch off MMR activity in vitro. Since CK2 is overexpressed in many tumors and is able to inactivate MMR, the new mechanism here described could have an important impact on tumors overactive in CK2.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Immunoprecipitation, Mutl alpha, Lc-ms/ms, Hek293t cells

### Affiliations
Experimental Ophthalmology, Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Mainz
Experimental Ophthalmology Ophthalmology University Medical Center Mainz Germany

### Submitter
Sebastian Funke

### Lab Head
Dr Franz H. Grus
Experimental Ophthalmology Ophthalmology University Medical Center Mainz Germany


