### Accession
PXD021237

### Title
Proteomic characterization of the Pseudomonas sp. strain phDV1 response to monocyclic aromatic compounds

### Description
The degradation of aromatic compounds comprises an important step in the removal of pollutants and re-utilization of plastics and other non-biological polymers. Here we set out to study Pseudomonas sp. strain phDV1, a gram-negative bacterium that was selected for its ability to degrade aromatic compounds. In order to understand how the aromatic compounds and their degradation products are reintroduced in the metabolism of the bacteria and the systematic/metabolic response of the bacterium to the new carbon source, the proteome of this strain was analysed in the presence of succinate, phenol and o-, m-, p-cresol as sole carbon source. We then applied label-free quantitative proteomics to monitor overall proteome remodeling during metabolic adaptation to different carbon sources. As a reference proteome, we grew the bacteria in succinate and then compared the respective proteomes of bacteria grown on phenol and different cresols. In total, we identified 2295 proteins; 1908 proteins were used for quantification between different growth conditions. We found that 70, 100, 150 and 155 proteins were significantly differentially expressed in cells were grown in phenol, o-, m- and p-cresol-containing medium, respectively. The carbon source affected the synthesis of enzymes related to aromatic compound degradation, and in particular, the enzyme involved in the meta-pathway of monocyclic aromatic compounds degradation. In addition, proteins involved in the production of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA), an attractive biomaterial, showed higher expression levels in the presence of monocyclic aromatic compounds.Our results provide for the first time comprehensive information on the proteome response of this strain to monocyclic aromatic compounds.

### Sample Protocol
The bacterium was cultured as described in Tsirogianni et al [7] with the following modifications. The strain was grown in M9 minimal medium in the presence of 10 mM succinate. After collection, the strains were grown on petri dishes in Luria broth medium containing 2.2 mM phenol. Colonies were transfered in phenol containing Luria broth medium for overnight growth, containing 2.2 mM phenol. The overnight culture was used to inoculate M9 minimal medium containing 10 mM succinate, 2.2 mM phenol and 1.9 mM cresols, respectively. The cultures were grown at 32ºC and the growth was monitored by measuring the optical density at 600 nm. Optical spectra were recorded on a dual wavelength UV2700 UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu). The consumption of aromatic compounds was monitored by 275 nm and the consumed compound  was resupplied. The cells were collected at OD600 = 0.9-1.0 by centrifugation at 6000 g for 20 min at 4° C. The pellet was resuspended in 50 mM Tris/H2SO4 in a ratio of 1 gr cell per 1.5 ml buffer and were stored at -40° C. Three biological replicates were prepared for each carbon source. Approximate 0,5 mg of cells were suspended in 500µl of 200 mM Tris/HCl, 8M Urea, 4% CHAPS, 1M NaCl containing protease inhibitors. The sample was incubated for 30 min on ice and broken by sonication using a micro tip at a Branson ultrasonic processor at 20% of the power (10 times, 2 sec with 15 sec intervals), while the temperature was maintained below 10 ºC, with a freezing bath. After the sonication 2μl benzonase (Sigma) was added for 10 min on ice. The sample was centrifuged at 10000 g for 5 min. at 6°C.  The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was estimated using a nanodrop photometer at 280 nm (ND-1000 Spectrophotometer, peqlab Biotechnologie GmbH, Erlangen Germany)    About 70 μg protein were loaded per filter unit (Microcon-10, Merck Millipore). After addition of 200 μl UA solution (6.5M Urea in 0.1M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) to the filter the sample was centrifuged at 14000 g for 20min. This step was repeated twice and the flow through was discarded carefully. The sample was incubated at room temperature with 100μl UA solution containing 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT) using a thermomixer for 30 min in the dark. The filter unit was centrifuged at 14000 g for 20min and the flow through was discarded carefully. Subsequently 100μl of UA solution containing 95mM Iodoacetamide  (IAA) was added and incubated at room temperature using a thermomixer for 30 min in the dark.  The filter unit was then centrifuged at 14000 g for 20min and the flow through was discarded. The filter was washed three times with 100μl of UB solution (6.5M Urea in 0.1M Tris/HCl, pH 8) and centrifuged at 14000 g for 20min. The filter unit was incubated with 40μl of UB containing Lys-C in a ratio of 1:50 in the dark at room temperature overnight. The unit was transferred to a new collection tube and 100 μl of ABS solution containing trypsin in a ratio 1:100 were added and the unit was incubated in the dark at room temperature overnight. The unit was centrifuged at 14000 g for 15min. Then 50 μl of 0,5M NaCl were added and the filter unit was centrifuged at 14000 g for 15min. The filtrate was acidified with 0,1% TFA and was desalted by C-18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore) according to the manufacturers protocols and dried in a SpeedVac.  For LC-MS/MS injection, the dried peptide fractions were dissolved in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, and subsequently loaded on reverse phase columns (trapping cartridge: 5µm C18-beads, L=5mm, inner diameter=100µm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen); analytical column: ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.8 μm beads, 75-μm inner diameter, L=50cm (Pepsep, Marslev, Denmark) using a nano-HPLC (Bruker nanoElute). Eluted peptides were separated over a 90min gradient of water (buffer A: water with 0.1% formic acid) and acetonitrile (buffer B: acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid). All LC-MS-grade solvents were purchased from Fluka. Typically, gradients were ramped from 2% to 35% B in 90 minutes at flowrates of 300nl/min. Peptides eluting from the analytical column were ionised online using a Bruker CaptiveSpray ESI-source and analysed in a Bruker Impact-II mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired over the mass range 150-2200 m/z, and sequence information was acquired by a computer-controlled, dynamic method with a fixed cycle time of 3s and an intensity dependent acquisition speed for MS/MS-spectra between 8 and 20Hz (instant expertise-mode) of the candidate ions.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were loaded into MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) and analyzed using the Andromeda search engine [14].  In brief, spectra were matched to a data set containing the Pseudomonas sp. phDV1 genome from NCBI. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm in the primary analysis and 4.5 ppm in the full search. Fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Search parameters were strict trypsin specificity, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Oxidation of methionines residues (+15.995) and acetylation of protein N-terminal (+42.011) were set as variable modification with carboxyamidomethylation (+57.021) being the fixed modification. The protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 and proteins with two peptides were included for subsequent analysis. Label-free quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ-algorithm implemented in MaxQuant as described [15]. In MaxQuant the “match between runs” option was used. Protein abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (Label-free Quantitation LFQ intensity). The statistical analysis was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.1.6). Proteins identified as contaminants, “reverse” were filtered out, as well as proteins which have been only identified by a side modification. The log2-transformed LFQ intensities of the samples were grouped (three biological and three technical replicates) and two sample t-tests of the grouped proteins were performed using a permutation-based FDR truncation. A t test (permutation-based FDR 1% and s0=0,5 ) was performed on the proteins identified in at least 2 replicates of one biological sample with 7 and more amino acids in each peptide and 4 or more unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The degradation of aromatic compounds comprises an important step in the removal of pollutants and re-utilization of plastics and other non-biological polymers. Here, Pseudomonas sp. strain phDV1, a gram-negative bacterium that is selected for its ability to degrade aromatic compounds is studied. In order to understand how the aromatic compounds and their degradation products are reintroduced in the metabolism of the bacteria and the systematic/metabolic response of the bacterium to the new carbon source, the proteome of this strain is analyzed in the presence of succinate, phenol, and o-, m-, and p-cresol as the sole carbon source. As a reference proteome, the bacteria are grown in succinate and then compared with the respective proteomes of bacteria grown on phenol and different cresols. In total, 2295 proteins are identified; 1908 proteins are used for quantification between different growth conditions. The carbon source affects the synthesis of enzymes related to aromatic compound degradation and in particular the enzyme involved in the meta-pathway of monocyclic aromatic compounds degradation. In addition, proteins involved in the production of polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA), an attractive biomaterial, show higher abundance in the presence of monocyclic aromatic compounds. The results provide, for the first time, comprehensive information on the proteome response of this strain to monocyclic aromatic compounds.

### Keywords
Cresol, Phenol, Aromatic degradation, Pseudomonas

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry lab Max Planck Institute of Biophysics Max Planck Institute for Brain Research Max von Laue Strasse 3/4 60438 Frankfurt am Main Germany

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry lab Max Planck Institute of Biophysics Max Planck Institute for Brain Research Max von Laue Strasse 3/4 60438 Frankfurt am Main Germany


