### Accession
PXD019263

### Title
HepG2 whole cell lysate LC-MS and 2D-LC-MS

### Description
Enchancing sensitivity of shotgun proteomics by means of offline fractionation of complex peptide sample of HepG2 by reversed phased chromatography in alkaline conditions. The aim of this study is deep human chromosome 18 proteome coverage.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were collected from plates and washed 3 times with PBS. Then they were lyzed in a solution containing 8M Urea, 1% Na deoxycholate, 10 mM PBS pH 7.2, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail. The solution was sonicated 5 cycles at 30% amplitude. Then the solution was clarified by centrifugation and desalted on 10 kDa MWCO filter. Proteins were reconstituted in 100 mM TEA and trypsin was added in a 1:100 ratio. The reaction was conducted at 38 degrees celsius overnight. Then part of this sample was analyzed by LC-MS and the other part was fractioned by RP chromatography in alkaline conditions and collected fractions were analyzed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
MS analysis was performed at least in triplicate with a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM Mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockwell, IL, USA). The temperature of capillary was 240°C and the voltage at the emitter was 2.1 kV. Mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (MS) in a range of 300−1500 m/z.Tandem mass spectra of fragments were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 (MS/MS) in the range from 100 m/z to m/z value determined by a charge state of the precursor, but no more than 2000 m/z. The maximum integration time was 50 ms and 110 ms for precursor and fragment ions, correspondently. AGC target for precursor and fragment ions were set to 1*10 6 and 2*10 5 ,correspondently. An isolation intensity threshold of 50,000 counts was determined for precursor’s selection and up to top 20 precursors were chosen for fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 29 NCE. Precursors with a charge state of +1 and more than +5 were rejected and all measured precursors were dynamically excluded from triggering of a subsequent MS/MS for 20 s. Raw data obtained after LC-MS/MS were converted in peak list format and used for proteins identification. Peak lists obtained from spectra were identified using X!Tandem and the search was conducted using Search GUI version 3.3.20 [7]. Proteins were identified against a concatenated target/decoy database of human proteins (Uniprot). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in Search GUI. The identification settings were as follows: trypsin as a specific protease, with a maximum of 1 missed cleavage, tolerance of ±5 ppm as MS1 level and tolerance of ±0.01 Da as MS2 level tolerances; variable modifications: oxidation of M (+15.99), deamination of N (+0.98 u), deamination of Q (+0.98 u); cysteine carbamidomethylation C (+57.02 u) was set as a fixed modification. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Proteins and peptide report were generated by Peptide Shaker software version 1.16.45.

### Publication Abstract
One of the main goals of the Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) is detection of "missing proteins" (PE2-PE4). Using the UPS2 (Universal proteomics standard 2) set as a model to simulate the range of protein concentrations in the cell, we have previously shown that 2D fractionation enables the detection of more than 95% of UPS2 proteins in a complex biological mixture. In this study, we propose a novel experimental workflow for protein detection during the analysis of biological samples. This approach is extremely important in the context of the C-HPP and the neXt-MP50 Challenge, which can be solved by increasing the sensitivity and the coverage of the proteome encoded by a particular human chromosome. In this study, we used 2D fractionation for in-depth analysis of the proteins encoded by human chromosome 18 (Chr 18) in the HepG2 cell line. Use of 2D fractionation increased the sensitivity of the SRM SIS method by 1.3-fold (68 and 88 proteins were identified by 1D fractionation and 2D fractionation, respectively) and the shotgun MS/MS method by 2.5-fold (21 and 53 proteins encoded by Chr 18 were detected by 1D fractionation and 2D fractionation, respectively). The results of all experiments indicate that 111 proteins encoded by human Chr 18 have been identified; this list includes 42% of the Chr 18 protein-coding genes and 67% of the Chr 18 transcriptome species (Illumina RNaseq) in the HepG2 cell line obtained using a single sample. Corresponding mRNAs were not registered for 13 of the detected proteins. The combination of 2D fractionation technology with SRM SIS and shotgun mass spectrometric analysis did not achieve full coverage, i.e., identification of at least one protein product for each of the 265 protein-coding genes of the selected chromosome. To further increase the sensitivity of the method, we plan to use 5-10 crude synthetic peptides for each protein to identify the proteins and select one of the peptides based on the obtained mass spectra for the synthesis of an isotopically labeled standard for subsequent quantitative analysis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD019263.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, 2d-lc/ms, Hepg2

### Affiliations
IBMC (Institute of Biomedical Chemistry)
Department of proteomics and mass spectrometry, laboratory of system biology, IBMC, Russia

### Submitter
Nikita Vavilov

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Gavrilovich Zgoda
Department of proteomics and mass spectrometry, laboratory of system biology, IBMC, Russia


