### Accession
PXD010122

### Title
Human pBAF complex (HA-BRD7, PHF10-HA pulldown)

### Description
Mammalian SWI/SNF (mSWI/SNF) ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes are large, multisubunit molecular machines that play vital roles in regulating genomic architecture and are frequently disrupted in human cancer and developmental disorders. To date, the organization and pathway of assembly of these chromatin regulators remain unknown, presenting a major barrier to structural and functional determination. Here we elucidate the architecture and assembly pathway of three different classes of mammalian SWI/SNF complexes: canonical BAF, PBAF, and a newly defined complex, ncBAF, and define the requirement of each subunit for complex formation and stability. Using affinity purification of endogenous complexes from mammalian and Drosophila cells coupled with cross linking-mass spectrometry, we uncover three distinct and evolutionarily conserved modules, their organization, and the temporal incorporation of these modules into each complete mSWI/SNF complex class.

### Sample Protocol
Purified protein complexes in 25mM HEPES pH 7.6, 150 mM KCl, 1mM EDTA, 1mM MgCl2, 1mM DTT, 1mM PMSF and 10% Glycerol, were crosslinked by addition of BS3 (Thermo Scientific; freshly prepared as 100 mM in pure water) to 2 mM for 2hrs at 25º C. The protein amounts used: HA-BRD7: 17ug; PHF10-HA: 15ug. we followed the sample preparation protocol using SP3 beads described by Hughes et al., 2014 (PMID: 25358341): 10uL of SP3 beads (10ug/uL ) and an equal volume of acetonitrile were added to the crosslinked samples and incubated at 60º C for 30 minutes with shaking. Then the beads were concentrated with a magnet and washed with 70% ethanol and 100% acetonitrile. The beads were then suspended in 100 uL 8M Urea in 1 M ammonium bicarbonate and treated with TECP/IAA for 2 hrs at 37º C in the dark. Then the samples were diluted 10 times with water and digested by addition of trypsin (20:1, protein:trypsin) overnight at 37º C. All peptide samples were desalted by passage over C18 cartridges (The Nest group, Southborough, MA),  and dried by Speed-Vac. The peptides were resuspended in 50 L Buffer A (25 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, pH 2.8). 1 ug of each sample was reserved for direct MS analysis and the remaining sample was fractionated using an in-house prepared microcapillary strong cation exchange column (200 mm X 20 cm; 5 m, 200 Å partisphere SCX, Whatman or Proteomix SCX 3um, Sepax Technologies). We used a binary HPLC pump with split flow with microcapillary flowrate at 2-3 uL/min.  Peptides were loaded onto the microcapillary column equilibrated in Buffer A and washed with Buffer A. Bound peptides were eluted with 20 μl of Buffer A containing 30%, 50%, 70%, and 100% Buffer B (800 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.8), followed by 50 μl elutions with Buffer B containing 5%, or 10% Buffer D (0.5 M ammonium acetate, 30% acetonitrile),or just 20 μl of Buffer D. All fractions were dried in a Speed-vac, and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2% acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files were converted to mzXML files by Rawconverter (He et al., 2015, PMID: 26499134). For crosslinked peptide searches, we used two different crosslink database searching algorithms: pLink (Yang et al, 2012, PMID: 22772728) and an in-house designed Nexus.  After performing the pLink and Nexus analyses, the search results were combined and each spectrum was manually evaluated for the quality of the match to each peptide using the COMET/Lorikeet Spectrum Viewer (TPP). Crosslinked peptides are considered confidently identified if at least 4 consecutive b or y ions for each peptide are observed and the majority of the observed ions are accounted for. Search results that did not meet these criteria were removed. Intralinks involving a crosslink between identical residues were only kept if the spectral evidence strongly supported the identification; that is, the major fragment ions correspond to the intralinked peptide sequence and no/few other fragment ions were observed. The percentage of spectra deleted after manual examination was:   BRD7 (34.9% for interlinks, 15.7% for intralinks), PHF10 (25.7% for interlinks, 9.7% for intralinks).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pbaf, Bs3., Hswi/snf

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Jie Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Jeff Ranish
Institute for Systems Biology


