### Accession
PXD045084

### Title
Toxicological Effects and Underlying Mechanisms of Chlorination–Derived Metformin Byproducts in Escherichia coli

### Description
Chlorination–derived byproducts of the emerging contaminant metformin, such as 3,3-CDTA and NCDC, occurring in global waters are toxic to biota, be it from bacteria to mice. However, the underlying toxicological mechanisms remain unknown. Here, we explored the toxicological effects and underlying molecular mechanisms of 3,3-CDTA and NCDC at milligram levels using Escherichia coli as a model organism. Compared with metformin (>300 mg/L), 3,3-CDTA and NCDC exerted stronger toxicity to E. coli with the 4-h IC50 of 2.97 mg/L and 75.7 mg/L, respectively. Both byproducts disrupted E. coli cellular structures and components, decreased membrane potential and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) biosynthesis, and produced excessive reactive oxidative species (ROSs), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and catalase. Proteomics analysis and molecular docking not only supported these biomarker responses in the byproduct-treated E. coli and indicated possible the damage of DNA/RNA process but also presented a novel insight into their toxicological and detoxification effects at the proteome level. Therefore, the mechanistically toxicological effects by which NCDC and 3,3-CDTA are toxic were ascribed to membrane disruption, oxidative stress, and abnormal protein expression. This study discusses the first toxicological effects of chlorination–derived metformin byproducts in E. coli and broadens understanding of the toxic effects and transformation risks of metformin throughout its entire life process.

### Sample Protocol
The intracellular protein of E. coli cells in the control and chemical–treated groups was extracted by One Step Bacterial Active Protein Extraction Kit (C500023, Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China) and detected using bicinchoninic acid method (P0012S, Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, China). In brief, 10-mL E. coli suspension exposed to metformin (300 mg/L), NCDC (150 mg/L), and 3,3-CDTA (48 mg/L) for 0, 1, 2, 4, 6, and 8 h was collected and centrifuged at 12000 g and 4 ℃ for 20 min. Subsequently, the pellet was resuspended with 101.5 μL protein extractant (extracting solution: Lysozyme: DNase Ⅰ: DTT: PMSF = 1000:2:2:1:10) which was about 5-fold wet bacteria weight, incubated in an orbital shaker at 180 rpm for 20 min in the dark, and then centrifuged at 12000 g and 4 ℃ for 20 min. Twenty–microliter extracted supematant and 200 μL BCA solution (BCA–A: BCA–B = 50:1) were mixed and incubated in each well of a 96-well plate at 37 ℃ for 30 min. Finally, the sample was measured the absorbance at 562 nm by the microplate reader.  The preparation of protein sample for mass spectrometric analysis was as follows: 1) The protein solution was reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol (dithiothreitol–to–protein volume ratio of 1:20, initial concentration 100 mM) at 60 °C for 30 minutes and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide (iodoacetamide–to–protein volume ratio of 1:10, initial concentration 200 mM) at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. 2) The reaction was quenched by 5 mM dithiothreitol (dithiothreitol–to–protein volume ratio of 1:20) at room temperature for 15 min, and added an optimized amount of prepared beads (Protein: beads=1:10, i.e., 2 μL 50 μg/μL beads for 10 μg of protein). 3) The mixture was bonded using the equal volume of 100% ethanol and incubated in a Mixer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) at 1000 rpm and 24 °C for 10 min. 4) The unbound supernatant was removed and the beads were washed with 180 μL 80% ethanol for four times. 5) The pellet was resuspended using 100 μL 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing trypsin (1:50, trypsin–to–protein mass ratio), sonicated for 30 s in a water bath and digested at 37 °C and 1000 rpm for 18 h in the Mixer. 6) The sample reacted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and centrifuged at 20000 g and 24 °C for 1 min. 7) The supernatant was freeze–dried and resuspended in 15 μL 0.1% formic acid for an EASY–nLC1200 integrated high performance liquid chromatography tandem a Q exactive HF–X hybrid quadrupole–orbitrap mass spectrometer (HPLC–MS/MS). The proteins were measured by HPLC–MS/MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The peptides separation was achieved on a home–made fused silica capillary column (75 µm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C18 resin (300 A, 3 µm, Varian, Lexington, MA) using a mixture of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (solvent B). A 139 min gradient elution was set up: 0–1 min (2%–8%, eluent B); 1–104 min: (8%–28%, eluent B);104–114 min (28%–35%, eluent B); 114–117 min (35%–98%, eluent B); 117–139 min (98%, eluent B). The HPLC was operated at a flow rate of 0.300 µL/min, with injection volume of 6 μL. The MS was operated in the data–dependent acquisition mode using the Xcalibur 4.1 software that alternated between a single full–scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (400–1800 m/z, 60000 resolution) and 20 data–dependent MS/MS scans at 30% normalized collision energy. The HPLC–MS/MS data was processed and analyzed using the Thermo Xcalibur Qual Browser and Proteome Discovery (version 2.4, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Workflow: CWF_Comprehensive_Enhanced Annotation_LFQ_and_Precursor_Quan(Result filtered for high confident peptides, with enhanced peptide and protein annotations. Added FASTA file with common contaminants to the Quan abunance are normalized to the same total peptide amount per channel and scaled. so that the average abunce per protein and peptides were obtained.) Workflow: PWF_qe_Precursor_Quan_and _FLQ_SequestHT_Percolator (Processing workflow for precursor-based quantification. using SequestHT with Preolator validation. Specify the FASTA database, labels used, and ang additional modification.) Each mass spectrum was analyzed using the Thermo Xcalibur Qual Browser and Proteome Discovery (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resulting peptide sequences were searched against the UniProt E. coli (strain K-12) (Proteome ID: UP000000625, 4448 sequences) database concatenated with a reverse decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Chlorination-derived byproducts of the emerging contaminant metformin, such as (3E)-3-(chloroimino)-N,N-dimethyl-3H-1,2,4-triazol-5-amine (3,3-CDTA) and N-cyano-N,N-dimethylcarbaminmidic chloride (NCDC), occur in global waters and are toxic to organisms, from bacteria to mice. However, the mechanisms underlying their toxicity remain unknown. Here, we explored the toxicological effects and potential molecular mechanisms of 3,3-CDTA and NCDC at milligram concentrations, using Escherichia coli as a model organism. Compared with metformin (&gt;300&#xa0;mg/L), 3,3-CDTA and NCDC exerted stronger toxicity to E. coli, with a 4-h half maximal inhibitory concentration of 2.97&#xa0;mg/L and 75.7&#xa0;mg/L, respectively. Both byproducts disrupted E. coli cellular structures and components, decreased membrane potential and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) biosynthesis, and led to excessive reactive oxidative species (ROS), as well as the ROS-scavenging enzymes superoxide dismutase and catalase. Proteomic analysis and molecular docking supported these biomarker responses in the byproduct-treated E. coli, and indicated potential damage to DNA/RNA processes, while also provided novel insights into the toxicological and detoxified-byproduct effects at the proteome level. The toxicity-related events of NCDC and 3,3-CDTA included membrane disruption, oxidative stress, and abnormal protein expression. This study is the first to examine the toxicological effects of chlorination-derived metformin byproducts in E. coli and the associated pathways involved; thereby broadening our understanding regarding the toxicity and transformation risks of metformin throughout its entire life process.

### Keywords
Chlorinated byproducts, Biomarkers, Lc-ms/ms, E. coli

### Affiliations
Westlake University
Enbironmental Microbiome and Biotechnology Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Coastal Environment and Resources of Zhejiang Province, School of Engineering, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310030, China

### Submitter
Yuanzhen He

### Lab Head
Dr Feng Ju
Enbironmental Microbiome and Biotechnology Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Coastal Environment and Resources of Zhejiang Province, School of Engineering, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310030, China


