### Accession
PXD000636

### Title
A conserved AAA+ ATPase network regulates endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced transcription

### Description
In C. elegans cdc-48.2(-/-) mutant animals, ER stress-mediated expression of the UPR ckb-2::GFP reporter transgene is abolished. Here, we have used this phenotype in a genome-wide RNAi screen to identify genes involved in the CDC-48.2 mediated ER stress transcription. Combined with a comparative proteomic analysis, this approach has allowed us to identify the AAA+ ATPase RUVB-2 as a novel regulator of the ER stress response and a CDC-48 degradation target.

### Sample Protocol
PROTEIN EXTRACTION, SDS-PAGE GEL, IN-GEL DIGESTION OF PROTEINS AND SAMPLE PREPARATION FOR MS ANALYSIS: DATA ACQUISITION, DATABASE SEARCHING AND LABEL-FREE ANALYSIS

### Data Protocol
The Mascot Daemon software (version 2.2.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) was used for protein identification in batch mode with the non-redundant Caenorhabditis elegans SwissProt database as a reference. Green fluorescent protein from the Aequorea victoria SwissProt database was added to the database. Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation on cysteine were searched as variable modifications. Mascot results were parsed with MFPaQ version 4.0.0 beta 5 software (Mascot File Parsing and Quantification, Toulouse, France), and protein hits were automatically validated with 1% protein FDR (evaluated using the “decoy” option of Mascot). Only top ranking peptides with a Mascot score higher than the identify threshold at p = 0.05 were selected for quantification. Quantification of peptides was performed using the MFPaQ v4.0.0 beta software label-free module by XIC extraction and comparison of area under the curve (AUC) values of peptides with the same sequence, the same modification(s) and the same charge state. Area values were first normalized on the total AUC of all identified peptides. Only peptides with a coefficient of variation of area values ≤30% were kept. Further, only proteins supported by at least two peptides were included. Protein ratios were defined as the average of the ratios of the peptides assigned to the protein. Proteins were considered as variants if ≥70% of their peptides ratios were ≥2 or ≤0.5 and if the other peptides ratios were ≥1.4 and ≤0.71.

### Publication Abstract
The accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) activates the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR(ER)) to restore ER homeostasis. The AAA(+) ATPase p97/CDC-48 plays key roles in ER stress by promoting both ER protein degradation and transcription of UPR(ER) genes. Although the mechanisms associated with protein degradation are now well established, the molecular events involved in the regulation of gene transcription by p97/CDC-48 remain unclear. Using a reporter-based genome-wide RNAi screen in combination with quantitative proteomic analysis in Caenorhabditis elegans, we have identified RUVB-2, a AAA(+) ATPase, as a novel repressor of a subset of UPR(ER) genes. We show that degradation of RUVB-2 by CDC-48 enhances expression of ER stress response genes through an XBP1-dependent mechanism. The functional interplay between CDC-48 and RUVB-2 in controlling transcription of select UPR(ER) genes appears conserved in human cells. Together, these results describe a novel role for p97/CDC-48, whereby its role in protein degradation is integrated with its role in regulating expression of ER stress response genes.

### Keywords
Ruvb-2, C. elegans, Vcp, Cdc-48, Proteomic screen, Reptin, Rnai screen, Endoplasmic reticulum stress, P97

### Affiliations
Team "Endoplasmic Reticulum stress and cancer", INSERM, UMR1053, Bordeaux, France
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Chevet Eric
Team "Endoplasmic Reticulum stress and cancer", INSERM, UMR1053, Bordeaux, France


