### Accession
PXD026098

### Title
Phosphorylation of the NBDY microprotein promotes dissociation of biomolecular condensates

### Description
Proteogenomic identification of translated small open reading frames in human has revealed thousands of microproteins, or polypeptides of fewer than 100 amino acids, that were previously invisible to geneticists. Hundreds of microproteins have been shown to be essential for cell growth and proliferation, and many regulate macromolecular complexes, but the vast majority remain functionally uncharacterized, lack secondary structure, and exhibit limited evolutionary conservation. One such intrinsically disordered microprotein is NBDY, a 68-amino acid component of membraneless organelles known as P-bodies. In this work, we show that NBDY can undergo liquid-liquid phase separation, a biophysical process thought to underlie the formation of membraneless organelles, in the presence of RNA in vitro. Phosphorylation of NBDY drives liquid phase remixing in vitro and macroscopic P-body dissociation in cells undergoing growth factor signaling and cell division. These results suggest that NBDY phosphorylation is a key regulator of P-body dynamics in cells, and more broadly that intrinsically disordered microproteins may contribute to liquid-liquid phase separation and remixing behavior in cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein-containing gel slices were digested with trypsin as previously described. The resulting peptide mixtures were extracted from the gel and dried, subjected to ethyl acetate extraction to remove residual detergent, and re-suspended in 15 µl of 3:8 70% formic acid: 0.1% TFA. A 10 μL aliquot of each sample was injected onto a pre-packed column attached to a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) in-line with an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific). Samples were trapped for 15 min with a flow rate of 2 μl/min on a 100-micron ID trap column packed for 5 cm with 5 μm Magic C18 AQ beads (Waters), and peptides were chromatographed on a 20 cm 75-micron ID analytical column (New Objective) packed in-house with 3 μm Magic C18 AQ beads (Waters). A NanoAcquity pump (Waters) eluted peptides at 300 nl/min flow rate as follows: Buffer A: water/0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: MeCN/0.1% formic acid; Gradient: 0% to 95% buffer B over 90 minutes. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS) was performed as follows: The full MS was collected over the range of 298–1750 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. MS/MS data were collected using a top 10 high-collisional energy dissociation method in data-dependent mode with a normalized collision energy of 33.0 eV and a 2.0 m/z isolation window. The first mass was 100 m/z in fixed mode. MS/MS resolution was 7500 and dynamic exclusion was 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using Mascot (version 2.5.0.1). We searched a database comprising human Uniprot proteins (version 2019) with the NBDY protein sequence appended. Phosphorylation of Ser, Thr and Tyr, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The MS1 mass error was set to 20 ppm, and MS/MS peak error was set at a maximum of 0.6 Da. Up to two missed cleavages were permitted. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. The minimum peptide length was set at five amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomic identification of translated small open reading frames in humans has revealed thousands of microproteins, or polypeptides of fewer than 100 amino acids, that were previously invisible to geneticists. Hundreds of microproteins have been shown to be essential for cell growth and proliferation, and many regulate macromolecular complexes. However, the vast majority of microproteins remain functionally uncharacterized, and many lack secondary structure and exhibit limited evolutionary conservation. One such intrinsically disordered microprotein is NBDY, a 68-amino acid component of membraneless organelles known as P-bodies. In this work, we show that NBDY can undergo liquid-liquid phase separation, a biophysical process thought to underlie the formation of membraneless organelles, in the presence of RNA <i>in vitro</i>. Phosphorylation of NBDY drives liquid phase remixing <i>in vitro</i> and macroscopic P-body dissociation in cells undergoing growth factor signaling and cell division. These results suggest that NBDY phosphorylation enables regulation of P-body dynamics during cell proliferation and, more broadly, that intrinsically disordered microproteins may contribute to liquid-liquid phase separation and remixing behavior to affect cellular processes.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Egf, Cell cycle, Nbdy

### Affiliations
Yale University
Department of Chemistry, Yale University

### Submitter
ZHENKUN NA

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Slavoff
Department of Chemistry, Yale University


