### Accession
PXD041066

### Title
Quantitative proteomics identifies tumour matrisome signatures in patients with non-small cell lung cancer

### Description
The composition and remodelling of the extracellular matrix (ECM) are important factors in the development and progression of cancers, and the ECM is implicated in promoting tumour growth and restricting anti-tumour therapies through multiple mechanisms. The characterisation of differences in ECM composition between normal and diseased tissues may aid in identifying novel diagnostic markers, prognostic indicators and therapeutic targets for drug development. Using tissue from non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients undergoing curative intent surgery, we characterised quantitative tumour-specific ECM proteome signatures by mass spectrometry, identifying 161 matrisome proteins differentially regulated between tumour tissue and nearby non-malignant lung tissue. We defined a collagen hydroxylation functional protein network that is enriched in the lung tumour microenvironment. We validated two novel putative extracellular markers of NSCLC, the collagen cross-linking enzyme peroxidasin and a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs 16 (ADAMTS16), for discrimination of malignant and non-malignant lung tissue. These proteins were up-regulated in lung tumour samples, and high PXDN and ADAMTS16 gene expression was associated with shorter survival of lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma patients, respectively. These data reveal tumour matrisome signatures in human NSCLC.

### Sample Protocol
Matrisome protein precipitation  Ice-cold TCA (10% (v/v) final concentration) was added to final ECM-enriched fractions for 20 min at 4°C. The sample was centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, and the ECM-enriched pellet was resuspended in ice-cold acetone, using vortexing and sonication, and incubated for 20 min at −20°C. The sample was centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was discarded. The acetone wash step was then repeated. Samples were air dried at room temperature until residual solvent had evaporated. Precipitated protein pellets were stored at −70°C until further use. Matrisome protein digestion  Precipitated protein pellets were resuspended in 300 μl solubilisation buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8, 10 mM dithiothreitol). Samples were sonicated on ice using a probe sonicator and then incubated for 30 min at 37°C. After cooling to room temperature, sample pH in the range pH 8–9 was verified using pH indicator paper. To 50 μl sample, 8.3 μl of 175 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8, was added (final concentration 25 mM) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark to block thiol groups of cysteine residues. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched by the addition of 3 μl of 100 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8. For protein digestion, urea was diluted from 8 M to 2 M using 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8. Samples were incubated with 833 units of PNGase F for 2 h at 37°C with shaking (900 rpm), then with 800 ng of Lys-C for 2 h at 37°C, then with 1.6 μg of MS-grade trypsin for 16 h at 37°C with shaking (1,200 rpm). Samples were then incubated with an additional 0.8 μg of trypsin for 2 h at 37°C with shaking (1,200 rpm). Samples were acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to obtain sample pH in the range pH 3–4, and samples were clarified by centrifugation at 18,000 × g for 15 min. Peptide desalting prior to MS analysis  Peptide concentrations in the digested samples were estimated using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer measuring absorbance at 280 nm. Stop-and-go extraction (Stage) tips were made in-house, using a method adapted from Rappsilber et al. (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Briefly, using an 18-gauge blunt-ended needle, two disks were cut from C18 solid-phase extraction material and placed on top of each other inside a 200-μl EasyLoad pipette tip (Greiner Bio-One). Stage tips were loaded into a custom-built tip holder over a deep 96-well plate. Methanol was added to each Stage tip, and tips were centrifuged at 300 × g for 2 min. Stage tips were then equilibrated with 0.1% (v/v) TFA and centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min. Samples estimated to contain 10 μg of acidified peptide (based on Nanodrop readings) were then added to Stage tips, and tips were centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min. Stage tips with bound protein were stored at −20°C until elution. Desalted peptide elution  Peptides were eluted from C18-containing Stage tips with 40 μl of 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA, and tips were centrifuged at 200 × g for 5 min. Acetonitrile was evaporated using a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were adjusted to 15 μl volume with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, and peptide concentration was re-measured using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer measuring absorbance at 280 nm. MS data acquisition  ‘Bottom-up’ liquid chromatography-coupled tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) was used to elucidate the structure of isolated peptides and to detect post-translational modifications. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC Nano (Thermo Fisher Scientific), Aurora C18 column (IonOpticks), column oven (maintained at 50°C; Sonation) and Proxeon Nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected onto an Aurora C18 column in buffer A (2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid) and eluted with a linear 120-min gradient of 2%–45% (v/v) buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid). Eluting peptides were ionised in positive-ion mode before data-dependent analysis. A dynamic exclusion window of 30 s was enabled and lockmass was not used.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis  The MS data were normalised and quantified using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) (Tyanova et al., 2016a). MaxQuant quantifies proteins using a label-free technique, which calculates a normalised peptide abundance from ion signal intensities (Cox et al., 2014). Peptide lists were searched against the human UniProt knowledgebase database (version 2019_09) (UniProt Consortium, 2019) and a common contaminants database using the Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, lysine oxidation, proline oxidation, N-terminal deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, with up to five modifications per peptide.  Peptide identifications were matched between runs if they eluted within a time window of 0.7 min. Enzyme specificity was C-terminal to arginine and lysine, except when followed by proline. A maximum of two missed cleavages were permitted in the database search; minimum peptide length was seven amino acids. At least two peptide ratios were required for label-free quantification, and large label-free quantification ratios were stabilised. Peptide and protein false-discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 1%, determined by applying the target-decoy search strategy implemented in MaxQuant. Proteins matching to the common contaminants or decoy databases, and matches only identified by site, were omitted. Label-free quantification intensities were log2 transformed, and proteins quantified in less than one-third of samples were removed. Missing values were imputed from a width-compressed, down-shifted Gaussian distribution using Perseus (version 1.6.2.3) (Tyanova et al., 2016b).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lung, Ecm, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr alex von kriegsheim
University of Edinburgh


