### Accession
PXD010166

### Title
Septin-2 is overexpressed in epithelial ovarian cancer and mediates proliferation via regulation of cellular metabolism proteins

### Description
Epithelial Ovarian Cancer (EOC) is associated with dismal survival rates due to the fact that patients are frequently diagnosed at an advanced stage and eventually become resistant to traditional chemotherapeutics. Hence, there is a crucial need for new and innovative therapies. Septin-2, a member of the septin family of GTP binding proteins, has been characterized in EOC for the first time and represents a potential future target. Septin-2 was found to be overexpressed in serous and clear cell human patient tissue compared to benign disease. Stable septin-2 knockout clones developed in an ovarian cancer cell line exhibited a significant decrease in proliferation rates. Comparative label-free proteomic analysis of septin-2 knockout cells revealed differential protein expression of pathways associated with the TCA cycle, acetyl CoA, proteasome and spliceosome,. Further validation of target proteins indicate that septin-2 plays a predominant role in post-transcriptional and translational modifications as well as cellular metabolism, and are the first to suggest the potential novel role of septin-2 in promoting EOC tumorigenesis through these mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were subjected in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 20 mM HEPES, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, pH 8.0, 20 min, 4°C), sonicated and cleared by centrifugation (14 000 × g, 15 min, 4°C). Protein concentration was measured (Pierce BCA Protein Assay, Thermo Fisher Scientific, IL, USA) and a total of 100 µg of protein per sample was subjected for trypsin digestion. Typtic peptides were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak plus cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA) and were lyophilized for 48 hours to dryness. The dried eluted peptides were reconstituted in buffer A (0.1 M acetic acid) at a concentration of 1 µg/µl and 5 µl was injected for each analysis.  The LC-MS/MS was performed on a fully automated proteomic technology platform that includes an Agilent 1200 Series Quaternary HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The LC-MS/MS set up was used as described earlier. Briefly, the peptides were separated through a linear reversed-phase 90 min gradient from 0% to 40% buffer B (0.1 M acetic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 3 µl /min through a 3 µm 20 cm C18 column. The electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied in a split flow configuration, and spectra were collected using a top-9 data-dependent method. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 400-1800) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 with an AGC target value of 3×106 ions or a maximum ion injection time of 200 ms. The peptide fragmentation was performed via higher-energy collision dissociation with the energy set at 28 NCE. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, with a targeted value of 2×104 ions or a maximum integration time of 200 ms. The ion selection abundance threshold was set at 8.0×102 with charge state exclusion of unassigned and z =1, or 6-8 ions and dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectrum matching of MS/MS spectra of each file was searched against a species-specific databases (UniProt; downloaded 2/1/2015) using MASCOT v. 2.4 (Matrix Science, Ltd, London, UK). A concatenated database containing “target” and “decoy” sequences was employed to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). Msconvert from ProteoWizard (v. 3.0.5047), using default parameters and with the MS2Deisotope filter on, was employed to create peak lists for Mascot. The Mascot database search was performed with the following parameters: trypsin enzyme cleavage specificity, 2 possible missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions, 20 mmu mass tolerance for fragment ions. Search parameters permitted variable modification of methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and static modification of carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) on cysteine. The resulting peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were reduced to sets of unique PSMs by eliminating lower scoring duplicates. To provide high confidence, the Mascot results were filtered for Mowse Score (>20). Peptide assignments from the database search were filtered down to a 1% FDR by a logistic spectral score as previously described.   Relative quantification of peptide abundance was performed via calculation of selected ion chromatograms (SIC) peak areas. Retention time alignment of individual replicate analyses was performed as previously described. Peak areas were calculated by inspection of SICs using in-house software programmed in R 3.0 based on the Scripps Center for Metabolomics’ XCMS package (version 1.40.0). This approach performed multiple passes through XCMS’ central wavelet transformation algorithm (implemented in the centWave function) over increasingly narrower ranges of peak widths, and used the following parameters: mass window of 10 ppm, minimum peak widths ranging from 2 to 20 seconds, maximum peak width of 80 seconds, signal to noise threshold of 10 and detection of peak limits via descent on the non-transformed data enabled. SIC peak areas were determined for every peptide that was identified by MS/MS. In the case of a missing MS/MS for a particular peptide, in a particular replicate, the SIC peak area was calculated according to the peptide's isolated mass and the retention time calculated from retention time alignment. A minimum SIC peak area equivalent to the typical spectral noise level of 1000 was required of all data reported for label-free quantitation. Individual SIC peak areas were normalized to the peak area of the standard synthetic peptide DRVYHPF that was exogenously spiked prior to reversed-phase elution into the mass spectrometer. Quantitative analysis was applied to replicate experiments. To select peptides that show a statistically significant change in abundance between control vs treatment cells, q-values for multiple hypothesis tests were calculated based on p-values from two-tailed unpaired Student’s t tests using the R package QVALUE as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
Epithelial Ovarian Cancer (EOC) is associated with dismal survival rates due to the fact that patients are frequently diagnosed at an advanced stage and eventually become resistant to traditional chemotherapeutics. Hence, there is a crucial need for new and innovative therapies. Septin-2, a member of the septin family of GTP binding proteins, has been characterized in EOC for the first time and represents a potential future target. Septin-2 was found to be overexpressed in serous and clear cell human patient tissue compared to benign disease. Stable septin-2 knockdown clones developed in an ovarian cancer cell line exhibited a significant decrease in proliferation rates. Comparative label-free proteomic analysis of septin-2 knockdown cells revealed differential protein expression of pathways associated with the TCA cycle, acetyl CoA, proteasome and spliceosome. Further validation of target proteins indicated that septin-2 plays a predominant role in post-transcriptional and translational modifications as well as cellular metabolism, and suggested the potential novel role of septin-2 in promoting EOC tumorigenesis through these mechanisms.

### Keywords
Epithelial ovarian cancer, Proteomics, Septin2

### Affiliations
Brown University
Center FOr Cancer Research Development, Proteomics Core Facility, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI, USA

### Submitter
Nagib Ahsan

### Lab Head
Dr Nagib Ahsan
Center FOr Cancer Research Development, Proteomics Core Facility, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI, USA


