### Accession
PXD034986

### Title
RNA-DNA hybrids prevent resection at dysfunctional telomeres

### Description
At critically short telomeres TERRA RNA-DNA hybrids become stabilized and drive homology-directed repair (HDR) to delay replicative senescence. However, even at long- and intermediate-length telomeres, not subject to HDR, transient TERRA RNA-DNA hybrids form, suggestive of additional roles. Here, we report that hybrids at telomeres prevent resection by the Exo1 nuclease when telomeres become non-functional. We employed the well-characterized cdc13-1 allele, where telomere resection can be induced in a temperature dependent manner, to demonstrate that ssDNA generation at telomeres is either prevented or augmented when RNA-DNA hybrids are stabilized or destabilized, respectively. The viability of cdc13-1 cells is affected by the presence or absence of hybrids accordingly. These results give insights into an additional role of TERRA at dysfunctional telomeres suggesting that it not only affects replicative senescence rates through HDR activation at critically short telomeres, but may also affect resection rates at intermediate length telomeres in pre-senescent cells.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells were incubated overnight at 30°C in SC-HIS medium. The cultures were diluted to OD600 0.1 in SC-HIS medium and incubated at 30°C. Exponential cells (OD600 0.6 – 0.7) were collected. 0.5 OD600 units of exponentially growing cells were collected by centrifugation for 3min at 3000xg, and stored at 80°C. The samples were resuspended in 1x LDS buffer containing 0.1M Dithiothreitol and denatured for 10min at 70°C. The proteins were separated on a 10 % NuPAGE NOVEX Bis-Tris gel (Thermo) for 8 min in 1 x MES buffer (Thermo) at 180 V. The gel was fixated and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 (Sigma), followed by destaining overnight in water. The in-gel digestion was performed according to the previous protocol (Shevchenko et al., 2006). After tryptic digestion the peptides were bound and desalted on C18-StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and stored at 4 °C until mass spectrometric (MS) measurement. For the MS analysis, the peptides were separated on a 50 cm capillary (New Objective) with 75 µm inner diameter packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr Maisch GmbH) mounted to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher). The HPLC system was coupled to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptide elution was performed during a 103-min gradient from 3 % to 40 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated with a top 20 MS/MS data-dependent acquisition method per MS full scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43; Cox and Mann, 2008) and searched against the Saccharomyces Genome Database (version R64-3-1, 6,716 entries). Data base searches were performed with standard settings using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. The option match between runs was activated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


