### Accession
PXD039612

### Title
Detection of Arc/Arg3.1 oligomers in rat brain: constitutive and synaptic activity-evoked dimer expression in vivo

### Description
The immediate early gene product activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associate protein (Arc or Arg3.1) is a major regulator long-term synaptic plasticity with critical roles in postnatal cortical development and memory formation. However, the molecular basis of Arc function is not defined. Arc is a hub protein with interaction partners in the postsynaptic neuronal compartment and nucleus. In vitro biochemical and biophysical analysis of purified recombinant Arc show formation of low-order oligomers and larger particles including retrovirus-like capsids. Here, we provide evidence for naturally occurring Arc oligomers in mammalian brain. Using in situ protein crosslinking to trap weak Arc-Arc interactions, we identified in various preparations a prominent Arc immunoreactive band on SDS-PAGE of molecular mass corresponding to a dimer. While heavier Arc species or putative trimers and tetramers were detected, they were of lower abundance. In the dentate gyrus (DG) of adult anesthetized rats, induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) by high-frequency stimulation (HFS) of medial perforant synapses or by brief intrahippocampal infusion of BDNF led to a massive increase in Arc dimer expression. Arc immunoprecipitation of crosslinked DG tissue showed enhanced expression of dimer during four hours of LTP maintenance. Mass spectrometric proteomic analysis of immunoprecipitated, gel-excised bands corroborated detection of Arc dimer. Furthermore, Arc dimer was constitutively expressed in naïve cortical, hippocampal and DG tissue, with lowest levels in the DG. Taken together the results implicate Arc dimers as the predominant low-oligomeric form in mammalian brain, exhibiting regional differences in its constitutive expression and pronounced enhanced expression during DG LTP.

### Sample Protocol
In situ crosslinked dentate tissue samples were immunoprecipitated using anti-Arc antibody and nanobody. Immunoprecipitated samples were separated on SDS-PAGE and stained in-gel with Coomassie brilliant blue (CBB) to visualize discrete bands of Mr matching identified Arc immunoreactive bands of interest. Stained gels were then excised and in-gel digested. Briefly, gel pieces were washed twice with 100 µL wash solution at RT for 20 min before drying in a vacuumed Rotavapor. Dried pieces were then incubated with 50 µL 10 mM DTT at 56oC for 45 min to reduce cysteines residues. After cooling samples and removing DTT, 50 µL 55 mM iodoacetamide was added and incubated in the dark at RT for 30 min. Iodoacetamide was then removed before washing and drying the gel pieces. Proteins were digested by adding 3 ng/μL trypsin from porcine and rehydration on ice for 30 min and then incubation at 37oC for 16 h with gentle mixing. Samples were cooled, centrifuged and supernatant was saved as the first extraction. 50 µL 1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) was then added and incubated at RT for 20 min with gentle agitation to extract peptides. The supernatant was added to the first extraction. 50 µL of 60% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA was added to the gel samples and incubated for 20 min with gentle agitation. The supernatant was pooled with the first two extractions and dried to 10-15 µL volume in the vacuumed Rotavapor. The samples were separated using electrospray liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS).   About 0.5 µg protein as tryptic peptides dissolved in 2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.5% formic acid (FA), were injected into an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, California, USA) connected online to a Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with EASY-spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded and desalted on a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm x 75 µm ID nanoViper column, packed with 3 µm C18 beads, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, USA) with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, v/v) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min for 5 min. Then, peptides were separated during a biphasic ACN gradient from two nanoflow UPLC pumps (flow rate of 250 nL/min) on a 25 cm analytical column (PepMap RSLC, 25 cm × 75 μm ID EASY-spray column, packed with 2 μm C18 beads). Solvent A and B were 0.1% FA (v/v) in water and 100% ACN, respectively. The gradient composition was 5% B during trapping (5min) followed by 5-6% B over 1.5 min, 6–24% B for the next 88.5 min, 24-32% B over 15 min, and 32–85% B over 2 min. Elution of very hydrophobic peptides and conditioning of the column were performed during 10 min isocratic elution with 85% B and 15 min isocratic elution with 5% B, respectively. Instrument was controlled through Thermo Scientific SII for Xcalibur 1.6.  Peptides eluted from the column were detected in the Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer with high field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) enabled and “Advanced Peak Determination” on. FAIMS was enabled using two compensation voltages (CVs), -45 V and -65 V respectively. During each CV, the mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent-acquisition (DDA)-mode to automatically switch between one full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition controlled via Orbitrap Exploris 480 Tune 3.1 and Xcalibur 4.4. The cycle time was maintained at 1.5 s/CV. MS spectra were acquired in the scan range 375-1500 m/z with a resolution of 120 000 at m/z 200, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time (IT) at auto (depending on transient length in the orbitrap). The most intense eluting peptides with charge states 2 to 5 were sequentially isolated to standard target value (AGC, 1e5) and a maximum IT of 75 ms in the C-trap, and isolation width maintained at 1.6 m/z (quadrupole isolation), before fragmentation in the higher energy collision dissociation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 30%, and fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15 000 at m/z 200, with first mass fixed at m/z 110. One MS/MS spectrum of a precursor mass was allowed before dynamic exclusion for 30 s with “exclude isotopes” on. Lock-mass internal calibration was not enabled. Ion spray voltage of 1900 V, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, and capillary temperature of 275°C were set as spray and ion-source parameters.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer™ software (version 2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was used to analyze the raw files from the LC-MS/MS. Peak lists were searched against the rat SwissProt FASTA database (version November 2022), and common contaminants database by Sequest HT. Methionine oxidation/acetylation on protein N-terminus and cysteine carbamidomethylation were included as variable and fixed modifications, respectively. For proteins and peptides, false discovery rate was set to 0.01. List of identified proteins was exported to Microsoft® Excel® (Version 2210 Build 16.0.15726.20188) for analysis. The normalized Arc abundances were log2 transformed and plotted on Graphpad prisim (version 9.4.1 for Windows, GraphPad Software, San Diego, California USA).

### Publication Abstract
The immediate early gene product activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated protein (Arc or Arg3.1) is a major regulator of long-term synaptic plasticity with critical roles in postnatal cortical development and memory formation. However, the molecular basis of Arc function is undefined. Arc is a hub protein with interaction partners in the postsynaptic neuronal compartment and nucleus. Previous <i>in vitro</i> biochemical and biophysical analysis of purified recombinant Arc showed formation of low-order oligomers and larger particles including retrovirus-like capsids. Here, we provide evidence for naturally occurring Arc oligomers in the mammalian brain. Using <i>in situ</i> protein crosslinking to trap weak Arc-Arc interactions, we identified in various preparations a prominent Arc immunoreactive band on SDS-PAGE of molecular mass corresponding to a dimer. While putative trimers, tetramers and heavier Arc species were detected, they were of lower abundance. Stimulus-evoked induction of Arc expression and dimer formation was first demonstrated in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells treated with the muscarinic cholinergic agonist, carbachol, and in primary cortical neuronal cultures treated with brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). In the dentate gyrus (DG) of adult anesthetized rats, induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) by high-frequency stimulation (HFS) of medial perforant synapses or by brief intrahippocampal infusion of BDNF led to a massive increase in Arc dimer expression. Arc immunoprecipitation of crosslinked DG tissue showed enhanced dimer expression during 4 h of LTP maintenance. Mass spectrometric proteomic analysis of immunoprecipitated, gel-excised bands corroborated detection of Arc dimer. Furthermore, Arc dimer was constitutively expressed in na&#xef;ve cortical, hippocampal and DG tissue, with the lowest levels in the DG. Taken together the results implicate Arc dimer as the predominant low-oligomeric form in mammalian brain, exhibiting regional differences in its constitutive expression and enhanced synaptic activity-evoked expression in LTP.

### Keywords
Arc oligomer, Dimer, Rat brain

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Department of Biomedicine, Bramham Lab, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Tadiwos Feyissa Mergiya

### Lab Head
Dr Clive, Raymond Evjen, Bramham
Department of Biomedicine, Bramham Lab, University of Bergen, Norway


