### Accession
PXD036789

### Title
Proteomic analysis of skeletal muscles from wild type and transgenic mice carrying recessive Ryr1 mutations

### Description
Skeletal muscle is a highly structured and differentiated tissue responsible for voluntary movement and metabolic regulation. Muscles however, are heterogeneous and depending on their location, speed of contraction, fatiguability and function, can be broadly subdivided into fast and slow twitch as well as subspecialized muscles, with each group expressing common as well as specific proteins. Congenital myopathies are a group of non-inflammatory non-dystrophic muscle diseases caused by mutations in a number of genes, leading to a weak muscle phenotype. In most cases specific muscles types are affected, with preferential involvement of fast twitch muscles as well as extraocular and facial muscles. The aim of this study is to compare the proteome of three groups of muscles from wild type and transgenic mice carrying compound heterozygous mutations in Ryr1 identified in a patient with a severe congenital myopathy.  Qualitative proteomic analysis was performed by comparing the relative fold change of proteins in fast twitch and slow twitch muscles. Subsequently we compared the proteome of different muscles in wild type and Ryr1 mutant mice. Finally, we applied a quantitative analysis to determine the stoichiometry of the main protein components involved in excitation contraction coupling and calcium regulation. Our results show that recessive Ryr1 mutations do not only cause a change in RyR1 protein content in skeletal muscle, but they are accompanied by profound changes in protein expression in the different muscle types and that the latter effect may be responsible in part, for the weak muscle phenotype observed in patients.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analysis using tandem mass tags. EDL, soleus and EOM muscles from 5 male WT and 5 male dHT, 12 weeks old mice were excised, weighed, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and mechanically grinded.  Approximately 10 mg of EDL, 8 mg for of Soleus and 6 mg of EOM muscle tissue was grinded and subsequently lysed in 200 µl of lysis buffer containing 100 mM TRIS, 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM TCEP and 15 mM chloroacetamide, followed by sonication (Bioruptor, 20 cycles, 30 seconds on/off, Diagenode, Belgium) and heating to 95°C for 10 minutes. After cooling, protein samples were digested by incubated overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin). Samples were acidified using 5% TFA and peptides cleaned up using the Phoenix 96x kit (PreOmics, Martinsried, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. After drying the peptides in a SpeedVac, samples were stored at -80°C. Dried peptides were dissolved in 100 µl of 0.1% formic acid and the peptide concentration determined by UV-nanodrop analysis. Sample aliquots containing 25 µg of peptides were dried and labeled with tandem mass isobaric tags (TMT 10-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To control for ratio distortion during quantification, a peptide calibration mixture consisting of six digested standard proteins mixed in different amounts were added to each sample before TMT labeling as recently described (51). After pooling the differentially TMT labeled peptide samples, peptides were again desalted on C18 reversed-phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus) and dried under vacuum. Half of the pooled TMT-labeled peptides (125 µg of peptides) were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase separation using a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (3,5 µm, 130 Å, 1 mm x 150 mm, Waters) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system. 125 ug of peptides were loaded onto the column in buffer A (ammonium formate (20 mM, pH 10, in water) and eluted using a two-step linear gradient starting from 2% to 10% in 5 minutes and then to 50% (v/v) buffer B (90% acetonitrile / 10% ammonium formate (20 mM, pH 10) over 55 minutes at a flow rate of 42 µl/min. Elution of peptides was monitored with a UV detector (215 nm, 254 nm). A total of 36 fractions were collected, pooled into 12 fractions using a post-concatenation strategy as previously described (52) and dried under vacuum.  The generated 12 peptide samples fractions were analyzed by LC-MS as described previously (51). Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 37 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Aliquots of 1 μg of total peptides of each fraction were analyzed per LC-MS/MS run using a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 20 seconds. Total cycle time was approximately 1 s. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.1 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were searched against a protein database containing sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of mus musculus (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 2019/03/27), Myh2 and Myh13 from Trembl, the six calibration mix proteins (51) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 17,414 sequences) using the SpectroMine software (Biognosys, version 1.0.20235.13.16424) and the TMT 10-plex default settings. In brief, the precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 3 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT6plex (K and peptide n-terminus) were set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) as a variable modification. The false identification rate was set to 1% by the software based on the number of decoy hits. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Acquired reporter ion intensities in the experiments were employed for automated quantification and statistically analyzed using a modified version of our in-house developed SafeQuant R script (v2.3)(51). This analysis included adjustment of reporter ion intensities, global data normalization by equalizing the total reporter ion intensity across all channels, summation of reporter ion intensities per protein and channel, calculation of protein abundance ratios and testing for differential abundance using empirical Bayes moderated t-statistics. Finally, the calculated p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini−Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Excitation contraction coupling, Proteomic profiling, Congenital myopathy, Ryanodine receptor mutations

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


