### Accession
PXD045050

### Title
Proteomic analysis of different developmental stages of Cystoisospora suis (Apicomplexa: Coccidia) in vitro

### Description
The apicomplexan parasite Cystoisospora suis has global significance as an enteropathogen of suckling piglets. Its intricate life cycle entails a transition from an asexual phase to sexual development, ultimately leading to the formation of transmissible oocysts. To advance our understanding of the parasite’s cellular development, we complemented previous transcriptome studies by delving into the proteome profiles at five distinct time points of in vitro cultivation through LC/MS-MS analysis. A total of 1324 proteins were identified in the in vitro developmental stages of C. suis, and 1082 proteins were identified as significantly differentially expressed. We performed BLAST, GO enrichment, and KEGG pathway analyses on the up- and downregulated proteins to elucidate correlated events in the C. suis life cycle. Our analyses revealed intriguing metabolic patterns in macromolecule metabolism, DNA and RNA-related processes, proteins associated with sexual stages, and those involved in cell invasion, reflecting the adaptation of sexual stages to a nutrient-poor and potentially stressful extracellular environment, with a focus on enzymes involved in metabolism and energy production. These findings have important implications for understanding the developmental biology of C. suis as well as other, related coccidian parasites, such as Eimeria spp. and Toxoplasma gondii. They also support the role of C. suis as a new model for the comparative biology of coccidian tissue cyst stages.

### Sample Protocol
Cystoisospora suis oocysts (strain Wien I) were obtained from experimentally infected suckling piglets. A total of eight 6-well plates were used for the experiment. Intestinal porcine epithelial cells (IPEC-1, ACC 705) were used as host cells and seeded in a density of 4 × 105 cells per well. Cells were grown at 37 °C under 5% CO2. After 24 h of cell growth IPEC-1 cells were infected with 5 × 103 sporozoites/well released from excysted oocysts and incubated further at 40 °C under 5% CO2. For the sampling of stages, we collected supernatant every day, from day 6 to day 14. The material was washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; Gibco) and pelleted by centrifugation at 600 × g for 10 min. The numbers of stages were counted in a Neubauer-counting chamber. For each day, four biological replicates were harvested. The analysis was performed for five time points: Day 7 (early merozoites) ,Day 8 (late merozoites) , Day 10 (merozoites and immature sexual stages), Day 12 (mature sexual stages and oocysts) and Day14 (oocysts) To produce total protein lysates, frozen pellets were solubilized in lysis DIGE buffer and subjected to three rapid (2 min) cycles of freezing in liquid nitrogen/defrosting at 30 °C with vigorous vortex. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. The protein concentration of samples was determined by Pierce 660 nm protein assay. Sample preparation for mass spectrometry 30 µg of the protein were filled up to 500 µl with 8 M urea in 50 mM TRIS and were loaded on to a 10 kDa filter. The solution was centrifuged 2 × 20 min at 10,000 × g. The proteins were reduced with 200 mM dithiothreitol (37°C, 30 min) and alkylated with 500 mM iodoacetamide (37°C, 30 min) on the filter. After two washes with 100 µl 50 mM TRIS, digestion was carried out using a trypsin/lysC mix in a ratio of 1:25 (protease : protein) over night. Digested peptides were recovered with 3 × 50 µl of 50 mM TRIS and acidified with 1 µl concentrated trifluoroacetic acid . Before LC-MS analysis, peptide extracts were desalted and cleaned up using C18 spin columns (Pierce/Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The dried peptides were redissolved in 300 µl 0.1% TFA of which 3 µl were injected onto the LC-MS/MS system. LC-MS/MS Mass spectrometry analyses were performed on a LC-MS/MS system consisting of a nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly coupled to a high-resolution Q Exactive HF Orbitrap® mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a nano-ESI ion source. Sample pre-concentration and desalting was accomplished with a 5 mm Acclaim PepMap μ‑Precolumn (300 µm inner diameter, 5 µm particle size, and 100 Å pore size; Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific). For sample loading and desalting 2% acetonitrile in ultra-pure H2O with 0.05% TFA was used as a mobile phase with a flow rate of 5 µl/min. Separation of peptides was performed on a 25 cm Acclaim PepMap C18 column (75 µm inner diameter, 2 µm particle size, and 100 Å pore size; (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient started with 4% B (80% acetonitrile with 0.08% formic acid) for 7 min, increased to 31% in 60min and to 44% in additional 5 min. It was followed by a washing step with 95% B. Mobile Phase A consisted of ultra-pure H2O with 0.1% formic acid.  The MS full scans were performed in the ultrahigh-field Orbitrap® mass analyser in ranges m/z 350−2000 with a resolution of 60,000, the maximum injection time (MIT) was 50 ms and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3e^6. The top 10 intense ions were subjected to Orbitrap® for further fragmentation via high energy collision dissociation (HCD) activation over a mass range between m/z 200 and 2000 at a resolution of 15,000 with the intensity threshold at 4e^3. Ions with charge state +1, +7, +8 and >+8 were excluded. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at 28. For each scan, the AGC was set at 5e^4 and the MIT was 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ion masses over a time window of 30 s was used to suppress repeated peak fragmentation. Mass spectrometry data processing The database search was performed using the Proteome Discoverer Software 2.4.305 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The protein databases were downloaded from the UniProt homepage for the following species: Cystoisospora suis (taxonomy ID 483139) and Sus scrofa (taxonomy ID 9823). Additionally, to the combined UniProt databases, the common contaminant database cRAP was used. Search settings were as follows: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance; dynamic modifications allowed were oxidation of methionine as well as the N-terminal protein modifications acetylation, methionine loss and the combination of both, static modification carbamidomethylating on cysteine. Only proteins with at least two identified peptides were reported. The label-free quantification strategy was applied to compare protein abundance in the experiments.

### Data Protocol
All statistical analyses were performed in R v4.2.1 R Core Team (2022).  We filtered for 1106 C. suis proteins that were quantifiable in a minimum of 75% of our samples (at least 30 out of our 40 measured samples derived from four biological replicates x two technical replicates x five timepoints) and imputed the missing data via a k-Nearest Neighbors (kNN) methodology applying function multi.impute in package mi4p version 1.0. (Chion, Carapito and Bertrand, 2022). We performed Principal Component Analysis on these 1106 (centred and scaled) proteins after imputation, using function prcomp in package factoextra version 1.0.7 and visualized them with function fviz_pca_ind (Kassambara and Mundt, 2020). Differential protein expression analysis was performed with function dream in package variancePartition version 1.28.0 (Hoffman and Roussos, 2021), on log2 transformed, normalized LC-MS/MS quantifications after adding a constant of one via univariate linear mixed effects models fitting timepoint of development as fixed categorical effect with factor levels day 7, 8, 10, 12 and 14. The hierarchical covariance structure in our data, aka two technical replicates per biological replicate and timepoint and repeated measures of our four biological replicates across the five developmental stages, was modelled with a maximal random slopes approach to control the type one error rate (Barr et al., 2013). We fitted a random intercept for biological replicate and dummy coded, centred, random slopes for day 8 to 14. We further added a random intercept of date of experiment as precaution to account for possible batch effects. We used maximum likelihood estimation by setting option REML to ‘false’. We tested all 10 possible pairwise contrasts among the five timepoints with function getContrast. We requested moderated t-tests via function eBayes and verified that linear model assumptions were met for the residuals and random effects of a randomly chosen set of proteins.  Proteins with at least one contrast significant at a global 5% false discovery rate (FDR) and absolute log2 fold change > 1 were considered significantly differentially expressed. Significant proteins were subjected to the pattern detection algorithm used by function degPatterns in package DEGreport version 1.34.0 (Pantano, 2023), and sorted according to their cluster membership (largest to smallest cluster) and visualised, row wise z-transformed, as unclustered heatmap, produced with package pheatmap version 1.0.12.(Kolde, 2012).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Isospora suis; coccidia, Swine; apicomplexa; sexual development; proteome; metabolism; oocyst; gametes

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology, Department of Pathobiology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Veterinärplatz 1, A-1210 Vienna,
institute parasitology, University of veterinary medicine vienna,  Veterinärplatz 1, 1210 vienna, austria

### Submitter
Teresa Cruz Bustos

### Lab Head
Dr anja joachim
institute parasitology, University of veterinary medicine vienna,  Veterinärplatz 1, 1210 vienna, austria


