### Accession
PXD024275

### Title
TMTpro-18plex: The Expanded and Complete Set of TMTpro Reagents for Sample Multiplexing

### Description
The development of the TMTpro-16plex series expanded the breadth of commercial isobaric tagging reagents by nearly 50% over classic TMT-11plex. In addition to the described 16plex reagents, the proline-based TMTpro molecule can accommodate two additional combinations of heavy carbon and nitrogen isotopes. Here, we introduce the final two labeling reagents, TMTpro-134C and TMTpro-135N, which permit the simultaneous global protein profiling of 18 samples with no missing values. For example, six conditions with three biological replicates can now be perfectly accommodated. We showcase the 18plex reagent set by profiling the proteome and phosphoproteome of a pair of isogenic breast cancer cell lines under three conditions in triplicate. We compare the depth and quantitative performance of this dataset with a TMTpro-16plex experiment in which two samples were omitted. Our analysis revealed similar numbers of quantified peptides and proteins, with high quantitative correlation. We interrogated further the TMTpro-18plex dataset by highlighting changes in protein abundance profiles under different conditions in the isogenic cell lines. We conclude that TMTpro-18plex further expands the sample multiplexing landscape, allowing for complex and innovative experimental designs.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark and then quenched with 10 mM DTT for 15 min at room temperature. The Streamlined (SL)-TMT protocol was used for sample preparation7. Briefly, 100 μg of protein lysate were chloroform-methanol precipitated and reconstituted in 100 μl of 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5). The samples were digested by Lys-C overnight at room temperature and then with trypsin for 6 hr at 37°C, both at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. Peptides corresponding to 50 μg of protein were labeled with TMTpro reagents in the presence of 29% acetonitrile for 90 min at room temperature (see Figure 2A for the experimental layout). Two microliters of each sample were pooled, desalted and analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) to check labeling efficiency. After labeling efficiency was verified, samples were quenched by adding 5% hydroxylamine and pooled. Pooled samples were then desalted with 100 mg Sep-Pak solid-phase extraction columns. Pierce High-Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (A32992, ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to enrich phosphopeptides from the pooled samples in a “mini-phos” format7. Unbound fractions were desalted and then fractionated with basic-pH reversed-phase chromatography. Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate and combined for a total of 24 fractions prior to desalting and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw ﬁles were converted to mzXML and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle12. The protein database included all human entries from Uniprot (downloaded on 02/15/2020). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Common contaminant proteins (e.g., trypsin and keratins) were appended as well. Searches were performed using the Comet search algorithm. We used a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.9 Da product ion tolerance for MS2 scans collected in the ion trap and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance for MS2 scans collected in the Orbitrap. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.2071 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications (except when testing for labeling efficiency, in which the TMTpro modification was set to variable), while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. For phosphorylated peptide analysis, +79.9663 Da was set as a variable modification on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR)13. PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) as described previously14, while considering the following parameters: Comet log expect, different sequence delta Comet log expect (percent difference between the first hit and the next hit with a different peptide sequence), missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, precursor mass accuracy, and fraction of ions matched. Only phosphorylated peptides were considered in LDA for phosphorylated peptide analysis. Each run was ﬁltered separately. Protein-level FDR was subsequently estimated. The posterior probabilities reported by the LDA model for each peptide were multiplied to give a protein-level probability estimate. Proteins were ﬁltered to the target 1% FDR level across the entire combined dataset using the Picked FDR method15. Phosphorylation site localization was determined using the AScore algorithm16. Phosphorylation sites with an AScore higher than 13 were reported. For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were ﬁltered to include only those with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) ≥ 160 across 16 TMTpro channels or ≥ 180 across 18 TMTpro channels. An extra filter of an isolation speciﬁcity of at least 0.7 in the MS1 isolation window was applied in phosphorylated peptide analysis. For each protein or phosphorylation site, the ﬁltered peptide TMTpro SN values were summed to generate protein or phosphorylation site quantification values. To control for different total protein loading within a TMTpro experiment, the summed protein quantities of each channel were adjusted to be equal within the experiment. Phosphorylation site quantities of each channel were also adjusted with respective normalization factors generated in the protein data normalization process. For each protein or phosphorylation site within a TMTpro experiment, the SN was scaled to sum to 100 for subsequent analyses unless stated otherwise.

### Publication Abstract
The development of the TMTpro-16plex series expanded the breadth of commercial isobaric tagging reagents by nearly 50% over classic TMT-11plex. In addition to the described 16plex reagents, the proline-based TMTpro molecule can accommodate two additional combinations of heavy carbon and nitrogen isotopes. Here, we introduce the final two labeling reagents, TMTpro-134C and TMTpro-135N, which permit the simultaneous global protein profiling of 18 samples with essentially no missing values. For example, six conditions with three biological replicates can now be perfectly accommodated. We showcase the 18plex reagent set by profiling the proteome and phosphoproteome of a pair of isogenic mammary epithelial cell lines under three conditions in triplicate. We compare the depth and quantitative performance of this data set with a TMTpro-16plex experiment in which two samples were omitted. Our analysis revealed similar numbers of quantified peptides and proteins, with high quantitative correlation. We interrogated further the TMTpro-18plex data set by highlighting changes in protein abundance profiles under different conditions in the isogenic cell lines. We conclude that TMTpro-18plex further expands the sample multiplexing landscape, allowing for complex and innovative experimental designs.

### Keywords
18plex, Mcf10a, Eclipse, Byl-719, Pten, Real-time search, Kin-193, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jiaming Li

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Harvard Medical School


