### Accession
PXD025965

### Title
Amaranthus hypochondriacus seeds as a rich source of cysteine rich bioactive peptides

### Description
Amaranthus hypochondriacus is a highly nutritious alternative grain native to Central and South America but consumed worldwide. Increased interest in A. hypochondriacus has driven characterization of bioactive secondary metabolites and their impact on the human body. A. hypochondriacus seeds are known to contain bioactive small molecules but there is a dearth of knowledge regarding endogenous bioactive peptides, especially cysteine-rich peptides (CRPs) which may be resistant to human digestion. Here, 89 CRPs were predicted in silico from A. hypochondriacus, 13 of which were detected in a seed extract via bottom-up proteomics, providing direct evidence for the translation of snakins, hevein-like peptides, defensins, lipid transfer proteins, and α-hairpinins. Mature forms of four novel and two known CRPs were molecularly characterized via top-down mass spectrometry. Four peptides demonstrated resistance to in vitro gastrointestinal digestion, suggesting that A. hypochondriacus CRPs may exhibit bioactivity after consumption and should be prioritized for further characterization.

### Sample Protocol
A. hypochondriacus seeds were purchased from Strictly Medicinal Seeds (Williams, OR). Briefly, seeds were extracted in an acetic acid solution (5 g seeds/150 mL) with size exclusion steps to remove large proteins (>30 kDa) and small molecules (<1 kDa). The crude extract was concentrated to 1.5 mL and fractionated via strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX). SCX fractions were desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters, 500 mg) sequentially eluting in 80/20/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 60/40/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid, and 40/60/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid. Sep-Pak eluate was collected, producing a total of 12 fractions and concentrated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. Fractions were resuspended in 30 μL LC-MS grade water for further analysis. Peptide fractions were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. For enzymatic digestion, a reduced and alkylated sample was incubated with sequencing grade trypsin overnight. All samples were desalted with C18 ZipTips prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  In vitro gastrointestinal digestions of fractions containing AC-AMP1, AC-AMP2, Ay-AMP2, and Ay-DEF1 were conducted using sequential pepsin and pancreatin digestions. Human insulin was added to each fraction to confirm protease activity. All samples were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters, 50 mg) prior to LC-MS analysis. Intact, reduced and alkylated, and digested samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis to profile peptide abundance across fractions.   LC-MS/MS data for bottom-up proteomic and top-down peptidomic characterization of A. hypochondriacus seed fractions were acquired using an Acquity M-class UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and mobile phase B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Injections were made to a Symmetry C18 trap column (100 Å, 5μm, 180μm x 20 mm; Waters) with a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 3 min using 99% A and 1% B. Peptides were then separated on an HSS T3 C18 column (100 Å, 1.8μm, 75μm x 250 mm; Waters) using a linear gradient of increasing mobile phase B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase B was held at 5% for 1 min, then increased from 5% to 50% in 30 min before ramping to 85% in 2 min, where it was held for 3 min before returning to 5% in 1 min and re-equilibrating for 23 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity, and the Nanospray Flex source had spray voltage floating at 2.1 kV, the capillary temperature at 320 °C, and funnel RF level at 40. MS survey scans were collected with a scan range of 350 – 2000 m/z at a resolving power of 120,000 and an AGC target of 3 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. A top 20 data-dependent acquisition was used where HCD fragmentation of precursor ions having +2 to +7 charge state was performed using a normalized collision energy setting of 28. MS/MS scans were performed at a resolving power of 30,000 and an AGC target of 1 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion for precursor m/z was set to a 10 s window. In vitro gastrointestinal digestion samples were analyzed using a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) coupled to a TripleToF 5600 (Sciex) using the same chromatographic method as above. The MS was operated in positive-ion, high-sensitivity mode with the MS survey spectrum using a mass range of m/z 350–1600 in 250 ms and information-dependent acquisition (IDA) of MS/MS data using an eight second dynamic exclusion window. The first 20 features above an intensity threshold of 150 counts and having a charge state of +2 to +5 were fragmented using rolling collision energy (CE) (±5%).

### Data Protocol
Collected raw MS data (*.raw) were converted to Mascot Generic Files (*.mgf) using ProteoWizard prior to database searching. Database searching was performed against a database of A. hypochondriacus proteins (23,879 entries, v2.1; www.phytozome.net; 08/15/2018) appended with the sequences for common laboratory contaminants (www.thegpm.org/cRAP; 116 entries). Digests were searched (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1) against the aforementioned database and a decoy database using peptide/fragment mass tolerances 15 ppm/0.02 Da, trypsin specificity, three possible missed cleavages, a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, and two variable modifications (N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation). Peptide false discovery rates (FDR) were adjusted to ≤1% using the Mascot Percolator algorithm. Peptides with a Mascot score >than 13, matching to A. hypochondriacus entries, and >1 unique tryptic peptides were considered for further analysis.   De-isotoped peak lists for intact, reduced/alkylated, and in vitro gasterointestinal digestion experiment samples were generated using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, v.2.0). Data was exported “peptide ion data”.  Fragmentation spectra were annotated using peak lists exported from the FreeStyle (Thermo Scientific) spectral viewer and imported into the Interactive Peptide Spectral Annotator. Annotated spectra were generated using appropriate peptide sequences, charges, and 10 ppm error. Fragment assignments were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
Amaranthus hypochondriacus is a nutritious alternative grain native to Central and South America. Increased interest in the impact of A. hypochondriacus on the human body has driven characterization of bioactive secondary metabolites. The seeds are known to contain bioactive small molecules but little is known regarding endogenous peptides. Cysteine-rich peptides (CRPs) in foodstuffs are particularly relevant because they are stabilized by disulfide bonds enhancing resistance to digestion. Here, in silico predictions, proteomics, and simulated gastrointestinal digestions are leveraged to identify digestion resistant CRPs within A. hypochondriacus seeds. Thirteen in silico predicted CRPs were detected in a seed extract providing evidence for the translation of five CRP families. Mature forms of six CRPs were characterized via top-down proteomics revealing multiple post-translational modifications. All six peptides demonstrated resistance to simulated gastrointestinal digestion, suggesting that A. hypochondriacus CRPs may exhibit bioactivity after consumption and should be prioritized for further characterization.

### Keywords
Cysteine rich peptides, Amaranthus hypochondriacus, Proteomics, Alternative grain, Peptidomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Department of Chemistry
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Leslie Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Department of Chemistry


