### Accession
PXD029134

### Title
Melatonin promotes chilling tolerance of cucumber seedlings by regulating antioxidant systems and relieving photoinhibition

### Description
Chilling is a major stress which adversely decreases photosynthesis and leads to oxidative stress in thermophilic plants. The role of melatonin (MT) in stress response of plants, has so far been investigated, while the mechanisms by which MT regulate photosynthesis in chilling-sensitive cucumber under chilling stress remain unclear. In this paper, we reported MT positively regulated chilling tolerance of cucumber. Moreover, MT showed a concentration-dependent manner and 1.0 μmol·L-1 was the optimum concentration, of which the chilling injury index, EL and MDA were the lowest, while growth was the highest among all the treatments. Further studies indicated that MT triggered the activity and expression of the antioxidant enzymes, which in turn decreased ROS accumulation caused by chilling stress. Meanwhile, MT maintained a high photosynthetic carbon assimilation capacity, increased the activity of PSI reaction center, PSII reaction center and electron transfer efficiency. More importantly, the proteome analysis and western-blot data revealed that PSI-associated proteins (PsaD, PsaE, PsaF, PsaH and PsaN), PSII-associated protein D1 as well as Rubisco large subunit and RCA were significantly up-regulated in MT-treated seedlings, compared to H2O-treated seedlings under chilling stress. These results suggest that MT enhances chilling tolerance of cucumber via activating the antioxidant system as well as protein level of key PSI-, PSII-related and carbon assimilation enzymes to decrease ROS accumulation, and finally alleviates the damage to photosynthetic apparatus under chilling stress.

### Sample Protocol
TMT quantitative proteomics analysis  The samples were obtained after 9h-chilling stress and then fully grinded with liquid nitrogen and extracted with lysis buffer (containing 10 mM dithiothreitol and 1% protease inhibitor). An equal volume of Tris-balanced phenol was added and centrifuged at 5500 g at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was retained and 5-fold volume of 0.1M ammonium acetate/methanol was added to precipitate overnight. The precipitates were washed with methanol and acetone respectively, and redissolved with 8 M urea. Dithiothreitol was added to the protein solution to make the final concentration became 5 mM, and then reduced at 56 °C for 30min. Then, iodoacetamide was added to make its final concentration became 11 mM, and incubated at room temperature for 15 min in darkness. the urea concentration of the sample was diluted to less than 2 M. Trypsin was added in a 1:50 mass ratio (trypsin: protein) and enzymatic hydrolysis overnight at 37 °C. Trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:100 (trypsin: protein) again, and the enzymatic hydrolysis was continued for 4 h. After trypsin digestion, the peptides were desalted with Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and then vacuum freeze-dried. The peptide was dissolved with 0.5M TEAB and labeled according to the instruction of TMT kit. The peptides were separated with high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). The peptides were dissolved with mobile phases A (0.1% formic acid) and separated by an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The mobile phase A was aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B was acetonitrile solution containing 0.1% formic acid. Liquid phase gradient setting: 0-43 min, 6%-22% phase B; 43-56 min, 22%-30% phase B; 56-58 min, 30%-80% phase B; 58-60 min, 80% phase B, and the flow rate maintained at 300 nL/min. The peptides were separated by UPLC system and then injected into capillary ion source for ionization and analyzed by tims TOF Pro mass spectrometry. The ion source voltage was set at 1.4kV, and the peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using TOF. The scanning range of secondary mass spectrometry was set to 100-1700 m/z. The data acquisition mode was parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Secondary mass spectrometry data was retrieved using Maxquant search engine (v1.6.5.0) and then peptide length was analyzed with mass spectrometry. Finally, bioinformatics analysis was performed. The quantitative proteins were identified and analyzed with threshold value of differential expression change was1.2-fold and statistically tested t-test p-value<0.05.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Chilling adversely affects the photosynthesis of thermophilic plants, which further leads to a decline in growth and yield. The role of melatonin (MT) in the stress response of plants has been investigated, while the mechanisms by which MT regulates the chilling tolerance of chilling-sensitive cucumber remain unclear. This study demonstrated that MT positively regulated the chilling tolerance of cucumber seedlings and that 1.0 &#x3bc;mol&#x22c5;L<sup>-1</sup> was the optimum concentration, of which the chilling injury index, electrolyte leakage (EL), and malondialdehyde (MDA) were the lowest, while growth was the highest among all treatments. MT triggered the activity and expression of antioxidant enzymes, which in turn decreased hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) and superoxide anion (O<sub>2</sub> <sup>&#x22c5;-</sup>) accumulation caused by chilling stress. Meanwhile, MT attenuated the chilling-induced decrease, in the net photosynthetic rate (Pn) and promoted photoprotection for both photosystem II (PSII) and photosystem I (PSI), regarding the higher maximum quantum efficiency of PSII (Fv/Fm), actual photochemical efficiency (&#x3a6;PS<sub>II</sub>), the content of active P700 (&#x394;I/I<sub>0</sub>), and photosynthetic electron transport. The proteome analysis and western blot data revealed that MT upregulated the protein levels of PSI reaction center subunits (PsaD, PsaE, PsaF, PsaH, and PsaN), PSII-associated protein PsbA (D1), and ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase or oxygenase large subunit (RBCL) and Rubisco activase (RCA). These results suggest that MT enhances the chilling tolerance of cucumber through the activation of antioxidant enzymes and the induction of key PSI-, PSII-related and carbon assimilation genes, which finally alleviates damage to the photosynthetic apparatus and decreases oxidative damage to cucumber seedlings under chilling stress.

### Keywords
Antioxidant system, Melatonin, Chilling stress, Photosynthesis, Cucumber, Reactive oxygen

### Affiliations
Shandong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Xiaowei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Huan gai Bi
Shandong Agricultural University


