### Accession
PXD010798

### Title
Oral Pathogen ‘Neutralizes’ the Human Innate Immune Defence

### Description
Our present findings show for the first time that the virulence factor PPAD protects the oral pathogen P. gingivalis against neutrophil insults at three distinct levels, namely phagocytosis, NETosis and CAMP activity. This identifies PPAD as a major agent in the evasion of human innate immunity, a view that is supported by studies from Potempa and co-workers showing PPAD-dependent citrullination of complement29. Why is this important? Every day, millions of people lose teeth due to periodontitis. This has a serious impact on their quality of life, not only for aesthetic reasons but much more so because tooth loss causes difficulties in eating and interferes with interpersonal communication. Yet, only few people realize that there is a major bacteriological component in periodontitis where our immune defences are breached with potentially serious implications, especially systemic and chronic diseases ranging from bacteraemia to rheumatoid arthritis.

### Sample Protocol
Neutrophil lysates were processed for mass spectrometry analysis as described before (Bonn et al. 2014). Briefly, proteins were bound to Strataclean resins (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA) and subsequently alkylated, reduced and digested by trypsin. Resulting peptides were purified by C18 stage-tip (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA), purification according to the manufacturer’s protocol and dried until further use. Purified peptides were analysed by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) electrospray ionization (ESI) MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). In brief, in-house self-packed nano-LC columns (20 cm) were used to perform LC with an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The peptides were loaded with buffer A (0.1 % acetic acid (v/v)) and subsequently eluted by a binary gradient of buffer A and B (0.1 % acetic acid (v/v), 94.9 % acetonitrile) over a period of 180 min. After injection into the MS, a full scan was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. The twenty most abundant precursor ions were consecutively isolated in the linear ion trap and fragmented via collision-induced dissociation (CID). Unassigned charge states as well as singly charged ions were rejected and the lock mass option was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was done with Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, USA). After extraction from the raw files, *.dta files were searched with Sequest against a target-decoy database with a set of common laboratory contaminants. A database for the respective peptide/protein search was created from the published genome sequences of the W83 strain and the human genome which were downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org) on 14/07/2016 (Supplementary FASTA file). The created database contained a total number of 148,472 proteins. Database search was based on a strict trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages permitted. No fixed modifications were considered. Oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and citrullination of arginine were considered as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and the mass tolerance for fragment ions to 1 Da. Validation of MS/MS based peptide and protein identification was performed with Scaffold v.4 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.1 % was set for filtering the data. Protein identifications were accepted if at least 2 identified peptides were detected with the above mentioned filter criteria in 2 out of 3 biological replicates. Protein data were exported from Scaffold and further curated in Microsoft Excel 2013 before further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, P. gingivalis, Ppad, Neutrophils, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics
Uni Greifswald Hausdorffstrasse 8 17489 Greifswald Germany; Institute for Microbiology; Department of Microbial Proteomics

### Submitter
Thomas Sura

### Lab Head
Dr Doerte Becher
Uni Greifswald Hausdorffstrasse 8 17489 Greifswald Germany; Institute for Microbiology; Department of Microbial Proteomics


