### Accession
PXD016468

### Title
human liver cancer Phosphoproteomics

### Description
Effect of Aminopeptidase N on Hepatocellular Carcinoma

### Sample Protocol
SDT lysis buffer was added to the sample. The lysate was sonicated and then boiled for 15 min. After centrifuged at 14000g for 40 min, the supernatant was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China). The sample was stored at -80 °C.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine embedded into Proteome Discoverer 2.1. Bioinformatics analysis of GO and KEGG.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent human malignancies worldwide and has high morbidity and mortality. Elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying HCC recurrence and metastasis is critical to identify new therapeutic targets. This study aimed to determine the roles of aminopeptidase N (APN, also known as CD13) in HCC proliferation and metastasis and its underlying mechanisms. We detected APN expression in clinical samples and HCC cell lines using immunohistochemistry, flow cytometry, real-time PCR, and enzyme activity assays. The effects of APN on HCC metastasis and proliferation were verified in both in vitro and in vivo models. RNA-seq, phosphoproteomic, western blot, point mutation, co-immunoprecipitation, and proximity ligation assays were performed to reveal the potential mechanisms. We found that APN was frequently upregulated in HCC tumor tissues and high-metastatic cell lines. Knockout of APN inhibited HCC cell metastasis and proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Functional studies suggested that a loss of APN impedes the ERK signaling pathway in HCC cells. Mechanistically, we found that APN might mediate the phosphorylation at serine 31 of BCKDK (BCKDK<sup>S31</sup>), promote BCKDK interacting with ERK1/2 and phosphorylating it, thereby activating the ERK signaling pathway in HCC cells. Collectively, our findings indicate that APN mediates the phosphorylation of BCKDK<sup>S31</sup> and activates its downstream pathway to promote HCC proliferation and metastasis. Therefore, the APN/BCKDK/ERK axis may serve as a new therapeutic target for HCC therapy, and these findings may be helpful to identify new biomarkers in HCC progression.

### Keywords
Human hcc phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
+8615902280369
Department of Immunology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China

### Submitter
mengying zhai

### Lab Head
Dr Mengying Zhai
Department of Immunology, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China


