### Accession
PXD025460

### Title
proteomic analysis of membrane vesicles from clinical Cutibacterium acnes isolates

### Description
Recently the membrane vesicles (MVs) production has been observed in Gram-positive bacterium, Cutibacterium acnes (C. acnes). In order to explore the mechanism of antibiotic resistance and the virulent components within the C. acnes-derived MVs, we isolated MVs from the clinical C. acnes, which were sensitive or resistant to antibiotics erythromycin and clindamycin. With the LC-MS/MS method, we detected several lipases, virulent factors and cell division protein differentially expressed between the sensitive and the resistant C. acnes-derived MVs.

### Sample Protocol
We isolated C. acnes clinical strains from the lesions of acne patients in the dermatology department of Huashan Hospital Fudan University (Shanghai, China). Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of erythromycin and clindamycin were measured by agar dilution as recommended by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Membrane vesicles were isolated from sensitive C. acnes isolates (MICs ≤0.5mg/L for erythromycin and ≤2mg/L for clindamycin at the same time) and resistant C. acnes isolates (MICs >128mg/L for both erythromycin and clindamycin at the same time) by differential ultracentrifugation. The proteomic profile of MVs was determined by label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant (Version 1.6.1.0). The protein sequence database (uniprot-proteome-Propionibacterium acnes. fasta) was downloaded from UNIPROT. This database and its reverse decoy were then searched against by MaxQuant software. Trypsin was set as specific enzyme with up to 3 miss cleavage. Oxidation [M] and Acetyl [protein N-term] were considered as variable modification (max number of modifications per peptide is 3). Carbamidomethyl [C] was set as fixed modification. Both peptide and protein FDR should be less than 0.01. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was normalized by maxLFQ algorithm. Differentially expressed proteins were filtered if their fold changes (FC) were over 1.2 folds and contained at least 2 unique peptides with statistical p-value (Student’s t test) below 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Membrane vesicles, C. acnes

### Affiliations
Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University
Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, No.12 Wulumuqizhong Road, Shanghai 200040, China.

### Submitter
Min Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Ma
Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, No.12 Wulumuqizhong Road, Shanghai 200040, China.


