### Accession
PXD025618

### Title
Disruption of nucleocytoplasmic trafficking as a cellular senescence driver

### Description
Senescent cells exhibit a reduced response to intrinsic and extrinsic stimuli. This reduction could be explained by disrupted nuclear transmission of signals. However, this hypothesis required more evidence to complete as a new modality of cellular senescence. Proteomic analysis of the cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions from young and senescent cells revealed disruption of nucleocytoplasmic trafficking (NCT) as an essential feature of replicative senescence (RS) at the global level. Blocking NCT either chemically or genetically induced RS-like senescence phenotypes, named as nuclear barrier-induced senescence (NBIS). Transcriptomic analysis revealed that NBIS had the most similar gene expression pattern to RS, compared with other stress-induced types of cellular senescence. Core proteomic and transcriptomic shared patterns between RS and NBIS included upregulation of endocytosis-lysosome network and downregulation of NCT in senescent cells, which were also conserved in yeast aging model. These results implicate an aging-dependent coordinated reduction in the transmission of extrinsic signals to the nucleus and in the nucleus-to-cytoplasm supply of proteins/RNAs. We further showed that the aging-associated decrease in Sp1 transcription factor expression was responsible for downregulation of NCT. Our results suggest that NBIS is a modality of cellular senescence that can represent the nature of physiological aging in eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture, treatment, and reagents Normal neonatal HDFs (PCS-201-010, American Type Culture Collection) were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (1×) with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone) containing 100 U/ml penicillin and 100μg/ml streptomycin (Hyclone). Cells were grown at 37°C and 5% CO2. Cells were treated with 0.1 μg/ml leptomycin B (LMB, Sigma) to inhibit nuclear export. Cells were serially passaged, and young proliferating and senescent cells were collected at doubling time (DT) ≤ 1 day and ≥ 14 days, respectively.  Subcellular fractionation To isolate the cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions, cells were lysed in buffer A (10 mM HEPES [pH8.0], 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM DTT, 300 mM sucrose, 0.1% NP40, 0.5 mM PMSF), and incubated for 5 min on ice. The samples were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm at 4℃ for 1 min, and the supernatant was collected as the cytoplasmic fraction. The pellet was resuspended in buffer B (20 mM HEPES [pH8.0], 20% glycerol, 100 mM KCl, 100 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF) and incubated for 15 min on ice. The samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm at 4℃ for 5 min, and the supernatant was used for the nuclear fraction.  Peptide preparation and TMT labeling  Cells were lysed initially in Buffer A (10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 300 mM sucrose, 0.1% NP-40, 0.5 mM PMSF) for 5 min on ice. The lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 1 min, and the supernatant was collected as cytosolic fraction. Then, the pellets were lysed in Buffer B (20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 20% glycerol, 100 mM KCl, 100 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM PMSF). After 10 min on ice, the lysates from the pellets were centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 5 min, and the supernatant was collected as nuclear fraction. After BCA measurement, a total of 200 μg of proteins from each sample were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37° C for 45 min, alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide in dark at room temperature for 30 min, and diluted with 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reach 1 M urea. Then, the sequencing grade trypsin (Promega; Madison; WI) was used to enzymatically digest the proteome at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1 to 20 (w/w) at 37 °C overnight. After acidification, the digested peptide mixture was desalted using C18 Macro Spin Columns (HA; 74-4101). Eluted clean peptide samples were dried in a speed vacuum concentrator and kept at − 80 °C until TMT labeling. Dried desalted peptides were labeled using 10-plex TMT reagent (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). TMT labeling reaction was performed as per the manufacturer instructions with minor modifications. Briefly, peptide samples were resuspended with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate while TMT reagents were with 40 μL anhydrous acetonitrile. Peptide solution were mixed vigorously with the reagents and kept at room temperature for 2 hours. Finally, TMT-labeled peptides were mixed and then stored at −80 ° C until peptide fractionation.   Peptide fractionation  A complex mixture of TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated as described previously. Briefly, mixed peptides were subjected to fractionation using Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA). Accucore XL C18 analytical column (4.6 mm × 250 mm, 4 μm) was used for peptide separation. Solvent A and B were 10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate in water (pH 7.4) and 10 mM TEAB in 90% acetonitrile (pH 7.4). Peptide fractions were collected using a 90 min linear gradient (0-5 min: 5% solvent B; 5-70 min: a shallow linear increase from 5 to 40% solvent B; 70-75 min: a sharp increase from 40 to 90% solvent B; 75-80 min: 90% solvent B; 80-85 min: 90 to 5% solvent B; 85-90 min: 5% solvent B) at the flow rate of 1 mL/min. Total number of fraction was 192 fraction which were then pooled into 24 fractions as follows: #1-#25-#49-#73-#97-#121-#145-#169, #2-#26-#50-#74-#98-#122-#146-#170, …, #24-#48-#72-#96-#120-#144-#168-#192. Peptides were vacuum-dried and stored at − 80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis Prepared 24 fractions of peptide samples were then analyzed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled online with EASY nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). PepMapTM RSLC C18 (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm) column and Acclaim PepMapTM 100 nanoViper C18 (75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm) column were used for an analytical column and for a trap column, respectively.

### Data Protocol
MS-GF+ database search and protein identification For the individual cytoplasmic or nuclear fractions, all LC-MS/MS datasets were subjected to postexperiment-monoisotopic mass refinement (PE-MMR) analysis to accurately assign precursor masses to the MS/MS data. The refined MS/MS data (i.e., mgf files) were searched against a composite database of Uniprot-Human-reference (released November, 2017; 21,200 entries) and 179 common contaminants at the target-decoy setting using MS-GF+ search engine (v10089). The MS-GF+ parameters were set as follows: i) semi-tryptic, ii) precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, iii) carbamidomethylation (+57.021464 Da) of cysteine and TMT labeling (+229.162932 Da) of any amino acids at N-termini and lysine as static modifications, and iv) oxidation (+15.994915 Da) of methionine and carbamylation (+43.005814 Da) of any amino acids at N-termini as variable modifications. The search results from the 24 MS/MS datasets for cytoplasmic or nuclear fractions were combined. We then identified peptides from the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%. Peptide abundances were quantified as maximum intensities of TMT reporter ions in the refined MS/MS spectra using MSnbase package (v2.12.0) in R (v3.5.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cellular senescence, Nuclear barrier, Replicative senescence, Nucleocytoplasmic trafficking, Eukaryotic aging

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea
Korea Bioinformation Center (KOBIC), Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB)

### Submitter
Ji-Hwan Park

### Lab Head
Dr Daehee Hwang
Department of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea


