### Accession
PXD005459

### Title
Comprehensive proteomic analysis of Penicillium verrucosum

### Description
In the present study we used OTA producing Penicillium verrucosum to identify and quantify proteins of an organism with yet no protein information available. We were able to identify 3632 proteins in an "ab initio" translated database from DNA sequences of P. verrucosum. Additionally a SWATH analysis was done to find differentially regulated proteins at two different time points of the growth curve. We compared the proteins at the beginning and the end of the log phase.

### Sample Protocol
The mycelium was harvested from liquid culture, washed, lyophilized and weighed. After grinding in liquid nitrogen, 50 mg were dissolved in lysis buffer and 10 µg were digested with Trypsin/LysC for LC MS/MS analysis. LC-separation was accomplished on a nano-HPLC system (Dionex) followed by shotgun mass spectrometric analysis on a TripleTOF 5600+ (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot 5.0 (Sciex) was used for identification. The translation of the DNA sequences into proteins was done with AUGUSTUS gene prediction tool. For an overview on the biological function a PFAM analysis was carried out (http://pfam.xfam.org/). SWATH data was processed in PeakView SWATH Processing Micro App (Sciex) and exported to MarkerView 1.2.1 (Sciex) to visualize data structure. For determination of differentially regulated proteins the data was further analyzed with R programming language (version 3.2.2).

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometric identification of proteins in species lacking validated sequence information is a major problem in veterinary science. In the present study, we used ochratoxin A producing Penicillium verrucosum to identify and quantitatively analyze proteins of an organism with yet no protein information available. The work presented here aimed to provide a comprehensive protein identification of P. verrucosum using shotgun proteomics. We were able to identify 3631 proteins in an "ab initio" translated database from DNA sequences of P. verrucosum. Additionally, a sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment-ion spectra analysis was done to find differentially regulated proteins at two different time points of the growth curve. We compared the proteins at the beginning (day 3) and at the end of the log phase (day 12).

### Keywords
Penicillium verrucosum, Swath, Shotgun proteomics, Fungal proteomics

### Affiliations
Austria
VetCore Facility for Research, Proteomics Unit, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Veterinärplatz 1, 1210 Wien

### Submitter
Katharina Nöbauer

### Lab Head
Dr Ebrahim Razzazi-Fazeli
VetCore Facility for Research, Proteomics Unit, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Veterinärplatz 1, 1210 Wien


