### Accession
PXD033231

### Title
Aedes aegypti Aag-2 cells proteome modulation in response to Chikungunya virus infection

### Description
Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a single-stranded positive RNA virus that belongs to the genus Alphavirus and is transmitted to humans by infected Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus bites. In humans, CHIKV can cause painful symptoms during acute and chronic stages of infection. However, the virus-vector interaction has characteristics that allow a persistent infection, not disturbing the mosquito’s fitness. Here, we aimed to clarify aspects of CHIKV infection in Ae. aegypti Aag-2 cells through label-free quantitative proteomic analysis and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). We used MOI 0.1 to infect Aag-2 cells in biological triplicates over 48 h. TEM images show a high load of intracellular viral cargo at 48 hpi, as well as an elongated unusual mitochondria morphology that might indicate a mitochondrial imbalance. Moreover, a total of 196 Ae. aegypti protein groups were up or downregulated upon infection, related to protein synthesis, energy metabolism, signaling pathways and apoptosis. These regulated Aag-2 proteins might have roles in antiviral and/or in pro-viral mechanisms during CHIKV infection, to support the balance between viral propagation and the survival of host cell, leading to the persistent infection.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry: 2 × 106 Aag-2 cells were seeded in T25 flasks. After 16 h, cells were infected with CHIKV stock at MOI 0.1 in biological triplicates. Mock cells (with Schneider’s medium only) were harvested at t = 0 h (uninfected) and CHIKV-infected cells were harvested at 12 hpi and 48 hpi. A total of 100 µg of proteins of each Aag-2 pellet harvesting time point were lysed in 8 M urea in 20 mM of ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.9 containing a complete mixture of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Then, the samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at 32 °C and alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then applied into a filter (Centrifugal Filters Ultracel – 3 kDa) and centrifuged for 10 min at 14,000 x g. Next, a washing step was performed with urea 8 M followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 14,000 x g. A total of 2 μg of modified trypsin (Promega, USA) was used for tryptic digestion following the proportion ratio 1:50 (enzyme:substrate) for 18 h at 37 °C under 600 rpm agitation. Tryptic peptides were acidified by adding TFA to final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) and desalted with POROS R2 resin (Applied Biosystems), packaged in micropipette tips. Desalted peptides were vacuum dried, suspended in 10 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, and aliquots corresponding to 0.5 µg/µL were used for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Label-free protein quantification and identification: protein quantification and identification were performed by using MetaMorpheus (Solntsev et al., 2018), which takes advantage of a modified version of Morpheus (Wenger and Coon, 2013) for identification and FlashLFQ (Millikin et al., 2017) for quantification. Briefly, .raw files and a fasta file containing the Uniprot reference proteomes of CHIKV (UP000000569) and Ae. aegypti (UP000008820), with one protein sequence per gene, were loaded into MetaMorpheus. Both fasta files were downloaded in May 2021. Then, calibration was performed with default values, with file specific tolerances set to each MS run. Next, global post-translational modification discovery (G-PTM-D) was used to search for common biological, common artifacts, and metal modifications in the files. Identification and quantification were done allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages, two modifications per peptide, and peptide minimum length of 7. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and selenocysteine were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Protein parsimony was applied, two peptides were required to identify a protein group and modified peptides were treated as different peptides to remove ambiguities in the proteins quantification. Quantification was performed without Match Between Runs (MBR) and results were normalized by FlashLFQ. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs) were considered as valid if q-value < 0.01 and MetaMorpheus minimum score was set to 5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mosquito, Protein synthesis, Chikungunya virus, Rna helicases., Mass spectrometry, Label-free quantification, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
UNIVERSITY OF BRASILIA
Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Biochemistry, Institute of Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil

### Submitter
SEBASTIEN CHARNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Sébastien Charneau
Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Biochemistry, Institute of Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil


