### Accession
PXD002039

### Title
Expression dynamics in mammalian cells responding to protein misfolding stress

### Description
The relative importance of gene expression regulation at the mRNA versus the protein-level is a matter of ongoing debate. We present an in-depth analysis of a cervical cancer cell line responding to protein misfolding stress induced by dithiothreitol treatment, quantifying the dynamics of mRNA and protein concentrations for >3,500 genes over a time-course 30 hours. While the early phase of the experiment (<two hours) was marked by apoptosis, surviving cells were marked by a strong response to unfolded proteins and stress of the endoplasmatic reticulum, specifically during the intermediate phase (two to eight hours). Using statistical time series analysis, we detected significant changes in the regulatory parameters at the RNA-level, caused by transcription and mRNA degradation, and at the protein-level, caused by translation and protein degradation. mRNA- and protein-level regulation were of equal importance (XX and YYY%, respectively), but displayed different magnitudes and dynamics: mRNA fold changes were much smaller on average than those of the proteins. While our method did not capture immediate changes, we found the strongest regulatory response between two and eight hours after the treatment. mRNA-level regulation showed a spike around this time interval, while protein-level regulation was delayed and continued at slower pace until the end of the experiment.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were Dounce homogenized in lysis buffer containing 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets in EASYpacks, Roche) in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Samples were kept on ice throughout the entire procedure. Cellular lysate was centrifuged at 1,000 x g at 4 °C; the supernatant was saved as the cytosolic fraction, and the pellet was subjected to a single purification step via a sucrose cushion of 0.25 M and 0.88 M sucrose. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford Protein assay (Bio-Rad) and samples diluted to 2mg/ml concentration. For each sample, 50ul was mixed with equal volume of trifluoroethanol and denatured. The samples were reduced with 15 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 55 °C for 45 min and alkylated with 55 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30min at room temperature in the dark. Protein digestion was performed overnight with ultra mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega; at 1:50 v/w) at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by adding 2% formic acid (FA) and purified on C18 stageTips (Thermo Scientific, HyperSep). Eluted peptides were separated using Eksigent nanoLC Ultra Plus system (AB Sciex) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). Peptides were separated on an Agilent ZORBAX 300SB-C18 column (150 mm x 75 μm inter diameter) using a five hours gradient of 2-40% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA. Each sample was analyzed by three to four technical replicates. MS analysis was performed in a data dependent mode using a top 10 method for MS/MS acquisition. Data analysis was performed with the Maxquant Software (1.3.0.3), searching against the human Uniprot database (2012), and combining the cytosolic and pellet samples as different fractions.  The label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used for data normalization with minimum ratio count set to 1. FDR was set to 1% at both the peptide and protein levels.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data processing While numerous datasets on transcriptome changes in response to stress are available, and microarray analysis methods are mature to use[4], there is no ready-to-use pipeline for analyzing mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomics data. We had to build my own statistical methods to analyze the proteome. Quantitative proteomics data was first extracted by MaxQuant version 1.3.0.3. Human protein sequence database (specify) was used for peptide identification and LFQ quantification was used for protein quantification. Different parameter settings were tested to maximize peptide identification and to optimize protein quantification. The extracted data included 3,200 proteins with MS/MS identification and 2,828 of these could be mapped to Ensembl gene identifier for matching with RNA data. To create a high-confidence dataset, genes with missing data at any time points in either replicates were removed, leaving 1,820 genes in total for further processing steps. The resulting data was normalized by the sum of all LFQ intensities with the exception of the proteins whose intensities were in the top 5% percentile in each sample. This removal is to prevent a few proteins with extremely high LFQ intensities accounting for a large proportion of total LFQ intensity from dominating the normalizing factor. Then the data were log transformed (base 2) and the jackknife procedure was applied for outlier (spikes) removal (TRV threshold 2). Jackknife is a leave-one-out procedure to remove very volatile spikes. In each replicate, each time point was removed and total variation (TV = max - min) was recorded.  The ratio between median TV and minimal TV was calculated. If a time point is an outlying spike, this minimal TV should come from that observation and this ratio was supposed to be large. For each gene, the larger ratio from two replicates was taken, i.e. outlying spike was detected from either replicate. Then the threshold was set at 2 to filter out outliers. Finally, weighted local regression (lowess) was applied to further smooth the time course data.  1266 genes were left in final dataset for clustering and functional analysis.  Hierarchical clustering and Function analysis. Hierarchical clustering was done by Perseus version 1.4.1.3. The correlation distance between genes was calculated using both RNA and protein relative expression values. The distance between two clusters was determined by average linkage criterion. Total transcriptome data was divided into 15 clusters with 0.544 as distance threshold (Figure SXXX). The distance threshold of 0.467 was chosen for total proteome data, and 25 clusters were generated (Figure SXXX). The combined RNA and protein data was divided into 25 clusters using 0.604 as distance threshold. Clusters with more than 30 genes and holding concordant and discordant RNA and protein expression trends were chosen to calculate GO term function enrichment. Then semi-manual combining of the clusters was done to merge clusters with similar expression patterns and related GO terms.   GO term function enrichment was analyzed using functional annotation clustering of David bioinformatics resources 6.7 (Ref). Significant enriched GO terms were decided based on 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
The relative importance of regulation at the mRNA versus protein level is subject to ongoing debate. To address this question in a dynamic system, we mapped proteomic and transcriptomic changes in mammalian cells responding to stress induced by dithiothreitol over 30 h. Specifically, we estimated the kinetic parameters for the synthesis and degradation of RNA and proteins, and deconvoluted the response patterns into common and unique to each regulatory level using a new statistical tool. Overall, the two regulatory levels were equally important, but differed in their impact on molecule concentrations. Both mRNA and protein changes peaked between two and eight hours, but mRNA expression fold changes were much smaller than those of the proteins. mRNA concentrations shifted in a transient, pulse-like pattern and returned to values close to pre-treatment levels by the end of the experiment. In contrast, protein concentrations switched only once and established a new steady state, consistent with the dominant role of protein regulation during misfolding stress. Finally, we generated hypotheses on specific regulatory modes for some genes.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Lc-msms, Protein misfolding stress

### Affiliations
Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York University, New York, NY, US
New York University

### Submitter
Zhe Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Vogel
Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York University, New York, NY, US


