### Accession
PXD016021

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Analysis to Determine Specificity of PRC2 Degrader

### Description
To assess the effects of UNC6852 treatment on cellular protein levels more broadly, we performed global proteomics experiments using tandem mass tag (TMT) quantification comparing HeLa cells treated with UN6852 (10 μM, 24 hrs) to DMSO treated control cells. Whole proteome analysis resulted in the identification of >60,000 peptides corresponding to 5,452 quantifiable proteins. Notably, these data revealed that EED and EZH2 were selectively degraded by UNC6852 within the proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Exponentially growing HeLa cells were seeded in 10 cm plates and treated with UNC6852, UNC7043, or DMSO (10 μM, 24 hrs). Cells from biological triplicates were harvested on ice and centrifuged at 4 °C for 10 min. Lysis on ice with 8M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8 with 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Active Motif, 37490) and 1X phosphatase inhibitor (Roche, PhosSTOP, 05892791001). Sample preparation: Each sample (200 μg) was incubated with trypsin overnight. Samples were desalted with SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters, 100 mg sorbent, WAT036820), and Pierce BCA peptide quantitation assay was performed. Each sample (50 μg) was labelled with a TMT label. After labelling, samples were quenched and combined 1:1 into a single multiplexed sample. An aliquot (100 μg) of the mixed sample was fractionated into 8 fractions using the Pierce high pH reversed phase fractionation spin columns. Peptide fractions were analysed in duplicate by LC-MS/MS using a Thermo Easy nLC 1200-QExactive HF. Sample ID: 1 DMSO control  1 127C 2 DMSO control 2 131 3 DMSO control 3 128C 4 UNC6852 (1) 10 uM  129C 5 UNC6852 (2) 10 uM  130C 6 UNC6852 (3) 10 uM  127N 7 UNC7043 (1) 10 uM  129N 8 UNC7043 (2) 10 uM  126 9 UNC7043 (3)  10 uM  128N

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching raw data against a reviewed Uniprot human database (containing 20,245 sequences) using Andromeda and quantified using TMT intensities (uncorrected) within MaxQuant v1.6.3.4. Parameters: carbamidomethyl(C)-fixed mod; oxidation(M)-varaible mod; peptide length-7. Further data analysis was performed in Perseus, Excel, and GraphPad Prism. Statistical significance between each pair of groups was calculated using Student’s T-test and a p-value of <0.01 was used as the significance cut-off. Log2 fold change of each protein was calculated by dividing the averaged log2 TMT intensities of each compound by the averaged log2 TMT intensities of the DMSO control across all replicates. A log2 absolute fold change of 0.5 was used as the significance cut-off.

### Publication Abstract
Protein degradation via the use of bivalent chemical degraders provides an alternative strategy to block protein function and assess the biological roles of putative drug targets. This approach capitalizes on the advantages of small-molecule inhibitors while moving beyond the restrictions of traditional pharmacology. Here, we report a chemical degrader (UNC6852) that targets polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). UNC6852 contains an EED226-derived ligand and a ligand for VHL which bind to the WD40 aromatic cage of EED and CRL2<sup>VHL</sup>, respectively, to induce proteasomal degradation of&#xa0;PRC2 components, EED, EZH2, and SUZ12. Degradation of PRC2 with UNC6852 blocks the histone&#xa0;methyltransferase activity of EZH2, decreasing H3K27me3 levels in HeLa cells and diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cells containing EZH2 gain-of-function mutations. UNC6852 degrades both wild-type and mutant EZH2, and additionally displays anti-proliferative effects in this cancer model system.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Tmt

### Affiliations
UNC-Chapel Hill
Center for Integrative Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Lindsey James
Center for Integrative Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, UNC-Chapel Hill


