### Accession
PXD026445

### Title
First comprehensive proteome analysis of lysine crotonylation in Streptococcus agalactiae, a pathogen causing meningoencephalitis in teleosts

### Description
In Homo sapiens, Streptococcus agalactiae is a common colonizer of the rectovaginal tract and a fundamental cause of neonatal and non-pregnant adults infectious diseases. It also causes infectious disease in fish which compromises food safety as well as possesses a zoonotic risk. Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is a type of histone post-translational modifications discovered in 2011. Kcr dynamics are involved in active gene promoters and potential enhancers in yeast and mammalian. However, lysine crotonylation in S. agalactiae has not yet been studied. In the present study, we conducted the first proteome-wide profiling of Kcr in S. agalactiae and identified 241 Kcr sites on 675 proteins, representing the Kcr event in S. agalactiae. Bioinformatics analysis showed that 164 sequences were matched to a total of six definitively conserved motifs, and many of them were significantly enriched in metabolic processes, cellular process, and single-organism processes. Moreover, we found four crotonylation modified proteins predicted as quorum sensing system and virulence factors, which indicate the important role of PTM on bacterial QS system and virulence. These data represent the first report of a global crotonylation proteome and provide a promising starting point for further functional research of crotonylation in bacterial virulence in S. agalactiae.

### Sample Protocol
1 To obtain the global crotonylation proteome of S. agalactiae, a proteomic method based on sensitive immune-affinity purification and high-resolution LC-MS/MS was applied to identify crotonylated proteins and their modification sites in S. agalactiae.  2 To further validate the identified lysine- crotonylated results, Four Kcr proteins (YebC/PmpR family DNA-binding transcriptional regulator, surface antigen-like protein, cold-shock protein, diacylglycerol kinase, CsbD) were selected and analyzed by Western blotting. Their four proteins were performed with anti-crotonylation and anti-target protein antibody, respectively.

### Data Protocol
1 To evaluate the nature of the crotonylated lysines in S. agalactiae, the sequence motifis in all identified crotonylated peptides were investigated using the Motif-X programme.  2 To explore the relationship between lysine crotonylation and protein secondary structures, a structural analysis of all crotonylated proteins was performed using the algorithm NetSurfP. 3 To obtain an overview of crotonylated proteins in S.agalactiae, the Gene Ontology (GO) functional 88 classification of all crotonylated proteins based on their biological processes, cellular component,  molecular function and subcellular locations was investigated (Supplementary Table S2). 4 To further identify the cellular processes regulated through crotonylation in S. agalactiae, the crotonylated protein interaction network was established using an algorithm in Cytoscape software. A total of 193 crotonylated proteins were mapped to the protein interaction database (Supplementary Table S4), presenting a global view of the diverse cellular functions of crotonylated proteins in S. agalactiae.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Streptococcus agalactiae; crotonylation; virulence factors; proteomics

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for Aquatic Economic Animal, Key Laboratory of Control for Disease of Aquatic Animals of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, College of Fishery, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang, P.R. China.

### Submitter
Chen Xinjin

### Lab Head
Dr Jian Jichang
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for Aquatic Economic Animal, Key Laboratory of Control for Disease of Aquatic Animals of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, College of Fishery, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang, P.R. China.


