### Accession
PXD012493

### Title
Trincr1 RNA pull down MS in mESC

### Description
Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have emerged as important components of gene regulatory network in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). However, the function and molecular mechanism of lncRNAs are still largely unknown. Here we identified Trincr1 (TRIM71 interacting long noncoding RNA 1) lncRNA that regulates the FGF/ERK signaling and self-renewal of ESCs. Trincr1 is exported by THOC complex to cytoplasm where it binds and represses TRIM71, leading to the downregulation of SHCBP1 protein. Knocking out Trincr1 leads to the upregulation of phosphorylated ERK and ERK pathway target genes and the decrease of ESC self-renewal, while knocking down Trim71 completely rescues the defects of Trincr1 knockout. Furthermore, ectopic expression of Trincr1 represses FGF/ERK signaling and the self-renewal of neural progenitor cells. Together, this study reveals more regulators in FGF/ERK signaling pathway and highlights lncRNA as an important player in cell signaling network to coordinate cell fate specification.

### Sample Protocol
Substrate RNA for beads immobilization were synthesized by in vitro transcription using T7 RNA polymerase (Thermo, EP0111) and PCR products as templates. 250 pmol RNA was used in 400 μl reaction mixture containing 100 mM sodium acetate (pH 5.0) and 5 mM sodium meta-periodate (Sigma, 71859). Reaction mixtures were incubated 1 h at room temperature avoiding light. The RNA was then ethanol precipitated and re-suspended in 500 ml 0.1 M sodium acetate (pH 5.0). 200 ml adipic acid dihydrazide agarose beads (Sigma, A0802) was washed four times with 0.1M sodium acetate (pH 5.0), pelleted after each wash at 1000 rpm for 3 min. After the final wash, the beads was re-suspended in 300 ml 0.1 M sodium acetate (pH 5.0) and mixed with the periodate-treated RNA, rotated overnight at 4℃.The beads with the bound RNA were then pelleted and washed three times in 1 ml of 2 M NaCl and three times in 1 ml of NP40 buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mM sodium chloride, 1.0% NP-40 , 1 mM EDTA supplemented with 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1:500 PI cocktail and 400 U per ml RNase Inhibitor).The beads containing immobilized RNA were then incubated with cell lysates 20 min at 30℃. After incubation, the beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 1000 rpm for 3 min and then washed twice with NP40 buffer and twice with high salt NP40 buffer (350 mM NaCl). The protein bound to the target RNA were eluted by heating the beads at 95℃ for 5 min with 30 ml SDS loading buffer .

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, the eluted peptides were sprayed into a Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with a nano-ESI source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with a full MS scan in FT mode at a resolution of 120,000 followed by CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) MS/MS scans on the 15 most abundant ions in the initial MS scan.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trincr1, Rna pull down, Mesc

### Affiliations
Peking University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Cardiometabolic Molecular Medicine, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Peking University, Beijing, China  

### Submitter
Yangming Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yangming Wang
Beijing Key Laboratory of Cardiometabolic Molecular Medicine, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Peking University, Beijing, China  


