### Accession
PXD033807

### Title
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis of bone marrow from the ground or running rats

### Description
Exercise can prevent osteoporosis and improve immune function, but the mechanism remains unclear. To explore the key factors involved in these two processes, we collected bone marrow from ground and running rats and then conducted liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Treadmill intervention was set as 10 m/min, 30 min for 21 days.  Bone marrow was extracted from ferumus and tibias through high-speed centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
We processed the data based on the raw file obtained by mass spectrometry,described detailedly as following: 1) built the sample specific protein database according to the sample source, and then searched the database with analysis software; 2) Then,conducted the quality control analysis of peptide and protein levels based on the database search results; 3)We annotated the identified proteins with common functional databases, including GO,KEGG,InterPro,COG and STRING databases; 4) Next,we carried out the quantitative analysis of protein , including quantitative distribution and repeatability analysis; 5) Screened the differences according to the quantitative results and drew the statistical chart related to difference analysis; 6) Then,conducted the functional classification and statistical analysis of differential proteins, including GO secondary classification, KEGG pathway classification and COG / KOG classification and statistics; 7) Based on the statistical results obtained by different classification methods,we used Fisher exact test method for enrichment analysis; 8) When the project had multiple experimental groups,we compared the functional relationship of different proteins under different experimental conditions by enrichment cluster analysis; 9) Then, through PPI analysis,selected the key regulatory proteins under specific experimental conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Exercise can prevent osteoporosis and improve immune function, but the mechanism remains unclear. Here, we show that exercise promotes reticulocalbin-2 secretion from the bone marrow macrophages to initiate bone marrow fat lipolysis. Given the crucial role of lipolysis in exercise-stimulated osteogenesis and lymphopoiesis, these findings suggest that reticulocalbin-2 is a pivotal regulator of a local adipose-osteogenic/immune axis. Mechanistically, reticulocalbin-2 binds to a functional receptor complex, which is composed of neuronilin-2 and integrin beta-1, to activate a cAMP-PKA signaling pathway that mobilizes bone marrow fat via lipolysis to fuel the differentiation and function of mesenchymal and hematopoietic stem cells. Notably, the administration of recombinant reticulocalbin-2 in tail-suspended and old mice remarkably decreases bone marrow fat accumulation and promotes osteogenesis and lymphopoiesis. These findings identify reticulocalbin-2 as a novel mechanosensitive lipolytic factor in maintaining energy homeostasis in bone resident cells, and it provides a promising target for skeletal and immune health.

### Keywords
Fat metabolism, Exercise, Bone marrow fat, Immunity, Bone metabolism, Lipolysis

### Affiliations
Xiangya Hospital of Central South University.
Xiangya Hospital of Central South University

### Submitter
Hui Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Xianghang Luo
Xiangya Hospital of Central South University.


