### Accession
PXD003030

### Title
SIL1 deficiency in lymphoblastoid cells: antagonizing cellular mechanisms and insights into selective vulnerability in Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome

### Description
Patients with Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome and gene targeting in mice revealed an essential role for the SIL1/Sil1 gene in maintenance of central nervous tissue and skeletal muscle. SIL1/Sil1 expression is not restricted to a certain tissue, and the gene product, SIL1/Sil1, localizes to the (sarco)endoplasmic reticulum. Due to the ADP/ATP exchange activity of SIL1/Sil1 for the major chaperone BiP (GRP78) it functions as a co-chaperone. It is still an enigma how loss of functional SIL1/Sil1 can lead to selective vulnerability of the nervous system and skeletal muscle whereas other cellular populations like lymphoblastoid cells (LCs) are protected against clinical manifestation of SIL1/Sil1 deficiency. In this study we address this issue in order to identify compensatory strategies and to gain a deeper understanding of the selective vulnerability in SIL1 pathology. By studying the morphology of SIL1-deficient LCs, we demonstrate that they present with altered organelle structures indicating subclinical vulnerability and once more the assumed presence of cellular strategies antagonizing phenotypical manifestation of loss of this co-chaperone. Proteomic profiling of MSS-derived LCs revealed affection of nuclear and mitochondrial integrity, cytoskeleton and cellular viability. Apart from that proteins, known to be causative for hereditary neuromuscular disorders or to be involved in development and function of the nervous system were altered in expression. Paradigmatic findings were confirmed in spleen of Sil1 deficient mice in comparison to appropriate controls. These findings along with the results of viability assays and the identification of activation of pro-survival mechanisms provide insights into cellular strategies antagonizing SIL1/Sil1 deficiency and on a more general note into the molecular cause of selective vulnerability defining the SIL1/Sil1-phenotype, in both man and mouse.

### Sample Protocol
Sample cleaning and proteolysis were based on filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. For label free protein quantification, ~1 µg of tryptic digest (four healthy and four MSS patients) were analyzed using a nano LC-MS system. Chemical labeling of the tryptic peptides (40 µg) of MSS and respective control samples was performed with iTRAQ 8-plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To reduce the sample complexity and to enhance proteome coverage, iTRAQ labeled sample was fractionated using reversed phase HPLC at pH 6.0.

### Data Protocol
Label free quantification of the acquired MS data was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.) version 4.1. All iTRAQ raw data were processed simultaneously using the MudPIT option with Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against a concatenated target/decoy version a concatenated target/decoy version of the human Uniprot database, (downloaded on 30th of July 2012, containing 20,232 target sequences).

### Publication Abstract
SIL1 is a ubiquitous protein of the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) acting as a co-chaperone for the ER-resident chaperone, BiP. Recessive mutations of the corresponding gene lead to vulnerability of skeletal muscle and central nervous system in man (Marinesco-Sj&#xf6;gren syndrome; MSS) and mouse. However, it is still unclear how loss of ubiquitous SIL1 leads to selective vulnerability of the nervous system and skeletal muscle whereas other cells and organs are protected from clinical manifestations. In this study we aimed to disentangle proteins participating in selective vulnerability of SIL1-deficient cells and tissues: morphological examination of MSS patient-derived lymphoblastoid cells revealed altered organelle structures (ER, nucleus and mitochondria) thus showing subclinical vulnerability. To correlate structural perturbations with biochemical changes and to identify proteins potentially preventing phenotypical manifestation, proteomic studies have been carried out. Results of proteomic profiling are in line with the morphological findings and show affection of nuclear, mitochondrial and cytoskeletal proteins as well as of such responsible for cellular viability. Moreover, expression patterns of proteins known to be involved in neuromuscular disorders or in development and function of the nervous system were altered. Paradigmatic findings were confirmed by immunohistochemistry of splenic lymphocytes and the cerebellum of SIL1-deficient mice. Ataxin-10, identified with increased abundance in our proteome profile, is necessary for the neuronal survival but also controls muscle fiber apoptosis, thus declaring this protein as a plausible candidate for selective tissue vulnerability. Our combined results provide first insights into the molecular causes of selective cell and tissue vulnerability defining the MSS phenotype.

### Keywords
Human, Sil1 mutations, Ebv-lymphoblastoid cells

### Affiliations
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V., Otto-Hahn-Str.6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  phone: +49 231 1392-4143 fax: +49 231 1392-4850 http://www.isas.de

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr René Peiman Zahedi
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V., Otto-Hahn-Str.6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  phone: +49 231 1392-4143 fax: +49 231 1392-4850 http://www.isas.de


