### Accession
PXD041585

### Title
Small open reading frame-encoded protein production is modulated by nonsense-mediated decay in breast cancer

### Description
Peptides from low abundance non-canonical proteins encoded by the human genome are presented by the major histocompatibility complex and serve as potential neoantigens or therapeutic targets. However, their prevalence in the genome is unclear. We identified several non-canonical proteins produced by breast cancer cell lines using proteogenomics approach. Although these proteins were detectable, the transcripts and corresponding proteins showed low abundance and inconsistent expression pattern. Targeting the nonsense-mediated decay pathway by UPF1-knockdown increased the levels of both non-coding transcripts and non-canonical proteins, suggesting they are subjected to degradation by conserved quality control mechanisms in cells. We also observed increased expression of unannotated transcripts and human leukocyte antigen transcripts associated with antigen presentation. These observations suggest that UPF1 has a role in regulating or suppressing transcriptional noise and that modulating the expression level of UPF1 could expand the reservoir of neoantigens and increase neoantigen presentation, potentially augmenting immunotherapeutic responses in cancers.

### Sample Protocol
One-step lysis and high molecular weight protein depletion Breast cancer cells were seeded in two 15-cm dishes at 5  106 cells per well and cultured as per ATCC requirements to 80% confluence. The culture supernatants were removed, and the cell monolayers were washed three times in ice-cold PBS. The cells were then trypsinized and pelleted in 15-mL protease-free tubes for storage at -80°C. For high molecular weight protein depletion, cell pellets were processed according to a previously published protocol25. In-gel peptide preparation for LC-MS/MS For in-gel digestion, Coomassie-stained protein bands obtained from SDS-PAGE (0–10 kDa, 10–15 kDa and 15–20 kDa; each kDa range gel band was processed individually) were destained using 40 mM TEABC buffer (Sigma – Cat. #T7408-500ML) in 40% acetonitrile. Subsequently, the proteins were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (final concentration) with gentle shaking at 60°C for 30 min. Next, the proteins were alkylated by incubation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (final concentration) in the dark at room temperature for 10 min. Reduced and alkylated samples were digested in-gel using 200 μL (or a sufficient volume to cover all the gel pieces) of MS grade trypsin (Promega – Cat.#V5111), diluted to 10 ng/µl in 40 mM TEABC buffer in 1.5-mL proteomics-compatible tubes. After 16 h, the trypsin was inactivated by adding 0.1% formic acid (final concentration) (PierceTM – Cat.#85178) and shaking vigorously at 37°C for 10 min. The supernatants were collected, and the digested peptides were extracted in 300 μL 5% formic acid/40% acetonitrile, twice with vigorous shaking at 37°C for 15 min. A final peptide extraction was performed using 500 μL 100% acetonitrile with vigorous shaking at 37°C for 20 min or until the gel became opaque. All collected supernatants were pooled and vacuum-dried in a GeneVac EZ2 using the DriPure® 30°C setting. Dried peptide pellets were resuspended in 200 μL of 0.1% formic acid, and peptide clean-up was performed using in-house prepared C18 stage tips (3M™ Empore™ – Cat.#14-386-2). Cleaned-up peptides were vacuum-dried in a GeneVac EZ-2and stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis MS/MS spectra were searched using the FragPipe (version 16.0) interface coupled with MSFragger42 search engine (version 3.3) and Philosopher43 data analysis software (version 4.0). FragPipe default label-free quantification with match-between-run workflow was performed using the UniProt canonical human proteome database (downloaded on 1st December 2021 and appended with a list of common contaminants), changing the match-between-runs MS1 ion retention time tolerance window to 3 min. For novel protein discovery and quantification, MS/MS spectra were searched as above, using either the OpenProt26 full proteome database (downloaded on 1st December 2021 and appended with a list of common contaminants) or a custom 3-frame translated cell line-specific database generated using RNA-seq data. Output MSstats files were processed using R-package MSstats44 version 3.22.1, Stringr version 1.4.0, and readr version 2.1.1 without imputations. Detected and quantified proteins were log10-transformed, and group comparisons were performed. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between triple-negative and non-TNBC cell lines were analyzed using t-tests (unpaired, parametric test, two-tailed) in GraphPad Prism version 9.3.1.471. Heatmaps were plotted using R-package ComplexHeatmap version 2.6.6 with Z-score transformed log10 normalized abundance values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Non-canonical proteins, Lc-ms/ms, Breast cancer cell lines

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*-Star
Cancer Precision Medicine Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, 4006, Australia.

### Submitter
PARTHIBAN PERIASAMY

### Lab Head
Dr HARSHA GOWDA
Cancer Precision Medicine Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, 4006, Australia.


