### Accession
PXD000188

### Title
Profiling protein kinases and other ATP binding proteins in Arabidopsis using acyl-ATP probes

### Description
Many protein activities are driven by ATP binding and hydrolysis. Here, we explore the ATP binding proteome of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana using Acyl-ATP (AcATP) probes. These probes target ATP binding sites and covalently label lysine residues in the ATP binding pocket. Protein extracts were labelled with NHS-LC-Biotin, purified over neutravidin and eluted with formic acid.  Eluted proteins were separated by 1-D SDS Gel and digested with Trypsin.  Peptide mixtures were analysed by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Velos. Spectra were searched using Mascot 2.3 using a fixed modification of cysteine (57.02 Da for carbamidomethyl), and variable modifications of methionine (15.99 Da for oxidation) and lysine (339.16 and 355.16 Da for BHAc and OBHAc labeling, respectively). A mass tolerance was set to 0.3 Da for the precursor ions and 0.4 Da for fragment ions. Up to two mis-cleavages for trypsin were permitted since the labeling would prevent cleavage at the labeled lysine. The MS2 spectra were searched against the TAIR10_pep_2012 (version November 2012) containing 35386 proteins of Arabidopsis thaliana, supplemented with a small database with 1095 artefact proteins and a reversed decoy database of the same proteins (totals 72962 entries). An oxidized version of the modifier was observed. Alternatively Arabidopsis leaf proteome was labeled with desthiobiotin-acyl ATP and digested with trypsin. Labeled peptides were purified on streptavidin matrix and sequenced by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ linear ion trap. Here the MS2 spectra were searched using SEQUEST against the TAIR9_pep_20090619 database (version June 2009) containing 32,769 proteins of Arabidopsis thaliana. MS2 searches included fixed iodoacetamide modification of cysteine (57 Da for alkylation), and variable modifications of methionine (16 Da for oxidation) and lysine (196 Da for DBAcATP labeling). Up to three mis-cleavages with trypsin were allowed and non-tryptic or half-tryptic peptides were excluded. A mass tolerance was set to 3 Da for the precursor ions and 1 Da for fragment ions.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Many protein activities are driven by ATP binding and hydrolysis. Here, we explore the ATP binding proteome of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana using acyl-ATP (AcATP)(1) probes. These probes target ATP binding sites and covalently label lysine residues in the ATP binding pocket. Gel-based profiling using biotinylated AcATP showed that labeling is dependent on pH and divalent ions and can be competed by nucleotides. The vast majority of these AcATP-labeled proteins are known ATP binding proteins. Our search for labeled peptides upon in-gel digest led to the discovery that the biotin moiety of the labeled peptides is oxidized. The in-gel analysis displayed kinase domains of two receptor-like kinases (RLKs) at a lower than expected molecular weight, indicating that these RLKs lost the extracellular domain, possibly as a result of receptor shedding. Analysis of modified peptides using a gel-free platform identified 242 different labeling sites for AcATP in the Arabidopsis proteome. Examination of each individual labeling site revealed a preference of labeling in ATP binding pockets for a broad diversity of ATP binding proteins. Of these, 24 labeled peptides were from a diverse range of protein kinases, including RLKs, mitogen-activated protein kinases, and calcium-dependent kinases. A significant portion of the labeling sites could not be assigned to known nucleotide binding sites. However, the fact that labeling could be competed with ATP indicates that these labeling sites might represent previously uncharacterized nucleotide binding sites. A plot of spectral counts against expression levels illustrates the high specificity of AcATP probes for protein kinases and known ATP binding proteins. This work introduces profiling of ATP binding activities of a large diversity of proteins in plant proteomes. The data have been deposited in ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD000188.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Arabidopsis, Activity-based protein profiling, Kinases, Abpp

### Affiliations
Proteomics Group

### Submitter
Thomas Colby

### Lab Head


