### Accession
PXD015015

### Title
Down-regulation of collagen hydroxylation in colorectal liver metastasis

### Description
Collagen, a major component of the extracellular matrix, is significantly upregulated in colorectal liver metastasis (CRLM) compared to liver tissue. Expression levels of specific collagen types in CRLM resemble those in colorectal cancer (CRC) and colon tissue. We investigated whether the collagen hydroxylation pattern from the primary tumor also migrates with the metastatic tumor. The degree of collagen alpha-1(I) hydroxylation in colon, CRC, liver, and CRLM tissue in the same individuals (n=14) was studied with mass spectrometry. The degree of hydroxylation was investigated in 36 collagen alpha-1(I) peptides, which covered 54% of the triple helical region. The average degree of hydroxylation in liver tissue was similar to that in colon tissue. The overall degree of hydroxylation was significantly lower (9% +/- 14%) in CRC tissue and also significantly lower (12% +/-22%) in CRLM tissue compared to colon or liver tissue. Still, in previous research of liver and CRLM enzymes involved in collagen hydroxylation were found to be upregulated, whereas P4HB (4-prolyl hydroxylase beta unit) was downregulated. Furthermore, 11 peptides are present with a specific number of hydroxylations that are significantly different between CRLM and liver tissue; these peptides could be candidates for the detection of CRLM. For one of these eleven peptides, a matching naturally occurring peptide in urine has been identified as being significantly different between patients suffering from CRLM and healthy controls. We conclude that the degree of hydroxylation in CRC and CRLM tumor tissue is in general significantly downregulated in comparison to healthy colon and liver tissue. The hydroxylation pattern in CRLM resemble partly the pattern in liver, primary colorectal cancer and colon.

### Sample Protocol
In short, formalin cross-links were removed by incubation with TRIS, followed by cysteine reduction and alkylation. The proteins in the tissue were cleaved into peptides by overnight incubation with trypsin. Peptides were identified with nanoLC-MS/MS measurements on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Raw data was converted into Mascot Generic Files and searched with Mascot (v2.3.2, Matrix Science Inc., London, UK) and the UniProt/Swiss-prot Human database (20194 entries). Hydroxylations (+16 Da) of proline, lysine, and methionine were included as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57 Da) of cysteine as fixed modification. Mascot search results were further analyzed in Scaffold (v4.6.2, Portland, OR, USA). In Scaffold, protein confidence levels were set to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), at least 2 peptides per protein, and a 1% FDR at the peptide level. FDRs were estimated by inclusion of a decoy database search generated by Mascot. A Peptide Report exported from Scaffold was used for data analysis.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis was performed in R (v3.6.0.)[22], the R-script can be found in the supplemental (S-2). In the digested tissue, collagen peptides are present with different numbers of hydroxylations per peptide. A difficulty with collagen analysis is the identification of the exact location of a hydroxylation. To avoid the identification of the exact hydroxylation position, we used the number of hydroxylations per peptide obtained by the parent mass. Per tissue type (n=4), per patient (n=14 or n=30), and per peptide from the peptide panel (n=36), we checked the presence of 0 to 10 hydroxylations, which generated a three-dimensional data matrix. Per peptide a list was generated containing the numbers of different forms observed, compared between two tissue types. Testing for differences between tissue types was performed with a paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Per tissue a list was generated containing the average number of hydroxylations per peptide, which was compared between two tissue types with a paired Wilcoxon signed-rank test. If a peptide was not identified in tissue from a particular patient, no average could be calculated, then this patient was removed from analysis of the average number of hydroxylations. Besides the overall differences between the number of different forms observed, and the average number of hydroxylations per peptide, we also studied in more detail if there are peptides with a specific number of hydroxylations that is different between different tissues. The difference in a specific hydroxylation form between two tissue types was assessed with the McNemar test. Two-sided p-values below 0.05 were considered as significant. The data quality was assessed prior to the analysis of the collagen hydroxylation. Per tissue type a 2D-PCA-plot was made, in which the color of the data points indicates the age, the shape indicates the gender, and, in the case of tumor tissue, the shape of the data points indicates the location of the primary tumor. Clustering of the data points based on color, shape, or size would indicate the presence of a bias in the data set. Also, a 2D-PCA-plot was made between Colon and CRC tissue, because they contained non-normal and non-tumor tissue, respectively. If grouping was based on the percentage non-tumor and non-normal tissue, then a bias in the data would be present.  To study the within tissue variation in liver (n=30) and in CRLM (n=30) tissue, permutation testing (n=1000 iterations) was performed. Samples were split randomly in two groups (n=15 each) and compared based on the number of forms, the average number of hydroxylations, and specific hydroxylation forms. Permutation testing (n=1000 iterations) was also performed for the  between different tissue comparisons. A frequency table was made based on the number of significant values per iteration. The permutation results shown are the 95% cumulative values.  If, between tissue types, a significant difference in the number of forms was present, then per tissue the presence of linear relation between the number of forms and the average number of hydroxylations was tested with the Pearson correlation test. A linear relation was considered significant if the p-value was below 0.05/4 (Bonferroni correction). The hydroxylation pattern was compared between: colon and liver, colon and CRC, CRC and CRLM, colon and CRLM, and liver and CRLM. The difference in the degree of hydroxylation was analyzed in different directions: 1) 2D- and 3D-PCA-plots; 2) the number of forms observed; 3) detailed analyzes of the average number of hydroxylations; and 4) analyzes of a specific hydroxylation form. Detailed information regarding the average number of hydroxylations was obtained by: plotting the average number of hydroxylations per peptide; the absolute difference in the average number of hydroxylations per peptide of CRC, CRLM, and liver tissue with respect to colon tissue (tissue – colon tissue); and the relative difference with respect to colon tissue ([tissue/colon -1]*100%). Differences between all groups were tested with 2-sided t-tests. For the average number of hydroxylations per peptide, p-values below 0.05/6 (Bonferroni correction, 6 comparisons), and for the relative differences, p-values below 0.05/3 (Bonferroni correction, 3 comparisons) were considered significant. The average of the relative difference was compared to zero with a one-sample t-test; p-values below 0.05/3 (Bonferroni correction, 3 comparisons) were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crlm, Human, Crc, Liver, Collagen, Ptm, Colon, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical Cancer Proteomics, Erasmus Medical Center, the Netherlands
Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Nick van Huizen

### Lab Head
Dr T.M. Luider
Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical Cancer Proteomics, Erasmus Medical Center, the Netherlands


