### Accession
PXD014874

### Title
SWATH differential abundance proteomics and cellular assays show in vitro anticancer activity of arachidonic and docosahexaenoic acid monoacylglycerols in HT-29 colorectal cancer cell line

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common and mortal types of cancer. There is increasing evidence that some polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) exercise specific inhibitory actions on cancer cells through different mechanisms, as a previous study on the effect on CRC cells of two PUFA free fatty acids (FFA), docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6n3) and arachidonic acid (ARA, 20:4n6)-FFA, shown. Here we have used the same study design and technology to investigate the actions of DHA and ARA-monoacylglycerols (MAG), and we have compared the results with the previous study of the corresponding FFA. Cell assays revealed that ARA- and DHA-MAG exercised dose- and time-dependent antiproliferative actions, with DHA-MAG acting on cancer cells more efficiently than ARA-MAG. SWATH-MS massive quantitative proteomics, validated by parallel reaction monitoring and followed by pathway analysis, revealed that DHA-MAG had a massive effect in the proteasome complex, while ARA-MAG main effect was related to DNA replication. Prostaglandin synthesis also resulted inhibited by DHA-MAG. Results clearly demonstrated the ability of MAGs to induce cell death in colon cancer cells and suggested a direct relationship between chemical structure and effect.

### Sample Protocol
HT-29 cells, treated or not with the studied compounds, were recovered after cell culture and lysed. 40 ug protein for each sample were subjected to trypsin digestion, and each sample (1 ug) was analyzed by nanoLC-MS using a variable SWATH method. Quantitative info for the individual proteins was extracted using a spectral library previosly built from data-dependent acquisition (DDA) LC-MS/MS runs from the same samples.

### Data Protocol
A MS/MS peptide library was built from the peptides and proteins identified in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) shotgun nanoLC-MS/MS runs from the samples, using Protein Pilot software (v5.0.1, Sciex) with a human Swiss-Prot protein database. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. Afterwards, each sample was analyzed using a variable SWATH method. Protein quantitative data for the proteins contained in the peptide library were obtained from the SWATH runs by extracting the corresponding fragment ion chromatograms using the MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (v.2.0, Sciex). Peptide retention times were calibrated in all the SWATH runs using the RePliCal iRT peptides, spiked into each sample according to manufacturer’s instructions. To be confident on the proteins being identified and quantified, only those showing confidence scores above 99% and FDR below 1% were included in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common and mortal types of cancer. There is increasing evidence that some polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) exercise specific inhibitory actions on cancer cells through different mechanisms, as a previous study on CRC cells demonstrated for two very long-chain PUFA. These were docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6<i>n</i>3) and arachidonic acid (ARA, 20:4<i>n</i>6) in the free fatty acid (FFA) form. In this work, similar design and technology have been used to investigate the actions of both DHA and ARA as monoacylglycerol (MAG) molecules, and results have been compared with those obtained using the corresponding FFA. Cell assays revealed that ARA- and DHA-MAG exercised dose- and time-dependent antiproliferative actions, with DHA-MAG acting on cancer cells more efficiently than ARA-MAG. Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH) - mass spectrometry massive quantitative proteomics, validated by parallel reaction monitoring and followed by pathway analysis, revealed that DHA-MAG had a massive effect in the proteasome complex, while the ARA-MAG main effect was related to DNA replication. Prostaglandin synthesis also resulted as inhibited by DHA-MAG. Results clearly demonstrated the ability of both ARA- and DHA-MAG to induce cell death in colon cancer cells, which suggests a direct relationship between chemical structure and antitumoral actions.

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer; proteomics; swath; monoacylglycerol; docosahexaenoic acid; arachidonic acid.

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, IMIBIC, Reina Sofía University Hospital, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain
IMIBIC

### Submitter
Ignacio Ortea

### Lab Head
Dr Ignacio Ortea
Proteomics Unit, IMIBIC, Reina Sofía University Hospital, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain


