### Accession
PXD021016

### Title
Murine alveolar macrophage cell line MH-S was transduced with lentivirus expressing GFP alone or GFP plus murine MFSD7C tagged with Myc and FLAG epitopes.

### Description
We used immunoprecipitation (IP) and mass spectrometry (MS) to identify proteins that interact with MFSD7C. Because an anti-MFSD7C monoclonal antibody is not available, we used MFSD7C tagged with both Myc and FLAG epitopes in a MFSD7C-expressing murine alveolar macrophage cell line MH-S (Supplementary Fig. 2a-c and see Methods for details). A total of 58 proteins were identified excluding MFSD7C and common contaminants of IP experiments such as keratin, actin, and ribosomal proteins (Table 1). Twenty-six of the 58 proteins are annotated as mitochondrial proteins and 4 (three Fc receptors and one integrin) are known to reside in the cytoplasmic membrane. The 58 proteins were classified into 10 different functional categories based on gene ontology.

### Sample Protocol
Murine alveolar macrophage cell line MH-S, which expresses MFSD7C (Supplementary Fig. 2c), was transduced with lentivirus expressing GFP alone or GFP plus murine MFSD7C tagged with Myc and FLAG epitopes. The GFP positive cells were sorted and expanded. Two hundred million cells per sample were lysed in 5 mL of cold Lysis Buffer, containing 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, proteinase inhibitor (Sigma Catalog No. 4693132001), and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma Catalog No. 4906845001), and homogenized. The lysates were centrifuged at 30,000g for 10 minutes, and the supernatants were further centrifuged at 30,000g for 20 minutes. The clear supernatants were incubated with M2 magnetic beads conjugated with anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma Catalog No. M8823) for 2 hours and eluted by 3X FLAG peptide. The elutes were incubated with magnetic beads conjugated to anti-Myc antibody (Cell Signaling Technology Catalog No. 5698) for 2 hours. The beads were washed in Lysis Buffer and balanced by PBS. The immunoprecipitates were washed three times with 100 mM NH4HCO3.  Proteins were reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol, 56 °C for 45 min) and alkylated (50 mM iodoacetamide, room temperature in the dark for 1 h). Proteins were subsequently digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega), at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50, at room temperature overnight in 100 mM ammonium acetate, pH 8.9. Trypsin activity was quenched by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 5%. Peptides were desalted using C18 SpinTips (Protea) then lyophilized and stored at −80°C

### Data Protocol
Peptides were loaded on a pre-column and separated by reverse phase HPLC (Thermo Easy nLC1000) over a 140-minute gradient before nanoelectrospray using a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. The parameters for the full scan MS were: resolution of 70,000 across 350-2000 m/z, AGC 3e6, and maximum IT 50 ms. The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for the top 10 precursor ions in each cycle with a NCE of 28 and dynamic exclusion of 30 s.  Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) and Mascot version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science). Mascot search parameters were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.8 Da for fragment ion mass tolerance; 2 missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modification was methionine oxidation.  Only peptides with a Mascot score greater than or equal to 25 and an isolation interference less than or equal to 30 were included in the data analysis. Potential interacting proteins are identified in the experimental sample after removal of proteins in the control sample and common contaminating proteins.

### Publication Abstract
ATP synthesis and thermogenesis are two critical outputs of mitochondrial respiration. How these outputs are regulated to balance the cellular requirement for energy and heat is largely unknown. Here we show that major facilitator superfamily domain containing 7C (MFSD7C) uncouples mitochondrial respiration to switch ATP synthesis to thermogenesis in response to heme. When heme levels are low, MSFD7C promotes ATP synthesis by interacting with components of the electron transport chain (ETC) complexes III, IV, and V, and destabilizing sarcoendoplasmic reticulum Ca<sup>2+</sup>-ATPase 2b (SERCA2b). Upon heme binding to the N-terminal domain, MFSD7C dissociates from ETC components and SERCA2b, resulting in SERCA2b stabilization and thermogenesis. The heme-regulated switch between ATP synthesis and thermogenesis enables cells to match outputs of mitochondrial respiration to their metabolic state and nutrient supply, and represents a cell intrinsic mechanism to regulate mitochondrial energy metabolism.

### Keywords
Alveolar macropahge, Lc-msms, Murine, Mfsd7c

### Affiliations
The Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT
Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at Massachusetts Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Yingzhong Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jianzhu Chen
Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at Massachusetts Institute of Technology


