### Accession
PXD029392

### Title
Novel RNA-binding Proteins Bind U1 snRNA to Promote Splicing of Weak 5' Splice Sites

### Description
Removal of introns during pre-mRNA splicing, which is central to gene expression, initiates by base pairing of U1 snRNA with a 5' splice site (5'SS). In mammals, many introns contain weak 5'SSs that are not efficiently recognized by the canonical U1 snRNP, suggesting alternative mechanisms exist. Here, we develop a cross-linking immunoprecipitation coupled to a high-throughput sequencing method, BCLIP-seq, to identify NRDE2 (Nuclear RNAi defective-2) and CCDC174 (Coiled-Coil Domain-Containing 174) as novel RNA-binding proteins in mouse ES cells that associate with U1 snRNA and unspliced 5'SSs. Both proteins bind directly to U1 snRNA independently of canonical U1 snRNP specific proteins, and they are required for the selection and effective processing of weak 5'SSs. Our results reveal that mammalian cells use non-canonical splicing factors bound directly to U1 snRNA to effectively select suboptimal 5'SS sequences in hundreds of genes, promoting proper splice site choice and accurate pre-mRNA splicing.

### Sample Protocol
On-bead digestion for mass spectrometry was performed as follows. The washed detergent-free beads were resuspended by vortexing in 5 l of digestion buffer (8 M urea freshly dissolved in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 5 mM TCEP and 10mM chloroacetamide) and sonicated in Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) at high energy in 30 cycles 10 s ON/10 s OFF. Next, 1 l of 0.2 mg/ml LysC protease (Promega) in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 was added and proteins were pre-digested for 2 hours rotating at room temperature. The urea concentration was then diluted with 17 l of 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 and after adding 1 l of 0.2 mg/ml trypsin (Promega) in 0.2 mM HCl the digestion continued overnight at 37°C with interval mixing at 2000 RPM for 30 s every 15 minutes.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 using the search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). The mouse subset of the UniProt version 2019_04 combined with the contaminant DB from MaxQuant was searched and the protein and peptide FDR values were set to 0.05. Statistical analysis was done in Perseus version 1.5.2.6 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Results were filtered to remove reverse hits, contaminants and peptides found in only one sample. Missing values were imputed and potential interactors visualized in the volcano plots were determined using two-sided t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Removal of introns during pre-mRNA splicing, which is central to gene expression, initiates by base pairing of U1 snRNA with a 5' splice site (5'SS). In mammals, many introns contain weak 5'SSs that are not efficiently recognized by the canonical U1 snRNP, suggesting alternative mechanisms exist. Here, we develop a cross-linking immunoprecipitation coupled to a high-throughput sequencing method, BCLIP-seq, to identify NRDE2 (nuclear RNAi-defective 2), and CCDC174 (coiled-coil domain-containing 174) as novel RNA-binding proteins in mouse ES cells that associate with U1 snRNA and 5'SSs. Both proteins bind directly to U1 snRNA independently of canonical U1 snRNP-specific proteins, and they are required for the selection and effective processing of weak 5'SSs. Our results reveal that mammalian cells use noncanonical splicing factors bound directly to U1 snRNA to effectively select suboptimal 5'SS sequences in hundreds of genes, promoting proper splice site choice, and accurate pre-mRNA splicing.

### Keywords
Spliceosome, Rna-binding proteins, Protein-rna interactions, Splicing factors, Nrde2, Ccdc174

### Affiliations
Senior Group Leader, Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Vytautas Iesmantavicius

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Buehler
Senior Group Leader, Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland


