### Accession
PXD039541

### Title
Barley  leaf infection with Ramularia collo-cygni

### Description
Barley plants (cv Fairytale and Tripple) were infected with two Ramularia collo-cygni isolates. Either DK05 or NZ11. Transcript and protein profiles were compared.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from barley leaves as previously described (Schneider et al. 2019).  In short, plant material was mixed with 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in acetone and incubated for 10 min in a cold ultra-sonication water bath. By centrifugation at 4000 g for 5 min, the plant material was washed with 1.5 mL ice cold 10% TCA in acetone, and 1.5 mL ice-cold 80% acetone. The pellet was air dried and proteins were extracted in 0.8 mL extraction buffer (50 mM TrisHCl pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 0.7 M Sucrose, 1% PVPP (w/v), 1 mM PMSF, 5 mM DTT, ddH2O) and 0.8 mL phenol. After centrifugation at 10 000 g for 5 min, the protein containing phenol phase was transferred to a new tube. Proteins were precipitated over night with 8 mL ice-cold 0.5% ß-mercaptoethanol in acetone. Precipitated proteins were centrifuged for 10 min (4 000 g, 4_C). The protein pellet was washed two times with ice cold 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol and two times with ice cold 80% acetone with intermediate centrifugation (20 000 g, 4_C, 5min) and stored at -80°C until further use. Protein pellets were digested and analyzed as previously described in Turetschek et al. (2017). In short, pellets were dissolved in urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.8) and quantified with Bradford assay. For each sample, 20 mg protein was digested with Lys-C (1:100 v/v, 5 h, 30_C, Roche, Mannheim, Germany) and trypsin (1:10, v/v, over- night, 37_C, Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany). The sample was acidified with formic acid (FA) and loaded on stage tips (PierceTM C18 Tips). Peptides were washed 4 times with FA, eluted with 0.1% FA in methanol, and stored at -80°C in a protein LoBind tube until measurement. Peptides were dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% FA and loaded in random order to a C18 column (15 cm x 50 mm column, PepMap R RSLC, Thermo Scientific, 2 mm particle size) via a Ultra HPLC (Thermo) for separation during a 90 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Measurement was done on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with following settings: Full scan range 350–1800 m/z, max. 20 MS2 scans (activation type CID), repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 s, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 60 s, charge state screening enabled with rejection of unassigned and 1 charge states, minimum signal threshold 500.

### Data Protocol
The barley proteome of uniprot Hordeum vulgare 189799 download Nov. 2019, UP000011116 and 160517_Hv_IBSC_PGSB_r1_proteins_HighConf_REPR_annotation fasta were used. Identification and quantification was done with MaxQuant v1.5 with following parameters as previously described (Turetschek et al. 2017): first search peptide tolerance 20 ppm, main search tolerance 4.5 ppm, ITMS MS/MS match tolerance 0.6 Da; maximum 3 of the following variable modifications: oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-term; maximum two missed cleavages allowed; best retention alignment function was determined in a 20 min window and identifications were matched between runs in a 0.7 min window. A FDR cut-off at 0.01 (at PSM and protein level) was set with aid of a revers decoy database. A minimum of 6 amino acids was required for identification of a peptide and at least two different peptides were required for protein identification. Label free quantification (LFQ) intensities were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rcc, Hordeum vulgare, Pathogen, Transcripts to protein

### Affiliations
Molecular Systems Biology
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Stefane Wienkoop

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Wienkoop
University of Vienna


