### Accession
PXD007172

### Title
mouse CD4+ T cells IP-MS -  Reversing SKI-SMAD4-mediated suppression is essential for TH17 cell differentiation

### Description
Identifying Smad4-binding proteins in mouse CD4+ T cells under IL6SB condition. Mouse CD4+ T cells were isolated from mouse spleen and lymph nodes.

### Sample Protocol
For immuno-blotting, protein extracts were resolved by AnyKD SDS-PAGE gel (Bio-Rad), transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (Millipore) and analyzed by immuno-blotting with the following antibodies: anti-Ski (H-329, Santa Cruz), anti-RORγt (B2D, Santa Cruz), anti-Smad4 (D3M6U, CST) and anti-β-actin (I-19, Santa Cruz).   For IP analysis, Cells were lysed with extract buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, with 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.42 M NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, and 25% (v/v) Glycerol, 1% Triton X-100) containing protease inhibitor mixture (Roche Applied Science), diluted with 3 volume of dilution buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, with 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 10 mM KCl, and 25% (v/v) Glycerol) and sonicated with Bioruptor PICO. The supernatant were incubated with magnetic beads (Bio-Rad) that had been conjugated with indicated antibody in cold room overnight. The immunocomplex was washed six times with washing buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 1.5mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA and 150m M NaCl) containing 0.1% NP40. Associated proteins were eluted by adding 2x Laemmli sample buffer (Bio-Rad) and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. The eluted proteins were resolved in SDS–PAGE gel to be analyzed by immuno-blotting or mass-spectrometry.   For MS analysis, CD4+ T cells were cultured in SILAC/AACT L media (RPMI1640 media depletion of lysine and arginine were supplemented with normal L-Lysine (K0)/L-arginine(R0)), or SILAC/AACT H media (RPMI1640 media depletion of lysine and arginine were supplemented with 13C615N2-lysine (K8)/13C615N4-arginine (R10)). After Immuno-precipitation, eluted proteins were resolved in SDS-PAGE gel and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. MS analyses of the immuno-precipitation products were performed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with a nanoLC-Ultra system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA). Samples were re-suspended in 20 μl HPLC buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5 μl was loaded onto an IntegraFrit column (New Objective, C18). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nl/min with a multi-step gradient, 5%-40% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 70 min, 40%-80% buffer B for 5 min, 80% buffer B for 5 min, 80%-5% buffer B for 5 min and 5% buffer B for 5 min. The MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent and positive ion mode at a spray voltage of 2.1 kV by XCalibur software (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). Orbitrap analyzer was used to do the survey scan at a resolution of 60,000 at a mass range between m/z 350 and 1,800. The top 11 most intense ions in every cycle were subjected to CID fragmentation in the LTQ Orbitrap with normalized collision energy at 35% and activation Q 0.25. Dynamic exclusion was enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.25). They were searched with Andromeda against Uniprot mouse database (release date: 30 November 2010; 20,248 entries). A database that contains contamination proteins was also used to exclude peptides that matched this database. Searches were performed with a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7.5 ppm and MS/MS tolerance at 0.5Da. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a maximum 1% and 5% false discovery rate, respectively. Up to two missed cleavages was allowed. Only peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for identification. The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier XXXXXXXXX.

### Publication Abstract
T helper 17 (T<sub>H</sub>17) cells are critically involved in host defence, inflammation, and autoimmunity. Transforming growth factor &#x3b2; (TGF&#x3b2;) is instrumental in T<sub>H</sub>17 cell differentiation by cooperating with interleukin-6 (refs 6, 7). Yet, the mechanism by which TGF&#x3b2; enables T<sub>H</sub>17 cell differentiation remains elusive. Here we reveal that TGF&#x3b2; enables T<sub>H</sub>17 cell differentiation by reversing SKI-SMAD4-mediated suppression of the expression of the retinoic acid receptor (RAR)-related orphan receptor &#x3b3;t (ROR&#x3b3;t). We found that, unlike wild-type T cells, SMAD4-deficient T cells differentiate into T<sub>H</sub>17 cells in the absence of TGF&#x3b2; signalling in a ROR&#x3b3;t-dependent manner. Ectopic SMAD4 expression suppresses ROR&#x3b3;t expression and T<sub>H</sub>17 cell differentiation of SMAD4-deficient T cells. However, TGF&#x3b2; neutralizes SMAD4-mediated suppression without affecting SMAD4 binding to the Rorc locus. Proteomic analysis revealed that SMAD4 interacts with SKI, a transcriptional repressor that is degraded upon TGF&#x3b2; stimulation. SKI controls histone acetylation and deacetylation of the Rorc locus and T<sub>H</sub>17 cell differentiation via SMAD4: ectopic SKI expression inhibits H3K9 acetylation of the Rorc locus, Rorc expression, and T<sub>H</sub>17 cell differentiation in a SMAD4-dependent manner. Therefore, TGF&#x3b2;-induced disruption of SKI reverses SKI-SMAD4-mediated suppression of ROR&#x3b3;t to enable T<sub>H</sub>17 cell differentiation. This study reveals a critical mechanism by which TGF&#x3b2; controls T<sub>H</sub>17 cell differentiation and uncovers the SKI-SMAD4 axis as a potential therapeutic target for treating T<sub>H</sub>17-related diseases.

### Keywords
Mouse, Ip-ms, Cd4+ t cells

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
Lineberge Comprehensive Cancer Center	
Dept. of Microbiology and Immunology
School of Medicine	
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Yisong Wan

### Lab Head
Dr Yisong Wan
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA


