### Accession
PXD020226

### Title
In depth characterization of the S. aureus phosphoproteome reveals new targets of Stk1

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus is the leading cause of infections worldwide and infection results in a variety of diseases. As of no surprise, phosphorylation is a major game player in signaling cascades and has been shown to be involved in S. aureus virulence. Albeit long neglected, eukaryotic-like serine/threonine kinases have been implicated in these complex signaling cascades. Due to the sub-stoichiometric nature of protein phosphorylation and a lack of suitable analysis tools, the knowledge of these cascades is however, to date, still limited. Here, were apply an optimized protocol for efficient phosphopeptide enrichment via Fe3+-IMAC followed by LC-MS/MS to get a better understanding of the impact of protein phosphorylation on the complex signaling networks involved in pathogenicity. By profiling a serine/threonine kinase and phosphatase mutant from a methicillin-resistant S. aureus mutant library, we generated the most comprehensive phosphoproteome dataset of S. aureus to date, aiding a better understanding of signaling in bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial samples were lysed and phosphopeptides were enriched using Fe3+-IMAC column.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) and the Andromeda search engine was used to search against either a B. subtilis 168 (Uniprot/TrEMBL, December 2017, 4247 entries) or S. aureus USA300 database (Uniprot, June 2018, 5954 entries) with the following parameters for phosphoproteome analysis: trypsin digestion with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation, N-acetylation of proteins’s N-termini and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, tyrosine and histidine residues as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm at the MS1 level and 20 ppm at the MS2 level. The False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein identification using a target-decoy approach, a score cut-off of 40 was used in the case of modified peptides and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 residues. The match between run feature was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The MaxQuant generated tables “evidence.txt” and “phospho (HSTY)Sites.txt” were used to calculate the number of unique phosphopeptides and phosphosites identified, respectively, and known contaminants were filtered out.  For full proteome analysis the following deviations were applied: trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine’s (57.02 Da) as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation (15.99 Da), N-acetylation of proteins’s N-termini (42.01 Da) as variable modifications. Relative label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm with the minimum ratio count set to 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stk1, Bacteria, Phosphoproteome, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Nadine Prust

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Lemeer
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands


