### Accession
PXD003658

### Title
In planta chemical crosslinking and mass spectrometry analysis of protein structure and interaction in Arabidopsis

### Description
Mass spectrometry analysis in combination with the site-specific chemical cross-linking has emerged as a powerful method in study of three-dimensional structure of protein complex and in mapping of protein-protein interactions (PPIs). Even though in vitro cross-linking experiments have been widely applied to investigate the specific interactions of a bait protein and its targets, the measurement of in vivo protein tertiary structure and PPIs has been problematic and strenuous due to the dynamic nature of the biological systems and a lower number of cross-linked peptides that can be isolated via MudPIT (Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology) for mass spectrometry analysis. Using Arabidopsis thaliana as a model multicellular eukaryotic organism, we have attempted to develop an improved in vivo chemical cross-linking and mass spectrometry (or IPXL-MS) workflow, which aims at optimizing the in vivo cross-linking conditions, establishing of a MudPIT procedure for enrichment of cross-linked peptides, and developing an integrated software program to identify the in planta chemical cross-linked peptides, by which three pairs of in vivo cross-linked peptides of high-confidence has been identified twice from two independent biological replicates. This work has demarked a beginning of alternative proteomic approach in study of in vivo protein tertiary structure and PPIs in higher plants. This in vivo cross-linking approach may be applied into other model multicellular organisms, such as mouse, for molecular systems biological research.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis plant (octuple acs, CS16651) seeds were first surface-sterilized and stored in the double distill (dd) water at 4 °C for 4 days. These seeds were mixed with 0.1% (w/v) agar solution, sown on agar growth media and finally dispensed into 9-cm diameter glass jars. All of the standard-grade chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (St. Louis, MO). The growth medium was made of 9 mM KNO3, 0.4 mM Ca5OH (PO4)3, 2 mM MgSO4 , 1.3 mM H3PO4 , 50 µM Fe-EDTA, 70 µM H3BO3 , 14 µM MnCl2 , 0.5 µM CuSO4 , 1 µM ZnSO4 , 0.2 µM Na2MoO4 , 10 µM NaCl, 0.01 µM CoCl2 , 10 g/L sucrose, 1 mg/L thiamine HCL, 0.1 mg/L pyridoxine, 0.1 mg/L nicotinic acid, 100 mg/L myo-inositol, and 0.8% bacteriological agar, pH 5.7. In each glass jar, 18 - 20 seeds were sown on the surface of agar medium and 1.5 - 2 cm apart from each other. In each biological repeat, 15 - 18 jars of Arabidopsis plants were routinely grown for a proteomics experiment. These jars were then placed in plant growth chambers of 16-h-light/8-h-dark regime with a constant temperature at 22 ± 2 °C. Approximately, 15 grams of fresh tissues were harvested from plants. The plant tissues were transferred in to a glass beaker and completely immersed inside the chemical cross-linking buffer (XLB), which contains 50 mM Na2HPO4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% formaldehyde, 8 wt% DMSO, 20 µL of the freshly added cross-linker solution of 25 mM of DSS-d0 and DSS-d12 and 50 mM of BS3-d0 and BS3-d12 in DMSO. The cross-linkers were vacuum-infiltrated into plant cells under a pressure of 600 Torr for 30 minutes with 5 cycles of application of infiltration. After that, aerial part of plant tissues were washed with dd water and frozen in liquid nitrogen as described previously.   The frozen Arabidopsis tissues were ground in a -20 °C pre-cooled mortar/pestle, and the total cellular proteins were extracted using a SDS detergent-free urea-based protein extraction buffer, which was specially designed for the cross-linking. This cesium chloride (CsCl) gradient-based protein extraction buffer (CGPEB) contains 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 8M urea, 20 mM EDTA, 20 mM EGTA, 50 mM NaF, *1% Glycerol-2-Phosphate disodium salt hydrate,  *1 mM PMSF; *2 mM DTT, *5 mM ascorbic acid, *1x EDTA free protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Complete™ Roche) and *2% polyvinylpolypyrrolidone (* stands for freshly added), which was modified from the previously reported recipe [25]. The ratio of Arabidopsis frozen tissue powder to extraction buffer was 1:3 (w/v). CsCl salt was added in the protein extract mixture to a final concentration of 4 M, and the suspension was stirred until the CsCl salt was completely dissolved. The extract mixture was transferred into an ultracentrifuge tube and performed the ultracentrifugation at 218,000 × g at 10 °C for 120 min. Plant cell membrane fraction located at the top of gradient was suspended in 5 volumes of membrane-solubilizing and protein-denaturing solution containing 8 M urea, 20 mM Tris-HCl, PH 8.0, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% glyceral, 0.5% SDS and 0.5% Triton-X100. Membrane protein extract was mixed with 3 volumes of cold acetone/methanol (12:1 v/v) organic mix to perform urea-methanol protein precipitation [25]. Protein pellet was rinsed with 15 volumes (v/w) of mixture solution of cold acetone: methanol: H2O (12:1:1.4 v/v) to remove residue pigment and urea precipitates. Protein pellets were air-dried and re-dissolved in a third volume of re-suspension buffer as described above, which was followed by another round of protein precipitation and re-suspension. The cycling of protein precipitation and re-suspension was repeated three times. The resulting protein amount was measured by protein DC assay (Bio-Rad) and calculated according to a bovine serum albumin (BSA) standard curve.  The membrane protein samples were reduced with freshly added 5 mM DTT to break disulfide bond and incubated in dark for 30 min at room temperature, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min. The protein samples were mixed with trypsin digestion buffer that contains a 1:200 ratio of modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to dilute urea to a final concentration less than 1 M for protein digestion. This digestion process lasted for 4 - 6 hours at 37 °C. The partially digested peptides were lyophilized and re-suspended in the same volume of trypsin digestion buffer again to allow the digestion to proceed overnight. The peptide samples were acidified to 1% formic acid and desalted on C18 Sep-Pak solid phase (Waters Corporation, United Kingdom). The eluate (elution buffer: water/acetonitrile/ formic acid = 20 / 80 / 0.1) was evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. Fractions were collected every minute and dried via a vacuum centrifugation. The resulting peptide amount from each fraction was measured by protein DC assay and calculated according to a bovine serum albumin (BSA) standard curve.

### Data Protocol
Raw files produced by the mass spectrometer were converted to mzXML files with ReAdW [26]. We first searched 30 raw data files in mzXML format using Mascot against Arabidopsis TAIR 7302 database [27]. There were a total of 2 x 15 peptide samples produced from two replicates. Each CsCl gradient fraction, i.e. membrane, soluble and DNA/RNA pellet protein fraction, was trypsin digested first and then fractionated separately on SEC to produce 5 fractions, (3 x 5 = and finally generated a total of 15 sample peptides samples (membrane, cytosolic and DNA/RNA-associated fractions from CsCl density gradient multiplied by 5 fractions from SEC column fractionation)). There were a total of 30 2 x 15 peptide samples produced from two biological replicates (2 x 15) analyzed by the . These 30 peptide samples were analyzed by Thermo LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer.  The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and the tandem mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Three kinds of variable modifications were used: oxidation on M, phosphorylation on STY, and mono-link modification on K (mass differences were 168.153965 Da, 156.078644 Da, 167.16995 Da, and 155.094629Da). One fix modification, carbamidomethylation on C, was used: . carbamidomethylation on C. PSMs, whose scores were larger than or equal to 20, were kept as results. Proteins, whose peptides were shown in these MS results, were put togethercombined to to generate a protein database. A total of 15976 proteins were detected.   In the process of ECL-based identification of the cross-linked peptides, the precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and the tandem mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. One fixed modification was used: carbamidomethylation on C. The mass of the light cross-linker was 138.06808 Da. The mass shift between light and heavy cross-linker were 12.075321. Peptide chain length in consideration is set 5 - 50 amino acid long. Precursor masses are set 1000 – 5000 Da.  Decoy peptide library is generated by reversing oligopeptides’ sequence. The This database used by ECL was defined to be a semi-complete database, in which a one chain’s ID sequence of the cross-linked peptides was derived from the Mascot search result, while the other chain’s ID sequence was obtained from a thorough complete search against the entire deduced proteome of Arabidopsis thaliana (Taxid: 3702). The score function was the normalized cross correlation coefficient:   xcorr(X,Y)=  (X^T Y)/(‖X‖  ‖Y‖ ), where X is a vector from an experimental spectrum, while Y stands for a vector from a theoretical spectrum. The q-value was estimated using Percolator [28].  The original ECL was designed for light cross-linker only. In order to take advantage of light and heavy-coded cross-linker, we modified ECL by adding a spectrum comparison module. Pairs of spectra were extracted based on three criteria [24]: (1) their precursor mass difference was 12.075321, (2) their precursor charges were identical and (3) their retention time difference was less than or equal to 300 s. De-noising was performed by comparing light and heavy spectra of each pair. Peaks with the same mz value and peaks of 12.075321 Da mass shift were kept. The rest was eliminated as noise. After de-noising, both light and heavy spectra had the same number of peaks, suggesting that these two peaks have identical mass spectrometry information. Thus, we only use the light spectra during cross-links’ search. Details of ECL’s algorithm can be found in Yu et al. [29].  Since xQuest [17, 30] is a well-known software designed to identify peptides cross-linked by either light or heavy isotope-coded  DSS, we applied this software in our experiments to see if it could help find more cross-linked peptides. To perform xQuest search, each CsCl density gradient centrifugation- separated protein fraction (consisting of 5 SEC-separated fractions of peptides) was analysed analyzed by this the xQuest software using a protein database generated by Mascot searching of the same group of peptides. There were about 9000 proteins in each of the Mascot generated protein databases. The common tandem mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da, and the cross-linking tandem mass tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. The rest of the parameters were the same as that used by ECL. A peptide sample from one of 5 SEC-separated fractions needed 7 days of computational analysis. Both search results of ECL and xQuest were compared afterwards.

### Publication Abstract
Site-specific chemical cross-linking in combination with mass spectrometry analysis has emerged as a powerful proteomic approach for studying the three-dimensional structure of protein complexes and in mapping protein-protein interactions (PPIs). Building on the success of MS analysis of in vitro cross-linked proteins, which has been widely used to investigate specific interactions of bait proteins and their targets in various organisms, we report a workflow for in vivo chemical cross-linking and MS analysis in a multicellular eukaryote. This approach optimizes the in vivo protein cross-linking conditions in Arabidopsis thaliana, establishes a MudPIT procedure for the enrichment of cross-linked peptides, and develops an integrated software program, exhaustive cross-linked peptides identification tool (ECL), to identify the MS spectra of in planta chemical cross-linked peptides. In total, two pairs of in vivo cross-linked peptides of high confidence have been identified from two independent biological replicates. This work demarks the beginning of an alternative proteomic approach in the study of in vivo protein tertiary structure and PPIs in multicellular eukaryotes.

### Keywords
In planta chemical cross-linking, Arabidopsis, Interactomics, Disuccinimidyl suberate, Exhaustive cross-linked peptides identification tool, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Division of Life Science, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Fengchao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr NIng Li
Division of Life Science, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology


