### Accession
PXD034620

### Title
Cardiovascular-related proteomic changes in ECFCs exposed to the serum of COVID-19 patients

### Description
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection not only exerts a deep impact over the respiratory system, but it also affects the cardiovascular system, causing vascular damage and thromboembolic events in critical patients. The endothelial dysfunction taking place in response to COVID-19 represents one of the first steps in this cascade of events that might leads to long-term sequelae over the vascular function. However, despite the enormous efforts in the last two years, the molecular mechanisms involved in such processes remains poorly understood. Using a label free-quantitative proteomics approach, we profiled the proteome of endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs), after its incubation with the serum from individuals infected with COVID-19, whether asymptomatic or critical patients. Specifically, ECFCs were incubated ex-vivo with the serum of either SARS-CoV-2 negative donors (PCR-/IgG-), SARS-CoV-2 positive asymptomatic donors, at different infective stages: PCR+/ IgG- and PCR-/IgG+, or hospitalized critical COVID-19 patients, followed by mass spectrometry analysis. Remarkably, in response to all infected serums, the differentially expressed protein were found to be correlated with alterations in viral infection, RNA metabolism or autophagy, among others. Moreover, the serum of critical patients promoted the highest number of protein alterations, many of which associated with cardiovascular related pathologies. Finally, machine learning algorithms confirmed the discriminating potential of some proteins differentially expressed between conditions.

### Sample Protocol
A LC-MS/MS based label free quantitative proteomics approach was used to analyze the proteome of Endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs) upon their ex-vivo incubation with serum factors from negative (PCR-/IgG-), asymptomatic (PCR+/ IgG- and PCR-/IgG+) and critical COVID-19 patients. The incubated ECFCs were then subjected to proteomics analysis. Briefly the cells were denatured with urea, reduced and alkylated followed by digestion with Trypsin/LysC. The desalted peptides were then analyzed in dia-PASEF mode using timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) connected to Easy nLC (Thermo Scientific). Additional details are provided in the associated manuscript

### Data Protocol
DIA-PASEF mass spectrometry files were analyzed using Spectronaut (v15, Biognosys AG) in directDIATM mode with default settings. The resultant protein intensity output was processed using Perseus software. Briefly the protein intensity values were log2 transformed and permutation-based t-test statistical analysis was used to identify the differentially expressed proteins between the groups. More detailed information about further steps can be found in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection significantly affects the cardiovascular system, causing vascular damage and thromboembolic events in critical patients. Endothelial dysfunction represents one of the first steps in response to COVID-19 that might lead to cardiovascular complications and long-term sequelae. However, despite the enormous efforts in the last two years, the molecular mechanisms involved in such processes remain poorly understood. Herein, we analyzed the protein changes taking place in endothelial colony forming cells (ECFCs) after the incubation with the serum from individuals infected with COVID-19, whether asymptomatic or critical patients, by application of a label free-quantitative proteomics approach. Specifically, ECFCs from healthy individuals were incubated <i>ex-vivo</i> with the serum of either COVID-19 negative donors (PCR-/IgG-, n:8), COVID-19 asymptomatic donors at different infective stages (PCR+/ IgG-, n:8and PCR-/IgG+, n:8), or hospitalized critical COVID-19 patients (n:8), followed by proteomics analysis. In total, 590 proteins were differentially expressed in ECFCs in response to all infected serums. Predictive analysis highlighted several proteins like CAPN5, SURF4, LAMP2 or MT-ND1, as highly discriminating features between the groups compared. Protein changes correlated with viral infection, RNA metabolism or autophagy, among others. Remarkably, the angiogenic potential of ECFCs in response to the infected serums was impaired, and many of the protein alterations in response to the serum of critical patients were associated with cardiovascular-related pathologies.

### Keywords
Ecfcs, Covid-19, Rna metabolism, Viral infection, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark (SDU), Denmark
Postdoc

### Submitter
Santosh Bhosale

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Røssel Larsen
Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark (SDU), Denmark


