### Accession
PXD003013

### Title
Comparison of the Cowpox Virus and Vaccinia Virus Mature Virion Proteome:  Analysis of the species- and strain-specific Proteome

### Description
Cowpox virus (CPXV) causes most zoonotic orthopoxvirus (OPV) infections in Europe and Northern as well as Central Asia. The virus has the broadest host range of OPV and is transmitted to humans from rodents and other wild or domestic animals. Increasing numbers of human CPXV infections in a population with declining immunity have raised concerns about the virus’ zoonotic potential. While there have been reports on the proteome of other human-pathogenic OPV, namely vaccinia virus (VACV) and monkeypox virus (MPXV), the protein composition of the CPXV mature virion (MV) is unknown. This study focused on the comparative analysis of the VACV and CPXV MV proteome by label-free single-run proteomics using nano liquid chromatography and high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Mature virion purification VACV Western Reserve (WR), VACV Copenhagen, VACV New York City Board of Health (NYCBOH) (Wyeth, calf adapted) and CPXV Brighton Red (BR) as well as the two CPXV strains RatHei09 (Hei) and RatKre08 (Kre), which were isolated from rats in the German Consultant Laboratory for Poxviruses (Robert Koch-Institute, Berlin, Germany), were propagated on HepG2 cells (ATCC® HB-8065™). The viruses were purified in a two-step protocol using zonal sucrose gradient centrifugation followed by caesium chloride density gradient centrifugation. The viral particles were lysed in 50 µL 4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris/HCl (pH 7.6), 10mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40mM 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA) at 99°C for 5 min and clarified by centrifugation. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP)  The virion lysates were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol with minor modifications. Briefly, 20 µg of each sample were processed using Vivacon 500 Centrifugal Ultra Filter (Sartorius, Goettingen, Germany) with a MWCO of 30 kDa. SDS was depleted 4 x with 200 µL 8 M Urea in 50 mM Tris⋅Cl, pH 8.5, before the urea concentration was reduced using 3 x 100 µL 50 mM Tris⋅Cl, pH 8.5. The proteins were digested for 16 h at 37°C in 50 mM Tris⋅Cl, pH 8.5 using a Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) at a protein/enzyme ratio of 1:50. The peptides were collected by centrifugation and two washing steps with 40 µL 50 mM Tris⋅Cl, pH 8.5. The peptides were desalted using 200 µL StageTips packed with two Empore™ SPE Disks C18 (3M Purification, Inc., Lexington, USA).  nLC-MS/MS  Single-run shotgun proteome analysis was performed on an Easy-nanoLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap Discovery™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). 3 µg peptides were loaded on a Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, 10 x 0.15 mm trap column at 2 µL/min 0.1% formic acid for 10 min. The peptides were then separated on a Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm, 250 mm x 75 µm fused silica capillary column (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear 240 min gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 3 % DMSO from 3 to 45%. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent manner in the m/z range of 450 –1,400 with a resolution of 30,000 in the orbitrap. The seven most intense 2+ and 3+ charged ions were selected for low-energy CID type fragmentation in the ion trap with normalized collision energy of 35%. The ion selection threshold for MS² spectra was 1,000 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 500 ms for full scans and 100 ms for MS² spectra. Automatic gain control was set to a target value of 1e6 for full scans and 5e3 for MS². For electrospray ionization a spray voltage of 2.0 kV, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow as well as a heated capillary temperature of 275°C were used.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.1.2). At first, parent ion masses were recalibrated using the 'software lock mass’ option before the MS² spectra were searched using the Andromeda algorithm against 69,181 sequences from the UniProt complete proteome set for humans,  245 entries of the cRAP database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and protein sequences of the six OPV strains. The databases for VACV WR, VACV Cop, VACV NYCBOH and CPXV BR were obtained from Uniprot, the sequences for CPXV Hei and CPXV Kre were built from translations of the genome sequences, which can be accessed at NCBI GenBank (RatHei09 # KC813504 and RatKre08 # KC813505). Spectra were searched with a tolerance of 4.5 ppm in MS1 and 0.5 Da in CID MS² mode, strict trypsin specificity (KR not P) and allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal acetylation of proteins as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identifications was set to 1 %. Peptide identifications were transferred between samples using the 'match between run’ option within a match window of 1 min and an alignment window of 20 min.  The statistical analysis of the MaxQuant results was done in Perseus (Version 1.5.0.31). At first, reverse protein hits, contaminants and proteins only identified by site were removed. Relative protein quantification was done based on LFQ intensities of at least two unique and razor peptides per protein. Proteins which were not quantified in at least two replicates of each OPV strain (3 biological replicates) were removed. Remaining missing values were replaced from normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift 1.8). The LFQ intensities were normalized using the median intensity for each protein. Significant protein expression differences between OPV species and strains were identified using FDR-adjusted p-values from an ANOVA test with a permutation based FDR of 0.01 and 2500 randomizations.  Absolute protein quantification was done based on copy number calculations using the Total Protein Approach in the Proteomic Ruler Plugin in Perseus (Version 1.5.0.31). The copy numbers were calculated from the peptide intensities and the protein amount per viral genome equivalent. They were corrected using the number of theoretical peptides (Trypsin/P, 7-30 amino acids) for each protein. Significant copy number differences between OPV species and strains were identified using FDR-adjusted p-values from an ANOVA test with a permutation based FDR of 0.01 and 2500 randomizations. Minimum required number of protein copy numbers was 9 in at least one species for intra-species comparison and 9 in total for intra-strain comparison.

### Publication Abstract
Cowpox virus (CPXV) causes most zoonotic orthopoxvirus (OPV) infections in Europe and Northern as well as Central Asia. The virus has the broadest host range of OPV and is transmitted to humans from rodents and other wild or domestic animals. Increasing numbers of human CPXV infections in a population with declining immunity have raised concerns about the virus' zoonotic potential. While there have been reports on the proteome of other human-pathogenic OPV, namely vaccinia virus (VACV) and monkeypox virus (MPXV), the protein composition of the CPXV mature virion (MV) is unknown. This study focused on the comparative analysis of the VACV and CPXV MV proteome by label-free single-run proteomics using nano liquid chromatography and high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). The presented data reveal that the common VACV and CPXV MV proteome contains most of the known conserved and essential OPV proteins and is associated with cellular proteins known to be essential for viral replication. While the species-specific proteome could be linked mainly to less genetically-conserved gene products, the strain-specific protein abundance was found to be of high variance in proteins associated with entry, host-virus interaction and protein processing.

### Keywords
Orthopoxvirus, Ltq-orbitrap, Virion proteome

### Affiliations
Robert Koch Institute, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens,  Highly Pathogenic Viruses (ZBS1), Berlin, Germany
Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Robert Koch-Institute

### Submitter
Joerg Doellinger

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Nitsche
Robert Koch Institute, Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens,  Highly Pathogenic Viruses (ZBS1), Berlin, Germany


