### Accession
PXD024239

### Title
Label-free comparative data dependent (DDA) nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of redox mediated posttranslational modifications (PTMs) in the proteomes from mouse primary dendritic cells (DC) isolated from control B6 and obese (Ob/Ob) mice

### Description
Proteomic modifications linked to non-enzymatic glycation and glycoxidation are common in all tissues under hyperglycemic conditions, as present in metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes (T2D), mice bearing a homozygous mutation in leptin (so-called Ob/Ob mice, a common model of obesity and T2D) and mice subjected to a high fat diet (HFD).   It has been already shown that the circulating levels of glycated or glycoxidated proteins (e.g., glycated hemoglobin or albumin) are commonly employed as a reliable indicator of overall glycemic status. Albeit these initial non-enzymatic reactions are reversible, following a series of chemical rearrangements protein glycation and glycoxidation become irreversible, generating the so-called advanced glycation end-products (AGEs).  AGEs are commonly detected in tissue proteins with an extended half-life, including dermal collagens as well as extracellular matrix proteins. In these proteins, Nϵ-carboxymethyllysine (CML), pentosidins, and glucosepane represent the most prevalent AGEs.  As an additional, novel mechanism linking protein PTMs to altered immunity, the research presented herein highlights that several components of the MHC class II antigen processing and presentation machinery are glycated in metabolic conditions associated with increased oxidative stress, leading to qualitative and quantitative changes in the MHC class II immunopeptidome. To investigate the impact of T2D and metabolic syndrome on the proteome of antigen presenting cells (APCs) we isolated dendritic cells (DCs, which are key for the initiation of antigen-specific immunity) from the lymph nodes of Ob/Ob mice and syngeneic, age-matched control C57BL/6 (B6) mice and mapped the oxidized proteins at the molecular and cellular level by employing label-free mass spectrometry using at least three biologically independent whole lysates of DCs.  Analysis of the type of post-translational modifications (PTMs) accumulated in the proteome from the combined three biological Ob/Ob samples ranked the formyl-lysine and site-specific carboxymethylation on lysine (CML) as the most abundant AGEs found in the glycated proteome; with CML having about two-fold increase in their total PTM-modified spectral counts in the Ob/Ob vs control dendritic cell proteome.  Additional glycoxidation-specific PTMs, that mapped only on the Ob/Ob proteome, albeit at a smaller amount than CML and formyl lysine, were glyceryl lysine and 3-deoxyglucosone. Finally, a separate proteomic analysis, performed on gradient purified late endosomes also mapped an increased number of PTM-modified proteins in the Ob/Ob organelles.  Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) analysis identified metabolic pathways as well as phagocytosis, antigen processing and presentation and phagosome maturation amongst the top pathways including a higher number of proteins modified by AGEs or carbonylation in primary DCs from Ob/Ob vs. control mice.  The site-specific amide-AGE modifications that we detected also mapped to proteins involved in response to DC signaling, immune cell trafficking, actin and cytoskeleton signaling, cell movement, and carbohydrate, nucleic acids and protein metabolism.  Overall, these findings indicate that the DC proteome of Ob/Ob mice has an increased number of carbonyl PTMs and AGEs as compared to DC of C57BL/6 mice.  The results presented herein are one of the first to map the redox mediated PTM in the primary mouse DC in healthy vs T2DM type syndrome physiological conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse Dendritic Cells: Ob/Ob mice and C57Bl6 controls were injected subcutaneously with 40x106 B16-FLt3-L-producing melanoma cells. Twelve to 14 days after injection spleens were harvested and DCs were purified by density-gradient centrifugation using 30% Bovine Albumin solution (Sigma-Aldrich). The preparation routinely contains 70 to 80% CD11c+ DC, with no significant differences observed in the numbers of cells isolated from control or Ob/Ob mice.  Equal protein amounts (50 g) from total dendritic cell lysates (C57BL/6 and Ob/Ob), were reduced in 20 mM TCEP.HCl (Thermo Scientiﬁc), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, at pH 8.5 containing 8 M urea for 35 min at room temperature.  The reduced proteins were alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide solution, for 50 min at room temperature in the dark.  Three different enzymes were used for “in solution” digestion in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.5, for 18 h, at 37 °C: endoproteinase Lys-C (1:50 enzyme: protein ratio); trypsin (1:20 enzyme: protein ratio) and Glu-C (1:10 enzyme: protein ratio) (sequencing grade Promega, Madison, WI, USA.  Peptides mixture, extracted from all enzymatic digestions, were desalted on C18 Prep clean columns before high resolution liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  nanoLC MS/MS: Technical duplicates for each of the biological triplicate samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. After equilibration with 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, peptides were separated by a 120 min linear gradients from 4% to 30% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at 400nL/min (Optima™ LC/MS, Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA).   The mass spectrometer was operated in a positive ion mode and in data–dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Full MS scans were obtained within a 300 to 1600 m/z range with a mass resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, and a target value of 1.00E+06 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. HCD collision was performed on the 15 most significant peaks, and tandem mass spectra were acquired at a mass resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200 and a target value of 1.00E+05. Isolation of precursors was performed with a window of 1.2 Th. The dynamic exclusion time was 20s. The normalized collision energy was 32%. We excluded precursor ions with single, unassigned,or eight and higher charge states from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Protocol Protein identification: The raw files from each technical and biological replicate were filtered, de novo sequenced and assigned a protein ID using Peaks 8.5/X software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada), by searching against the mouse (Mus musculus) Swiss-Prot database (17,046 entries). The following search parameters were applied for LFQ analysis:  trypsin, Lys-C and GluC restriction enzymes and one allowed missed cleaved at one or both peptide end.  The parent mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm using monoisotopic mass, and fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.05 Da.  Carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.0215 on C) was specified in PEAKS as a fixed modification.  Methionine, lysine, proline, arginine, cysteine and asparagine oxidations (+15.99 on CKMNPR), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ-0.98) and pyro-Glu from glutamine (Q-18.01 N-term) were set as variable modifications.   Post-translational analysis of amide-AGE peptides: The analysis of amide-AGE focused on the following PTMs on lysine and arginine: Carboxymethylation (CML, CMA) (+58.005; K, R);  Carboxyethylation (CEL) (+72.021; K, R);  Fructosylation (N-hexosyl lysine) (+162.053; K)  Pyrraline (+108.021; K);  GLAP (+109.029; K);  Glycerinylation (+88.016; K);  Acetylation (+42.011; K);  Formylation (+27.995; K);  Glarg (+39.995; R);  MG-H (+54.011; R); G-H1 (+39.990; R); Argpyrimidine (+79.966; R)  Tetrahydropyrimidine (3-deoxyglucosone) (+144.042; R); Dihydroxyimidazolidine (CEAMGDHI) (+72.020; R); N-Pentosyl Lysine (+132.0575; K); N-tetrosyl Lysine (+102.0317; K) (as reported in other proteomic AGE analyses. All AGE PTMs were added to the list of other variable PTM described above and included in the workflow for the protein identification using the de novo algorithm provided by PEAKS 8.0 software.   Post-translational analysis of carbonylated peptides: The following posttranslational modifications were specified in PEAKS 8.0 as variable modifications for carbonylation: Lys->Allysine (-1.03; K);  Lys->AminoadipicAcid (+14.96; K);  Amino (Y) (+15.01, Y); Trp->Oxolactone (W) (+13.98, W);  Pro->Pyrrolidone (P) (-27.99; P);  Pro->Pyrrolidinone (P) (-30.01; P);  Arg->GluSA (-43.05; R);  Dehydrated 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE-Delta:H(2)O(H)) (+138.21, C,H,K); reduced 4-Hydroxynonenal (HNE+Delta:H(2) (H)) (+158.13, C,H,K);  HNE (+156.12, C,H,K); 4-Oxononenal (ONE) (4-ONE) (+154.10, C,H,K); dehydrated 4-Oxononenal Michael adduct (4-ONE+Delta:H(-2)O(-1)) (+136.09; C,H,K). PTMs validation and normalized spectral counts:  Data were validated using the false discovery rate (FDR) method built in PEAKS 8.5/X and protein identifications were accepted if they could be identified with a confidence score (-10lgP)>20 for peptides and (-10lgP)>20 for proteins; a minimum of 1 peptide per protein after data were filtered for less than 1.0% FDR for peptides and less than 1.5 % FDR for proteins identifications.  In addition, selected peptides and proteins with 15< (-10lgP) <20 were included in the data set after manual inspection of their MS/MS spectra.  An independent validation of the MS/MS-based peptides and protein identification was performed with Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.6.2, Proteome Software Inc.) using the compatible “mzid” files of all samples exported from PEAKS 8.0.  The Scaffold built in option “MuDPIT” was used to combine multiple files from biological and/or technical replicates of C57BL6 and Ob/Ob mice.  Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Scaffold PTM 3.1.0 and later versions (Proteome Software Inc, Portland Oregon, USA) was used to annotate PTM sites derived from MS/MS sequencing using Scaffold (version 4.7.2 and later versions).   Scaffold PTM (Proteome Software, Portland, Oregon, USA) was used to annotate PTM sites derived from MS/MS sequencing results obtained using Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.10.0).

### Publication Abstract
Hyperglycemia and hyperlipidemia are often observed in individuals with type II diabetes (T2D) and related mouse models. One dysmetabolic biochemical consequence is the non-enzymatic reaction between sugars, lipids, and proteins, favoring protein glycation, glycoxidation, and lipoxidation. Here, we identified oxidative alterations in key components of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecule antigen processing and presentation machinery in&#xa0;vivo under conditions of hyperglycemia-induced metabolic stress. These modifications were linked to epitope-specific changes in endosomal processing efficiency, MHC class II-peptide binding, and DM editing activity. Moreover, we observed some quantitative and qualitative changes in the MHC class II immunopeptidome of Ob/Ob mice on a high-fat diet compared with controls, including changes in the presentation of an apolipoprotein B100 peptide associated previously with T2D and metabolic syndrome-related clinical complications. These findings highlight a link between glycation reactions and altered MHC class II antigen presentation that may contribute to T2D complications.

### Keywords
Control b6 and ob/ob mice dendritic cells, Bottom-up proteomics on qehf and velos orbitrap

### Affiliations
Englander Institute of Precision Medicine Professor Radiation Oncology Professor Physiology and Biophysics Weill Cornell Medicine 1300 York Avenue Room E215 New York, NY 10065 tel 646-962-2160
Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
Cristina Clement

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Santambrogio M.D. Ph.D, Associate Director Precision Immunology
Englander Institute of Precision Medicine Professor Radiation Oncology Professor Physiology and Biophysics Weill Cornell Medicine 1300 York Avenue Room E215 New York, NY 10065 tel 646-962-2160


