### Accession
PXD028051

### Title
Specific deletion of protein phosphatase 6 catalytic subunit in Sertoli cells leads to disruption of spermatogenesis

### Description
Protein phosphatase 6 (PP6) is a member of the PP2A-like subfamily, which plays significant roles in numerous fundamental biological activities. We found that PPP6C plays important roles in male germ cells recently. Spermatogenesis is supported by the Sertoli cells in seminiferous epithelium. In this study, we crossed Ppp6cF/F mice with AMH-Cre mice to gain mutant mice with specific depletion of the Ppp6c gene in the Sertoli cells. We discovered that the PPP6C cKO male mice were absolutely infertile and germ cells were largely lost during spermatogenesis. By combing phosphoproteome with bioinformatics analysis, we showed that the phosphorylation status of β-catenin at S552 (a marker of adherens junctions) was significantly upregulated in mutant mice. Abnormal β-catenin accumulation resulted in impaired testicular junction integrity, thus led to abnormal structure and functions of BTB. Taken together, our study reveals a novel function for PPP6C in male germ cell survival and differentiation by regulating the cell-cell communication through dephosphorylating β-catenin at S552.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteome sample preparation and phosphopeptide enrichment For phosphoproteome preparation, primary Sertoli cells from ten mice in each group were pooled to obtain about 1 mg of protein lysate. Primary Sertoli cells were isolated using a method above described by van der Wee with minor modification[47]. Phosphoproteome experiment was supported by Jingjie PTM BioLabs. The Sertoli cells were lysed with lysis buffer supplemented with Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail and Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and precipitated with 4× volumes of −20 °C acetone for 4 hours. Then precipitated protein was collected by centrifuging for 5 min at 4,500g (4 °C), pellets washed twice with −20 °C 80% acetone, and air dried upside down for ∼10 min at RT or until no residual acetone odor remained. Pellets were resuspended in 8M carbamide. Then protein concentration was determined with a BCA assay kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Then samples were digested with trypsin. For phosphopeptide enrichment, digested peptide mixtures were incubated with an IMAC microsphere suspension. The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. Then the IMAC microspheres were washed. Finally, the supernatant was collected and lyophilized for the LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analysis The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column. Peptides were separated and were subjected to Capillary source followed by the tims-TOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Database search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Mus musculus swissprot database (17045 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1%. Phosphoproteome bioinformatics data analysis We performed bioinformatic analysis by using the Perseus software environment. Statistical analysis of phosphoproteome was performed on logarithmized intensities for those values that were found to be quantified in any experimental condition. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway.Database search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Mus musculus swissprot database (17045 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1%. Phosphoproteome bioinformatics data analysis We performed bioinformatic analysis by using the Perseus software environment. Statistical analysis of phosphoproteome was performed on logarithmized intensities for those values that were found to be quantified in any experimental condition. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway.

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphatase 6 (PP6) is a member of the PP2A-like subfamily, which plays significant roles in numerous fundamental biological activities. We found that PPP6C plays important roles in male germ cells recently. Spermatogenesis is supported by the Sertoli cells in the seminiferous epithelium. In this study, we crossed Ppp6c<sup>F/F</sup> mice with AMH-Cre mice to gain mutant mice with specific depletion of the Ppp6c gene in the Sertoli cells. We discovered that the PPP6C cKO male mice were absolutely infertile and germ cells were largely lost during spermatogenesis. By combing phosphoproteome with bioinformatics analysis, we showed that the phosphorylation status of &#x3b2;-catenin at S552 (a marker of adherens junctions) was significantly upregulated in mutant mice. Abnormal &#x3b2;-catenin accumulation resulted in impaired testicular junction integrity, thus led to abnormal structure and functions of BTB. Taken together, our study reveals a novel function for PPP6C in male germ cell survival and differentiation by regulating the cell-cell communication through dephosphorylating &#x3b2;-catenin at S552.

### Keywords
Β-catenin, Spermatogenesis, Ppp6c, Phosphoproteome, Sertoli cells

### Affiliations
Department of Reproductive Medicine, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital,  Shenzhen 518036, China
State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Wenlong Lei

### Lab Head
Dr Wen-Long Lei
Department of Reproductive Medicine, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital,  Shenzhen 518036, China


