### Accession
PXD034526

### Title
LINC00839 promotes malignancy of liver cancer via binding FMNL2 under hypoxia

### Description
Liver cancer is one of the most common malignant tumors in the world and metastasis is the leading cause of death associated with liver cancer. Hypoxia is a common feature of solid tumors and enhances malignant character of cancer cells. However, the exact mechanisms involved in hypoxia-driven liver cancer progression and metastasis have not been well clarified so far. The aim of this study was to investigate the contribution of long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) in hypoxia promoting liver cancer progression. We screened and revealed LINC00839 as a novel hypoxia-responsive lncRNA in liver cancer. LINC00839 expression was up-regulated in liver cancer tissues and cell lines, and the patients with high LINC00839 expression had shortened overall survival. LINC00839 further overexpressed under hypoxia and promoted liver cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Mechanistically, LINC00839 bound multiple proteins that were primarily associated with the metabolism and RNA transport, and positively regulated the expression of Formin-like protein 2 (FMNL2). LINC00839 could promote hypoxia-mediated liver cancer progression, suggesting it may be a clinically valuable biomarker and serve as a molecular target for the diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy of liver cancer.

### Sample Protocol
The binding proteins of LINC00839 were collected using RNA pull down Kit (BersinBio, China). Biotinylated RNA probes were incubated with cell protein extract to form RNA-protein complexes. The complexes were separated from other components in the incubated solution through binding to streptavidin-labeled magnetic beads and the proteins were eluted to further analyzed.

### Data Protocol
The project used the Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific) software to submit the original map file (.raw file) of the peptide identification by Orbitrap Elite to the SEQUEST software for database search, and obtained highly reliable qualitative results.

### Publication Abstract
Liver cancer is one of the most common malignant tumors in the world and metastasis is the leading cause of death associated with liver cancer. Hypoxia is a common feature of solid tumors and enhances malignant character of cancer cells. However, the exact mechanisms involved in hypoxia-driven liver cancer progression and metastasis have not been well clarified so far. The aim of this study was to investigate the contribution of long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) in hypoxia promoting liver cancer progression. We screened and revealed LINC00839 as a novel hypoxia-responsive lncRNA in liver cancer. LINC00839 expression was up-regulated in liver cancer tissues and cell lines, and the patients with high LINC00839 expression had shortened overall survival. LINC00839 further overexpressed under hypoxia and promoted liver cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Mechanistically, LINC00839 bound multiple proteins that were primarily associated with the metabolism and RNA transport, and positively regulated the expression of Formin-like protein 2 (FMNL2). LINC00839 could promote hypoxia-mediated liver cancer progression, suggesting it may be a clinically valuable biomarker and serve as a molecular target for the diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy of liver cancer.

### Keywords
Liver cancer; hypoxia; long non-coding rna; formin-like protein 2

### Affiliations
Guangxi University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Mingfen Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yangyi Xie
Guangxi University of Chinese Medicine


