### Accession
PXD034896

### Title
Proteomic analysis of S-acylated proteins in human retinal pigment epithelial cells reveals the role of palmitoylation of Niemann–Pick type C1 protein in cholesterol transportation

### Description
Palmitoylation is a dynamic process which regulates the activity of the modified proteins. Retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells play pivotal roles in visual cycle and maintaining healthy photoreceptor cells. Dysfunctional RPE cells are often associated with degenerative retinal diseases. The aim of the study was to identify potentially palmitoylated proteins in human RPE cells. By using the detergent-resistant membrane, we found 312 potentially palmitoylated peptides which corresponded to 192 proteins in RPE cells, including 60 new candidate proteins which were not reported before. Gene enrichment analysis highlighted significant involvement of the palmitoylated proteins in lipid transporter activity and receptor-mediated endocytosis, among others. We further studied the effect of 3 potential palmitoylation sites (Cys 799, 900 and 816) of Niemann–Pick type C1 protein (NPC1) on cholesterol accumulation. We found that mutation of any single Cys alone had no significant effect on intracellular cholesterol accumulation while simultaneous mutation of Cys 799 and 800 caused significant cholesterol accumulation in late endosome. No further cholesterol accumulation was observed by adding another mutation at Cys 816. At the meantime, the mutated proteins were largely located at the endosome/lysosome. Conclusions: PRE cells have abundant number of palmitoylated proteins which are involved in cellular processes critical to visual function. The palmitoylation at Cys799 and 800 was needed for cholesterol transportation, but not the intracellular localization of NPC1.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel trypsin digestion The S-acylation enriched proteins obtained from above was subjected to SDS-PAGE and the gel was fixed with 50% methanol/10% acetic acid for 1 hr at RT and rinsed with distilled water. The lane of interest was cut into 4 slices and transferred to a clean Eppendorf tube. After dehydration using acetonitrile, the gel was soaked in 50 mM NH4HCO3 with 10 mM DTT for 45 mins at RT. After a brief spin to remove the supernatant, acetonitrile was added again to shrink the gel and 55 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to protect the free –SH group. The reaction was carried out in dark at RT for 45 mins. After the incubation, the supernatant was removed and the gel dehydrated again with acetonitrile. The protein was digested in gel with 20 ng/µL trypsin in 2 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37oC with interval mixing. After digestion, the samples were dried by speedvac and kept at -20oC until further analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis  The digested sample above was reconstituted in 12 µL of loading buffer which contained 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. Two microliters of the sample was injected into LC-MS/MS system (Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with AB Sciex 5600 TripleTOF (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) for the analysis. A 15 cm × 75 µm i.d. column packed with Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for reversed phase (RP) separation. This column was connected to a spray tip (New Objectives, Woburn, MA, USA), which was directly coupled with the nano-spray interface into AB Sciex 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 2cm x 75µm i.d., Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. After a 5 mins wash with loading buffer (2/98 v/v of acetonitrile/water with 0.1% formic acid), the system was switched into line with the C18 analytical capillary column. A 2-step linear gradient of mobile phase B (2/98 v/v of water/acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) from 7% to 60% over 92-minute and 60%-95% for 3 minutes at flow rate of 300 nL/min was utilized for this analysis.   Third generation Nanospray Source was installed and other instrumentation settings were as follows: Ionspray Voltage Floating (ISVF) = 2200 V, curtain gas (CUR) = 30, Ion source gas 1 (GS2) = 12, Interface Heater Temperature (IHT) = 125, Declustering potential (DP) = 100 V, Nebuliser current (NC) = 3 for nitrogen gas. All data was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (AB Sciex). For IDA parameters, 0.25 s TOF MS survey scan in the mass range of 350-1250 were followed by product ion scan of 0.075 s in the mass range of 100-1500. Switching criteria were set to ions greater than m/z 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2-5, maximum number of candidate ions to monitor per cycle was 30 spectra and an abundance threshold of >120 counts. Former target ions were excluded for 12 s. IDA Advanced “rolling collision energy (CE)”, was required.

### Data Protocol
The peptide sequences appeared in the HA-treated and mock-treated portions were compared. Any sequences that appeared in both portions were removed from the HA-treated portion as they were most likely false-positive. The sequences of S-acylated peptides (with peptide confidence level >95%) were determined. The data was processed using Protein Pilot software 4.5 (AB Sciex) with database search using uniprot_all_Oct2014 (40516 proteins searched). Protein identification was based on false positive rate (FDR) < 1% with 95% peptide confidence level.  Functional classification analysis (GO slim, version 13.0, released 2017-11-12) and statistical overrepresentation tests (annotation version 13.0, release date 2017-11-12, Fisher’s Exact with FDR multiple test correction) were performed on all putative palmitoylated proteins identified in this study using the PANTHER database (Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationships, http://pantherdb.org).

### Publication Abstract
Palmitoylation is a dynamic process that regulates the activity of the modified proteins. Retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells play pivotal roles in the visual cycle and maintaining healthy photoreceptor cells. Dysfunctional RPE cells are often associated with degenerative retinal diseases. The aim of the study was to identify potentially palmitoylated proteins in human RPE cells. By using the detergent-resistant membrane, we found 312 potentially palmitoylated peptides which corresponded to 192 proteins in RPE cells, including 55 new candidate proteins which were not reported before. Gene enrichment analysis highlighted significant enrichment of palmitoylated proteins in cell-matrix adhesion, cell-cell recognition, protein cellular localization, and translation, among others. We further studied the effect of 3 potential palmitoylation sites (Cys 799, 900, and 816) of Niemann-Pick type C1 protein (NPC1) on cholesterol accumulation. We found that mutation of any single Cys alone had no significant effect on intracellular cholesterol accumulation while simultaneous mutation of Cys799 and 800 caused significant cholesterol accumulation in the late endosome. No further cholesterol accumulation was observed by adding another mutation at Cys 816. However, the mutation did not alter the cellular localization of the protein. Conclusion: PRE cells have an abundant number of palmitoylated proteins which are involved in cellular processes critical to visual function. The palmitoylation at Cys799 and 800 was needed for cholesterol export, but not the intracellular localization of NPC1.

### Keywords
Retinal pigment epithelial cells, Palmitoylation, Niemann-pick type c1 protein

### Affiliations
Singapore Eye Research Institute

### Submitter
Lei Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Lei ZHOU
Singapore Eye Research Institute


