### Accession
PXD014957

### Title
Mass spectrometry approach to identify mitochondrial poly(A) RNA interacting proteins

### Description
To identify mitochondrial RNA-interacting proteins, we developed three related mass spectrometry based methods. In the first method, called mitochondrial crosslinking (MXL), mitochondria of 4-thiouridine labelled cells were isolated, exposed to UV-light and poly(A) RNA was isolated. In the second method, called whole cell crosslinking (WCXL), 4-thiouridine labelled cells were first exposed to UV-light, subsequently mitochondria were isolated followed by a poly(A) RNA extraction. The third method, called ethidium bromide whole cell crosslinking (WCXL_EtBr), is exactly the same as the WCXL method, but the cells are cultured with ethidium bromide to reduce the amount of mitochondrial RNA. In all methods poly(A) RNA was degraded and proteins in the sample were digested and identified using mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Details on sample preparation are described in: 'A combined mass spectrometry and data integration approach to predict the mitochondrial poly(A) RNA interacting proteome. Selma L. van Esveld, Şirin Cansız-Arda, Fenna Hensen, Robin van der Lee &, Martijn A. Huynen1 & Johannes N. Spelbrink'.’

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.25) and with the human proteome from the reviewed UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database release 2016_11 including isoforms (42111 proteins) as reference proteome.  For details see: 'A combined mass spectrometry and data integration approach to predict the mitochondrial poly(A) RNA interacting proteome. Selma L. van Esveld, Şirin Cansız-Arda, Fenna Hensen, Robin van der Lee &, Martijn A. Huynen1 & Johannes N. Spelbrink'.’

### Publication Abstract
In order to synthesize the 13 oxidative phosphorylation proteins encoded by mammalian mtDNA, a large assortment of nuclear encoded proteins is required. These include mitoribosomal proteins and various RNA processing, modification and degradation enzymes. RNA crosslinking has been successfully applied to identify whole-cell poly(A) RNA-binding proteomes, but this method has not been adapted to identify mitochondrial poly(A) RNA-binding proteomes. Here we developed and compared two related methods that specifically enrich for mitochondrial poly(A) RNA-binding proteins and analyzed bound proteins using mass spectrometry. To obtain a catalog of the mitochondrial poly(A) RNA interacting proteome, we used Bayesian data integration to combine these two mitochondrial-enriched datasets as well as published whole-cell datasets of RNA-binding proteins with various online resources, such as mitochondrial localization from MitoCarta 2.0 and co-expression analyses. Our integrated analyses ranked the complete human proteome for the likelihood of mtRNA interaction. We show that at a specific, inclusive cut-off of the corrected false discovery rate (cFDR) of 69%, we improve the number of predicted proteins from 185 to 211 with our mass spectrometry data as input for the prediction instead of the published whole-cell datasets. The chosen cut-off determines the cFDR: the less proteins included, the lower the cFDR will be. For the top 100 proteins, inclusion of our data instead of the published whole-cell datasets improve the cFDR from 54% to 31%. We show that the mass spectrometry method most specific for mitochondrial RNA-binding proteins involves <i>ex vivo</i> 4-thiouridine labeling followed by mitochondrial isolation with subsequent <i>in organello</i> UV-crosslinking.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial rna, Mass spectrometry, 4-thiouridine labelling & crosslinking

### Affiliations
RCMM, CMBI, RIMLS, Radboudumc Nijmegen
Radboud Center for Mitochondrial Medicine, Department of Paediatrics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Selma van Esveld

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes N. Spelbrink
Radboud Center for Mitochondrial Medicine, Department of Paediatrics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


