### Accession
PXD018758

### Title
Leveraging immonium ions for identifying and targeting acyl-lysine modifications in proteomic datasets

### Description
Acyl modifications vary greatly in terms of elemental composition and site of protein modification. Developing methods to identify these modifications more confidently can help assess the scope of these modifications in large proteomic datasets. Herein we analyze the utility of acyl-lysine immonium ions for identifying the modifications in proteomic datasets. We demonstrate that the cyclized immonium ion is a strong indicator of acyl-lysine presence when its rank or relative abundance compared to other ions within a spectrum is considered. Utilizing a stepped collision energy method in a shotgun experiment highlights the immonium ion strongly. Implementing an analysis that accounted for features within each MS2 spectra, this method allows peptides with short chain acyl-lysine modifications to be clearly identified in complex lysates. Immonium ions can also be used to validate novel acyl-modifications; in this study we report the first examples of 3-hydroxylpimelyl-lysine modification and validate them using immonium ions. Overall these results solidify the use of the immonium ion as a marker for acyl-lysine modifications in complex proteomic datasets.

### Sample Protocol
Acetylated-bovine serum albumin (BSA) was obtained from Promega (Product #R3961) and diluted in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Butyrylated-BSA (was prepared in a process adapted from Baez, et al.) Butyric anhydride (~25 μmol) was added to 100 μL of a 1 mg/ml  solution of BSA dissolved in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, Product #A8022). The solution was incubated for 20 minutes at 4°C. The pH of the solution was then adjusted to pH ~8 using ammonium hydroxide. The process was then repeated two more times. Subsequently, hydroxylamine hydrochloride was added at 50% (w/v) of the final concentration and the pH was readjusted with NH4OH to ~8 to reverse adventitious O-acylation. The solution was incubated at room temperature overnight. Butyrylated-BSA was then buffer exchanged into 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate using 10kD MWCO Amicon spin filters (Millipore).   Sample was heated to 95℃ for 10 minutes, reduced with 20mMmM DTT for 1 hour at 60℃, and alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Alkylation was quenched with DTT and sample was then digested overnight with GluC (1:100) at room temperature. Digested peptide was dried in a vacuum concentrator, acidified with 0.1% acetic acid, and desalted with STAGE tips assembled from 3M Empore C18 Solid Phase Extraction Disks and dried again. Peptides were reconstituted in LC-MS injection buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and quantified by Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted into MGF format and peak lists were submitted to Mascot (version 2.5; Matrix Science) and searched against the BSA sequence supplemented with protein sequences of common contaminants. GluC was specified as the cleavage enzyme with up to 6 missed cleavages considered, and a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and product mass error of 0.02 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021464), methionine oxidation (+15.994915), and the respective acyl-lysine modification, acetyl (+42.010565) or butyryl (+70.041865) were set as variable modifications. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to 1% false discovery rate using the target-decoy strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Acyl modifications vary greatly in terms of elemental composition and site of protein modification. Developing methods to identify acyl modifications more confidently can help to assess the scope of these modifications in large proteomic datasets. The utility of acyl-lysine immonium ions is analyzed for identifying the modifications in proteomic datasets. It is demonstrated that the cyclized immonium ion is a strong indicator of acyl-lysine presence when its rank or relative abundance compared to other ions within a spectrum is considered. Utilizing a stepped collision energy method in a shotgun experiment highlights the immonium ion. By implementing an analysis that accounted for features within each MS<sup>2</sup> spectrum, the method clearly identifies peptides with short chain acyl-lysine modifications from complex lysates. Immonium ions can also be used to validate novel acyl modifications; in this study, the first examples of 3-hydroxylpimelyl-lysine modifications are reported and they are validated using immonium ions. Overall these results solidify the use of the immonium ion as a marker for acyl-lysine modifications in complex proteomic datasets.

### Keywords
Immonium ion, Bsa, Lysine acylation, Lc-ms/ms, Lysine acetylation, Stepped collision energy, 3-hydroxypimelylation

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA,USA David Geffen School of Medicine, Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA UCLA-DOE Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA UCLA Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
University of California, Los Angeles

### Submitter
Janine Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph A. Loo
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA,USA David Geffen School of Medicine, Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA UCLA-DOE Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA UCLA Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA


