### Accession
PXD027823

### Title
Secretome from human pancreatic ductal cells (HPDE)

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterised by an abundant desmoplastic reaction which includes an excess production of extracellular matrix. The proteins and extracellular matrix secreted by HPDE cells (H6c7), with and without expression of mutant KRas G12V, was analysed by LC-MSMS

### Sample Protocol
Serum-free growth medium, incubated for 72 hrs with confluent cells on 10 cm diameter tissue culture dishes was collected, passed through a 0.45 µm syringe filter to remove cells, and concentrated 40x by passing through VIVASPIN 20 MWCO 10 kDa centrifugal concentrator columns (Sartorius Stedim Biotech), as per manufacturer's guidelines. The concentrated samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE, InstantBlue Coomassie stained and processed for MS. Samples were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analysed by Mascot and Scaffold to generate protein identifications. Quantification was performed using spectral counts

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a dismal prognosis due to its aggressive progression, late detection and lack of druggable driver mutations, which often combine to result in unsuitability for surgical intervention. Together with activating mutations of the small GTPase KRas, which are found in over 90% of PDAC tumours, a contributory factor for PDAC tumour progression is formation of a rigid extracellular matrix (ECM) and associated desmoplasia. This response leads to aberrant integrin signalling, and accelerated proliferation and invasion. To identify the integrin adhesion systems that operate in PDAC, we analysed a range of pancreatic ductal epithelial cell models using 2D, 3D and organoid culture systems. Proteomic analysis of isolated integrin receptor complexes from human pancreatic ductal epithelial (HPDE) cells predominantly identified integrin &#x3b1;6&#x3b2;4 and hemidesmosome components, rather than classical focal adhesion components. Electron microscopy, together with immunofluorescence, confirmed the formation of hemidesmosomes by HPDE cells, both in 2D and 3D culture systems. Similar results were obtained for the human PDAC cell line, SUIT-2. Analysis of HPDE cell secreted proteins and cell-derived matrices (CDM) demonstrated that HPDE cells secrete a range of laminin subunits and form a hemidesmosome-specific, laminin 332-enriched ECM. Expression of mutant KRas (G12V) did not affect hemidesmosome composition or formation by HPDE cells. Cell-ECM contacts formed by mouse and human PDAC organoids were also assessed by electron microscopy. Organoids generated from both the PDAC KPC mouse model and human patient-derived PDAC tissue displayed features of acinar-ductal cell polarity, and hemidesmosomes were visible proximal to prominent basement membranes. Furthermore, electron microscopy identified hemidesmosomes in normal human pancreas. Depletion of integrin &#x3b2;4 reduced cell proliferation in both SUIT-2 and HPDE cells, reduced the number of SUIT-2 cells in S-phase, and induced G1 cell cycle arrest, suggesting a requirement for &#x3b1;6&#x3b2;4-mediated adhesion for cell cycle progression and growth. Taken together, these data suggest that laminin-binding adhesion mechanisms in general, and hemidesmosome-mediated adhesion in particular, may be under-appreciated in the context of PDAC. Proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifiers PXD027803, PXD027823 and PXD027827.

### Keywords
Pdac, Ecm

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Jon Humphries

### Lab Head
Dr Martin J Humphries
University of Manchester


