### Accession
PXD014232

### Title
Prolonged fasting/refeeding modifies proteome profile and parvalbumin expression in the fast-twitch muscle of pacu (Piaractus mesopotamicus)

### Description
Skeletal muscle in fish presents a high plasticity controlled by a dynamic balance between anabolic and catabolic signaling pathways. Decreased food availability can inhibit muscle growth and trigger muscle catabolism pathways, thu promoting muscle atrophy. In contrast, anabolism may be favored during restoration of food supply, promoting the muscle growth. Considering this, we analyzed fast-twitch muscle of juvenile Piaractus mesopotamicus (pacu) submitted to a prolonged fasting (30 days) and refeeding (up to 30 days) using shotgun proteomics and gene expression analysis. The relative rate of weight and length increase, as well as the expression of mafbx and igf -1 genes, suggest that prolonged fasting caused muscle atrophy and that 30 days of refeeding led to partial compensatory growth. Shotgun proteomics analysis identified 99 proteins after fasting and 71 proteins after refeeding periods, of which 23 and 17 were differentially expressed after fasting and after 30 days of refeeding, respectively. Most of these differentially expressed proteins were related to cytoskeleton, muscle contraction and muscle metabolism. Among these, parvalbumin (PVALB), a calcium-binding protein and food allergen, was selected for further RT-qPCR analysis, which showed that pvalb mRNA was not changed after 30 days of fasting and 30 days of refeeding, but it was downregulated after 6h and 24h of refeeding. This suggests a post-transcriptional regulation of PVALB in fish muscle. In conclusion, our results suggest that muscle atrophy and partial compensatory growth caused by prolonged fasting and refeeding affected the muscle proteome and PVALB expression. Our results can contribute to the understanding of muscle anabolic and catabolic pathways in response to changes in food availability.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction Sarcoplasmic protein was extracted from fast muscle of fish after 30 days of fasting and after 30 days of refeeding (n = 9 for each group / time point). Extraction was carried out by homogenizing 5 g of sample in 10 mL of 10 mM Tris –HCl buffer (pH 7.2) with 5 mM Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 8M Urea and 65 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT). The resulting suspension was vortexed for 2-3 minutes and centrifuged for 15 min at 9,690 g and 4°C. The supernatant, which contained the sarcoplasmic protein fraction, was recovered and quantified by Bradford assay using BSA standard. Samples were mixed into protein pools. Each pool contained proteins from three different fish. There were three pools for each group at each collect point.  In solution digestion of proteins  The sarcoplasmic proteins were digested in solution of 8 M urea (1:1) followed by 25 minutes of incubation with 10 mM DTT at 56°C. Alkylation was performed by adding 14 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) during 30 minutes at room temperature, avoiding light exposure. To quench free IAA, samples were reincubated for 15 minutes with 5 mM DTT and subsequently 1 mM calcium chloride was added to the samples. The hydrolysis occurred in the presence of trypsin enzyme (Promega, Madison, WI) (1:50 enzyme/substrate) for 18 hours at 37°C. Trypsin was inactivated with 0.4% formic acid solution. The samples were desalinated using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The peptide fragments were reduced with vacuum centrifuge and kept at -20°C until analysis by mass spectrometry.  Mass spectrometry  During our mass spectrometry experiments, the protein pools (n = 3 pools containing proteins from 3 animals each) were run in triplicate. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed in a Q-Tof PREMIER API mass spectrometer (MicroMass/Waters, Mildford, MA) at the Brazilian Biosciences National Laboratory (LNBio), Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil. An aliquot of 4.5 μL of digested proteins was inject by analytic column C18 1.7 μm of BEH 130 (100 μm 100 mm) RP-UPLC (Nano Acquity UPLC, Waters, Mildford, MA) coupled with the nanoelectrospray tandem mass spectrometer at a flow rate of 600 nL/min. The instrument was operated in MS positive mode, data continuum acquisition from m/z 100–2,000 Da at a scan rate of 1 second and an inter scan delay of 0.1 second.

### Data Protocol
Peak list was created using Mass Lynx Version 4.1 (MicroMass/Waters). Search for peptide identity from LC-MS/MS experiments was performed against Actinopterygii taxonomy NCBI database (May, 2017) using Mascot Distiller v.2.3.2.0, 2009 (Matrix Science, AQ7 Boston, MA) set with carbamidomethyl -cys as fixed modification (monoisotopic mass 57.0215 Da), methionine oxidation as variable modification (monoisotopic mass 15.9949), and 0.1 Da of MS and MS/MS fragment tolerances. For the protein relative quantification between C and E groups, data from Mascot were analyzed using Scaffold Q+ software Version 4.3.4 (Proteome Software Inc, Portland, USA). This program returned the fold change of the E group relative to the C group. For a given protein, the closer the fold change value is to 1, the less it is differentially expressed. The proteins with fold change ≥1.5 or ≤0.6 were considerately differently expressed between groups.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we analyzed the fast-twitch muscle of juvenile Piaractus mesopotamicus (pacu) submitted to prolonged fasting (30d) and refeeding (6h, 24h, 48h and 30d). We measured the relative rate of weight and length increase (RRIlength and RRIweight), performed shotgun proteomic analysis and did Western blotting for PVALB after 30d of fasting and 30d of refeeding. We assessed the gene expression of igf-1, mafbx and pvalb after 30d of fasting and after 6h, 24h, 48h and 30d of refeeding. We performed a bioinformatic analysis to predict miRNAs that possibly control parvalbumin expression. After fasting, RRIlength, RRIweight and igf-1 expression decreased, while the mafbx expression increased, which suggest that prolonged fasting caused muscle atrophy. After 6h and 24h of refeeding, mafbx was not changed and igf-1 was downregulated, while after 48h of refeeding mafbx was downregulated and igf-1 was not changed. After 30d of refeeding, RRIlength and RRIweight were increased and igf-1 and mafbx expression were not changed. Proteomic analysis identified 99 proteins after 30d of fasting and 71 proteins after 30d of refeeding, of which 23 and 17, respectively, were differentially expressed. Most of these differentially expressed proteins were related to cytoskeleton, muscle contraction, and metabolism. Among these, parvalbumin (PVALB) was selected for further validation. The analysis showed that pvalb mRNA was downregulated after 6h and 24h of refeeding, but was not changed after 30d of fasting or 48h and 30d of refeeding. The Western blotting confirmed that PVALB protein was downregulated after 30d of fasting and 30d of refeeding. The downregulation of the protein and the unchanged expression of the mRNA after 30d of fasting and 30d of refeeding suggest a post-transcriptional regulation of PVALB. Our miRNA analysis predicted 444 unique miRNAs that may target pvalb. In conclusion, muscle atrophy and partial compensatory growth caused by prolonged fasting followed by refeeding affected the muscle proteome and PVALB expression.

### Keywords
Muscle atrophy, Fasting, Compensatory growth, Refeeding, Proteomics, Parvalbumin

### Affiliations
Department of Morphology, Institute of Biosciences of Botucatu, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil.
IBB-UNESP

### Submitter
Maria Laura Gabriel Kuniyoshi

### Lab Head
Dr Maeli Dal-Pai-Silva
Department of Morphology, Institute of Biosciences of Botucatu, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil.


