### Accession
PXD020446

### Title
Multiresolution imaging using bioluminescence resonance energy transfer identifies distinct biodistribution profiles of extracellular vesicles and exomeres with redirected tropism

### Description
Extracellular particles (EPs) including extracellular vesicles and exomeres play a significant role in diseases and therapeutic applications. However, the spatiotemporal dynamics of EPs in vivo remains to be elucidated with a suitable method. In this study, we developed a bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET)-based reporter, PalmGRET, to visualize, track and quantify EPs both in vitro and in vivo. To explore the tropism effect of membrane proteins on EPs from lung metastatic hepatocellular carcimoma (HCC), we established PalmGRET in a mouse hepatocellular carcinoma cell line, HCA1, termed HCA1-PalmGRET. EP harvested from HCA1-PalmGRET cells were processed with gel electrophoresis, followed by in-gel digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis. The identified protein list was compared with published lung tropism databases and four membrane proteins were selected for subsequent gene knockdown experiments: solute carrier organic anion transporter family member 2A1 (Slco2a1), alanine aminopeptidase (Anpep/Cd13), chloride intracellular channel 1 (Clic1), and sodium-hydrogen antiporter 3 regulator 1 (Nherf1). Using PalmGRET, we revealed that knockdown of Slco2a1, Cd13 and Clic1 significantly reduced lung tropism of HCC-EPs with varying redirected delivery to other organs.

### Sample Protocol
EPs from HCC were first resolved in 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich, Missouri, USA) with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 37℃ followed by alkylation in 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min in the dark at 25℃. Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, Wisconsin, USA) solution was mixed with samples and incubated at 37℃ for 12hr. The digested peptides were extracted from gel fragment and analyzed with Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) combined with UltiMate 3000RSLC nano-flow HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) with HCD or EThcD MS/MS mode.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS spectra were first processed for peak detection in MaxQuant (1.6.5.01), followed by peptide identification with Andromeda search engine and Swiss-Prot database (Mus Musculus, 17,009 reviewed protein sequence, UP000000589). Applied search criteria for EP-HCA1-PalmGRET were trypsin specificity, carbamidomethyl for fixed modification, and oxidation and acetyl (Protein N-term) for variable modification. Minimum peptide length was 5 amino acids and allowed up to 2 missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was 0.5Da. For peptide identification filters, False discovery rate was 0.01 and Peptide Rank was 1.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular particles (EPs) including extracellular vesicles (EVs) and exomeres play significant roles in diseases and therapeutic applications. However, their spatiotemporal dynamics in vivo have remained largely unresolved in detail due to the lack of a suitable method. Therefore, a bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET)-based reporter, PalmGRET, is created to enable pan-EP labeling ranging from exomeres (&lt;50&#xa0;nm) to small (&lt;200&#xa0;nm) and medium and large (&gt;200&#xa0;nm) EVs. PalmGRET emits robust, sustained signals and allows the visualization, tracking, and quantification of the EPs from whole animal to nanoscopic resolutions under different imaging modalities, including bioluminescence, BRET, and fluorescence. Using PalmGRET, it is shown that EPs released by lung metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) exhibit lung tropism with varying distributions to other major organs in immunocompetent mice. It is further demonstrated that gene knockdown of lung-tropic membrane proteins, solute carrier organic anion transporter family member 2A1, alanine aminopeptidase/Cd13, and chloride intracellular channel 1 decreases HCC-EP distribution to the lungs and yields distinct biodistribution profiles. It is anticipated that EP-specific imaging, quantitative assays, and detailed in vivo characterization are a starting point for more accurate and comprehensive in vivo models of EP biology and therapeutic design.

### Keywords
Redirected tropism, Extracellular vesicles, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Microvesicles, Exosomes, Biodistribution

### Affiliations
Institute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan Chemical Biology and Molecular Biophysics Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, National Taiwan University and Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
+886 2 2366 8244

### Submitter
Steven Chuo

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pin-Kuang Lai
Institute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan Chemical Biology and Molecular Biophysics Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, National Taiwan University and Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.


