### Accession
PXD010953

### Title
Uncovering metabolic regulatory mechanisms connected to rubber biosynthesis by the down-regulation of CPTL1 in Taraxacum koksaghyz

### Description
The Russian dandelion Taraxacum koksaghyz synthesizes considerable amounts of high molecular weight rubber in its roots. The cis-1,4-isoprene polymers are stored as rubber particle in the latex, the cytosol of specialized cells, called laticifers. The rubber transferase complex localizes at the particle surface and catalyzes the elongation of the cis-1,4-isoprene chains. The heteromeric complex is composed of an NgBR-like protein and a cis-prenyltransferase. In T. koksaghyz two NgBR homologous proteins, TkCPTL1 and TkCPTL2 were identified. Spatial expression analysis showed that TkCPTL1 is predominantly expressed at a high rate in latex, whereas TkCPTL2 exhibits low mRNA levels in all tissues. We investigated the functions of TkCPTL1&2 in two RNAi approaches. The down-regulation of TkCPTL2 showed no altered phenotype indicating a redundant function of the protein in dandelion. Knockdown of TkCPTL1 led to abolished poly(cis-1,4-isoprene) synthesis indicating that TkCPTL1 is essentially contributing to the formation of the rubber polymer. Simultaneously, levels of triterpenes and inulin in roots were significantly elevated. Analyses of latex from TkCPTL1-RNAi plants yielded a newly appearing latex fraction still containing particles, which seemed to be unaffected in structure compared to native rubber particles. Particle size, phospholipid composition and presence of small rubber particle proteins were determined for this purpose. We could show that the particles encapsulate triterpenes in a phospholipid shell that is stabilized by SRPPs. MS-based comparison of latex proteomes from TkCPTL1-RNAi plants and T. koksaghyz wildtypes enabled evidences for regulation mechanisms in several metabolic pathways associated to rubber biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and peptide desalting For proteome analysis, four T0 plants of four independent TkCPTL1-RNAi lines (A, B, C & D) each and four T. koksaghyz wildtypes were grown in the greenhouse for 14 weeks. Total latex was harvested from the roots in 200 µl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6). Samples were incubated for 5 min at 95°C. The extract was centrifuged twice at 18,000 x g for 30 min to remove cell debris. Protein samples (80 µg) were 8-fold diluted with 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.6. The samples were transferred to 0.5 mL 30k MWCO centrifugal filter devices (Vivacon 500 30K, Sartorius). The filter-assisted sample preparation was performed as previously described in Wozny et al. (2016) . Digested peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips (Rappsilber 2007) and evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge.   LC-MS/MS data acquisition  Dried peptides were redissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for analysis. Samples (0.5 µg) were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 20 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 0.75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The column was kept at 50°C in a column oven throughout the run. Peptides were eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5 % to 98 % solvent B (solvent A 0 % ACN, 0.5 % FA; solvent B 80 % ACN, 0.5 % FA) at a flow-rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a Top15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1759 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM, maximum IT of 55 ms and a target value of 3x106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 1x105 ions at a resolution of 15,000 FWHM, maximum IT of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, ≥6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (Cox 2008, Tyanova 2016; version 1.5.2.8, http://www.maxquant.org/). MS/MS spectra were searched with the Andromeda search engine against a dandelion database (name?; web adresse?). Sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences were automatically added during the search. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Label-free quantification was enabled with a LFQ minimum ratio count of 1. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Match between runs was enabled.  Protein hits were annotated based on NCBI and UniProt protein databases (status February 2018).

### Publication Abstract
The Russian dandelion Taraxacum koksaghyz synthesizes considerable amounts of high-molecular-weight rubber in its roots. The characterization of factors that participate in natural rubber biosynthesis is fundamental for the establishment of T.&#xa0;koksaghyz as a rubber crop. The cis-1,4-isoprene polymers are stored in rubber particles. Located at the particle surface, the rubber transferase complex, member of the cis-prenyltransferase (cisPT) enzyme family, catalyzes the elongation of the rubber chains. An active rubber transferase heteromer requires a cisPT subunit (CPT) as well as a CPT-like subunit (CPTL), of which T.&#xa0;koksaghyz has two homologous forms: TkCPTL1 and TkCPTL2, which potentially associate with the rubber transferase complex. Knockdown of TkCPTL1, which is predominantly expressed in latex, led to abolished poly(cis-1,4-isoprene) synthesis but unaffected dolichol content, whereas levels of triterpenes and inulin were elevated in roots. Analyses of latex from these TkCPTL1-RNAi plants revealed particles that were similar to native rubber particles regarding their particle size, phospholipid composition, and presence of small rubber particle proteins (SRPPs). We found that the particles encapsulated triterpenes in a phospholipid shell stabilized by SRPPs. Conversely, downregulating the low-expressed TkCPTL2 showed no altered phenotype, suggesting its protein function is redundant in T.&#xa0;koksaghyz. MS-based comparison of latex proteomes from TkCPTL1-RNAi plants and T.&#xa0;koksaghyz wild-types discovered putative factors that convert metabolites in biosynthetic pathways connected to isoprenoids or that synthesize components of the rubber particle shell.

### Keywords
Prenyltransferase, Triterpenes, Proteomics, Rna interference, Lipids, Rubber, Taraxacum koksaghyz

### Affiliations
University of Muenster IBBP Plant Physiology Schlossplatz 7 48149 Muenster
WWU Münster

### Submitter
Ines Lassowskat

### Lab Head
Dr Iris Finkemeier
University of Muenster IBBP Plant Physiology Schlossplatz 7 48149 Muenster


