### Accession
PXD023505

### Title
Proteomics Profiling of Breast Cell Line-derived Extracellular Vesicles

### Description
Membrane-derived extracellular vesicles, referred to as microvesicles (MVs), have been proposed to participate in several cancer diseases. In this study, MV fractions were isolated by differential ultracentrifugation from a metastatic breast cancer (BC) cell line MDA-MB-231 and a non-cancerous breast cell line MCF10A, then analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry. A total of 1,519 MV proteins were identified from both cell lines. The data obtained were compared to previously analyzed proteins from small extracellular vesicle (sEV), revealing 1,272 proteins present in both MVs and sEVs derived from the MDA-MB-231 cell line. Among the 89 proteins unique to MDA-MB-231 MVs, three enzymes: ornithine aminotransferase (OAT), transaldolase (TALDO1) and bleomycin hydrolase (BLMH) have been previously proposed as cancer therapy targets. These proteins were enzymatically validated in cells, sEVs and MVs derived from both cell lines. The specific activity of OAT and TALDO1 was significantly higher in MDA-MB-231-derived MVs than in MCF10A10A MVs. BLMH was highly expressed in MDA-MB-231-derived MVs, compared to MCF10A MVs. This study shows that MVs carry functional metabolic enzymes and provides a framework for future studies of their biological role in BC and potential in therapeutic applications.

### Sample Protocol
EV isolation:  Cell culture and EV isolation were done as described in Risha et. al., 2020 and the adjacent manuscript.  In-solution digestion:  Isolated EVs in 200 μL of PBS were lysed with 50 μL of the solubilization buffer consisting of 8 M urea, 100 mM HEPES, 5% glycerol, and a surfactant (any of 0.5% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM), 0.5% Digitonin or 0.075% Triton X-100). Samples were then reduced using 4 µL of 100 mM TCEP solution and incubated at 25 °C for 55 min on a shaking plate at 450 rpm. Samples were then alkylated with 4 µL of 500 mM iodoacetamide (in H2O) solution and incubated at 25 °C for 55 min on a plate shaking at 450 rpm. Finally, proteins were digested using 1.5 µL of 0.3 µg/µL trypsin/Lys-C solution (Trypsin/Lys-C Mix, Promega V5072) and incubated at room temperature for about 20 h. 2 µL of 100% formic acid was added to samples, which were then vortexed and centrifuged at 10,000g for 30 s. Samples were desalted using C18 TopTips (Glygen) columns, as per the manufacturer’s instructions, then vacuum dried.  Nano-LC–MS/MS:  Protein samples (about 5 μg of protein) were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an in-house packed column (Polymicro Technology), 15 cm × 70 μm ID, Luna C18(2), 3 μm, 100 Å (Phenomenex) employing a water/acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient. Samples were loaded onto the column for 105 min at a flow rate of 0.30 μL/min. Peptides were separated using 2% acetonitrile in the first 7 min and then using a linear gradient from 2 to 38% of acetonitrile for 70 min, followed by a gradient from 38 to 98% of acetonitrile for 9 min, then at 98% of acetonitrile for 10 min, followed by a gradient from 98 to 2% of acetonitrile for 3 min and wash 10 min at 2% of acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were directly sprayed into a mass spectrometer using positive electrospray ionization (ESI) at an ion source temperature of 250 °C and an ion spray voltage of 2.1 kV. The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was run in the top speed mode. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350–2000) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000. Precursor ions were filtered according to monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state (+ 2 to + 7), and dynamic exclusion (30 s with a ± 10 ppm window). The automatic gain control settings were 5 × 105 for full FTMS scans and 1 × 104 for MS/MS scans. Fragmentation was performed with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap. Precursors were isolated using a 2 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant software. Peptides were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database using the Andromeda search engine, integrated into MaxQuant. Default parameters were used if not described otherwise. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Trypsin and LysC, C-terminal cleavage at lysine and arginine, were set as digestion enzymes to generate peptides of at least 7 amino acids with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Identified peptides had an initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins of 1% was determined using a reverse sequence database. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) values were obtained through the MaxLFQ algorithm, considering only unique peptides. A contaminants database provided by MaxQuant was used. All proteins matching the reverse database or labeled as contaminants were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Proteomics, Cell lines, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
John L. Holmes Mass Spectrometry Facility, Faculty of Science, University of Ottawa, Canada
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Ottawa, Canada

### Submitter
Nico Hüttmann

### Lab Head
Dr Maxim Valentinovich Berezovski
Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Ottawa, Canada


