### Accession
PXD012902

### Title
Corneal protome of trangenic TGFBI R124H mouse model

### Description
In this study we analysed the proteome of transforming growth factor β-induced protein (TGFBIp) R124H transgenic mouse corneas in an attempt to understand the disease mechanisms leading to the granular corneal dystrophy type 2. The transgenic mouse model was generated by insertion of human TGFBI cDNA with the R124H mutation into the first exon of the mouse TGFBI DNA generating the transgenic TGFBIR124H mouse model We compared the corneal proteome of three wild-type, heterozygous, and homozygous mice of different genders, which were age-matched and analysed the proteolytic processing and relative amount of TGFBIp. No protein deposits were observed in the investigated corneas.

### Sample Protocol
The left corneas of each biological replicate were lyophilized for 2 h using a speedvac concentrator. The dried corneas were subjected to 50 μL 0.66 M CNBr in 70% trifluoroacetic acid at 23°C overnight. The next day, the tissues were lyophilized and washed twice in H2O before re-suspended and reduced in 8 M Urea in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM DTT, pH 8 for 30 min. The samples were then alkylated in 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min followed by quenching of residual IAA by 30 mM DTT. The samples were diluted to 1 M Urea using 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate before digestion with 1:50 w/w (3 μg) trypsin (sigma) overnight at 37°C. For each replicates 1/3 of the sample were desalted using homemade RP micro columns containing small plugs of Octadecyl C18 Solid Phase Extraction disks (Empore, 3M) and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Scientific) connected to a Q Excative Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The samples were injected and desalted on a trap column (2 cm × 75 μm inner diameter) and separated on an in-house pulled silica emitter (15 cm × 75 μm inner diameter). Both columns were packed with PreproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany).  The peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer by using a gradient going from 5% solvent A to 35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) over 50 min, followed by a quick increase to 100% solvent B over 10 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. Analyses were performed in the ddMS2 mode, using Xcalibur software. Full mass scan was performed using the following parameters: resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, AGC target 1e6, m/z 375-1500, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The ten most abundant peptides of each full scan were selected for MS/MS using the following parameters: resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200, AGC target 1e5, maximum injection time of 110 ms, and an isolation window of 2 m/z. Dynamic exclusion of 20 s was also applied in the analysis. The samples were run in technical duplicates on the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.5.6.0) was used to generate peak lists from raw files, and Andromeda was used as search engine using the following parameters: carbamidomethyl as fixed modification, while C-terminal conversion of methionine to homoserine and homoserine lactone by CNBr and oxidation of proline and methionine were set as variable modifications, and digestion enzymes CNBr and trypsin were selected allowing one missed cleavage. The data was searched against the mouse proteome (Swissprot_2019-01-08) and the human R124H TGFBIp sequence. The false discovery rate of peptides and proteins was adjusted to 1% and the mass tolerances of first and main precursor searches were set at 20 and 4.5 ppm. The peptide mass tolerance was set at 35 ppm. MaxQuant software was used to calculate the label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity for each protein based on minimum 2 peptides. The match-between-runs feature was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cornea, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark
Aarhus University

### Submitter
Marie Vestergaard Lukassen

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark


