### Accession
PXD018578

### Title
LETR1 (LINC01197) RNA pull-down in human LECs followed by LC-MSMS

### Description
Recent studies have revealed the importance of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) as tissue-specific regulators of gene expression. There is ample evidence that distinct types of vasculature undergo tight transcriptional control to preserve their structure, identity, and functions. We determined, for the first time, the global lineage-specific lncRNAome of human dermal blood and lymphatic endothelial cells (BECs and LECs), combining RNA-Seq and CAGE-Seq. A subsequent genome-wide antisense oligonucleotide-knockdown profiling of two BEC- and two LEC-specific lncRNAs identified LETR1 as a critical gatekeeper of the global LEC transcriptome. Deep RNA-DNA and RNA-protein interaction studies, and phenotype rescue analyses revealed that LETR1 is a nuclear trans-acting lncRNA modulating, via key epigenetic factors, the expression of essential target genes governing the growth and migratory ability of LECs. Together, our study provides new evidence supporting the intriguing concept that every cell type expresses precise lncRNA signatures to control lineage-specific regulatory programs.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare nuclear lysate, 40 million LECs per replicate were collected and washed once with DPBS. The cell pellet was resuspended in 40mL consisting of 8mL DPBS, 24mL RNase-free H2O, and 8mL nuclear isolation buffer (1.28M sucrose, 40mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 20mM MgCl2, 4% triton X-100). After mixing by inversion, LECs were incubated on ice for 20min with occasional mixing. Cells were then centrifuged at 1,668rpm for 15min at 4°C. The nuclear pellet was resuspended in 2mL of RNA pull-down buffer (150mM KCl, 2.5mM MgCl2, 25mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5mM EDTA pH 8, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5mM DTT, complete protease inhibitor cocktail, 100U/mL Ribolock RNase inhibitor). Lysed nuclei were transferred into a 7mL Dounce homogenizer (Kimble) and sheared mechanically using 30-40 strokes with pestle B. Next, the nuclear lysate was transferred to a fresh tube and sonicated 2x 30s at a high intensity (50% cycle and 90% power) using a Sonopuls HD2070 (Bandelin). 10U/mL DNase I (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were subsequently added to the nuclear lysate and incubated for 30min at 4°C while rotating. The nuclear lysate was further sonicated for another 2x 30s at high intensity. The nuclear lysate was centrifuged at 13,000rpm for 10min at 4°C. Finally, the supernatant was collected into a fresh tube, and glycerol was added to reach a 10% final concentration. Resulting clear nuclear lysate was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for later use. Nuclear fractionation was checked after performing western blot analysis, as described above, of GAPDH (cytoplasmic protein) and Histone H3 (nuclear protein) using rabbit anti-GAPDH antibody (1:5000, Sigma) and rabbit anti-histone H3 antibody (1:10000, Sigma) antibodies. To produce biotinylated RNA, full-length LETR-1, determined by RACE, and antisense strand were cloned into pcDNA3.1 backbone. Both transcripts were amplified by PCR using Phusion high-fidelity DNA polymerase (New England BioLabs), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Amplified fragments were digested with BamHI and XbaI restriction enzymes (New England BioLabs) overnight at 37°C. After gel purification, digested fragments were cloned into a linearized pcDNA3.1 backbone (from 64599, Addgene) using T4 DNA ligase for 20min at room temperature. Cloned vectors were transformed into one shot TOP10 chemically competent cells, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Plasmids were isolated using the Nucleospin Plasmid kit (Machery Nagel). Sequences of inserted fragments were checked by Sanger sequencing (Microsynth). Subsequently, both transcripts were biotin-labeled after in vitro transcription from 1µg linearized pcDNA3.1-LETR1-1 and pcDNA3.1-LETR1-1-antisense plasmids for 1h at 37°C using Ampliscribe T7-flash biotin-RNA kit (Lucigen). Biotinylated LETR1 sense and antisense RNA were then treated with RNase-free DNase I for additional 15min at 37°C. Both biotinylated RNAs were purified by ammonium acetate precipitation, as described by the manufacturer. After determining the concentration using Nanodrop 1000, the integrities of sense and antisense LETR1 transcripts were tested by gel electrophoresis. To perform RNA pull-down, 150µL Dynabeads M-270 streptavidin magnetic beads were washed twice with RNA pull-down buffer. For each condition, 60µL washed beads were then incubated with 1.5mg nuclear lysate for 30min at 4°C. During nuclear pre-clearing, 100pmol per condition of biotinylated RNAs were denatured by heating to 65°C for 10min and cooled down slowly to 4°C. Pre-cleared nuclear extract was further diluted to 2mL using RNA pull-down buffer and incubated with 100pmol biotinylated RNA for 1h at 4°C on a rotatory shaker. Next, 60µL washed streptavidin magnetic beads were added and further incubated for 45min at 4°C. Beads were carefully washed five times in RNA pull-down buffer. Bound proteins were finally eluted twice by adding 3mM biotin in PBS (Ambion) to the beads and incubating them for 20min at room temperature and for 10min at 65°C. Eluted proteins were subjected to protein identification by mass spectrometry at the Functional Genomics Center Zurich (FGCZ). Proteins were pelleted by TCA precipitation using 20% TCA. Protein pellets were washed twice with cold acetone. Dry pellets were then dissolved in 45µL trypsin buffer (10mM Tris, 2mM CaCl2, pH 8.2) plus 5µL trypsin (100ng/µL in 10mM HCl) and 1.5µL 1M Tris pH 8.2. After microwaving for 30min at 60°C, dried samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid. Digested peptides were finally analyzed by LC/MS.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using Mascot software (Matrix Science). Search results were then loaded into Scaffold software (ver. 4.8.7) to perform statistical analysis. Only proteins with 1% protein FDR, a minimum of 2 peptides per protein, 0.1% peptide FDR, and present in both LETR1 replicates but not in the antisense control were considered. PPI network for the proteins identified by RNA-biotin pull-down was generated using the STRING web tool (https://string-db.org/cgi/input.pl). The human PPI database was used for the analysis, while default values were used for the rest of the parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lesr2, Lc-msms, Linc01197, Lncrna, Lecs

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Luca Ducoli

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Detmar
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland


