### Accession
PXD031885

### Title
DEK/NUP214 SILAC interactormics analysis

### Description
Among most of leukemogenic fusion proteins the aberrant localization that the translocation partners are forced in  when compared to their wt counterparts contributes to leukemogenesis most likely by a sequester of interaction  partners. The aim was to disclose the role of localization of DEK/NUP214 and the related sequester of proteins  interacting with DEK/NUP214 for the induction t(6;9)- AML. The pathways indispensable for the induction of the  leukemogenic phenotype were worked out by comparing the interactome of the full-length fusion protein to that of biologiaclly-dead mutants.

### Sample Protocol
cells were grown in SILAC medium (DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS dialyzed in order to eliminate the unlabeled a.a. (Gibco), 1% L-Glutamine, 1% Pen/Strep, essential amino acids) for at least 5 days or 5 divisions (Ong et al., 2002). Argi- nine and lysine (1%) enriched in stable isotopes of 13C and 15N (SILAC heavy) were used to label the cells before transfection with the empty vector control (TAP-), whereas the unmodified a.a. (SILAC light) were used for the cells to be transfected with a vector encoding TAP-DEK/NUP214 or TAP tagged mutants. 48 hours after transfection 293T cells were lysed and TAP-tagged proteins were precipitated in two consecutive steps. The eluted proteins from the heavy labeled control cells were mixed 1:1 with each of the eluted light-labeled sample proteins. The mixed protein samples were run on an SDS-PAGE, subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and the resulting peptides were sequenced. MS and MS/MS data were acquired with an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to the LC system.

### Data Protocol
MS files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0 and the peptides were searched against the Uniprot human Database using the Andromeda search engine which is integrated into MaxQuant. Default parameters were applied except described otherwise. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Trypsin was used as digestion enzyme, the minimum peptide length set at 7 amino acids with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins was set at 1%. The contaminants database provided by MaxQuant was used to filter out the proteins labeled as contaminants. The normalized heavy/light ratio was inverted to represent the sample/control ratio and log2 transformed and the resulting proteinGroups file was used for further bioinformatic analysis. The Maxquant proteinGroups output file was used for the next steps of bioinformatic analysis. The differential expression analysis between DEK/NUP214 and each of its mutants was done in the R programming language using the package Proteus (GitHub) that used limma for statistical analysis (Gierlinski et al., 2018, bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/416511).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interactome, Silac, Dek/nup214

### Affiliations
Division of Cancer and Genetics, Medical School, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
DCG, Hematology, Cardiff University, UK

### Submitter
Martin Ruthardt

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Ruthardt
DCG, Hematology, Cardiff University, UK


