### Accession
PXD029515

### Title
Differentiation of young and replicatively aged mouse C2C12 muscle cells

### Description
Age-related impairments in myoblast differentiation may contribute to reductions in muscle function in older adults but the underlying proteostasis processes are not well understood. We investigated young (P6-10) and replicatively aged (P48-50) C2C12 myoblast cultures during early (0h-24h) and late (72h-96h) stages of differentiation using deuterium oxide (D2O) labelling and mass spectrometry. The absolute dynamic profiling technique for proteomics (Proteo-ADPT) was used to quantify the absolute rates of abundance change, synthesis and degradation of individual proteins. Proteo-ADPT encompassed 116 proteins and 74 proteins exhibited significantly (P<0.05, FDR <5 %) different changes in abundance between young and aged cells at early and later periods of differentiation. Young cells exhibited a steady pattern of growth, protein accretion and fusion, whereas aged cells failed to gain protein mass or undergo fusion during later differentiation. Maturation of the proteome was retarded in aged myoblasts at the onset of differentiation, but the proteome appeared to ‘catch up’ with the young cells during the early differentiation period. However, this ‘catch up’ process in aged cells was not accomplished by higher levels of protein synthesis. Instead, a lower level of protein degradation in aged cells was responsible for the elevated gains in protein abundance. Our novel data point to a loss of proteome quality as a precursor to the lack of fusion of aged myoblasts and highlights dysregulation of protein degradation, particularly of ribosomal and chaperone proteins, as a key mechanism that may contribute to age-related declines in the capacity of myoblasts to undergo differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction in RIPA buffer, FASP tryptic digest, nano UPLC separation on 90 min gradient ESI-Q-ToF on Waters QTOF Premier

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitation using Protenesis QI for Proteomics

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Replicative ageing, C2c12, Deuterium oxide

### Affiliations
Liverpool John Moores University

### Submitter
Jatin Burniston

### Lab Head
Dr Jatin Burniston
Liverpool John Moores University


