### Accession
PXD025248

### Title
Peniophora incarnata T-7 LC-MSMS

### Description
To explore the mechanism of selective degradation of lignocellulose components by P. incarnate T-7, TMT labeling quantitative proteomic analysis was performed to explore the differential expression of secretory proteins of P. incarnate T-7 by submerged fermentation on poplar wood substrate relative to glucose substrates

### Sample Protocol
The cultures of the fungus strains grew in poplar wood and glucose substrates containing media, respectively, were collected at 4th day. After filtering, the collected cultures were centrifuged at 4000 rpm, 4 °C for 10 min, and the supernatant was further filtered through 0.45 μm membranes. Ammonium sulfate precipitation was employed for concentrating the supernatant protein fraction. The precipitated protein pellets were redissolved in an appropriate volume of the preparation solution buffer (8 M urea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS and 40 mM dithiothreitol).

### Data Protocol
dithiothreitol was firstly added into 100 μg of extracted protein with 25 mM final concentration and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Then, iodoacetamide with 50 mM final concentration was added and incubated in darkness at room temperature for 30 min. After that, the protein solution was precipitated by ice-cold acetone and the collected pellets were dissolved in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. Subsequently, sequencing grade trypsin was added at a protein/trypsin ratio of 50:1 (w/w) and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. The digested peptides were labeled with a TMT label reagent kit at room temperature for 1 h, and formic acid was added with 1% final concentration to quench the labeling reaction. The labeled samples were pooled in equal proportion and subjected to nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS). NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS (Thermo, Waltham, MA) equipped with an UltiMate 3000 system.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Submerged fermentation, Lc-msms, Peniophora incarnata t-7

### Affiliations
Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Forestry Biotechnology, Central South University of Forestry and Technology, Changsha, 410004, Hunan, P.R. China
Central South University of Forestry and Technology

### Submitter
Jiangshan Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Jiangshan Ma
Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Forestry Biotechnology, Central South University of Forestry and Technology, Changsha, 410004, Hunan, P.R. China


