### Accession
PXD013640

### Title
Keap-1-mediated S-nitrosylation of NOX4 hampers oxidative damage in endothelium

### Description
ABSTRACT  Rationale Premature senescence is conducive to aging and cardiovascular diseases. Nrf2 transcription factor, the master orchestrator of adoptive response to cellular stress, has been implicated in regulation of premature senescence in fibroblasts, neural and mesenchymal stem cells by transactivation of antioxidant gene expression. However, as we show here, human primary endothelial cells (ECs) devoid of Nrf2 and murine Nrf2 transcriptional knockout (tKO) aortas are senescent but do not encounter oxidative stress and damage, what contradicts this mechanism. Moreover, a molecular switch between normal, senescent and apoptotic fate remains unknown. Objective To elucidate the mechanism of Nrf2-related premature senescence of vascular system, to understand why Nrf2 deregulation does not cause oxidative stress exclusionary in ECs and to indicate a molecular switch determining ECs fate. Methods and Results Herein we evidence that ECs deficient in Nrf2 protein, or with limited Nrf2 activity in shear stress conditions, exhibit excessive S-nitrosylation of proteins. It is also a characteristic of Nrf2 tKO murine aortas, as determined by biotin switch assay in situ. Mass spectrometry analysis reveals that NOX4 is S-nitrosylated exclusively in ECs devoid of Nrf2. A functional role of S-nitrosylation is protection of ECs from death by inhibition of NOX4-mediated oxidative damage. As a result Nrf2-deficient ECs preserve oxidative balance but are redirected to premature senescence. The same phenotype is seen in Nrf2 tKO aortas. These effects are mediated by Keap1, a direct binding partner of Nrf2 and repressor of its transcriptional activity, remaining in cytoplasm unrestrained by Nrf2. S-nitrosylation, followed by senescence, can also be triggered in smooth muscle cells (SMCs) by EC-derived paracrine induction of iNOS.  Conclusions Collectively, Keap1-dependent S-nitrosylation of NOX4 hampers oxidative detriment in ECs with disturbed Nrf2 signaling and may provide defence in the adjacent aortic cells. Overabundance of unrestrained Keap1 in the cytoplasm determines fate of ECs.

### Sample Protocol
Mass Spectrometry analysis. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 100 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced with 0.5 M (5 mM f.c.) TCEP for 1 h at 60°C, blocked with 200 mM MMTS (10 mM f.c.) for 10 minutes at RT and digested overnight with 10 ng/mL trypsin (CAT NO V5280, Promega) at 37°C. Finally, to stop digestion trifluoroacetic acid was added at a final concentration of 0.1%. Mixture was centrifuged at 4°C, 14 000g for 30 minutes, to remove solid remaining. MS analysis was performed by LCMS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS2 mode, and data were acquired in the m/z range of 300-2000. Peptides were separated by a 180 minutes linear gradient of 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 35% solution B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The measurement of each sample was preceded by three washing runs to avoid cross-contamination. The final MS washing run was searched for the presence of cross-contamination between samples.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with the Max-Quant (Version 1.5.7.4) platform search parameters: match between runs (match time window 0.7 minute, alignment time 20 minutes), enzyme: trypsin/p; specific; max missed 2, minimal peptide length 7 aa, variable modification: methionine oxidation, N-term acetylation, fixed: cysteine alkylation, main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm, protein FDR 0.01. The reference human proteome database from UniProt was used (downloaded on 2017.08.20). Label-Free-Quantification (LFQ) intensity values were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm. Data were normalized and analyzed using Scaffold 4.8.2 ProteomeSofware platform

### Publication Abstract
The breach of proteostasis, leading to the accumulation of protein aggregates, is a hallmark of ageing and age-associated disorders, up to now well-established in neurodegeneration. Few studies have addressed the issue of dysfunctional cell response to protein deposition also for the cardiovascular system. However, the molecular basis of proteostasis decline in vascular cells, as well as its relation to ageing, are not understood. Recent studies have indicated the associations of Nrf2 transcription factor, the critical modulator of cellular stress-response, with ageing and premature senescence. In this report, we outline the significance of protein aggregation in physiological and premature ageing of murine and human endothelial cells (ECs). Our study shows that aged donor-derived and prematurely senescent Nrf2-deficient primary human ECs, but not those overexpressing dominant-negative Nrf2, exhibit increased accumulation of protein aggregates. Such phenotype is also found in the aortas of aged mice and young Nrf2 tKO mice. Ageing-related loss of proteostasis in ECs depends on Keap1, well-known repressor of Nrf2, recently perceived as a key independent regulator of EC function and protein S-nitrosation (SNO). Deposition of protein aggregates in ECs is associated with impaired autophagy. It can be counteracted by Keap1 depletion, S-nitrosothiol reductant or rapamycin treatment. Our results show that Keap1:Nrf2 protein balance and Keap1-dependent SNO predominate Nrf2 transcriptional activity-driven mechanisms in governing proteostasis in ageing ECs.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Nrf2, S-nitrosylation, Nox4, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Department of Medical Biotechnology Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology Jagiellonian University Gronostajowa 7 30-387 Krakow, Poland

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Grochot-Przęczek
Department of Medical Biotechnology Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology Jagiellonian University Gronostajowa 7 30-387 Krakow, Poland


