### Accession
PXD016499

### Title
Galectins expression profile in mice intestine -  Galectin 3 interacting partners identification

### Description
In this present project, we aimed to physiologically dissect the contribution of glycolipid- and lectin-driven endocytosis mechanism that operate within the mice intestine. We therefore decided to first characterize the expression profile of galectins in this tissue and then to focus on the specific implication of galectin 3 in that context and identify a potential binding partner, that may use this endocytic process for its internalization.

### Sample Protocol
The jejunum was washed with PBS until it became visually clean, and processed for DTT treatment. For the identification of Gal3 interacting partners, jejunum was incubated for 30 min at 4°C in PBS alone, or PBS containing 20 µg/ml of Gal3-His. After rinsing twice with PBS, intestine was longitudinally opened and enterocytes of the jejunum were scraped with the glass slide (Thermo Scientific, USA) and lysed with 2% Triton X-100/0.5% NP40 in PBS in the presence of protease inhibitor cocktail. Cleared lysates (26,000xg, 30 min, 4°C) were incubated overnight at 4°C with NiNTASepharose (Qiagen) and washed with lysis buffer (without protease inhibitors). After elution with two buffers (1. Loading buffer for SDS PAGE, 2% SDS 1X and 2. Hepes 50mM, NaCl 50 mM, Lactose 200 mM, pH 7.5 and LSB 1X) partners were separated by SDS-PAGE (30 min, 80V). Gel was stained with colloidal blue, the complete band of each replicate was excised and processed. Excised gel slices were washed and proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT prior to alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After washing and shrinking of the gel pieces with 100% acetonitrile, in-gel digestion was performed using trypsin/LysC (0.1µg) overnight in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 30°C. Peptide are then extracted using 60/35/5 MeCN/H2O/HCOOH, vacuum concentrated to dryness. Sample were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted from beads by incubation with 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were dried in a Speedvac and reconstitute in 10 µL 2/98 MeCN/H2O + 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Samples were chromatographically separated using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X with a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific).  To identify galectins in jejunum, enterocytes were scraped off the lamina propria with a glass slide (Superfrost, Thermo Scientific). 1 ml of 2% Triton X-100/0.5% NP40 in PBS was added to the cells, which were passed 10 times through a 23G needle. Lysate was cleared at by 16,000xg centrifugation for 10 min at 4°C. Lactose agarose beads (L7634-5ml, Sigma) were prepared by 2 washes in lysis buffer. Lysates were incubated by end-over-end rotation for 1 hour at 4°C with beads. Beads were then washed in lysis buffer and then again twice with 100 μl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and on-beads digested with 0.2 μg of trypsine/LysC (Promega) for 1 hour in 50 μl of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Sample was desalted and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer as in Żylicz et al. (PMID: 30595450).

### Data Protocol
For identification the data were searched against the UniProt Mus musculus canonical (house Mouse downloaded on 22/08/2017 or UP000000589) database using SequestHF through proteome discoverer. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage site were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethyl cysteine (not on bead sample) were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (PMID: 17610305) v3.9. FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2 (PMID: 21751374). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with missed cleavages and carbamidomethyl modifications were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05. To select, from this complex list only partners present in Gal3 replicates, we selected in the qualitative comparison proteins with at least 1 peptide in each Gal3 replicate, i.e. 0 peptide in the PBS control and only based on proteotypic peptides which allows to capture only specific proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intestine, Galectins, Mice

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


