### Accession
PXD007615

### Title
Cisplatin-induced proteome changes in ovatian cancer cells

### Description
Tumors easily acquire resistance to individual drugs and drug combinations thereby limiting the treatment effectiveness. Drug-stressed tumor cells secrete components that promote the survival of recipient cells and repopulation of damaged tumors. We have previously found that therapy-induced secretomes are enriched with spliceosomal proteins. The behavior of splicing-associated genes in response to chemotherapeutic drugs is poorly understood. We show that a severely stressed cell dramatically down-regulates spliceosomal proteins by secreting them into the extracellular space, reducing the expression of the respective genes, and disrupting the splicing. Our meta-analysis indicates that drugs with different action mechanisms cause a correlated decrease in the transcription of genes involved in spliceosome and mitotic cell cycle pathways and induce similar intron retention patterns in these genes. The key transcription factors regulating the concerted change in transcription are MYC, E2F1, TP53, and WT1. Based on the correlation analysis with siRNA data, we conclude that a decrease in the representation of intracellular spliceosomal proteins in response to stress is aimed at the cell cycle arrest. At the expression and processing levels, we demonstrate that a strong interplay between splicing-associated and cell cycle genes develops in stressed cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of SKOV3 cell lysates was performed in three replicates (Supplementary Table S5) on a TripleTOF 5600+ mass-spectrometer with a NanoSpray III ion source (ABSciex) coupled with a NanoLC Ultra 2D+ nano-HPLC system (Eksigent). The HPLC system was configured in a trap-elute mode. For sample loading buffer and buffer A, the mixture of 98.9% water, 1% methanol, 0.1% formic acid (v/v) was used. Buffer B was 99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (v/v). Samples were loaded on a Chrom XP C18 trap column (3 μm 120 Å 350 μm*0.5 mm; Eksigent) at a flow rate of 3 μl/min for 10 min and eluted through a 3C18-CL-120 separation column (3 μm, 120 Å, 75 μm*150 mm; Eksigent) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient was from 5 to 40% of buffer B in 90 min followed by 10 min at 95% of buffer B and 20 min reequilibration with 5% of buffer B. Between different samples, two blank 45 min runs consisting of 5*8 min waves (5%B-95%-95%-5%) were required to wash the system and to prevent carryover. Information-dependent mass-spectrometer experiment included 1 survey MS1 scan followed by 50 dependent MS2 scans. MS1 acquisition parameters were as follows: mass range for MS2 analysis was 300–1250 m/z, signal accumulation time was 250 ms. Ions for MS2 analysis were selected on the basis of intensity with the threshold of 200 cps and the charge state from 2 to 5. MS2 acquisition parameters were as follows: resolution of quadrupole was set to UNIT (0.7 Da), measurement mass range was 200–1800 m/z, signal accumulation time was 50 ms for each parent ion. Collision-activated dissociation was performed with nitrogen gas with collision energy ramping from 25 to 55 V within the signal accumulation time of 50 ms. Analyzed parent ions were sent to dynamic exclusion list for 15 sec in order to get an MS2 spectra at the chromatographic peak apex. β-Galactosidase tryptic solution (20 fmol) was run with 15 min gradient (5-25% of buffer B) between samples to calibrate the mass-spectrometer and to control the overall system performance, stability and reproducibility.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were converted to .mgf peaklists with the ProteinPilot (version 4.5). For this procedure we run ProteinPilot in identification mode with the following parameters: Cys alkylation by iodoacetamide, trypsin digestion, TripleTOF 5600 instrument, thorough ID search with detected protein threshold 95.0% against UniProt human Protein knowledgebase. For thorough protein identification the generated peaklists were searched with the MASCOT and the X! Tandem search engine against the UniProt human Protein knowledgebase with concatenated reverse decoy dataset . Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 20 ppm and 0.04 Da, respectively. Database searching parameters included the following: tryptic digestion with 1 possible miss cleavage, static modifications for carbamidomethyl (C) and dynamic/flexible modifications for oxidation (M). For X! Tandem we also selected parameters that allowed a quick check for protein N-terminal residue acetylation, peptide N-terminal glutamine ammonia loss or peptide N-terminal glutamic acid water loss. Result files were submitted to the Scaffold 4 software for validation and meta analysis. We used LFDR scoring algorithm with standard experiment wide protein grouping. For the evaluation of peptide and protein hits, a false discovery rate of 5% was selected for both. False positive identifications were based on reverse database analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spliceosome, Chemotherapy, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Proteomics, Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency

### Submitter
Georgij Arapidi

### Lab Head
Dr Georgij Pavlovich Arapidi
Laboratory of Proteomics, Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences


