### Accession
PXD029244

### Title
Alterations in liver proteome caused by bisphenol A and the bisphenol A metabolite, MBP, in males of Cyprinodon variegatus

### Description
Fifteen adult male Cyprinodon variegatus were exposed individually to 10µg/L of bisphenol A (BPA) for 7 days in 1.8L vessels and other fifteen to 10 µg/L of BPA metabolite, 4-methyl-2,4-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)pent-1-ene (MBP) under the same conditions. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was used as a carrier at 1µL/100mL and was added at the same concentration to the solvent control (n = 15).  90% daily water renewal was done after monitoring the culture conditions, that were: temperature 18.8 ± 0.2°C, pH 7.94±0.03, dissolved oxygen saturation 99.3% ± 1.1 and 16:8 hours of light:dark photoperiod.  BPA, MBP and DMSO concentrations were adjusted daily after water renewal.

### Sample Protocol
Livers were dissected and liver proteins were extracted by sonication in lysis buffet (7M urea; 2M thiourea; 4% CHAPS) followed by a quantification by the Bradford method, adapted for microplates. Samples of each treatment were grouped in pools of equal amount of proteins from 3 independent fish, therefore 5 pools were made per treatment. Proteins were acetone precipitated and trypsin digested. Two TMT10-plex experiments were prepared at this point: BPA experiment, where 5 pools of BPA samples and 5 pools of solvent control were labeled with a distinctive isobaric label; and MBP experiment, were 5 pools of MBP samples and 5 pools of the same solvent control samples than for the BPA experiment were labelled with the isobaric labels. For labelling, TMT10 plex guidelines were followed. In duplicated (one for each TMT experiment) labelled samples were mix together and fractioned by a high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit, following manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides from each fraction were resuspended in formic acid 0.5% and analyzed by ESI-MS/MS in an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 100 UHPLC system.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio v.8.0 software was used for MS/MS spectra identification and peptide and protein quantification. For this, Cyprinodon variegatus available proteome (Uniprot, 31881 protein sequences on September 6th, 2019) were used. 1% of false discovery rate was set at PSM level and 8.5% at protein level. Precursor ion tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance at 0.02 Da, one missed trypsin cleavage was allowed and only identifications with at least one unique peptide were used. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 10plex (N-terminal, K) were set as fixed modification and Methionine oxidation was set as variable.

### Publication Abstract
The toxicological status of bisphenol A (BPA) is under strong debate. Whereas in vitro it is an agonist of the estrogen receptor with a potency ca. 10<sup>5</sup>-fold lower than the natural female hormone estradiol, in vivo exposure causes only mild effects at concentration thresholds environmentally not relevant and inconsistent among species. By using a proteomic approach, shotgun liver proteome analysis, we show that 7-d exposure to 10&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/L of the BPA metabolite, 4-methyl-2,4-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)pent-1-ene (MBP), and not the same exposure to the parental molecule BPA, alters the liver proteome of male Cyprinodon variegatus fish. Different physiological and environmental conditions leading to biotransformation of BPA to MBP may partly explain the conflicting results so far reported for in vivo BPA exposures. The pattern of alteration induced by MBP is similar to that caused by estradiol, and indicative of estrogenic endocrine disruption. MBP enhanced ribosomal activity, protein synthesis and transport, with upregulation of 91% of the ribosome-related proteins, and 12 proteins whose expression is regulated by estrogen-responsive elements, including vitellogenin and zona pellucida. Whey acidic protein (WAP) was the protein most affected by MBP exposure (FC&#xa0;=&#xa0;68). This result points at WAP as novel biomarker for xenoestrogens.

### Keywords
4-methyl-2, Bpa, Sheepshead minnow, Cyprinodon variegatus, Endocrine disruption, Mbp, 4-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)pent-1-ene

### Affiliations
University of Vigo
Departament of Biochemestry, Genetics and Immunology, University of Vigo, Spain

### Submitter
Alexandre M Schönemann

### Lab Head
Dr Angel P. Diz
Departament of Biochemestry, Genetics and Immunology, University of Vigo, Spain


