### Accession
PXD002028

### Title
Tissue-specific Proteogenomic Analysis of Plutella xylostella Larval Midgut Using a Multi-algorithm Pipeline

### Description
Plutella xylostella is the major cosmopolitan pest of brassica and other crucifer crops, the larval midgut of which is a dynamic organ that interfaces with a divers earray of physiological and toxicological processes. The draft sequence of the P.xylostella genome was recently released, but its annotation remains challenging because of the low coverage of this branch of life.Peptide sequencing by computational assignment of tandem mass spectra to a database of putative protein sequences provides an independent approach to confirm or refute protein prediction, which has been termed proteogenomics. In this study we carried out an in-depth proteogenomic analysis using shotgun HPLC-ESI-MS/MS approach with a multi-algorithme pipeline to complement genome annotation in the P.xylostella larval midgut.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein extraction: Midguts were dissected carefully from the larvae in 4th instar.<br>2. SDS-PAGE separation of the proteins: One-hundred micrograms of the midgut proteins was denatured and subjected to SDS-PAGE.<br>3. In-Gel Trypsin Digestion: The protein lane of the stained gel was cut into 20 pieces in equal size, which was conducted according to Shevchenko.<br>4. LC-MSMS Data Acqusition: Chromatography was performed using a surveyor LC system.The effluent peptides from the reverse phas column was analyzed by an ESI mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos).

### Data Protocol
Data from LC-MSMS were searched by two databases in a multi-algorithm pipeline. Database1 consisted of GDP and PDB. Database2 consisted of ASDB and PDB. Peptides identified from Database1 would be further analyzed for gene fixes and found new genes, while peptides identified from Database2 would be further analyzed for Alternative Splicing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plutella xylostella, Msms, Proteogenomic, Proteome

### Affiliations
Department of Entomology,Institute of Vegetables and Flowers,Chinese Academy of Agriculture Sciences,Beijing,100081,China
Department of Entomology, Institute of Vegetables and Flowers, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100081, China

### Submitter
Xun Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Xun Zhu
Department of Entomology,Institute of Vegetables and Flowers,Chinese Academy of Agriculture Sciences,Beijing,100081,China


