### Accession
PXD018572

### Title
A mass spectrometry-based proteome map of drug action in lung cancer cell lines Part 4

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based discovery proteomics is an essential tool for the proximal read-out of cellular drug action. Here, we used a robust proteomic workflow to rapidly and systematically profile the proteomes of five cell lines in response to > 50 drugs. We found that aggregating millions of quantitative protein-drug associations substantially improved the mechanism of action (MoA) deconvolution of single compounds. For example, MoA specificity increased after removal of proteins which frequently responded to drugs and the aggregation of proteome changes across multiple cell lines resolved compound effects on proteostasis. These characteristics were further leveraged to demonstrate efficient target identification of protein degraders. Moreover, we followed up on selected proteomic findings and showed that the inhibition of mitochondrial function is an off-target mechanism of the clinical MEK inhibitor PD184352 and that Ceritinib, an FDA approved drug in lung cancer, modulates autophagy. Overall, this study demonstrates that large-scale proteome perturbation profiling can be a useful addition to the drug discovery toolbox.

### Sample Protocol
Drug treatment in 96 well plates; 12 DMSO controls spotted throughput the plate; 3 replicates per inhibitor; Cell culture in 96 well plate; Lysis in 5% SDS; SP3 magnetic bead-based sample cleanup in 96 well; AssayMap-based C18 desalting; single shot proteomic measurements.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant using a match time library and MS1 acquisition in m/z segments. Peptide and protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1339. MS2 data were searched against the Swissprot reference database (human proteins, 42,233 entries; downloaded 16.08.2017) using the embedded search engine Andromeda. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification; Oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the matching-between-runs option (0.4 min match time window) was enabled. Search results were filtered for a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, 1 % peptide and protein false discovery rate. The fractionated match time library data and the single proteome measurements were processed in separate parameter groups. For the analysis to work properly, it is essential that the option “require MS/MS for LFQ comparisons” is unchecked to allow transfer of identified peptides from the match time library. Importantly, no other modifications to the software are required for the analysis of segmented MS1 runs. Cell line datasets were processed individually in order to confine false positive peptide retention time matches.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based discovery proteomics is an essential tool for the proximal readout of cellular drug action. Here, we apply a robust proteomic workflow to rapidly profile the proteomes of five lung cancer cell lines in response to more than 50 drugs. Integration of millions of quantitative protein-drug associations substantially improved the mechanism of action (MoA) deconvolution of single compounds. For example, MoA specificity increased after removal of proteins that frequently responded to drugs and the aggregation of proteome changes across cell lines resolved compound effects on proteostasis. We leveraged these findings to demonstrate efficient target identification of chemical protein degraders. Aggregating drug response across cell lines also revealed that one-quarter of compounds modulated the abundance of one of their known protein targets. Finally, the proteomic data led us to discover that inhibition of mitochondrial function is an off-target mechanism of the MAP2K1/2 inhibitor PD184352 and that the ALK inhibitor ceritinib modulates autophagy.

### Keywords
Perturbation profiling, Proteomics, Drug discovery, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Merck

### Submitter
Benjamin Ruprecht

### Lab Head
Dr An Chi
Merck


