### Accession
PXD030166

### Title
Aggregation under genotoxic conditions in HEK293T and U2OS cells

### Description
This dataset consists of 2 independent experiments. The first research aim was to identify the proteins that aggregate in HEK293T cells treated with the chemotherapeutic agent camptothecin (CPT), the second to identify the proteins that aggregate in U2OS cells after a loss of the checkpoint kinase ATM. For the first experiment, cells were treated for 24 hours with vehicle (DMSO) or CPT, left to recover for 48 hours, and harvested. For the second experiment, wild-type and ATM KO cells were grown for 72 hours and harvested. For both experiments, aggregated proteins were isolated by a differential detergent fractionation protocol, which ultimately resulted in a 1% SDS insoluble protein fraction. These proteins were solubilized in 8M urea.

### Sample Protocol
After solubilization, samples were reduced (dithiothreitol 25 mM, 37 ºC, 30 minutes), alkylated (Iodoacetamide 100 mM, room temperature, 30 minutes in darkness) and trypsin digested on S-trap columns (Protifi) using their standard micro protocol (https://protifi.com/pages/protocols). After elution, samples where dried up on speed-vac and resuspended in 25 uL of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water (MS quality, Thermo). Mass spectral analysis was conducted on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Exploris. The mobile phase consisted of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B). Samples were loaded using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system onto a 75 um x 50 cm Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC nanoViper column filled with 2 µm C18 particles (Thermo Scientific) using a 120-minute LC-MS method at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min as follows: 3 % B over 3 minutes; 3 to 45 % B over 87 minutes; 45 to 80 % B over 1 minute; then wash at 80 % B over 14 minutes, 80 to 3 % B over 1 minutes and then the column was equilibrated with 3 % B for 14 minutes. For precursor peptides and fragmentation detection on the mass spectrometer, MS1 survey scans (m/z 200 to 2000) were performed at a resolution of 120,000 with a 300 % normalized AGC target. Peptide precursors from charge states 2-6 were sampled for MS2 using DDA. For MS2 scan properties, HCD was used and the fragments were analyzed in the orbitrap with a collisional energy of 30 %, resolution of 15000, Standard AGC target, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.6.7.0 was used for peptides and protein identification and quantification with a proteomic database of reviewed proteins sequences downloaded from Uniprot (08/17/2020, proteome:up000005640; reviewed:yes). Abbreviated MaxQuant settings: LFQ with minimum peptide counts (razor + unique) ≥ 2 and at least 1 unique peptide; variable modifications were Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), and Phospho (STY); Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification with Trypsin/P as the enzyme. ProteinGroup.txt from MaxQuant output was used for protein significance analysis via post-processing in R: potential contaminant and reversed protein sequences were filtered out, partial or complete missing values in either case or control replicates were imputed using a single seed, log2 transformed LFQ intensities were used for t-tests, including Benjamini-Hochberg corrected, p-adjusted values. Log2 fold-change for each protein record was calculated by subtracting the average log2 LFQ intensity across all replicates in control samples from the average log2 LFQ intensity across all replicates in case samples. To mitigate imputation-induced artifacts among significant proteins, only significant proteins detected and quantified in at least two replicates were considered: p-adjusted value ≤ 0.05 and, for cases (log2 fold-change ≥ 1, replicates with non-imputed data ≥ 2), or for controls (log2 fold-change ≤ -1, replicates with non-imputed data ≥ 2).

### Publication Abstract
A loss of the checkpoint kinase ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) leads to impairments in the DNA damage response, and in humans causes cerebellar neurodegeneration, and an increased risk of cancer. A loss of ATM is also associated with increased protein aggregation. The relevance and characteristics of this aggregation are still incompletely understood. Moreover, it is unclear to what extent other genotoxic conditions can trigger protein aggregation as well. Here, we show that targeting ATM, but also ATR or DNA topoisomerases, results in the widespread aggregation of a metastable, disease-associated subfraction of the proteome. Aggregation-prone model substrates, including Huntingtin exon 1 containing an expanded polyglutamine repeat, aggregate faster under these conditions. This increased aggregation results from an overload of chaperone systems, which lowers the cell-intrinsic threshold for proteins to aggregate. In line with this, we find that inhibition of the HSP70 chaperone system further exacerbates the increased protein aggregation. Moreover, we identify the molecular chaperone HSPB5 as a cell-specific suppressor of it. Our findings reveal that various genotoxic conditions trigger widespread protein aggregation in a manner that is highly reminiscent of the aggregation occurring in situations of proteotoxic stress and in proteinopathies.

### Keywords
Human, Aggregation, Camptothecin, Insoluble, Cpt, U2os, Genotoxic

### Affiliations
ERIBA-UMCG
Laboratory of Macromolecules and Interactomes,ERIBA-UMCG, Groningen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Luciano Di Stefano

### Lab Head
Dr John LaCava
Laboratory of Macromolecules and Interactomes,ERIBA-UMCG, Groningen, The Netherlands


