### Accession
PXD012157

### Title
Proteomic proximity mapping by rapamycin-dependent targeting of APEX2 to tail-anchored membrane proteins

### Description
Enhanced ascorbate peroxidase 2 (APEX2) can be used as a genetic tag that produces short-lived yet highly reactive biotin species, allowing the modification of proteins that interact with or are in very close proximity to the tagged protein, ideally within a confined compartment. Biotinylated proteins can be isolated using immobilized streptavidin and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Here we used rapamycin-dependent targeting of APEX2 to tail-anchored proteins of the endoplasmic reticulum and of the inner nuclear membrane (INM). In combination with stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), our novel approach (rapamycin- and APEX-dependent identification of proteins by SILAC, or RAPIDS) allowed the identification of proteins that are in close proximity to the prototypic INM-protein emerin and the vesicle-trafficking protein VAPB. In addition to well-known interaction partners, several new potential binding partners were identified. In RAPIDS, the comparison of plus/minus-rapamycin conditions allows a clear distinction between specific and non-specific hits.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reconstituted  in 1× NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Invitrogen) and separated on 4-12 % NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigels (Invitrogen). Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue, and each lane sliced into 11-12 equidistant bands. After washing, gel slices were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight. The resulting peptide mixtures were then extracted , dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/ (v:v) and analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) as described previously {Atanassov, 2013}

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant Software version 1.5.0.0 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Proteins were identified against the combined M. musculus and R. norvegicus UniProt reference proteomes (v2016.07)  along with a set of common lab contaminants. The Arginine R10 and Lysine K8 labels including the ‘Re-quantify’ option were specified for relative protein quantitation. Perseus Software version 1.5.0.15 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) was used for statistical evaluation of relative protein quantitation values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vapb, Apex, Mass spectrometry, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; University Medical Center Goettingen


