### Accession
PXD033256

### Title
Dichloroacetate and reduced oxygen utilization induced metabolic regulation of the heart: A focus on the cardiac mitochondrial proteome

### Description
Myocardial compensatory mechanisms stimulated by reduced oxygen utilization caused by streptozotocin-induced diabetes mellitus (D) and treated with the dichloroacetate (DCA) are presumably associated with the regulation of mitochondria. We aimed to promote the understanding of key signaling pathways and identify effectors involved in signal transduction.

### Sample Protocol
A volume of mitochondria containing 250 µg of proteins was dried in a centrifugal SpeedVac concentrator. The dried sample was diluted with 8 M urea and 100 mM NH4HCO3, achieving a urea concentration of 6.4 M in the homogenate. Dithiothreitol (DTT) at a concentration of 30 mM was added as a reducing solution (5 mM DTT in the sample). The solution was then incubated for 30 min at 56 °C in a Thermal Shake lite heater (VWR, Leuven, Belgium). The reduction was followed by alkylation via the addition of 105 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (15 mM of IAA in the sample), with a subsequent 20 min of incubation in the dark at room temperature. The process of alkylation was stopped by adding 30 mM of DTT to the sample, achieving a concentration of DTT 5 mM. The urea in the sample was diluted to 1.4 M by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3. The proteins were digested by trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) at a ratio of 1:25 (a concentration of trypsin 0.2 µg/µL) overnight at 37 °C. The next day, formic acid was added to a concentration of 1% in the sample. The samples were further centrifuged at 14,000 g  and desalted by using C18-U SPE columns (Strata, Phenomenex).

### Data Protocol
An Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany) with an Amazon SL, electrospray ionization (ESI) mass spectrometer and a 3D ion trap mass analyzer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) were used for protein analysis. The mobile phase consisted of component A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile (ACN)) and component B (0.1% formic acid in 95% ACN). The loading phase consisted of 0.05% formic acid in 2% ACN. The mobile phase flow rate was 0.4 μL/min with a gradient in length: 0%–35% B for 255 min followed by 10 min at 90% B. The analyzed samples were separated on a 75 μm × 300 mm column with a 3 μm particle size at 100 Å and 40 °C. The spectrometer parameters were set as follows: 1450 V capillary voltage, 0.4 Ψ atomizer pressure, 3.0 L/min gas flow rate, 150 °C gas temperature, positive polarity, and scan range 50−2200 m/z at a scan rate of 8100 m/z/sec.  To define input LC-MS/MS methods and describe analyzed samples, the HyStar program was used. The obtained spectra and chromatograms were processed using Data Analysis software, and correlation analysis was performed by Proteinscape software. The Mascot server 2.5.0. was used as an annotated search library for protein identification.  Analysis of proteomic datasets: In this study, we defined strict inclusion criteria for quantification. Samples were prepared as technical duplicates for 6 biological replicates in every group. Every sample had 2 runs of mass spectra. We evaluated proteins which occurred in intersection of all 4 groups. The protein abundancies were evaluated by their exponentially modified Protein Abundance Indexes (emPAI), parameters used for relative protein quantitation of proteomic datasets.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dichloroacetate, Mitochondrial proteome, Cardioprotection, Heart mitochondria, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Centre of Experimental Medicine SAS
Department of Biology, Institute for Heart Research, Centre of Experimental Medicine, Slovak Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Miroslav Ferko

### Lab Head
Dr Miroslav Ferko
Department of Biology, Institute for Heart Research, Centre of Experimental Medicine, Slovak Academy of Sciences


