### Accession
PXD020722

### Title
Urinary proteome profiling in Parkinson’s disease

### Description
The prevalence of Parkinson's disease (PD) is increasing but the development of novel treatment strategies and therapeutics altering the course of the disease would benefit from specific, sensitive and non-invasive biomarkers to detect PD early. Here, we describe a scalable and sensitive proteomics workflow for urinary proteome profiling by combining high-throughput sample preparation with state-of-the-art mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. Our workflow enabled the reproducible quantification of more than 2,000 proteins in more than 200 urine samples using minimal volumes from two independent cohorts. The urinary proteome was significantly different between PD patients and healthy controls as well as between LRRK2 G2019S carriers and non-carriers in both cohorts. Interestingly, our data revealed lysosomal dysregulation in individuals with the LRRK2 G2019S mutation. Machine learning on the urinary proteome data alone classified mutation status and especially disease manifestation in mutation carriers remarkably well (ROC AUCs 0.87 and 0.94, respectively), identifying VGF, ENPEP and other PD-associated proteins as the most discriminating features. Our results validate urinary proteomics as a valuable strategy for biomarker discovery and patient stratification in PD.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ion source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). Purified peptides were separated at 60 °C on 50cm columns with an inner diameter of 75µm packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9µm resin (Dr.Maisch GmbH). Mobile phases A and B were 99.9/0.1% water/formic acid (v/v) and 80/20/0.1% acetonitrile/water/formic acid (v/v/v). For the LCC cohort, the flow rate was constant at 300 nl/min and the initial concentration of 5% B was linearly increased to 30% B within 36 minutes, and then increased further to 95% within 6 min with a 3 min plateau at the end. For the Columbia cohort, the flow rate was constant at 350 nl/min and the initial concentration of 5% B was linearly increased to 30% B within 35 minutes, and then increased further to 95% within 5 min with a 5 min plateau at the end.  MS data was acquired in the data-independent acquisition (DIA) scan mode for single-shot patient samples, using the MaxQuant Live software and spectral processing with phase-constrained spectrum deconvolution (phi-SDM) [84, 85]. Full MS scans were acquired in the range of m/z 300–1,650 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 and the automatic gain control (AGC) set to 3e6. For the Columbia cohort, additionally two BoxCar scans with 12 isolation windows each and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 were acquired [86] . Full MS events were followed by 33 MS/MS windows (LCC cohort) or 58 MS/MS windows (Columbia cohort) per cycle in the range of m/z 300–1,650 at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200. For the LCC cohort, higher-energy collisional dissociation MS/MS scans were acquired with a stepped normalized collision energy of 25/27.5/30 and ions were accumulated to reach an AGC target value of 3e6 or for a maximum of 30 ms. For the Columbia cohort, higher-energy collisional dissociation MS/MS scans were acquired with a normalized collision energy of 27 and ions were accumulated to reach an AGC target value of 3e6 or for a maximum of 22 ms.  All fractionated samples including EV fractions were acquired with a top12 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) scan mode. Full MS scans were acquired in the range of m/z 300–1,650 at a resolution of 60,000 (Columbia cohort) or 120,000 (LCC cohort) at m/z 200. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6. Higher-energy collisional dissociation MS/MS scans were acquired with a normalized collision energy of 27 at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200. Precursor ions with charge states of 2-7 were isolated in a 1.4 Th window and accumulated to reach an AGC target value of 1e5 or for a maximum of 60 ms. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 20 s after the first fragmentation event.

### Data Protocol
The MS data of the fractionated pools (DDA MS data, 24 neat pool urine and 8 EV fractions) and the single shot subject samples (DIA MS data, 165 and 132 samples in Columbia and LCC, respectively) were used to generate a DDA-library and direct-DIA-library, respectively, which were computationally merged into two cohort-specific hybrid libraries using Spectronaut version 13.9.191106.43655 (Biognosys AG). For all experiments except the machine learning, the two cohorts were quantified separately in Spectronaut. A minimum of 3 and a maximum of 10 fragments was required for each peptide in the library. The hybrid spectral libraries were subsequently used to search the MS data of the single shot patient samples in the Spectronaut software. All searches were performed against the human SwissProt reference proteome of canonical and isoform sequences with 42,431 entries downloaded in July 2019. Searches used carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and acetylation of the protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines as variable modifications. Trypsin/P proteolytic cleavage rule was used, permitting a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. The Q-value cutoffs for both library generation and DIA analyses were set to 0.01. For generation of the global correlation map, the individual protein correlations with clinical parameters, and the machine learning, the Q-value data filtering setting in Spectronaut was set to ‘Qvalue’ to use every peptide passing the Q-value threshold for the protein group quantification. For all other analyses, the setting was set to ‘Qvalue percentile’ with a cutoff of 25%, to use only those peptides for the protein quantification that passed the Q-value threshold in at least 25% of all analyzed samples. The ‘Qvalue percentile’ setting results in a complete data matrix with no missing values, as the noise is quantified and reported if the peptide did not pass the Qvalue threshold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Body fluid, Biomarker, Neurodegeneration, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Dia, Mass spectrometry, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Head of Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Head of Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


