### Accession
PXD022875

### Title
Lysine acylations of humangut microbiome

### Description
In this study we developed an analytical workflow by integrating a serial immunoaffinity enrichment with high resolution mass spectrometry and unrestricted metaproteomic database search strategy, which enables efficient and comprehensive identification and quantification of lysine acetylation, propinoylation and succinylation in microbiomes.

### Sample Protocol
Microbial cells were harvesred from fresh stool samples collected from healthy adults. Proteins were extracted using ultrasonication and lysis buffer containing 4% (w/v) SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and protease inhibitor (one tablet of Roche cOmpleteTM mini per 10 ml lysis buffer). Approximately 10~15 mg of proteins were then used for a sequential digestion using lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C; Wako Pure Chemical Corp., Osaka, Japan) and trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp., Lakewood, NJ, USA). Briefly, proteins were first reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature; then after dilution the digestion was performed using 1 mAU of Lys-C per 50 ug protein for 4 hours followed by the addition of 1 ug of trypsin per 50 ug protein for overnight at room temperature with agitation. The resulting digests were then desalted using Waters Sep-Pak® Vac 3cc (200 mg) tC18 cartridges and eluted using 80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid. The eluents were then dried using a SpeedVac™ vacuum concentrator for further immunoaffinity enrichment using Cell signaling technology (CST) PTMScan® acetyl-lysine (Kac), succinyl-lysine (Ksucc), and propionyl-lysine (Kprop) motif kits.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data processing was performed using MetaLab  pFind workflow was developed and applied for the identification and quantification of both modified and unmodified peptides/proteins, including lysine acylated ones. Briefly, in the first step, spectra from all raw files were extracted and redundant spectra removed through spectral clustering using PRIDE Cluster. The clustered spectra were then searched against the human fecal microbial Integrated Gene Catalog database (IGC) using Open-pFind algorithm and all the resulting protein hits were used for generating a refined database for a second database search. The identification results were filtered at peptide level with FDR threshold of 1%. Proteins were kept with ≥1 confidently identified peptides and a FDR <1%.  Quantification of all identified modified or non-modified peptides was performed using FlashLFQ.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acylations are important post-translational modifications that are present in both eukaryotes and prokaryotes and regulate diverse cellular functions. Our knowledge of the microbiome lysine acylation remains limited due to the lack of efficient analytical and bioinformatics methods for complex microbial communities. Here, we show that the serial enrichment using motif antibodies successfully captures peptides containing lysine acetylation, propionylation, and succinylation from human gut microbiome samples. A new bioinformatic workflow consisting of an unrestricted database search confidently identified &gt;60,000 acetylated, and &#x223c;20,000 propionylated and succinylated gut microbial peptides. The characterization of these identified modification-specific metaproteomes, i.e., meta-PTMomes, demonstrates that lysine acylations are differentially distributed in microbial species with different metabolic capabilities. This study provides an analytical framework for the study of lysine acylations in the microbiome, which enables functional microbiome studies at the post-translational level.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Lysine acylation, Ptm, Microbiome

### Affiliations
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
University of Ottawa


