### Accession
PXD017078

### Title
Nanopillar surface mediates antibacterial effects via cell impedance, penetration and induction of oxidative stress

### Description
Abstract. The adhesion of bacteria to medical implants and formation of biofilms is a growing healthcare problem that accounts for a significant proportion of hospital-acquired infections globally. Insects, including cicada and dragonfly, have evolved nanoprotrusions-protruding arrays on their wings that rupture bacteria on contact. This has inspired the design of antibacterial implant surfaces with insect wing mimetic nanopillarsarrays . Here we characterise the physiological and morphological responses of bacteria to dragonfly wing mimetic nanowirenanopillars arrays, with the aim of determining the mechanistic basis for antibacterial activity. Dragonfly wing mimetic nanowirenanopillars arrays induce deformation and penetration of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial envelopes, but do not rupture or lyse bacteria. NanowireNanopillars also have capacity to impede bacterial division and trigger reactive oxygen species production oxidative stress responses, leading to the increased abundance of oxidative stress proteins. NanowireNanopillar-induced oxidative stress represents a novel antibacterial mechanism of biomimetic nanotopographies .arrays Better understanding of this could prove invaluable for enhancing the bactericidal performance of nanotextured materials for next generation antibacterial medical implants

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from S. aureus and E. coli. Titanium discs (25 cm2) were placed inside sterile petri dishes (94 mm by 16 mm) and were inoculated with 1 mL S. aureus or E. coli suspensions containing 107-108 cells. Titanium discs were incubated for 24 hours at 37°C under static conditions inside a humidity chamber. Following incubation, titanium samples were rinsed in 20 mL Tris-HCl buffer to recover bacteria. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (5000 rpm, 10 minutes) and resuspended in Tris-HCl. To extract S. aureus proteins, Tris-HCl (200 µL) was supplemented with 200 µg/mL lysostaphin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and suspensions were incubated for 60 minutes at 37°C before cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 13,300 rpm for 20 minutes at 4°C. For E. coli proteins, cell suspensions (500 µL) were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and transferred to a pre-cooled 5 mL Teflon flask containing one tungsten carbide bead. Homogenisation of frozen bacteria was performed at 2000 rpm for 2.5 minutes, using a Micro-Dismembrator (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany). This resultant powder was resuspended in 1 mL Tris-HCl (pH 7.2) and cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 13,300 rpm for 20 minutes at 4°C. Soluble S. aureus and E. coli protein fractions were then transferred to an Eppendorf tube and stored at -80°C. TMT labelling and high pH reversed-phase chromatography. An equal volume of each protein sample was digested overnight at 37°C with 2.5 µg trypsin, labelled with TMT ten plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the labelled samples pooled. An aliquot of the pooled sample was evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 5% formic acid and then desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, USA). Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was again evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM ammonium hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes. The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry. High pH reversed-phase fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (v/v) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (v/v) acetonitrile / 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 min, 6-15% B over 58 min, 15-32% B over 58 min, 32-40% B over 5 min, 40-90% B over 1 min, held at 90% B for 6 min and then reduced to 1% B over 1 min) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0 kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200,000 and a max injection time of 50 ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60 s +/- 10 ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2 m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10,000, max injection time of 70 ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50,000 resolution with an AGC target of 50,000 and a max injection time of 105 ms. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield. Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Data Analysis. The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt S. aureus (strain Newman) database (downloaded October 2018; 2584 entries) or the Uniprot E. coli (strain K12) database (downloaded February 2019; 4469 entries) using the SEQUEST algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214 Da) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163 Da ) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled, and all data were filtered to satisfy a false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. Based on the protein abundance values from three biological replicates of each sample, a Student’s t-test was used to determine the signiﬁcance of protein abundance fold changes between S. aureus and E. coli incubated on NW-850-5 and control surface. Proteins with P ≤ 0.05 were deemed significant. Blast2Go software was used to categorise S. aureus and E. coli DEPs based on GO terms; DEPs were grouped by Level 2 GO. Protein–protein interactions were investigated using the functional protein association network tool (STRING v11) within Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
Some insects, such as dragonflies, have evolved nanoprotrusions on their wings that rupture bacteria on contact. This has inspired the design of antibacterial implant surfaces with insect-wing mimetic nanopillars made of synthetic materials. Here, we characterise the physiological and morphological effects of mimetic titanium nanopillars on bacteria. The nanopillars induce deformation and penetration of the Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial cell envelope, but do not rupture or lyse bacteria. They can also inhibit bacterial cell division, and trigger production of reactive oxygen species and increased abundance of oxidative stress proteins. Our results indicate that nanopillars' antibacterial activities may be mediated by oxidative stress, and do not necessarily require bacterial lysis.

### Keywords
Nanopillars, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Bristol Dental School, University of Bristol

### Submitter
Joshua Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Bo Su
Bristol Dental School, University of Bristol


