### Accession
PXD019639

### Title
The protein interaction landscape of breast cancer

### Description
Cancers have been associated with diverse sets of genomic alterations, many of which are rare with uncertain significance. To understand the cellular mechanisms impacted by such alterations in breast invasive carcinoma, we have applied affinity-purification mass spectrometry to delineate comprehensive biophysical interaction networks for 40 frequently altered breast cancer proteins. These networks interconnect and enrich for common and rare cancer mutations; they are also substantially re-wired by mutations, including in TP53 and PIK3CA, and across cancerous and non-cancerous cell contexts. Our analysis identifies a novel AKT-interacting protein, S100A3, which we find activates AKT signaling and is predictive of clinical response to AKT inhibitors. Similarly, UBE2N emerges as a BRCA1 interactor predictive of clinical response to inhibition of PARP. Finally, we show that Spinophilin interacts with and dephosphorylates BRCA1 to promote DNA double strand break repair. Thus, cancer protein interaction landscapes provide a framework for recognizing oncogenic drivers and drug vulnerabilities.

### Sample Protocol
For AP-MS experiments, samples were resuspended in 15 μL of MS loading buffer (4% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 2μL were separated by a reversed-phase gradient over a nanoflow 75μm ID x 25cm long picotip column packed with 1.9μM C18 particles (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were directly injected over the course of a 75 min acquisition into a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo), or over the course of a 90 min acquisition into an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. For analysis of endogenous protein abundances in parental cell lines, ~500ng of peptides was separated over a 180 min gradient using the same column as for AP-MS experiments, and directly injected into a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched against the uniprot canonical isoforms of the human proteome (downloaded March 21, 2018), and using the default settings in MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10), with a match-between-runs enabled (Cox and Mann, 2008). Peptides and proteins were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant, and identified proteins were then subjected to protein-protein interaction scoring. To quantify changes in interactions between WT and mutant baits, or differences in endogenous protein abundances between parental cell lines, we used a label free quantification approach in which statistical analysis was performed using MSstats (Choi et al., 2014) from within the artMS Bioconductor R-package.

### Publication Abstract
Cancers have been associated with a diverse array of genomic alterations. To help mechanistically understand such alterations in breast-invasive carcinoma, we applied affinity purification&#x2013;mass spectrometry to delineate comprehensive biophysical interaction networks for 40 frequently altered breast cancer (BC) proteins, with and without relevant mutations, across three human breast cell lines. These networks identify cancer-specific protein-protein interactions (PPIs), interconnected and enriched for common and rare cancer mutations, that are substantially rewired by the introduction of key BC mutations. Our analysis identified BPIFA1 and SCGB2A1 as PIK3CA-interacting proteins, which repress PI3K-AKT signaling, and uncovered USP28 and UBE2N as functionally relevant interactors of BRCA1. We also show that the protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit spinophilin interacts with and regulates dephosphorylation of BRCA1 to promote DNA double-strand break repair. Thus, PPI landscapes provide a powerful framework for mechanistically interpreting disease genomic data and can identify valuable therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction network, Brca1, Proteomics, Spinophilin, Breast cancer, Akt

### Affiliations
University of California San Francisco
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology Quantitative Biosciences Institute University of California San Francisco San Francisco, CA 94158, USA

### Submitter
Minkyu Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology Quantitative Biosciences Institute University of California San Francisco San Francisco, CA 94158, USA


