### Accession
PXD001208

### Title
Exposure of Mycobacterium tuberculosis to thioridazine alters the cell envelope permeability; an alternative mechanism for the synergistic effects with other antibiotics

### Description
The emergence of multidrug resistant tuberculosis and the increasing level of resistance urges the search for alternative drugs in treatment. Several neuroleptics, like thioridazine, reveal activity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Thioridazine was even successfully applied in compassionate therapy of extensively drug resistant tuberculosis in patients when added to other second and third line antibiotics. The synergistic effects between thioridazine and other anti-tuberculosis drugs is usually assigned to the inhibition of efflux pumps by thioridazine. Using an unbiased proteomic approach, we set out to unravel the molecular mechanism of this potential new anti-tuberculosis component by examining the impact of continuous thioridazine exposure on the proteome of M. tuberculosis. We discovered that under the influence of thioridazine several proteins involved in the maintenance of the cell wall permeability barrier are differentially regulated, while none of the known mycobacterial efflux pumps was differentially regulated on the protein level. By assessing accumulation of fluorescent dyes in M. tuberculosis over time, we demonstrated that long-term drug exposure of M. tuberculosis indeed affected the mycobacterial cell envelope and increased the permeability towards both hydrophilic and hydrophobic compounds. Furthermore, we demonstrated that treatment of M. tuberculosis with thioridazine altered the composition of the plasma membrane. Thioridazine induced an increase in cell envelope permeability, and thereby the enhanced uptake of compounds,  this could explain the previously reported synergistic effects between thioridazine and other anti-tuberculosis drugs. Although the hypothesis of higher intercellular drug concentrations by THZ has not changed in this study, the more exact knowledge on its mode of action is a major step forward. This new insight in the molecular mechanism of this anti-tuberculosis compound could facilitate further development of this class of drugs for application in drug therapy of multidrug resistant tuberculosis. In fact, the efficacy of many existing drugs could be improved significantly.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, M. tuberculosis H37Rv was cultured in the presence or absence of THZ until mid-logarithmic phase was reached. Harvesting of the cells was performed by centrifugation following three washes with ice-cold PBS. The cells were mechanically lysed using bead-beating followed by protein digestion using the FASP procedure. Protein digests were provided with a dimethyl mass label, combined and fractionated using SCX. Fifteen fractions were taken, lyophilized and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantitation was accomplished using MaxQuant 1.4.0.3. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01. Minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. The first search was performed using 20 ppm, while the main search was conducted with 10 ppm. Search of MS/MS spectra was performed with 20 ppm using the Andromeda search engine. Both the first search and the main search were carried out against a database of M. tuberculosis H37Rv (3,996 entries). In total, 262 common contaminants were included in the searches by Andromeda. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine without proline restriction. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Variable modifications included N-terminal protein acetylation, methionine oxidation and corresponding dimethyl labels. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification. Proteins considered for quantification required a cumulative peptide count of two, including both unique and razor peptides. Proteins identified by site, which matched against the reverse database or were identified as a contamination, were excluded for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The increasing occurrence of multidrug resistant tuberculosis exerts a major burden on treatment of this infectious disease. Thioridazine, previously used as a neuroleptic, is active against extensively drug resistant tuberculosis when added to other second- and third-line antibiotics. By quantitatively studying the proteome of thioridazine-treated Mycobacterium tuberculosis, we discovered the differential abundance of several proteins that are involved in the maintenance of the cell-envelope permeability barrier. By assessing the accumulation of fluorescent dyes in mycobacterial cells over time, we demonstrate that long-term drug exposure of M. tuberculosis indeed increased the cell-envelope permeability. The results of the current study demonstrate that thioridazine induced an increase in cell-envelope permeability and thereby the enhanced uptake of compounds. These results serve as a novel explanation to the previously reported synergistic effects between thioridazine and other antituberculosis drugs. This new insight in the working mechanism of this antituberculosis compound could open novel perspectives of future drug-administration regimens in combinational therapy.

### Keywords
Thioridazine, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Dept. IHB-E3Q Mass spectrometry group
LUMC

### Submitter
Jeroen de Keijzer

### Lab Head
Dr Peter van Veelen
Dept. IHB-E3Q Mass spectrometry group


