### Accession
PXD018187

### Title
Effect of Dhps deletion on macrophage activation by Helicobacter pylori

### Description
Bone marrow-derived macrophages from Dhps fl/fl mice and mice with specific deletion of Dhps in myeloid cells were infected with Helicobacter pylori PMSS1 for 24 hours. Cells were washed and lysed. Proteins were analyzed by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ).

### Sample Protocol
Lysates were digested and peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagents. Samples were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Q Exactive Plus or Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against a database containing Mus musculus and Helicobacter pylori (strain 26695) subsets of the UniprotKB protein database using Spectrum Mill. Autovalidation was performed using a FDR threshold of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Innate responses of myeloid cells defend against pathogenic bacteria via inducible effectors. Deoxyhypusine synthase (DHPS) catalyzes the transfer of the N-moiety of spermidine to the lysine-50 residue of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A (EIF5A) to form the amino acid hypusine. Hypusinated EIF5A (EIF5A<sup>Hyp</sup>) transports specific mRNAs to ribosomes for translation. We show that DHPS is induced in macrophages by two gastrointestinal pathogens, Helicobacter pylori and Citrobacter rodentium, resulting in enhanced hypusination of EIF5A. EIF5A<sup>Hyp</sup> was also increased in gastric macrophages from patients with H.&#xa0;pylori gastritis. Furthermore, we identify the bacteria-induced immune effectors regulated by hypusination. This set of proteins includes essential constituents of antimicrobial response and autophagy. Mice with myeloid cell-specific deletion of Dhps exhibit reduced EIF5A<sup>Hyp</sup> in macrophages and increased bacterial burden and inflammation. Thus, regulation of translation through hypusination is a critical hallmark of the defense of eukaryotic hosts against pathogenic bacteria.

### Keywords
Bacterial infection, Helicobacter pylori, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University Proteomics Core
Vanderbilt university

### Submitter
Kristie Lindsey Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Kristie Lindsey Rose
Vanderbilt University Proteomics Core


