### Accession
PXD036995

### Title
Tyrosine phosphorylation regulates RIPK1 activity to limit cell death and inflammation

### Description
Receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1 (RIPK1) is a cytosolic protein kinase that regulates multiple inflammatory and cell death pathways. Serine/Threonine phosphorylation of RIPK1 is known to suppress RIPK1 kinase-mediated cell death in the contexts of inflammation, infection and embryogenesis, however, regulation by tyrosine phosphorylation has not been reported. Here, we show that non-receptor tyrosine kinases Janus kinase 1 (JAK1) and SRC are able to phosphorylate RIPK1 at Y384 (Y383 in murine RIPK1), leading to suppression of TNF-induced cell death. Mice bearing a homozygous Ripk1 mutation that prevents tyrosine phosphorylation of RIPK1 (Ripk1Y383F/Y383F), develop systemic inflammation and emergency haematopoiesis. Mechanistically, Ripk1Y383F/Y383F mutation promotes RIPK1 kinase activation and enhances TNF-induced apoptosis and necroptosis, which is partially due to impaired recruitment and activation of MAP kinase-activated protein kinase 2 (MK2). The systemic inflammation and emergency haematopoiesis in Ripk1Y383F/Y383F mice are largely alleviated by RIPK1 kinase inhibition, and prevented by genomic deletions targeted to the upstream pathway (either to Tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 or RIPK3 and Caspase8 simultaneously). In summary, our results demonstrate that tyrosine phosphorylation of RIPK1 is critical for regulating RIPK1 activity to limit cell death and inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
1×10^7 HEK293T were seeded in ten 150 cm2 petri dishes per condition. The next day, cells were over-expressed FLAG-hRIPK1 and then immunoprecipitated according to the TNFR1 complex1 IP protocol (see in immunoprecipitation section). After the final wash step in TritonX-100 lysis buffer, the beads were additionally washed five times in ice-cold PBS. And then the immunocomplexes were separated by SDS-PAGE gel. The gel bands of interest were excised from the gel, reduced with 25 mM of DTT and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide which was followed by in-gel digestion with sequencing grade modified trypsin at 37℃overnight. The peptides were extracted twice with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 50% acetonitrile aqueous solution for 30 min and then dried in a speedvac. Peptides were redissolved in 25μl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 6μl of extracted peptides were analyzed by Thermo orbitrap fusion.

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, the peptides were separated by a 60 min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.30 µl/min with EASY-nLC 1000 system, which was directly interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The analytical column was a home-made fused silica capillary column (75 µm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C-18 resin (300 Å, 5 µm, Varian, Lexington, MA). Mobile phase consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur3.0 software and there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the orbitrap (350-1550 m/z, 120,000 resolution) followed by top-speed MS/MS scans in the Orbitrap. The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the target protein database from UniProt proteome (human20191231) using an in-house Proteome Discoverer (Version PD1.4, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA). The search criteria were as follows: full chymotrypsin specificity was required; four missed cleavage was allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) were set as the fixed modifications; the oxidation (M) and 54.01063Da (F) was set as the variable modification; precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm for all MS acquired in an orbitrap mass analyzer; and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02Da for all MS2 spectra acquired. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 15,000, Isolation window was set as 2.0 m/z, AGC target set as 1.00e5, dynamic exclusion was set as 15.0s, TopN was set as 40). The gas phase fragmentation was done by HCD (Resolution 60,000, AGC target set as 3.00e6, Scan range set as 200 to 1800 m/z and Maximum injection time was set as 20ms). The minimum length of peptides considered for proteome analysis is 6 amino acids. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Fixed value PSM validator provided by PD. When the q value was smaller than 1%, the peptide spectrum match (PSM) was considered to be correct. FDR was determined based on PSMs when searched against the reverse, decoy database. Peptides only assigned to a given protein group were considered as unique. The false discovery rate (FDR) was also set to 0.01 for protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Cell death, Inflammation, Ripk1

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
Institute for Immunology, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

### Submitter
Hailin Tu

### Lab Head
Dr Xin Lin
Institute for Immunology, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.


