### Accession
PXD042471

### Title
The Drosophila acetyltransferase chameau (chm) promotes starvation resilience at the expense of a shortened life span

### Description
Proteins involved in cellular metabolism and molecular regulation have been shown to extend lifespan in various laboratory organisms. However, for any improvement in aging to confer an evolutionary benefit, organisms must also be able to survive under non-ideal conditions. Earlier, we discovered that the loss of chm function and reduced activity resulted in several notable effects. Firstly, flies with a loss-of-function allele of chm exhibited an extended healthy lifespan when provided with an unrestricted food supply, indicating that chm plays a role in lifespan regulation. In this study, we demonstrate that these flies also experience a significant reduction in weight and decreased starvation resistance compared to flies with normal chm function. Furthermore, based on observations from transcriptomic, proteomic, and acetylome data, we hypothesize that chm is important for regulating metabolism in Drosophila, particularly in energy storage and utilization. Moreover, we demonstrate that reduced chm activity affects carbohydrate metabolism in flies at the basal level and during changes in nutrient status. In summary, this study suggests that chm is also required for starvation resilience by regulating carbohydrate metabolism, and the previously observed increase in survival time likely accompanies the inability to prepare for and cope with nutrient stress. Finally, as the ability to adapt and survive in a food-restricted environment was likely a stronger evolutionary driver than the ability to live a long life, chm is still present in the organism's genome despite its apparent deleterious effect on lifespan.

### Sample Protocol
Flies for the fed and starved conditions were transferred to a 2.0 ml Eppendorf, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, shaken to separate heads, bodies and wings/legs and passed through two sieves (Analysensieb width: 710 um, width: 355 um) on top of each other.  Approximately 1000 male fly heads were collected and homogeneized in an electrical homogeneizer with 250 μl of lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM Na-Butyrate and 60 uM Sirtinol). After homogeneization, sample volume was made up to 700 μl with lysis buffer. The obtained homogenate was rotated for 30 min (8 revolutions per min) at 4°C. Samples were then sonicated in a Bioruptor for 6 cycles (10 s ON, 45 s OFF) and again rotated for 10 min (8 revolutions per min) at 4°C. Centrifugation was performed at 14,000 x g and 4°C for 20 min and the supernatant was transferred to another eppendorf. This was followed by another centrifugation to remove the debris completely. The final supernatant was then transferred to a 15 ml falcon and the volume was made up to 2 ml with lysis buffer. Sample preparation for acetylome was performed with PTMScan® Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac-K] kit (Cell Signaling, 13416) and manufacturer’s protocol was followed with minor modifications. To the obtain protein extract, 1/278th volume of 1.25 M DTT was added and incubated at room temperature for 60 min, followed by 15 min incubation in dark with 1/10th volume of iodoacetamide (Merck, 8.04744.0025). The supernatant was then diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and incubated (with mixing) with 1 mg/ml trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, 175641-5G) at room temperature for overnight. Trypsin was added at 1:100 ratio with total initial protein amount. Following overnight incubation, the digestion was confirmed with SDS-PAGE and 1/20 volume of 20% TFA was added to the digested peptide solution and incubated for 15 min on ice. The lysate was then centrifuged at 1,780 x g for 15 min at RT to remove any precipitate.  For peptide purification, Sep-Pak® Light C18 cartridges (Waters, WAT023501) were connected to a 10 cc syringe and the column was pre-wet with 5 ml 100% ACN, followed by sequential washes with 1 ml, 3 ml and 6 ml of 0.1% TFA. Acidified digest was then loaded on to the column (without vacuum), followed by further washes of 1 ml, 5 ml and 6 ml with 0.1% TFA and then with 2 ml of wash buffer (0.1% TFA and 5% ACN). Elution of the peptide was carried out by washing the column with 0.1% TFA and 40% ACN. Eluted peptide was then frozen overnight at -80°C and lyophilized for at least 48 hours. Lyophilized peptide was centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 5 min at room temperature and resuspended with 1.4 ml of the IAP buffer and centrifuged again at 10,000 x g at 4°C for 5 min. Resuspended samples were then quantified by BCA. 10% of the cleared solution was taken as input for proteome. Lysine antibody beads were washed with 1 ml of 1X PBS, centrifuged at 2,000 x g, resuspended with 40 μl of 1X PBS. To the cleared solution, half the volume of antibody-bead slurry was used and incubated in a rotator for 2 hr at 4°C. Incubated samples were then centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 30 s, supernatant transferred to a new vial for further use. Beads were then washed twice with 1 ml of IAP buffer, mixed by inverting, centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 30 s, followed by similar washes, thrice with 1 ml chilled HPLC water. Peptides bound to the beads were eluted with twice by adding 55 μl of 0.15% TFA, vortexing, incubating for 10 min at room temperature and centrifuging for 30 s at 2,000 x g. Desalting of the eluted peptide was performed with AttractSPE® Disks Tips C18 column (affinisep, Tips-C18.T2.200.96). The column was first equilibrated with 50 μl 0.1% TFA twice. Input proteome and IP sample was then added to the C18, followed by washes with 0.1% TFA twice. Peptides were eluted with 10 μl of 0.1% TFA and 40% ACN, dried with vacuum concentrator and resuspended with 15 μl of 0.1% TFA for mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 15 µl of 0.1% formic acid solution and injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) separated in a 25-cm Aurora column (Ionopticks) with a 100-min gradient from 6 to 43% of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 350-1200) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 6 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 30% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 275ºC; intensity selection threshold, 3x105

### Data Protocol
Raw flies from mass spectrometry were aligned using MaxQuant1 (v2.1.3.0) with Drosophila fasta from Uniprot. Output files of proteome (proteinGroups.txt) and acetylome (Acetyl(K)sites.txt) from MaxQuant were analyzed in R environment2 primarily with DEP package15 (v1.18.0) and modified to be used for protein modification analysis. Both proteome and acetylome data was filtered such that proteins that are present in 3 of the 4 replicates of at least one condition were used taken for the analysis. Following filtering, MinProb imputation algorithm with q = 0.01 was performed to impute the missing values and limma3 based differential expression analysis was performed. Two parameters were used to obtain the significant list of proteins/sites. Intensities of acetylome were not normalized to the proteome LFQ intensities and were used directly for differential expression analysis. A stringent statistical parameter with a Q-value cut-off of 0.1 and a less stringent but one that includes both statistical and biological information, called Π-value. Π-value takes into consideration log2FoldChange and p-value to obtain a range such that Π lies between 0 and 14. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis was performed for the proteome from using the gseGO function (clusterProfiler (Yu et al, 2012)package version 3.12.0) by ranking the genes based on t-statistic value without any log2FoldChange or p-adjusted cut-off (FDR ≦ 0.1 cut-off for predicted GO terms). Over-representation analysis was performed without a background set, for significant proteins in the acetylome by separating them based on log-fold change to obtain the up- and down-regulated sites and their corresponding proteins (FDR ≦ 0.1 cut-off for predicted GO terms). Corresponding GO plots were also generated with R environment. The script for data analysis will be provided on request as there is a possibility of publishing it as a tool.  1. Cox, J. and Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol, 2008, 26, pp 1367-72 2. R Core Team (2020). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/. 3. Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Wu D, Hu Y, Law CW, Shi W, Smyth GK (2015). “limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies.” Nucleic Acids Research, 43(7), e47. doi:10.1093/nar/gkv007. 4. Xiao Y, Hsiao T-H, Suresh U, Chen H-IH, Wu X, Wolf SE, Chen Y (2014) A novel significance score for gene selection and ranking Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 30:801–807. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btr671

### Publication Abstract
Proteins involved in cellular metabolism and molecular regulation can extend lifespan of various organisms in the laboratory. However, any improvement in aging would only provide an evolutionary benefit if the organisms were able to survive under non-ideal conditions. We have previously shown that Drosophila melanogaster carrying a loss-of-function allele of the acetyltransferase chameau (chm) has an increased healthy lifespan when fed ad libitum. Here, we show that loss of chm and reduction in its activity results in a substantial reduction in weight and a decrease in starvation resistance. This phenotype is caused by failure to properly regulate the genes and proteins required for energy storage and expenditure. The previously observed increase in survival time thus comes with the inability to prepare for and cope with nutrient stress. As the ability to survive in environments with restricted food availability is likely a stronger evolutionary driver than the ability to live a long life, chm is still present in the organism's genome despite its apparent negative effect on lifespan.

### Keywords
Starvation, Drosophila, Chameau, Acetylation, Hbo1

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München  Protein Analysis Unit  Molecular Biology Department  Großhadernerstr. 9  82152 Planegg-Martinsried

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Axel Imhof
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München  Protein Analysis Unit  Molecular Biology Department  Großhadernerstr. 9  82152 Planegg-Martinsried


