### Accession
PXD035100

### Title
ALK fusion NSCLC oncogenes promote survival and inhibit NK cell responses via SERPINB4 expression

### Description
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) fusion variants in non-small-cell-lung cancer (NSCLC) consist of numerous dimerising fusion partners, with the most common being EML4. Clinical data suggests that the degree of treatment benefit in response to ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) differs among the variant present in the patient tumor. Therefore, a better understanding the oncogenic signaling networks driven by different ALK-fusion variants is important. Here, we developed highly controlled doxycycline-inducible cell models bearing four different ALK fusion proteins, namely EML4-ALK-V1, EML4-ALK-V3, KIF5B-ALK, and TFG-ALK, in the context of non-tumorigenic NL20 human bronchial epithelial cells. These were complimented by patient-derived NSCLC cell lines harboring either EML4-ALK-V1 or EML4-ALK-V3 fusions. RNAseq and phosphoproteomics analysis were employed to identify dysregulated genes and hyper/hypo-phosphorylated proteins associated with ALK fusion expression. Among ALK fusion induced responses, we noted a robust inflammatory signature that included up-regulation of the Serpin B4 serine protease inhibitor in both NL20-inducible cell models and ALK-positive NSCLC patient-derived cell lines. We show that STAT3 is a major transcriptional regulator of SERPINB4 downstream of ALK fusions, along with NF-B and AP1. The upregulation of SERPINB4 promotes survival of ALK fusion expressing cells and inhibits natural killer (NK) cell-mediated cytotoxicity. In conclusion, our study reveals a novel ALK downstream survival axis that regulates Serpin B4 expression and identifies a molecular target that has potential for therapeutic impact targeting the immune response together with ALK TKIs in NSCLC.

### Sample Protocol
Pooled ALK-fusion clones were serum-starved for 18 hours and treated with doxycycline (EML4-ALK-V1, KIF5B-ALK at 300 ng/ml and EML4-ALK-V3, TFG-ALK at 100 ng/ml) for 6 h followed by 1 h of lorlatinib treatment (30nM). For phosphor protein analysis, treated cells were washed once with ice-cold PBS and lysed in urea lysis buffer containing 20 mM Hepes (pH 8.0), 9 M urea, 1 mM activated sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, and 1 mM β-glycerol phosphate. Total protein concentration was determined using BCA kit as described above. For each sample, 30 mg of protein was subjected to custom phosphoprofiling by Cell Signaling Technology as described previously (Stokes et al., 2012, PTMScan direct: identification and quantification of peptides from critical signaling proteins by immunoaffinity enrichment coupled with LC-MS/MS. Mol Cell Proteomics 11, 187-201.). In brief, samples were trypsinized and immunoprecipitated using P-Tyr-1000 (CST #8803) or P-Ser/Thr (CST #25081) motif antibodies. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously (Stokes et al., 2012, PTMScan direct: identification and quantification of peptides from critical signaling proteins by immunoaffinity enrichment coupled with LC-MS/MS. Mol Cell Proteomics 11, 187-201.)(. Samples from EML4-ALK-V1, V3 (+/-dox, +/-lorlatinib) were performed in 2 biological replicates (n=2). KIF5B-ALK and TFG-ALK were performed once (n=1), and technical duplication was done for all conditions. MS/MS spectra were evaluated using a Comet and the Core platform from Harvard University (Eng et al., 2013, Comet: an open-source MS/MS sequence database search tool. Proteomics 13, 22-24.).

### Data Protocol
Differential phosphorylation was determined using the R Differential Enhancement of Proteomics data (DEP) package (default settings) (Zhang et al.,2018. Proteome-wide identification of ubiquitin interactions using UbIA-MS. Nature Protocols, 13, 530–550.). Phosphosites were considered differentially phosphorylated when the absolute log2 fold change values were above 1,5 at FDR-adjusted p values below 0.05, respectively, considering a hyperbolic threshold as described earlier (Szydzik, J., Lind, D.E., Arefin, B. et al. ATR inhibition enables complete tumour regression in ALK-driven NB mouse models. Nat Commun 12, 6813 (2021).).

### Publication Abstract
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) fusion variants in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) consist of numerous dimerizing fusion partners. Retrospective investigations suggest that treatment benefit in response to ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) differs dependent on the fusion variant present in the patient tumor. Therefore, understanding the oncogenic signaling networks driven by different ALK fusion variants is important. To do this, we developed controlled inducible cell models expressing either Echinoderm Microtubule Associated Protein Like 4 (EML4)-ALK-V1, EML4-ALK-V3, Kinesin Family Member 5B (KIF5B)-ALK, or TRK-fused gene (TFG)-ALK and investigated their transcriptomic and proteomic responses to ALK activity modulation together with patient-derived ALK-positive NSCLC cell lines. This allowed identification of both common and isoform-specific responses downstream of these four ALK fusions. An inflammatory signature that included upregulation of the Serpin B4 serine protease inhibitor was observed in both ALK fusion inducible and patient-derived cells. We show that Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), Nuclear Factor Kappa B (NF-&#x3ba;B) and Activator protein 1 (AP1) are major transcriptional regulators of <i>SERPINB4</i> downstream of ALK fusions. Upregulation of <i>SERPINB4</i> promotes survival and inhibits natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity, which has potential for therapeutic impact targeting the immune response together with ALK TKIs in NSCLC.

### Keywords
Human, Nsclcl, Orbitrap fusion lumos

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University, Sweden.
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Jonatan Gabre

### Lab Head
Dr Bengt Hallberg
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg University, Sweden.


