### Accession
PXD027110

### Title
Surfaceome proteomic of glioblastoma revealed potential targets for immunotherapy

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and devastating malignant brain tumor in adults. The mortality rate is very high despite different treatments. New therapeutic targets are therefore highly needed to improve patient care. Cell-surface proteins represent attractive targets due to their accessibility, their involvement in essential signaling pathways, and their dysregulated expression in cancer. Moreover, they are potential targets for CA-based immunotherapy or mRNA vaccine strategies. However, cell-surface proteins are often underrepresented in standard proteomic data sets, due to their poor solubility and lower expression levels compared to intracellular proteins. In this context, we investigated GBM-associated surfaceome by comparison to healthy astrocytes surfaceome to identify new specific targets to GBM. For this purpose, biotinylation of cell surface proteins has been carried out in GBM and healthy astrocytes cell lines. Biotinylated proteins were purified on streptavidin beads and analyzed by shotgun proteomics. After filtering our data with Cell Surface Proteins Atlas (CSPA) and Gene Ontology, 78 overexpressed or exclusive in GBM have been identified. Validation has been performed using Human Protein Atlas. In this context, we identified 21 specific potential targets for GBM including 5 mutated proteins (RELL1, CYBA, EGFR, and MHC I proteins). Taken together, we identified potential targets for immune therapy strategies in GBM.

### Sample Protocol
Human glioma cell line NCH82 and U-87 MG and immortalized human astrocytes were biotinylated with 0.25 mg/ml EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin. Cells were then lysed with Tx114. The detergent phase including membrane proteins was collected. Biotinylated proteins were purified in Streptavidin UltraLink Resin and then digest with Trypsin. The samples were desalted using ZipTip C-18 just before processing using LC-MS/MS. Mass spectrometry proteomics analysis of digested proteins was performed using a nano Acquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled with the Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source. The samples were separated using online reversed-phase, using a preconcentration column (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm). The peptides were separated by applying a linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (5%-35%) for 2h, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q- Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode defined to analyze the ten most intense ions of MS analysis (Top 10). The MS analysis was performed with an m/z mass range between 300 to 1 600, resolution of 70,000 FWHM, AGC of 3e6 ions and maximum injection time of 120ms. The MS/MS analysis was performed with an m/z mass range between 200 to 2,000; AGC of 5e4 ion; maximum injection time of 60 ms and resolution set at 17,500 FWHM.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by comparing all MS/MS data with the proteome database of the complete reviewed proteome of Homo sapiens (Uniprot, release November 2020; 20,370 entries), using the MaxQuant software version 1.6.10.43 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016a). Trypsin specificity was used for the digestion mode with two missed cleavages. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as the variable modifications. For MS spectra, an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm was selected, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for HCD data (Cox et al., 2011). For identification, the FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein level was set to 0.01. Relative, label-free quantification of proteins was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant with the default parameters (Cox et al., 2014). Analysis of the proteins identified was performed using Perseus software (http://www.perseus-framework.org/) (version 1.6.5.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016b). The file containing the information from identification was used with hits to the reverse database, and proteins identified with modified peptides and potential contaminants were removed. Then, the LFQ intensity was logarithmized (log2[x]). Categorical annotation of rows was used to define different groups depending on the cell line. Multiple-samples tests were performed using an ANOVA test with a p-value of 0.05 and preserved grouping in randomization. The results were normalized by Z-score and represented as hierarchical clustering. Functional annotation and characterization of identified proteins were obtained using STRING (version 11.0, http://string-db.org). Surface proteins were then identified with the lists of surface proteins provided by the cell surface protein atlas (CSPA) (Bausch-Fluck et al., 2015) and the list of predicted surfaceome proteins (Bausch-Fluck et al., 2018). Gene Ontology enrichment allows the identification of some additional surface proteins. To identify surface protein already described in GBM we grouped the surface proteins described in the CSPA of primary brain tumor and GBM cells and in the CSPA of GBM cell lines LN18, LN229, U251-MG, U87-MG and T98G GBM cell line (Bausch-Fluck et al., 2015). Venn diagram analysis was performed using “the InteractiVenn” (Heberle et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunotherapy, Glioblastoma, Surface proteins, Surfaceome, Mutated proteins

### Affiliations
PRISM - Inserm U1192 Universite de Lille France
PRISM Laboratory

### Submitter
Melanie Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
PRISM - Inserm U1192 Universite de Lille France


