### Accession
PXD040684

### Title
Effects of PRSS35 on the extra cellular matrix

### Description
In the project four sets of label-free proteomics studies were performed to characterize the extra cellular matrix (ECM) proteome of differentially treated cells (see below). All cells were treated with sorbitol to induce the expression of PRSS35. Only in set IV PRSS35 is downregulated. For each set, three biological replicates were performed, which were each fractionated by SDS-PAGE into five fractions. Proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin and analyzed by DDA on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer:

### Sample Protocol
Purified ECM samples were processed similarly as described (PMID: 34435183). Briefly, samples were taken up in Laemmli buffer, proteins were reduced with 1 mM DTT (10 min, 56°C) and alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (10 min, RT), concentrated on Vivaspin 10 kDa cut-off filters and separated by SDS-PAGE using Genscript precast gradient gels (4-12%). Following staining and fixation, gel lanes were cut into 5 bands, which were further cut into small pieces. Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated using rounds of 100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 7.5 and ethanol. Proteins therein were digested with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) ON at 37°C, resulting peptides were extracted by incubation with 2% TFA followed by ethanol. Extracts were combined, concentrated in a speed-vac vacuum concentrator, and taken up in 0.1 % formic acid in H2O. Samples were desalted using STAGE tips (PMID: 12585499) prior LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software using a Uniprot full-length human database and common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for digestion as reference (PMID: 19029910). Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification and protein amino-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm and three missed cleavages were allowed using trypsin/P as enzyme specificity. Peptide and protein FDR based on a forward-reverse database were set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to 7, and minimum number of peptides for identification of proteins was set to one, which must be unique. The “match-between-run” option was used with a time window of 0.7 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Skin, Fibroblast, Ecm

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biology University of Fribourg Chemin du Musee 10 CH-1700 Fribourg Switzerland
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dept. of Biology University of Fribourg Chemin du Musee 10 CH-1700 Fribourg Switzerland


