### Accession
PXD036113

### Title
Proximity labeling facilitates defining neighborhood proteome of photosystem II oxygen evolution complex in a model cyanobacterium

### Description
APEX2-based proximity labeling coupled with mass spectrometry have great potential for spatiotemporal identification of proteins proximal to a protein complex of interest. Using this approach it is feasible to define the proteome neighborhood of important protein complexes in a popular photosynthetic model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 (hereafter named as Synechocystis). To this end, we developed a robust workflow for APEX2-based proximity labeling in Synechocystis, and used the workflow to identify proteins proximal to the photosystem II (PS II) oxygen evolution complex (OEC) through fusion APEX2 with a luminal OEC subunit, PsbO.

### Sample Protocol
The cyanobacterial culture at the end of the exponential phase was diluted to a cell density of OD730=0.2 and grown until OD730=0.8. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4000 g for 5 min and resuspended in BG11 containing 2mM biotin phenol, and incubated at 30℃ for 10 min. H2O2 was then added to a final concentration of 2 mM and the labeling reaction was allowed to continue for 1 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were searched against the Synechocystis proteome sequence database appended with 248 common contaminations using the software MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) (80). The database containing 3672 entries was downloaded from CyanoBase (ftp://ftp.kazusa.or.jp/pub/CyanoBase/Synechocystis, released on 5/11/2009). N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were chosen as the variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation was chosen as the fixed modification. The 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was set at both the peptide and protein levels. The minimum score for unmodified peptides were set to 15. The match between runs was enabled. All other parameters were set to default values of MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Ascorbate peroxidase (APEX)-based proximity labeling coupled with mass spectrometry has a great potential for spatiotemporal identification of proteins proximal to a protein complex of interest. Using this approach is feasible to define the proteome neighborhood of important protein complexes in a popular photosynthetic model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 (hereafter named as Synechocystis). To this end, we developed a robust workflow for APEX2-based proximity labeling in Synechocystis and used the workflow to identify proteins proximal to the photosystem II (PS II) oxygen evolution complex (OEC) through fusion APEX2 with a luminal OEC subunit, PsbO. In total, 38 integral membrane proteins (IMPs) and 93 luminal proteins were identified as proximal to the OEC. A significant portion of these proteins are involved in PS II assembly, maturation, and repair, while the majority of the rest were not previously implicated with PS II. The IMPs include subunits of PS II and cytochrome b<sub>6</sub>/f, but not of photosystem I (except for PsaL) and ATP synthases, suggesting that the latter two complexes are spatially separated from the OEC with a distance longer than the APEX2 labeling radius. Besides, the topologies of&#xa0;six IMPs were successfully predicted because their lumen-facing regions exclusively contain potential APEX2 labeling sites. The luminal proteins include 66 proteins with a predicted signal peptide and 57 proteins localized also in periplasm, providing important targets to study the regulation and selectivity of protein translocation. Together, we not only developed a robust workflow for the application of APEX2-based proximity labeling in Synechocystis and showcased the feasibility to define the neighborhood proteome of an important protein complex with a short radius but also discovered a set of the proteins that potentially interact with and regulate PS II structure and function.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Cyanobacteria, Synechocystis, Apex, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No.1 West Beichen Rd., Beijing 100101, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Chengcheng Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yingchun Wang
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No.1 West Beichen Rd., Beijing 100101, China


