### Accession
PXD042942

### Title
Long-Chain Acyl Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase, a Key Player in Metabolic Rewiring/Invasiveness in Experimental Tumors and Human Mesothelioma Cell Lines

### Description
Cross-species investigations of cancer invasiveness are a new approach that has already identified new biomarkers which are potentially useful for improving tumor diagnosis and prognosis in clinical medicine and veterinary science. In this study, we combined proteomic analysis of four experimental rat malignant mesothelioma (MM) tumors with analysis of ten patient-derived cell lines to identify common features associated with mitochondrial proteome rewiring. A comparison of significant abundance changes between invasive and non-invasive rat tumors gave a list of 433 proteins, including 26 proteins reported to be exclusively located in mitochondria. Next, we analyzed the differential expression of genes encoding the mitochondrial proteins of interest in five primary epithelioid and five primary sarcomatoid human MM cell lines; the most impressive increase was observed in the expression of the long-chain acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase (ACADL). To evaluate the role of this enzyme in migration/invasiveness, two epithelioid and two sarcomatoid human MM cell lines derived from patients with the highest and lowest overall survival were studied. Interestingly, sarcomatoid vs. epithelioid cell lines were characterized by higher migration and fatty oxidation rates, in agreement with ACADL findings. These results suggest that evaluating mitochondrial proteins in MM specimens might identify tumors with higher invasiveness.

### Sample Protocol
Collection of Rat Tumor Tissues for Proteomic Analyses The formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue samples used in this study were collected from the same groups of Fisher F344 rats with four different experimental mesotheliomas at increasing stages of invasiveness, as previously described [15]. To generate the tumors, the experimental procedures used for in vivo manipulations at the Unité Thérapeutique Expérimentale de l’Institut de Recherche en Santé de l’Université de Nantes (UTE-IRS UN) between 2011 and 2015 followed the European Union guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals in research (approval #01257.03 from the French Ministry of Higher Education and Research (MESR)). The rats were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (L’Arbresle, 69210, France), and the experiments were approved by the ethics committee for animal experiments (CEEA) of the Pays de la Loire Region and registered under the number 2011.38. The non-invasive M5-T2, mildly invasive F4-T2, moderately invasive F5-T1 and deeply invasive M5-T1 tumors were collected after intraperitoneal injection of 3 × 106 cells of the corresponding cell lines (https://technology-offers.inserm-transfert.com/offer/, accessed on 30 January 2023, recorded as RT00418, RT00419, RT00421 and RT00417, respectively) into syngeneic rats. Proteomic Analyses For each sample analyzed, four or five 20-µm-thick sections of tumor tissue were scratched with a scalpel and collected in a 1.5-mL Eppendorf® microtube. Next, all the material collected was deparaffinized in three successive xylene washes and then rehydrated in 100%, 95%, 70% and 50% ethanol solutions. The pellets were vacuum-dried, and the dried tissues resuspended in 200 µL of Rapigest SF (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Dithiothreitol (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany) was then added (5 mM final concentration), and the samples were incubated in a thermo shaker at 95 °C for one hour before being sonicated twice (ultrasonic processor 75185, Bioblock Scientific, Illkirch, France). Cystein residues were alkylated by adding 200 mM S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate at 37 °C (10 mM final concentration). Sequencing-grade trypsin was added at a ratio ≥ 2 µg mm−3 tissue (at 37 °C overnight). The reaction was stopped with formic acid (9% final concentration, incubation at 37 °C for one hour), and the acid-treated samples were centrifuged at 16,000× g for 10 min. After removing the salts from the supernatant, the peptides were collected in a new Eppendorf® microtube using C18 STAGE tips, and their concentration finally determined using the Micro BCA™ Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, St Herblain, France). The rat spectral library, SWATH-MS analysis, peptide identification, and relative quantification were performed as previously described [15]. The statistical analysis of the SWATH data set and peak extraction output data matrix from PeakView were imported into MarkerView (v.2, AB Sciex Pte, Ltd., Framingham, MA, USA) for data normalization and relative protein quantification. Proteins with a statistical p-value < 0.05, estimated by MarkerView, were considered to be differentially expressed under different conditions.

### Data Protocol
All data in the text and figures are provided as means ± SEM. The results were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA and Tukey test. p < 0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-species investigations of cancer invasiveness are a new approach that has already identified new biomarkers which are potentially useful for improving tumor diagnosis and prognosis in clinical medicine and veterinary science. In this study, we combined proteomic analysis of four experimental rat malignant mesothelioma (MM) tumors with analysis of ten patient-derived cell lines to identify common features associated with mitochondrial proteome rewiring. A comparison of significant abundance changes between invasive and non-invasive rat tumors gave a list of 433 proteins, including 26 proteins reported to be exclusively located in mitochondria. Next, we analyzed the differential expression of genes encoding the mitochondrial proteins of interest in five primary epithelioid and five primary sarcomatoid human MM cell lines; the most impressive increase was observed in the expression of the long-chain acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase (ACADL). To evaluate the role of this enzyme in migration/invasiveness, two epithelioid and two sarcomatoid human MM cell lines derived from patients with the highest and lowest overall survival were studied. Interestingly, sarcomatoid vs. epithelioid cell lines were characterized by higher migration and fatty oxidation rates, in agreement with ACADL findings. These results suggest that evaluating mitochondrial proteins in MM specimens might identify tumors with higher invasiveness. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the dataset identifier PXD042942.

### Keywords
Malignant mesothelioma; metabolism; mitochondria; long-chain specific acyl-coa dehydrogenase; fatty acid β-oxidation; biomarker

### Affiliations
Oncoproteomics
Oncoproteomic Unit

### Submitter
Catherine Guette

### Lab Head
Dr Institut de Cancerologie de l Ouest
Oncoproteomic Unit


