### Accession
PXD043341

### Title
circITGB6-pulled down proteins in A549 cells

### Description
A549 cells were transfected with 100 pmol DNA probes complementary to the back-splice site of circITGB6 or PDPN 3’UTR region. 24 h later, cells were washed with PBS and lysed with the lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, RNase inhibitors (Thermo Scientific), protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails). Pre-treated streptavidin magnetic beads were incubated with cell lysates at 4°C for 1 h, followed by washing five times with the washing buffer (20 mM Tri-HCl, pH7.5, 1 mM EDTA and 450 mM NaCl) and elution with Laemmli sample buffer. The circITGB6- or PDPN mRNA- interacting proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE and visualized by coomassie blue staining or immunoblot analysis. Protein bands were excised and identified by LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry and Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4; Thermo Scientific).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins eluted from the RNA pull down assay was resolved by 10% SDS-PAGE gel. When protein bands entered separating gel, electrophoresis was stopped so the bands were “stacked”. The protein bands were stained by staining solution (0.1% Coomassie Blue R250 in 40% ethanol, 10% acetic acid) and were destained by destaining solution. Then the gel was washed with washing solution (50% methanol and 10% acetic acid) to remove potential contaminant. The gel with bands excised and was completely destained (JTBaker). In-gel digestion was performed by reduction and alkylation by 20mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) and 40mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), respectively. Protein digestion was performed by overnight trypsin (5ng/µl; Promega) incubation at 37◦C. Subsequent tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel with 60 % ACN (Thermo Scientific) twice. The peptide extracts were pooled together and SpeedVac dried. Peptides derived from each condition were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed Dionex Ultimate3000 nanoRSLC system coupled to Easy LC 1200-Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software v2.4 with Sequest HT engine using a human database downloaded from uniport and appended with known contaminants. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, and only two missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the product ion tolerance was 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine were selected as fixed modifications, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The percolator algorithm was used for FDR analysis. Peptides with FDR <1% were set as high confidence peptides

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Circitgb6, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Frontiers Science Center for Disease-related Molecular Network, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Sichuan university

### Submitter
ke li

### Lab Head
Dr Ke Li
Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Frontiers Science Center for Disease-related Molecular Network, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,


