### Accession
PXD020622

### Title
ATR interactome in  Homo sapiens bone osteosarcoma  U2OS cells

### Description
MS experiments for ATR interactors (GFP-ATR pull-down):SILAC 1,SILAC 2, SILAC 3

### Sample Protocol
Each IP was run in a separate lane on a gel. Each lane has been divided into 10 slices, destained, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. Peptides were analysed by LCMSMS.

### Data Protocol
Spectra have been analyzed by MaxQuant, proteins are considered as  identified if the have at least 2 peptides and 1 unique peptides, and quantified with at least 2 ratio  measurements.

### Publication Abstract
ATR responds to mechanical stress at the nuclear envelope and mediates envelope-associated repair of aberrant topological DNA states. By combining microscopy, electron microscopic analysis, biophysical and in vivo models, we report that ATR-defective cells exhibit altered nuclear plasticity and YAP delocalization. When subjected to mechanical stress or undergoing interstitial migration, ATR-defective nuclei collapse accumulating nuclear envelope ruptures and perinuclear cGAS, which indicate loss of nuclear envelope integrity, and aberrant perinuclear chromatin status. ATR-defective cells also are defective in neuronal migration during development and in metastatic dissemination from circulating tumor cells. Our findings indicate that ATR ensures mechanical coupling of the cytoskeleton to the nuclear envelope and accompanying regulation of envelope-chromosome association. Thus the repertoire of ATR-regulated biological processes extends well beyond its canonical role in triggering biochemical implementation of the DNA damage response.

### Keywords
Interactome atr   u2os cells

### Affiliations
IFOM
ifom

### Submitter
vittoria matafora

### Lab Head
Dr Angela Bachi
IFOM


