### Accession
PXD041650

### Title
Maximizing protein production by keeping cells at optimal secretory stress levels using real-time control approaches

### Description
Optimizing the production of recombinant proteins is a problem of major industrial and pharmaceutical importance. Secretion of the protein by the host cell considerably simplifies downstream purification processes.  However, for many proteins, this is also the limiting production step. Current solutions involve extensive engineering of the chassis cell to facilitate protein trafficking and limit protein degradation triggered by excessive secretion-associated stress. Here, we propose instead a regulation-based strategy in which induction is dynamically adjusted to an optimal strength based on the current stress level of the cells. Using a small collection of hard-to-secrete proteins, a bioreactor-based platform with automated cytometry measurements, and a systematic assay to quantify secreted protein levels, we demonstrate that the secretion sweet spot is indicated by the appearance of a subpopulation of cells that accumulate high amounts of proteins, decrease growth, and face significant stress, that is, experience a secretion burnout. In these cells, adaptations capabilities are overwhelmed by a too strong production. Using these notions, we show for a single-chain antibody variable fragment that secretion levels can be improved by 70% by dynamically keeping the cell population at optimal stress levels using real-time closed-loop control.

### Sample Protocol
The protein assay with the Pierce kit (660 nm for the determination) was performed on all 16 samples: the average is 70µg.ml-1 (note:  Sample 8 is an outlier, with a much higher concentration). 21 µg of protein was used per sample for the MS experiment. An equal amount of universal proteomic standard (UPS2, sigma) was added to all samples. The UPS2 standard is composed of 48 human proteins that has been formulated into a dynamic range of concentrations, ranging from 500 amoles to 50 pmoles. Then, the samples were dried, resuspended, and denatured in 8M GuHCl, 5mM TCEP, 20mM ChloroAcetamide. Two successive protein digestions were performed. The first using Endoprotease LysC at ratio E/S 1:50 (Promega) for 3 hours at 37°C. The sample were diluted five times in 50mM Tris pH8.0, and the second digestion was performed with trypsin at ratio E/S 1/50 (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Digestion was stopped adding 0.1% final of Formic acid (FA). Resulting peptides were desalted using a C18 cartridge.  LC-MS/MS analysis of digested peptides was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A home-made column was used for peptide separation (C18) 50 cm capillary column picotip silica emitter tip (75 μm diameter filled with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany)). It was equilibrated and peptide were loaded in solvent A (0.1% FA) at 900 bars. Peptides were separated at 250 nl min−1. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of solvent B (ACN, 0.1% FA) from 3 to 7% in 8 min, 7 to 23% in 95 min, 23 to 45% in 45 min (total length of the chromatographic run was 170 min including high ACN level step and column regeneration). Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 12 method. MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35000 (at m/z 400) with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. The scan range was limited from 300 to 1700 m/z. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with the energy set at 27 NCE. Intensity threshold for ions selection was set at 1 × 106 ions with charge exclusion of z = 1 and z > 7. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 400). Isolation window was set at 1.6 Th. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) using the Andromeda search engine (ref 1) against UPS2 proteins and mNEON sequences. The following search parameters were applied: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. Maximum peptide charge was set to 7 and 5 amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. A false discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels. The iBAQ intensity was used to estimate the protein abundance within a sampleref 2 The match between runs features was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Secretory, Protein quantification

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur, Inria, Université Paris Cité, 75015 Paris, France
Pasteur

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr Gregory Batt
Institut Pasteur, Inria, Université Paris Cité, 75015 Paris, France


