### Accession
PXD005719

### Title
Comparative Membrane Proteomics Analyses of Breast Cancer Cell Lines to Understand the Molecular Mechanism of Breast Cancer Brain Metastasis

### Description
Breast cancer is the leading type of cancer in women. Breast cancer brain metastasis is considered as an essential issue in breast cancer patients. Membrane proteins play important roles in breast cancer brain metastasis that contributes to the cell adhesion and penetration of blood-brain barrier. To achieve a deeper insight of the mechanism of breast cancer brain metastasis, liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed to analyze the enriched membrane proteomes from six different breast cancer cell lines. Quantitative proteomic data of all cell lines were compared with MDA-MB-231BR which has the specific brain metastasis capacity. 1239 proteins were identified and 990 were quantified with more than 70% of membrane proteins in all cell lines. Each cell line can be separated apart from others in PCA. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) supported the high brain metastatic ability of 231BR and suggested importance of the up-regulation of integrin proteins and down-regulation of EPHA in brain metastasis. 28 proteins were observed unique expression alteration in 231BR. The up-regulation of NPM1, hnRNP Q, hnRNP K and eIF3l and the down-regulation of TUBB4B and TUBB were observed to be associated with the brain metastasis cell line and may contributes to the breast cancer brain metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane protein samples were denatured in 90 °C water bath for 10 min. After denaturing, 2 μL solution of each sample was taken out for the protein assay. Protein assay was achieved using micro BCA method (Thermo Scientific/Pierce, Rockford, IL) by following manufacturer’s instruction. The final protein concentration measurement and calculation were perform by Multiskan plate-reader (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). Based on protein concentration, the remaining portion of samples were normalized to the same concentration using ABC-SDC buffer. Then normalized samples were reduced by 5 mM DTT at 60 °C in dark for 45 min to break the disulfide bonds. Then reduced membrane proteins were alkylated by 20 mM IAA at 37 °C in dark for 45 min. The reaction was quenched by adding additional 5 mM DTT and incubating at 37 °C in dark for 30 min. Then protease trypsin-lys C was added to the sample solution with a 1:25 enzyme to protein ratio and incubated at 37 °C for 18 hrs. After tryptic digestion, formic acid was added to the final concentration of 0.5% to remove detergent. The acidic mixture was then vortex thoroughly and centrifuge at maximum speed for 10 min. The supernatant contained the digested peptides and was ready for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The proteomic LC-MS/MS raw data was converted to mascot generic format files (*.mgf) by Proteome Discover version 1.2 software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) and then searched using UniProt database (2014_06, Homo sapiens, 20214 entries) in MASCOT version 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were set as the fixed modification and the variable modification, respectively. The m/z tolerance of MS and MS/MS were set to 6 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Maximum peptide missed cleavage was set to 2. MASCOT search result was verified using Scaffold (version Scaffold_3.6.3, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Peptide identifications were accepted at greater than 95.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they were established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped based on the parsimony principles. Membrane proteins were annotated with gene ontology (GO) terms from NCBI

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer is the leading type of cancer in women. Breast cancer brain metastasis is currently considered an issue of concern among breast cancer patients. Membrane proteins play important roles in breast cancer brain metastasis, involving cell adhesion and penetration of blood-brain barrier. To understand the mechanism of breast cancer brain metastasis, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was employed in conjunction with enrichment of membrane proteins to analyze the proteomes from five different breast cancer and a brain cancer cell lines. Quantitative proteomic data of all cell lines were compared with MDA-MB-231BR which is a brain seeking breast cancer cell line, thus representing brain metastasis characteristics. Label-free proteomics of the six cell lines facilitates the identification of 1238 proteins and the quantification of 899 proteins of which more than 70% were membrane proteins. Unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA) of the label-free proteomics data resulted in a distinct clustering of cell lines, suggesting quantitative differences in the expression of several proteins among the different cell lines. Unique protein expressions in 231BR were observed for 28 proteins. The up-regulation of STAU1, AT1B3, NPM1, hnRNP Q, and hnRNP K and the down-regulation of TUBB4B and TUBB5 were noted in 231BR relative to 231 (precursor cell lines from which 231BR is derived). These proteins might contribute to the breast cancer brain metastasis. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) supported the great brain metastatic propensity of 231BR and suggested the importance of the up-regulation of integrin proteins and down-regulation of EPHA2 in brain metastasis.

### Keywords
Membrane enrichment, Differential expression analysis, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Breast cancer brain metastasis

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University

### Submitter
Wenjing Peng

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Texas Tech University


