### Accession
PXD018757

### Title
Phosphoproteomics identifies microglial Siglec-F inflammatory response during neurodegeneration

### Description
This study sought to explore phosphoproteome signaling dysregulation in different models of neurodegeneration. We collected phosphotyrosine, MAPK/CDK substrates, global phosphoproteome, and protein expression data from hippocampus and/or cortex tissue from each model. Tryptic peptides were multiplexd with TMT, enriched for phosphopeptides, and then identified and quantified by LC-MS/MS. We additionally quantified phosphotyrosine peptides from BV-2 cells expressing various Siglec receptor constructs.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were anesthetized and sacrificed, then brain cortex, cerebellum, and hippocampus tissues were immediately dissected from each hemisphere. In cold PBS, the cerebellum was first removed, then the brain was split in half and set with the cortex facing down to remove the hippocampus. The striatum and olfactory bulbs were then removed and the rest of the tissue was kept as cortex. Tissues were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.  Tissues for proteomics analysis was homogenized in 3 mL ice-cold 8 M urea. Lysates were then centrifuged at 4000g for 30 minutes to clear lipids and DNA. Aliquots were taken for a BCA assay of protein concentration. Lysates were then treated with 10 mM DTT for 1 hour at 56°C, followed by 55 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature, rotating in the dark. Samples were diluted by adding 8 mL Ammonium Acetate pH 8.9 and then digested at room temperature overnight on a rotator with trypsin at a 1:50 ratio of trypsin to total protein mass (1-2 mg total protein expected for hippocampus, 3-4 mg for cerebellum, and 8-10 mg for cortex). This reaction was quenched with 1 mL 99.99% Acetic Acid and samples were desalted using Sep-Pak Lite C18 cartridges for hippocampus and Sep-Pak Plus for cortex and cerebellum samples. Peptides were then dried to half volume in a speed-vac and post-cleanup concentrations were assayed using a Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. Peptides were then divided into 130 μg aliquots that were snap-frozen and lyophilized. Peptides were then labeled with 6-plex and 10-plex isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Labeled samples were then dried down in a speed-vac overnight. Two or more technical replicates were run for each collection of tissues to improve pTyr coverage. Lysates for proteomics analysis of BV-2 cells were prepared first transducing cells with MCSV-IRES-Puro retrovirus with stable of Siglec constructs. 4 days after transduction, cells were split into 10 cm dishes with 1 million cells / dish in 10 mL of fresh RPMI media. 1 μM SHP099 was added to cells 24 hours before lysis. Cells were lysed after 48 hours in ice cold 8 M urea. Peptides with TMT 10-plex labels were prepared following the same protocol as mouse brain tissue above. Tyrosine phosphorylated peptides were enriched by a two-step process consisting of an immunoprecipitation (IP) with two pan-specific anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies (4G10, PT66) followed by immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) as we have previously described (Gajadhar et al., 2015; Johnson and White, 2012; Johnson et al., 2012; Reddy et al., 2016; Wolf-Yadlin et al., 2006). IP supernatants were subjected to a second round of IP with anti-pSer/pThr motif antibodies (MPM-2; 34B2) followed by IMAC cleanup step. IP supernatants were then divided into 80 fractions using high pH reverse phase chromatography on a ZORBAX C18 column. Fractions were concatenated into 20 tubes and dried down. Each fraction was then enriched using commercial Fe-NTA columns. Small amounts of each IP supernatant were saved and diluted 1:1000 in 0.1% acetic acid for global protein expression profiling. Phosphopeptide-enriched samples were loaded onto a BSA-conditioned pre-column with 10 μm C18 beads. Columns were rinsed with 0.1% acetic acid to remove excess salts and attached to an analytical column with 10 cm of 5 μm C18 beads. Agilent 1100 Series HPLCs were operated at 0.2 mL/min flow rates with a pressure-restricted T-junction to attain nanoliter flow rates. Peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of buffer B (70% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid) using the gradient settings: 0-13% (10 min), 13-42% (95 min), 42-60% (10 min), 60-100% (7 min), 100% hold (6 min), 100-0% (2 min). Global phosphoproteome and proteome fractions were analyzed using an EASY-nLC nano-flow UHPLC. Fractions were eluted using the gradient settings: 0-10% (10 min), 10-30% (100 min), 30-40% (14 min), 40-60% (5 min), 60-100% (2 min), hold 100% (10 min), 100-0% 2 min. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization (ESI) at 1 - 3 kV. Peptides were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a QExactive Plus and QExactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer operating in data-dependent mode acquiring MS scans and HCD MS/MS fragmentation spectra. Ions with charge > 1 were dynamically selected for fragmentation using a top-20 untargeted method with an exclusion time of 30s. The maximum injection time and ACG targets were set to 50 ms and 3e6 respectively. MS scans were captured with resolution = 60,000 and MS2 scans with resolution = 45,000. Peptides were fragmented with the HCD normalized collision energy set to 33%. Protein expression profiling was performed on LTQ Orbitrap or QExactive Plus instruments.

### Data Protocol
Peptide-spectrum matching and quantification was run using Proteome Discoverer and MASCOT. Peptides were searched against the UniProt mouse proteome database (UP000000589, SwissProt Version 2020_01) with a max missed tryptic cleavage count of 2. Tau P301S mice and 5XFAD were also searched against a secondary database containing transgenic human MAPT (isoform E, P301S), APP (isoform C K670N/M671L; I716V; V717I), and PSEN1 (isoform I-463 M146L; L286V) sequences. Precursor and fragment ions were matched with 10 ppm and 0.8 Da mass tolerances, respectively. Variable modifications were included for phosphorylation (STY), oxidation (M), and TMT (N-term, K). Fixed modifications were set for carbamidomethyl (C). Phosphorylation sites were localized using the ptmRS module with a confidence threshold of 0.75. Searched .msf files were imported and processed using pyproteome, an in-house tool for phosphoproteomics data integration and analysis. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were read directly into pandas data frames from .msf files using programmed SQLite queries. PSMs were filtered using an ion score cutoff > 15, isolation interference < 50, and median TMT signal > 1e3, and Percolator FDR < 5e-2. Transgenic peptides were excluded from filtering on percolator values. TMT quantification data was normalized using a iterative fitting procedure based on the CONSTrained STANdardization algorithm (Maes et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ck-p25, Mouse, 5xfad, Siglec-f, Bv-2, Phosphotyrosine, Lc-ms/ms, Tau p301s, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA

### Submitter
Nader Morshed

### Lab Head
Dr Forest Michael White
Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA


