### Accession
PXD043293

### Title
Adipogenic characterization of immortalized CD55+ progenitor cells frAdipogenic characterization of immortalized CD55+ progenitor cells from human white adipose tissueom human white adipose tissue

### Description
Background: Mature adipocytes are notoriously difficult to study ex vivo and alternative cell culture systems have therefore been developed. One of the most common models are human adipose progenitor cells (hAPCs). Unfortunately, these display replicative senescence after prolonged culture conditions, which limits their use in mechanistic studies.  Methods: Herein, we knocked in human telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) into the AAVS1 locus of CD55+ hAPCs derived from abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue and characterized the cells before and after differentiation into adipocytes.  Results: Immortalized TERT-hAPCs retained proliferative and adipogenic capacities comparable to those of early-passage wild type hAPCs for >80 passages. In line with this, our integrative transcriptomic and proteomic analyses revealed that TERT-hAPCs displayed robust adipocyte expression profiles. This was confirmed by functional analyses of lipid turnover where TERT-hAPCs exhibited pronounced responses to insulin and pro-lipolytic stimuli such as isoprenaline, dibutyrul cAMP and tumor necrosis factor alpha. In addition, TERT-hAPCs could be readily cultured in both standard 2D and 3D-cultures and proteomic analyses revealed that the spheroid culture conditions improved adipogenesis.  Conclusion: Through descriptive and functional studies, we demonstrate that immortalization of human CD55+ hAPCs is feasible and results in cells with stable proliferative and adipogenic capacities over multiple passages. As these cells are cryopreservable, they provide the additional advantage over primary cells of allowing repeated studies in both 2D and 3D model systems with the same genetic background.

### Sample Protocol
Digestion, peptide Purification: Samples for proteome measurement were prepared using the inStageTip (iST) method ( Kulak et al 2014). In detail, frozen samples were mixed with SDC buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, and 2% (w/v) SDC) to a final concentration of 1% SDC, heated (five minutes, 95°C) and sonicated (Diagenode Bioruptor, high intensity, 15 x 30 seconds). After determining protein concentration by BCA assay, 30 µg protein were reduced and alkylated using 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM CAA (five minutes, 40°C in the dark). Samples were digested with trypsin and LysC (1:50 protein:enzyme) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were acidified with TFA (1% final concentration) and  loaded onto activated triple layer styrenedivinylbenzene–reversed phase sulfonated STAGE tips (SDB-RPS; 3M Empore) and washed with 100 µl ethylacetate 1% TFA, 100µl 30% methanol 1% TFA and 150 µl 0.2% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 60 µl SDB-RPS elution buffer (80% ACN, 5% NH4OH), followed by evaporation of the solution in a SpeedVac for 40 minutes at 45°C. Desalted peptides were re-solved in 10 µl MS loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and stored at -20°C until measurement. LC-MS/MS analysis Proteomes were measured using a 115 minute long single-shot data-independent acquisition (DIA) method on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer [Thermo Fisher Scientific]. For this, 500 ng of peptide mixture were separated on an in-house packed column (1.9 µm C18 ReproSil particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using the EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography unit [Thermo Fisher Scientific]. Peptides were separated on a binary buffer system consisting of buffer A and B (0.1% formic acid and 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, respectively) in which buffer B changed from 5% to 45% over the elution. Peptides were ionized via electrospray (ESI) and pre-filter b FAIMS [Thermo Fisher Scientific] switching between a constant voltage (CV) of -50V/-70V each corresponding to a full ms1/ms2 DIA cycle. The cycle consisted of a ms1 scan (300-1650 m/z, max. ion fill time of 45ms, normalized AGC target = 300%, R= 120.000 at 200 m/z) followed by 49 tMS2 fragment scans of unequally spaced windows in the same m/z range (fill time = 22 ms, normalized AGC target = 1000%, normalized HCD collision energy = 30%, R= 15.000).

### Data Protocol
The DIA raw files were processed using Spectronauts (v14.9.201124.47784) directDIA function (16) with default settings. Spectra were searched against a human UniProt regular and “additional “ FASTA database (UP000005640_9606_2020-06; 20,609 and 77,157 entries respectively) and filtered for contaminants (MaxQuant contaminants list, 245 entries). Spectronaut report files were further analyzed with Perseus (v.1.6.14.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Immortalization, 3d-culture, Adipocytes, Adipogenesis model

### Affiliations
Emmy-Noether Research Group Cellular Proteomics and Metabolic Signaling Institute for Diabetes and Obesity Helmholtz Diabetes Center Germany
Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Natalie Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Krahmer
Emmy-Noether Research Group Cellular Proteomics and Metabolic Signaling Institute for Diabetes and Obesity Helmholtz Diabetes Center Germany


