### Accession
PXD034464

### Title
Novel splicing and open reading frames revealed by long-read direct RNA sequencing of adenovirus transcripts

### Description
Adenovirus is a common human pathogen that relies on host cell processes for transcription and processing of viral RNA and protein production. Although adenoviral promoters, splice junctions, and cleavage and polyadenylation sites have been characterized using low-throughput biochemical techniques or short read cDNA-based sequencing, these technologies do not fully capture the complexity of the adenoviral transcriptome. By combining Illumina short-read and nanopore long-read direct RNA sequencing approaches, we mapped transcription start sites and cleavage and polyadenylation sites across the adenovirus genome. In addition to confirming the known canonical viral early and late RNA cassettes, our analysis of splice junctions within long RNA reads revealed an additional 35 novel viral transcripts. These RNAs include fourteen new splice junctions which lead to expression of canonical open reading frames (ORF), six novel ORF-containing transcripts, and fifteen transcripts encoding for messages that potentially alter protein functions through truncations or fusion of canonical ORFs. In addition, we also detect RNAs that bypass canonical cleavage sites and generate potential chimeric proteins by linking separate gene transcription units. Of these, an evolutionary conserved protein was detected containing the N-terminus of E4orf6 fused to the downstream DBP/E2A ORF. Loss of this novel protein, E4orf6/DBP, was associated with aberrant viral replication center morphology and poor viral spread. Our work highlights how long-read sequencing technologies can reveal further complexity within viral transcriptomes.

### Sample Protocol
Biological triplicate cells were lysed with 8M urea and sonicated in a Diagenode BiorupterTM bath sonicator at 4oC on high 30 seconds on and 30 seconds off for 5 minutes. The cells were centrifuged at 10,000xg for 10 minutes at 4oC and the lysates transferred to a new tube. The lysate was then reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour at RT and alkylated using 10mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 45 minutes in the dark and 15 minutes in the light, followed by trypsin at a 1:50 ratio overnight at RT. The following day 200ug of peptides for each timepoint and bio-replicate were cleaned using Hamilton spin tip columns. Samples were separated on a standard linear 80-minute gradient from 5% to 60%, using standard proteomics buffers of 0.1% formic acid in aqueous and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (ACN) using a Thermo Dionex 3000 LC. Samples were quantified using a Thermo FusionTM MS instrument and batch randomized to account for instrument variation. The PRM method was designed with the MS1 having a window of 350-1200m/z, resolution of 60K, AGC target of 100% and MIT of 50ms. the tSIM MS2 scan having an AGC target of 200% and MIT of 54ms, resolution of 30K and HCD fragmentation of 28%.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were imported into Skyline using 2 missed cleavages with a minimum length of 5 and a maximum length of 30 amino acids.  Fragments required 4 or more product ions within 5 minutes of the predicted RT window and a mass tolerance of 10ppm or less to be considered for evaluation. Peptides were manually evaluated with the requirement of 5 or more overlapping fragments to be considered a “real” identification in comparison to mock.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Targeted ms, Splicing, Adenovirus

### Affiliations
Childrens Hospital of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Richard Lauman

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Weitzman
Childrens Hospital of Pennsylvania


