### Accession
PXD011258

### Title
MS on EVs from the YSL of 3dpf zebrafish embryos

### Description
We set up a zebrafish model to study EVs in vivo by light microscopy, using CD63-pHluorin as a marker. To verify if exosomes from zebrafish have a comparable composition as human exosomes, and to validate the use of CD63 as a marker, we first analysed the compositon of EVs isolated from in vitro cultured fibroblasts (AB.9 ATCC), and could detect the presence of conventional exosome markers, including (zebrafish) CD63. In live embryos, we could track a population of exosomes from their source (the yolk syncytial layer (YSL)) to their final destination by live microscopy. To assess the composition of these exosomes, we dissociated YSL:CD63-pHluorin expressing 3dpf embryos and isolated exosomes from the supernatant and enriched for EVs from the YSL. This was compared to a background of total EVs isolated the control fish (non-expressing).

### Sample Protocol
Zebrafish at 3dpf were dissociated using Collagenase I. Exosomes were isolated from the supernatant as described before (Thery et al., 2006). After isolation, samples were enriched for EVs coming from the YSL using Chromotec GFP-trap (YSL:CD63-pHluorin expressing), or aspecific binding to the GFP-trap beads (non-expressing). Samples were then further processed for MS analysis. Samples were chromatographically separated using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a C18 column (75-μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100 or 300 µm x 5 mm PepMapTM 100, 5 µm, Thermo Scientific), separated and MS data acquired using Xcalibur software. Peptides separation was performed over a linear gradient of 100 min from 5% to 25% or 5% to 35% MeCN (75-μm inner diameter × 50 cm; nanoViper C18, 2 μm or 5 µm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, Thermo Scientific). Full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution set to 120,000 and ions from each full scan were HCD fragmented and analyzed in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
For identification the data were searched against the UniProtKB Zebrafish database using Sequest through proteome discoverer. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage site were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al., 2007). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1%. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 1.2.1 (Valot et al., 2011). Global MAD normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. Protein ratios were computed as the geometrical mean of related peptides. To estimate ratio significance, a two-tailed t test was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05. Fold change-based GO enrichment analysis was performed as in Kowal et al. (Kowal et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released by most cell types but providing evidence for their physiological relevance remains challenging due to a lack of appropriate model organisms. Here, we developed an in&#xa0;vivo model to study EV function by expressing CD63-pHluorin in zebrafish embryos. A combination of imaging methods and proteomic analysis allowed us to study biogenesis, composition, transfer, uptake, and fate of individual endogenous EVs. We identified a subpopulation of EVs with exosome features, released in a syntenin-dependent manner from the yolk syncytial layer into the blood circulation. These exosomes are captured, endocytosed, and degraded by patrolling macrophages and endothelial cells in the caudal vein plexus (CVP) in a scavenger receptor- and dynamin-dependent manner. Interference with exosome biogenesis affected CVP growth, suggesting a role in trophic support. Altogether, our work represents a system for studying endogenous EV function in&#xa0;vivo with high spatiotemporal accuracy, demonstrating functional inter-organ communication by exosomes.

### Keywords
Endogenous, Ysl, Ex vivo, Zebrafish, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University


