### Accession
PXD012945

### Title
Free mRNA interactome upon heat shock in Hela cells

### Description
The polypeptide-coding mRNAs are coated by specialized proteins at any stage of their lifecycle. One of few circumstances when free mRNA appears in the cytosol is the disassembly of polysomes during stress-induced shutdown of protein synthesis. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we identified free RNA interactors in the heat-shocked mammalian cells and reconstituted the protein-RNA association in vitro. RNA-associated proteins displayed higher disorder and larger size, which supports the role of multivalent interactions during the initial phase of the RNA granule formation. Structural features of the free RNA interactors defined them as a subset of RNA-binding proteins. Our results reveal how free RNA can participate in reorganization of cellular functions during proteostasis stress.

### Sample Protocol
The in vitro transcribed and biotinylated coding regions of the Hsp70 and B-Raf mRNAs were incubated with the lysate of heat shocked Hela cells. The bait mRNA pull-downs were performed with Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin in 5 or 3 biological replicates for the Hsp70 and B-Raf mRNA, respectively, and analyzed by quantitative mass spectrometry. Background binding was controlled with uncoated beads. Samples were processed by on-beads LysC/Trypsin digestion and released peptides were fractionated into 3 SCX fractions.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using the software environment MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 (Cox et al. 2008). Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against the human complete proteome sequences from UniProtKB, version of November 2015, containing 70075 sequences. Carbamido-methylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was up to 4.5 ppm and for the fragment masses it was up to 20 ppm. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled to match identifications across samples within a time window of 2 min of the aligned retention times. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was set to 0.01. Protein matching to the reverse database or identified only with modified peptides were filtered out. Relative protein quantitation was performed using the LFQ algorithm of the Maxquant with a minimum ratio count of 1 (Cox et al. 2014). Bioinformatic data  analysis  was  performed  using  Perseus  (version 3131.5.2.6) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Proteins identified in the pulldown experiments were further included in the analysis if they were quantified in at least 4 out of 5 biological replicates in at least one group (pulldown/background)  for  the  Hsp70  coding  region  RNA  and  in  at  least  3  out  of  3  biological replicates  in  at  least  one  group  (pulldown/background)  for  the  B-Raf  coding  region  RNA  control. Missing  LFQ  values  were  imputed  on  the  basis  of  normal  distribution  with  a  width  of  0.3  and  a downshift of 1.8. Proteins enriched in the pulldown (RNA over background binding) were identified by two-sample t-test at a permutation-based FDR cutoff of 0.001 and s0 = 0.1 for the Hsp70 coding region  interactome  and  at  a  p-value  cutoff  of  0.01  for  the  B-Raf  coding  region  interactome.

### Publication Abstract
At any stage of their lifecycle, mRNAs are coated by specialized proteins. One of few circumstances when free mRNA appears in the cytosol is the disassembly of polysomes during the stress-induced shutdown of protein synthesis. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, we sought to identify the free RNA-interacting cellular machinery in heat-shocked mammalian cells. Free RNA-associated proteins displayed higher disorder and larger size, which supports the role of multivalent interactions during the initial phase of the association with RNAs during stress. Structural features of the free RNA interactors defined them as a subset of RNA-binding proteins. The interaction between these assembled proteins in vivo required RNA. Reconstitution of the association process in vitro indicated a multimolecular basis for increased binding to RNA upon heat shock in the cytosol. Our study represents a step toward understanding how free RNA is processed in the cytosol during proteostasis stress.

### Keywords
Proteostasis stress, Mrna, Stress granules, Rna granules

### Affiliations
Buchmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences and Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Goethe University Frankfurt

### Submitter
Giulia Calloni

### Lab Head
Dr R. Martin Vabulas
Buchmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences and Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


