### Accession
PXD044453

### Title
Age-Dependent Effects of Voluntary Exercise on Urinary Voiding Function and Frailty-Related Metrics in Mice

### Description
Risk factors for BPH/LUTS include sedentary lifestyle, anxiety/depression, obesity, and frailty. While physical exercise may reduce the progression and/or severity of BPH/LUTS, the mechanisms responsible remain unknown.

### Sample Protocol
Serum (20μl) were diluted in 180μL of 6M urea in 50mM Tris-HCl buffer pH8 with 1X protease inhibitor cocktail. Proteins were reduced using dithiothreitol at a final concentration of 5mM for 1 hour. Alkylation was performed using 15mM iodoacetamide via incubation in the dark for 30 minutes. Samples were diluted using 50mM Tris-HCl for a final urea concentration of 1.5M. The protein mixture was digested at a 50:1 ratio for 16 hours overnight using trypsin at 37°C. Digestion reactions were quenched via acidification using 20% trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges and concentrated via SpeedVac concentrator. Peptide concentrations were determined by peptide assay prior to instrumental analysis on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Elite.

### Data Protocol
Serum peptides were identified using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5, Thermo Scientific). Raw files were searched against the UniProt reviewed mouse proteome using Sequest HT algorithm with trypsin selected as the enzyme and an allowance of two missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da were set for the searching. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) was chosen as a static modification, while dynamic modifications selected consisted of oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da). Search results were filtered to 1% FDR at both peptide and protein levels. The INFERYS 1.0 rescoring algorithm (MSAID) was used after initial search to increase peptide identifications and scoring confidence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Physical activity, Bph, Translational, Luts

### Affiliations
George M. O'Brien Urology Research Center, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Hannah Miles

### Lab Head
Dr William A.
George M. O'Brien Urology Research Center, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison


