### Accession
PXD013960

### Title
NanoLC-MSMS Phosphoproteomics comparison of in vitro cultured reticulocytes and red blood cells  before, during and after microsphiltration

### Description
Four samples of in vitro culture-derived reticulocytes (biological replicates, derived from CD34+ cells) and three samples of red blood cells (biological replicates) were analysed through qualitative phosphoproteomics before, during and after passage through a spleen-mimicking microsphiltration device in order to investigate the mechanisms underlying shear stress recognition.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were separated using SDS-PAGE, allowing the dye front to run approximately 1cm into the separating gel and the gel piece was then subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using a DigestPro automated digestion unit (Intavis Ltd). The resulting peptides were then subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce). Enriched phosphopeptides were fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (v/v) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (v/v) acetonitrile 0.1% (v/v) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1 min., 6-15% B over 58 min., 15-32%B over 58 min., 32-40%B over 5 min., 40-90%B over 1 min., held at 90%B for 6 min and then reduced to 1%B over 1 min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.2 kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 250°C. All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000 over a scan range (m/z) of 350-1,550, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400,000 and a max injection time of 100ms. The Data Dependent mode was set to Cycle Time with 3s between master scans. Precursors were filtered according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (40s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.6m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 5,000, max injection time of 50ms and HCD collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
The raw proteomic mass spectrometry data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (134,169 entries) using the SEQUEST algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966Da) as variable modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed. The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Conversion of msf files (result files of Proteome Discoverer) into the mzIdentML standard format was conducted using ProCon - PROteomics CONversion tool (ver. 0.9.718).

### Publication Abstract
The capacity to undergo substantial deformation is a defining characteristic of the red blood cell (RBC), facilitating transit through the splenic interendothelial slits and microvasculature. Establishment of this remarkable property occurs during a process of reticulocyte maturation that begins with egress through micron-wide pores in the bone marrow and is completed within the circulation. The requirement to undertake repeated cycles of deformation necessitates that both reticulocytes and erythrocytes regulate membrane-cytoskeletal protein interactions in order to maintain cellular stability. In the absence of transcriptional activity, modulation of these interactions in RBCs is likely to be achieved primarily through specific protein posttranslational modifications, which at present remain undefined. In this study, we use high-throughput methods to define the processes that underlie the response to deformation and shear stress in both reticulocytes and erythrocytes. Through combination of a bead-based microsphiltration assay with phosphoproteomics we describe posttranslational modification of RBC proteins associated with deformation. Using microsphiltration and microfluidic biochip-based assays, we explore the effect of inhibiting kinases identified using this dataset. We demonstrate roles for GSK3 and Lyn in capillary transit and maintenance of membrane stability following deformation and show that combined inhibition of these kinases significantly decreases reticulocyte capacity to undergo repeated deformation. Finally, we derive a comprehensive and integrative phosphoproteomic dataset that provides a valuable resource for further mechanistic dissection of the molecular pathways that underlie the RBC's response to mechanical stimuli and for the study of reticulocyte maturation.

### Keywords
Erythrocyte, Deformation, Red blood cell, Reticulocyte, Blood

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom
Center for Hematology and Regenerative Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Department of Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital

### Submitter
Pedro Moura

### Lab Head
Dr Ashley Mark Toye
Department of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom


