### Accession
PXD028139

### Title
Nutrient Responsive O-GlcNAcylation Dynamically Modulates Galectin 3 Secretion

### Description
Endomembrane glycosylation and cytoplasmic O-GlcNAcylation each play essential roles in nutrient sensing, and in fact, characteristic changes in glycan patterns have been described in disease states such as diabetes and cancer. These changes in glycosylation have important functional roles and can drive disease progression. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying how these signals are integrated and transduced into biological effects. Galectins are proteins that bind glycans and are secreted by a poorly characterized non-classical secretory mechanism. Once outside the cell, galectins bind to terminal galactose residues of cell surface glycans and modulate numerous extracellular functions like clathrin independent endocytosis (CIE). Originating in the cytoplasm, galectins are predicted substrates for O-GlcNAc addition and removal; and, as we have shown, galectin 3 is a substrate for OGT.  This study also shows that galectin 3 secretion is sensitive to changes in O-GlcNAc levels. We determined that there is a significant difference in O-GlcNAcylation status between cytoplasmic and secreted galectin 3. We observed dramatic alterations in galectin 3 secretion in response to nutrient conditions and these changes were dependent on dynamic O-GlcNAcylation. Importantly, we showed that these O-GlcNAc driven alterations in galectin 3 secretion drove changes in CIE. These results indicate that dynamic O-GlcNAcylation of galectin 3 plays a role in modulating its secretion and can tune its function of transducing nutrient sensing information coded in cell surface glycosylation into biological effects.

### Sample Protocol
After Galectin 3 immunoprecipitation the samples were resolved on SDS-NuPAGE gel and stained with Simply Safe Blue (Invitrogen). Multiple protein bands were excised, destained with 50% methanol in 50mM bicarbonate, reduced with 20 mM DTT at 57 °C for 45 min and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min, and then were digested with 5ng/ul of trypsin (Promega) at room temperature overnight according to the manufacturer's protocol . The resulting peptides were dried and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and desalted by C18 ziptip (EMD Millipore) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The eluted peptides were dried again and dissolved with sample loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, and 5% AcN ) for LC-MS/MS analysis.The digested peptides were analyzed by reverse phase LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 -nLC (Thermo Scientific) liquid chromatography system. Digested proteins were first loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim® PepMap 100 pre-column, 75 μm × 2 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) and then separated on an analytical column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm × 75 μm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) maintained at a constant temperature (45°C) and equilibrated with 2% buffer A (0.1 % Formic acid). Peptides were separated with a 55-minute linear gradient of 5–30% buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Each full MS1 scan was acquired from 375–1500 (120,000 resolution, 4e5 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by EThcD MS/MS acquisition (15,000 resolution, 5e4 AGC, 90ms injection time), and HCD supplemental activation was set to 25% NCE.

### Data Protocol
All raw data files were searched against UniProt homo sapiens database (downloaded 01/2018) using PD 1.4 software using Sequest H. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme and two maximum missed cleavages were allowed. Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Static modifications consisted of carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da). Dynamic modifications consisted of oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da), deamidation of asparagine deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da) and GlcNAc attachment to serine and threonine (+203.079 Da). Four maximal dynamic modifications were allowed. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were validated validated by Percolator with the false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Endomembrane glycosylation and cytoplasmic O-GlcNAcylation each play essential roles in nutrient sensing, and characteristic changes in glycan patterns have been described in disease states such as diabetes and cancer. These changes in glycosylation have important functional roles and can drive disease progression. However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying how these signals are integrated and transduced into biological effects. Galectins are proteins that bind glycans and that are secreted by a poorly characterized nonclassical secretory mechanism. Once outside the cell, galectins bind to the terminal galactose residues of cell surface glycans and modulate numerous extracellular functions, such as clathrin-independent endocytosis (CIE). Originating in the cytoplasm, galectins are predicted substrates for O-GlcNAc addition and removal; and as we have shown, galectin 3 is a substrate for O-GlcNAc transferase. In this study, we also show that galectin 3 secretion is sensitive to changes in O-GlcNAc levels. We determined using immunoprecipitation and Western blotting that there is a significant difference in O-GlcNAcylation status between cytoplasmic and secreted galectin 3. We observed dramatic alterations in galectin 3 secretion in response to nutrient conditions, which were dependent on dynamic O-GlcNAcylation. Importantly, we showed that these O-GlcNAc-driven alterations in galectin 3 secretion also facilitated changes in CIE. These results indicate that dynamic O-GlcNAcylation of galectin 3 plays a role in modulating its secretion and can tune its function in transducing nutrient-sensing information coded in cell surface glycosylation into biological effects.

### Keywords
Hela, Gal-3ip

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology NIDDK NIH
NIH/NIDDK

### Submitter
Lara Abramowitz

### Lab Head
Dr John Hanover
Laboratory of Cell and Molecular Biology NIDDK NIH


