### Accession
PXD021932

### Title
A Metaproteomic Workflow for Sample Preparation and Data Analysis Applied to Mouse Faeces: 4

### Description
A Metaproteomic Workflow for Sample Preparation and Data Analysis Applied to Mouse Faeces: 1 MTD project_description Many diseases have been associated with gut microbiome abnormalities. The root cause of such diseases is not only due to bacterial dysbiosis, but also to change in bacterial functions, which are best studied by proteomic approaches. Although bacterial proteomics is well established, metaproteomics is hindered by challenges associated with the sample physical structure, contaminating proteins, the simultaneous analysis of hundreds of species and the subsequent data analysis. Here, we present a systematic assessment of sample preparation and data analysis methodologies applied to LC-MS/MS metaproteomics experiment.  We could show that low speed centrifugation (LSC) has a significant impact on both peptide identifications and reproducibility. LSC led to increase in peptide and proteins identifications compare to no LSC. Notably, the dominant bacterial phyla, i.e. Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, showed divergent representation between LSC and no-LSC. In terms of data processing, protein sequence databases derived from mouse faeces metagenome provided at least four times more MS/MS identification compared to databases of concatenated single organisms. We also demonstrated that two-steps database search strategy comes at the expense of a dramatic rise in number of false positives compared to single-step strategy. Overall, we found a positive correlation between matching metaproteome and metagenome abundance, which could be linked to core microbial functions, such as glycolysis-gluconeogenesis, citrate cycle and carbon metabolism. We observed significant overlap and correlation at the phylum, class, order and family taxonomic levels between taxonomy-derived from metagenome and metaproteome. Notably, nearly all functional categories (e.g., membrane transport, translation, transcription) were differentially abundant in the metaproteome (activity) compared to what would be expected from the metagenome (potential). In conclusion, these results highlight the need to perform metaproteomics when studying complex microbiome samples.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Sample treatment before protein extraction Mouse faecal pellets obtained from euploid and trisomic Ts65Dn mice were used to compare MS instruments and protein sequence databases. Samples were processed via the LSC procedure, faeces (~50 mg) were resuspended in phosphate buffer (50 mM Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, pH 8.0, 0.1 % Tween 20, 35x volume per mg) by vortexing vigorously for 5 min using 4 mm glass beads, followed by incubation in a sonication bath for 10 min and shaking at 1,200 rpm for 10 min. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 200 × g at 4 °C for 15 min. The supernatant was removed and the remaining pellet was subjected to an additional round of microbial cell extraction. After merging supernatants, microbial cells were collected by centrifugation at 13,000 × g at 4 °C for 30 min. The pellet was resuspended in 80 µL SDS buffer (Pellet Extraction buffer) and incubated at 95 °C for 30 min.   Cell lysis and protein extraction Samples were homogenised using 0.1 mm glass beads together with the FastPrep-24 5G instrument (MP) at 4 m/s. Three homogenization cycles were performed and consisted of 1 min bead beating, 30 sec incubation at 95 °C and 30 sec centrifugation at 13,000 × g. The homogenate was diluted with 800 µL MgCl2 buffer (0.1 mg/mL MgCl2, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5) and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 min. Proteins from the supernatant were precipitated overnight in acetone/methanol at ˗20 °C (acetone:methanol:sample with 8:1:1 ratio). Protein pellets were resuspended in 120 µL denaturation buffer for downstream use.  Protein digestion Following extraction, protein amount was quantified using Bradford assay. Proteins were in-solution digested as follows. Proteins were reduced in 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated in 5.5 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature (RT) for 1 h each. Proteins were pre-digested with LysC at RT for 3 h using a protein to protease ratio of 75:1. Samples were diluted nine-fold with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight with trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modiﬁed Trypsin, Promega) at pH 8.0 using a protein to protease ratio of 75:1. Following digestion, samples were acidified to pH 2.5 with formic acid and cleaned for LC-MS/MS measurement using Empore C18 disks in StageTips.  LC-MS/MS measurements Samples were measured on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were chromatographically separated using 75 μm (ID), 20 cm packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptide samples were eluted over 43 min using a 10 to 33 % gradient of solvent B (80 % ACN in 0.1 % formic acid) followed by a washout procedure. MS1 spectra were acquired between 300-1,650 Thompson at a resolution of 60,000 with an AGC target of 3 × 106 within 25 ms. Using a dynamic exclusion window of 30 sec, the top 12 most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with an NCE of 27. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 and a minimum AGC of 4.5 × 103 within 45 ms.  In addition, samples were measured on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were chromatographically separated using 75 μm (ID), 20 cm packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptide samples were eluted over 213 min using a 10 to 33 % gradient of solvent B (80 % ACN in 0.1 % formic acid) followed by a washout procedure. An optimised gradient was also tested whereby peptide samples were eluted over 225 min using a 5 % (0 min), 10 % (5 min), 13 % (80 min), 15 % (170 min) and 30 % (225 min) gradient of solvent B (80 % ACN in 0.1 % formic acid) followed by a washout procedure. MS1 spectra were acquired between 300-2,000 Thompson at a resolution of 120,000 with an AGC target of 1 × 106 within 100 ms. Using a dynamic exclusion window of 30 sec, the top 15 most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with an NCE of 35. MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 and a minimum AGC of 5 × 103 within 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
To compare MS instruments performance, the raw data obtained from the various instruments were processed together using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). The protein sequence databases used for database search consisted of the complete Mus musculus Uniprot database (54,506 sequences) and frequently observed contaminants (248 entries), as well as the matching metagenome gene translation (1,595,268 entries). A FDR of 1 % was required at the peptide and protein levels. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed and full tryptic enzyme specificity was required. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as ﬁxed modiﬁcation, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modiﬁcations. Match between runs was enabled where applicable. Quantification was performed using label-free quantification (LFQ) and a minimum ratio of 1. All other parameters were left to MaxQuant default settings.  To compare the protein sequence database performance, the samples measured on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer were also processed separately (without Elite acquired data) using identical MaxQuant parameters with a couple of exception. The microbiome sequence databases differed and consisted of one of (1) UniProt bacterial reference proteomes (5,408,622 protein entries), (2) UniProt bacterial pan proteomes (18,541,701 entries), (3) protein sequences from the Mouse Gut Metagenome catalogue (2,626,630 entries), or (4) the matching metagenome gene translation (1,595,268 entries). Processing also involved comparison between single- and two-step database search.

### Publication Abstract
Intestinal microbiota plays a key role in shaping host homeostasis by regulating metabolism, immune responses and behavior. Its dysregulation has been associated with metabolic, immune and neuropsychiatric disorders and is accompanied by changes in bacterial metabolic regulation. Although proteomics is well suited for analysis of individual microbes, metaproteomics of fecal samples is challenging due to the physical structure of the sample, presence of contaminating host proteins and coexistence of hundreds of taxa. Furthermore, there is a lack of consensus regarding preparation of fecal samples, as well as downstream bioinformatic analyses following metaproteomics data acquisition. Here we assess sample preparation and data analysis strategies applied to mouse feces in a typical mass spectrometry-based metaproteomic experiment. We show that subtle changes in sample preparation protocols may influence interpretation of biological findings. Two-step database search strategies led to significant underestimation of false positive protein identifications. Unipept software provided the highest sensitivity and specificity in taxonomic annotation of the identified peptides of unknown origin. Comparison of matching metaproteome and metagenome data revealed a positive correlation between protein and gene abundances. Notably, nearly all functional categories of detected protein groups were differentially abundant in the metaproteome compared to what would be expected from the metagenome, highlighting the need to perform metaproteomics when studying complex microbiome samples.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Metaproteomics, Taxonomy, Metagenome

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics Proteome Center Tübingen Universität Tübingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tübingen
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Boris Maček
Quantitative Proteomics Proteome Center Tübingen Universität Tübingen Auf der Morgenstelle 15 72076 Tübingen


