### Accession
PXD029700

### Title
Improving statistical certainty of glycosylation similarity between influenza A virus variants using data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry

### Description
The amino acid sequences of immunodominant domains of hemagglutinin (HA) on the surface of influenza A virus (IAV) evolve rapidly, producing viral variants. HA mediates receptor recognition, binding and cell entry, and serves as the target for IAV vaccines. Glycosylation, a post-translational modification that places large, branched polysaccharide molecules on proteins, can modulate the function of HA, and can shield antigenic regions allowing for viral evasion from immune responses. Our previous work showed that subtle changes in the HA protein sequence can have a measurable change in glycosylation. Thus, being able to measure quantitatively how glycosylation changes in viral variants is critical for understanding how HA function may change throughout viral evolution. Moreover, understanding quantitatively how the choice of viral expression systems affects glycosylation can help in the process of vaccine design and manufacture. Although IAV vaccines are most commonly expressed in chicken eggs, cell-based vaccines have many advantages and the adoption of more cell-based vaccines would be an important step in mitigating seasonal influenza and protecting against future pandemics. Here, we have investigated the use of data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry for quantitative glycoproteomics. We found that DIA improved the sensitivity of glycopeptide detection for four variants of A/Switzerland/9715293/2013 IAV: WT and mutant, each expressed in chicken eggs and MDCK cells. We used the Tanimoto similarity metric to quantify changes in glycosylation between WT and mutant, and between egg-expressed and cell-expressed virus. Our DIA site-specific glycosylation similarity comparison of WT and mutant expressed in eggs confirmed our previous analysis while achieving greater depth of coverage. We found that sequence changes resulting from different viral expression systems affected distinct glycosylation sites of HA. Our methods can be applied to track glycosylation changes in circulating IAV variants to bolster the genomic surveillance already being done, for a more complete understanding of IAV evolution.

### Sample Protocol
Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein, purified from human serum, was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO; #G9885). A/Philippines/2/1982 (Phil82) samples were expressed in embryonated chicken eggs, and were generous gift from Dr. Kevan Hartshorn of Boston University School of Medicine. The A/Switzerland/9715293/2013 (SWZ13) viral samples, both wild-type and 5B8 mutant, were propagated in parallel in chicken eggs and Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cell culture. The protocol for generation of the influenza virus has been described elsewhere (13). The mutant HA sequence, herein referred to as strain 5B8, had three amino acid substitutions, Q132H, Y219S, and D225N, none of which disrupted any N-glycosylation sequons.  Glycopeptide sample preparation Virus samples were first sonicated in methanol to disrupt virions before denaturation and reduction in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (J.T. Baker, Philipsburg, NJ), 2-2-2 trifluoroethanol (TFE) (Sigma-Aldrich), and 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich) at 65 °C for 1 hr. A solution of 200 mM iodoacetamide (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) was added to alkylate cysteine residues in the dark for 1 hr at room temperature. Additional DTT was added to the mixture to quench the alkylation reaction. A 3:1 mixture of water/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to dilute the TFE to 5% by volume. Sequencing-grade trypsin and chymostrypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) were applied in parallel reactions at an enzyme:substrate ratio 1:20 to digest the proteins into peptides, incubating at 37 °C overnight. The samples were heated to 95 °C for 10 min to inactivate the enzymes. Glycopeptides were enriched using iSPE-HILIC solid-phase extraction cartridges (HILICON, Umeå, Sweden) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The enriched AGP glycopeptides were treated with α2-3,6,8 neuraminidase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) to remove their terminal sialic acid residues. These glycopeptides are referred to as asialo AGP (aAGP). A small aliquot from all samples was deglycosylated by incubating with 500 units of PNGase F (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) per 20 µg of glycoprotein at 37 °C overnight. As a final step, every sample was cleaned using PepClean C18 spin columns (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). LC-MS/MS acquisition All mass spectrometry analysis was conducted on a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo-Fisher, San Jose, CA) in positive mode. Chromatography was accomplished using a nanoAcquity UPLC, equipped with a nanoAcquity NPLC Symmtry C18 trap column, and an Acquity UPLC Peptide BEH C18 analytical column (Waters, Milford, MA), heated to 37 °C, and a Triversa Nanomate source (Advion, Ithaca, NY). We used 1% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for mobile phase A, and 99% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for mobile phase B. We trapped analytes at 4 µL/min for 4 min in mobile phase A. Separation was done at 0.5 µL/min flow rate using the following gradient: 2–5% mobile phase B over 0–3 min, 5–40% B over 3–93 min, 40% B over 93–98 min, 40–98% B over 98–100 min, 98% B over 100–105 min, 98–2% B over 105–106 min, and 2% B  over 106–120 min. DDA acquisition. MS1 spectra were acquired with resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400, 1 microscan per spectrum, scan range m/z 350-1800, 64 ms maximum injection time, and AGC target of 3e6 (AGC target of 1e6 was used for deglycosylated peptides). Up to 20 precursor ions were selected for fragmentation per cycle. MS2 spectra were acquired with resolution 30,000 at m/z 400, 2 microscans, 64 ms maximum injection time, AGC target 2e5 (1e6 for deglycosylated peptides), isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.4 m/z, scan range m/z 200-2000, NCE 35 (NCE of 27 was used for deglycosylated peptides), and 3.1e5 intensity threshold. Unassigned and +1 charge states were excluded, and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. Profile data were recorded for MS1 and MS2. DIA acquisition. MS1 spectra were acquired with resolution 60,000 at m/z 400, 1 microscan per spectrum, scan range m/z 350-1800, 32 ms maximum injection time, and AGC target of 3e6. For MS2, we used 50 non-overlapping isolation windows, 16 m/z¬ wide, to cover the range of m/z 800-1600. Spectra were acquired with resolution 30,000 at m/z 400, 2 microscans, 32 ms maximum injection time, AGC target 1e6, and NCE 35. Profile and centroid data were recorded for MS1 and MS2, respectively.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were first converted to mzML format (14) using MSConvert (15) from ProteoWizard version 3.0.11252 with no additional filters. Deglycosylated samples were processed using the “Peaks PTM Search” function of the Peaks Studio 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) (16) to provide information about the proteome for each sample type. AGP was searched against the entire Uniprot Swiss-Prot (17) database (release 2017_04) with Homo sapiens as the species taxonomy and 555,085 valid proteins. Databases for Phil82 and the SWZ13 variants consisted of HA and neuraminidase (NA) sequences from each specific strain and internal IAV protein sequences from A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (PR8) appended to the host proteome, either Gallus gallus (UP000000539 9031; release 2017_06) or Canis lupus familiaris (UP000002254 9615; release 2017_06). The Phil82 and SWZ13 databases had 29,551 and 29,628 entries actually searched, respectively. Relevant FASTA files can be found in supplemental Figures S1 and S2. We searched technical replicates together, with trypsin or chymotrypsin as the proteolytic enzyme, a maximum of 3 missed cleavages, and one nonspecific cleavage allowed. We specified a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of arginine deamidation and methionine oxidation. The precursor ion (MS1) mass error tolerance was 10 ppm and the fragment ion (MS/MS) error tolerance was 0.02 Da. We required a minimum of two unique peptides for protein identification. Default settings were used for the threshold score for accepting individual spectra. We used a target-decoy false discovery threshold of 1% at the peptide level. Peaks Studio search results were exported in mzIdentML (18) format.  DDA and DIA raw files were processed using the GlycReSoft search engine (19). DDA preprocessed used default GlycReSoft parameters. For DIA, we first performed deisotoping and charge state deconvolution, then using DIA-Umpire methodology (20), we limited MS2 spectra with co-isolating precursor ions based on retention time. Potential precursors were limited to those with an apex retention time within 0.6 min of the product apex time, to account for retention time shifts due to co-isolated precursors with shared product ions. Using a Pearson correlation, we correlated the precursors with the product ions, retaining up to the top 20 co-isolating precursors. For these precursors, we created a duplicate MS2 spectrum containing information for a single precursor, while retaining all of the product ion information. After the preprocessing step, subsequent GlycReSoft searching steps were the same for DDA and DIA files. The glycopeptide search space was built from the proteomics mzIdentML file and a glycan search space which was generated combinatorially following these glycan composition rules and restrictions. The number of Hex residues was 3-10, the number of HexNAc residues was 2-9, the number of Fuc residues was 0-5, and the number of Neu5Ac residues was 0-4. The number of Fuc was required to be less than the number of HexNAc, and the number of HexNAc was required to be greater than the number of Neu5Ac + 1. In addition, ≤1 sulfation and ≤1 ammonium adduct were considered. The same glycomics search space was used for AGP and IAV samples. When there were two different glycosylation sites on the same peptide, GlycReSoft used a parsimony filter to weight and report the score towards the localization with the fewest missing ions.  Scoring was accomplished using default GlycReSoft parameters, with a false discovery threshold of 0.05 for positive identification. We used a peptide-centric scoring method to evaluate glycopeptide-spectrum-matches, building on our previous coverage-weighted binomial model (19). Because we used a relatively high single collision energy for fragmentation without calibration for specific precursor m/z and charge states, we did not observe peptide+Y ions consistently for all glycopeptides, producing low scores for spectra that were otherwise well matched. Therefore, we did not allow any peaks matching theoretical peptide+Y ions to be included in scoring.  The abundances of glycopeptides that passed the FDR threshold of 0.05 were quantified by aggregating the all associated MS1 peak areas of the glycoforms deconvoluted and identified by GlycReSoft. Peptide with varying cleavages or PTMs that had the same glycoform were summed. If a glycosite was identified in both tryptic and chymotryptic digestions, only we retained only the set with the highest average abundance across replicates. Only glycan compositions that were observed in at least two replicates were considered positive identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Amino acid sequences of immunodominant domains of hemagglutinin (HA) on the surface of influenza A virus (IAV) evolve rapidly, producing viral variants. HA mediates receptor recognition, binding and cell entry, and serves as the target for IAV vaccines. Glycosylation, a post-translational modification that places large branched polysaccharide molecules on proteins, can modulate the function of HA and shield antigenic regions allowing for viral evasion from immune responses. Our previous work showed that subtle changes in the HA protein sequence can have a measurable change in glycosylation. Thus, being able to quantitatively measure glycosylation changes in variants is critical for understanding how HA function may change throughout viral evolution. Moreover, understanding quantitatively how the choice of viral expression systems affects glycosylation can help in the process of vaccine design and manufacture. Although IAV vaccines are most commonly expressed in chicken eggs, cell-based vaccines have many advantages, and the adoption of more cell-based vaccines would be an important step in mitigating seasonal influenza and protecting against future pandemics. Here, we have investigated the use of data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry for quantitative glycoproteomics. We found that DIA improved the sensitivity of glycopeptide detection for four variants of A/Switzerland/9715293/2013 (H3N2): WT and mutant, each expressed in embryonated chicken eggs and Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. We used the Tanimoto similarity metric to quantify changes in glycosylation between WT and mutant and between egg-expressed and cell-expressed virus. Our DIA site-specific glycosylation similarity comparison of WT and mutant expressed in eggs confirmed our previous analysis while achieving greater depth of coverage. We found that sequence variations and changing viral expression systems affected distinct glycosylation sites of HA. Our methods can be applied to track glycosylation changes in circulating IAV variants to bolster genomic surveillance already being done, for a more complete understanding of IAV evolution.

### Keywords
Glycosylation similarity, Glycoproteomics, Hemagglutinin, Influenza, Dia, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Boston University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Deborah Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Zaia
Boston University School of Medicine


