### Accession
PXD020861

### Title
PhosTip for Enrichment of Phosphopeptides from Urinary Extracellular Vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are attracting increasing interest with their intrigue role in intercellular communications. Protein phosphorylation in EVs is of great importance for understanding intercellular signaling processes. However, the study of EV phosphoproteomics is impeded by their relatively low amount in limited clinical samples and it is necessary to have a sensitive and efficient enrichment method for EV phosphopeptides. Herein, a novel Ti4+-functionalized and glass-fiber supported hybrid monolithic spin tip, we named PhosTip, was prepared for enriching phosphopeptides from urinary EVs.

### Sample Protocol
EVs enrichment，lysis, digest, phosphopeptides enrichment

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS data were searched directly against Uniprot database version downloaded November 2019 with no redundant entries, using PEAKS Studio X+ software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.).

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are attracting increasing interest with their intriguing role in intercellular communications. Protein phosphorylation in EVs is of great importance for understanding intercellular signaling processes. However, the study of EV phosphoproteomics is impeded by their relatively low amount in limited clinical sample volumes, and it is necessary to have a sensitive and efficient enrichment method for EV phosphopeptides. Herein, a novel Ti(IV)-functionalized and glass fiber-supported hybrid monolithic spin tip, termed PhosTip, was prepared for enriching phosphopeptides from urinary EVs. Glass fiber as the stationary phase positions the hybrid monolith in a standard pipet tip and prevents the monolith from distortion during experiments. The preparation procedure for the new PhosTip is simple and time-saving. The hybrid monolithic PhosTip provides excellent enrichment efficiency of low-abundance phosphopeptides from cell digests and urinary EVs with minimum contamination and sample loss. Using the PhosTip, we demonstrate that 5373 and 336 unique phosphopeptides were identified from 100 and 1 &#x3bc;g of cell lysates, while 3919 and 217 unique phosphopeptides were successfully identified from 10 and 1 mL of urinary samples, respectively. The PhosTip was finally applied to enrich phosphopeptides in urine EVs from prostate cancer patients and healthy controls and quantify 118 up-regulated proteins with phosphosites in prostate cancer samples. These results demonstrated that the PhosTip could be a simple and convenient tool for enriching phosphopeptides from clinical samples and for broader applications in biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
Phosphopeptides， extracellular vesicles，biomarker

### Affiliations
Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Purdue Center of Cancer Research, Purdue University
Southeast University 

### Submitter
Haiyang Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr W. Andy Tao
Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Purdue Center of Cancer Research, Purdue University


