### Accession
PXD022701

### Title
The ubiquitin ligase Ariadne-1 regulates NSF for neurotransmitter release

### Description
The aim of the present project was to identify putative substrates of Ariadne-1 (Ari-1), an essential E3 ubiquitin-ligase, in Drosophila heads. For that purpose we combined an in vivo ubiquitin biotinylation strategy termed bioUb with label free mass spectrometry analysis. In brief, BioUb strategy relies on the overexpression of a tagged ubiquitin that bears a 16 amino-acid long biotinylatable peptide, which can be biotinylated by the E.coli biotin holoenzyme synthetase enzyme (BirA) in neurons in vivo. Hence, ubiquitinated and therefore, biotinylated proteins can be enriched using avidin prior to MS analysis. We performed the same procedure in triplicate using flies expressing BioUb alone (control) and together with Ari-1. From the 1452 proteins quantified, 16 fulfilled the criteria established to be considered as putative Ari-1 substrates. Additionally, our analyses resulted in the detection of 150 peptides containing the characteristic GlyGly remnant of ubiquitin. Of those, 86 are novel ubiquitination sites not previously described in Drosophila.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from flies expressing BioUb alone (control) or BioUb together with Ari-1. Ubiquitinated, and hence, biotinylated proteins were enriched using avidin resin. Then, proteins were fractionated by SDS-PAGE, and visualized gel bands were cut into 4 slices, which were subsequently subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. Finally, resulting peptides were analyzed LC-MS/MS using a QExactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw MS data was processed using the MaxQuant software and further statistical analysis were done in the Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nsf, Synapse, Neurotransmitter release, Ubiquitination, Drosophila, Ariadne-1, E3 ubiquitin ligase

### Affiliations
Teacher/Researcher
Ikerbasque Researcher, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science and Technology, UPV/EHU, Leioa 48940, Bizkaia, Spain

### Submitter
Nerea Osinalde

### Lab Head
Dr Ugo Mayor
Ikerbasque Researcher, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science and Technology, UPV/EHU, Leioa 48940, Bizkaia, Spain


