### Accession
PXD002995

### Title
The E. coli type III secreted effectors NleB and EspL interact with the microtubule associated protein ensconsin to disrupt vesicle trafficking, part 2

### Description
This is the companion dataset to PXD002933. This contains additional RAW files

### Sample Protocol
Please see the details for PXD002933. THese samples were processed in the same way

### Data Protocol
Please see the details for PXD002933. THese samples were processed in the same way

### Publication Abstract
Enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli cause enteric diseases resulting in significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. These pathogens remain extracellular and translocate a set of type III secreted effector proteins into host cells to promote bacterial virulence. Effectors manipulate host cell pathways to facilitate infection by interacting with a variety of host targets, yet the binding partners and mechanism of action of many effectors remain elusive. We performed a mass spectrometry screen to identify host targets for a library of effectors. We found five known effector targets and discovered four novel interactions. Interestingly, we identified multiple effectors that interacted with the microtubule associated protein, ensconsin. Using co-immunoprecipitations, we confirmed that NleB1 and EspL interacted with ensconsin in a region that corresponded to its microtubule binding domain. Ensconsin is an essential cofactor of kinesin-1 that is required for intracellular trafficking, and we demonstrated that intracellular trafficking was severely disrupted during wild type EPEC infections but not during infections with &#x394;nleB1 or &#x394;espL mutants. Our findings demonstrate the efficacy of quantitative proteomics for identifying effector-host protein interactions and suggest that vesicular trafficking is a crucial cellular process that may be targeted by NleB1 and EspL through their interaction with ensconsin.

### Keywords
Pathogenesis, Virulence, Bacteria

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Leonard Foster

### Lab Head
Dr Leonard Foster
University of British Columbia


