### Accession
PXD000156

### Title
Tryptic striptease of Staphylococcus aureus unveils the cell surface  localization of immunodominant epitopes

### Description
The opportunistic pathogen Staphylococcus aureus has become a major threat for human health and well-being by developing resistance to antibiotics, and by its fast evolution into new lineages that rapidly spread within the healthy human population. This calls for the development of active or passive immunization strategies to prevent or treat acute phase infections. Since no such anti-staphylococcal immunization approaches are available as yet, the present studies were aimed at identifying new leads for their development. For this purpose, we thoroughly profiled the cell surface-exposed staphylococcal proteome by combining two surface shaving approaches. In parallel, non-covalently cell wall-bound proteins were extracted with KSCN and analyzed by gel-free proteomics, and also the exoproteome was analyzed through gel-free proteomics. Lastly, we screened a selection of the identified cell wall-attached proteins for binding of immunoglobulin G from patients that have been challenged with different types of S. aureus over extended periods of time due to chronic wound colonization. The combined results of these analyses highlight particular cell surface-exposed S. aureus proteins with highly immunogenic epitopes as potentially powerful targets for the development of protective anti-staphylococcal immunization strategies. Bioinformatics pipeline: Reduction and alkylation, desalting of the samples, mass spectrometric  (MS) analysis and database searches were performed as previously described (PMID: 20662103). The strain-specific uniprot databases were used for the /S. aureus/ strains Newman and USA300, respectively including concatenated reversed databases with 5250 and 5298 entries. Validation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications was performed with Scaffold (version Scaffold_2_04_00, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Peptide identifications were accepted if they exceeded the specific database search engine thresholds. Sequest identifications required at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.10 and XCorr scores of greater than 1.9, 2.2, 3.8 and 3.8 for singly, doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides, respectively. All experiments were conducted in independent triplicates. Peptides were only accepted as identified if they were detected in at least two out of the three replicates per sample set. With these filter parameters no false positive hits were obtained.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The opportunistic pathogen <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> has become a major threat for human health and well-being by developing resistance to antibiotics and by fast evolution into new lineages that rapidly spread within the healthy human population. This calls for development of active or passive immunization strategies to prevent or treat acute phase infections. Since no such anti-staphylococcal immunization approaches are available for clinical implementation, the present studies were aimed at identifying new leads for their development. For this purpose, we profiled the cell-surface-exposed staphylococcal proteome under infection-mimicking conditions by combining two approaches for "bacterial shaving" with immobilized or soluble trypsin and subsequent mass spectrometry analysis of liberated peptides. In parallel, non-covalently cell-wall-bound proteins extracted with potassium thiocyanate and the exoproteome fraction were analyzed by gel-free proteomics. All data are available through ProteomeXchange accession PXD000156. To pinpoint immunodominant bacterial-surface-exposed epitopes, we screened selected cell-wall-attached proteins of <i>S. aureus</i> for binding of immunoglobulin G from patients who have been challenged by different types of <i>S. aureus</i> due to chronic wound colonization. The combined results of these analyses highlight particular cell-surface-exposed <i>S. aureus</i> proteins with highly immunogenic exposed epitopes as potential targets for development of protective anti-staphylococcal immunization strategies.

### Keywords
Cellwall, Exoproteome, Virulence factor, Surfacome, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head


