### Accession
PXD007060

### Title
Cell rearrangement during angiogenesis requires suppression of actomyosin at cell-cell contacts via PI3-kinase.

### Description
Sprouting angiogenesis is a highly dynamic process which relies on the continuous interchange of endothelial cell relative position within the vascular sprout, a process mediated by cell rearrangements. Here we take advantage of a previous identified role of p110a/PI3K regulating endothelial cell motility to address how cell rearrangement and interaction regulate vessel growth. By using advanced fluorescent zebrafish models and a tamoxifen-inducible endothelial-specific gene targeting in the postnatal mouse retina, we demonstrate that inactivation of the p110a isoform of PI3K in endothelial cells is a good model to study cell shuffling in the growing vasculature.  We identify that a failure of endothelial cells to rearrange results in cell elongation and inability to stabilize new contacts upon anastomosis. Instead of rearrange, blockade of p110 signaling drive these cells to grow in a three dimension fashion by sending multiple protrusions which lack lumen and fail to stabilize upon anastomosis. Through a combination of in vivo and in vitro approaches together with a global phosphoproteomic screen, we discover that p110a signaling stimulates cell rearrangements by suppressing actomyosin contractility in a myosin light chain phosphatase (MLCP) dependent manner.  Together, our findings highlight the importance of cell rearrangement orchestrating several steps within the angiogenic program and uncover a critical role of the p110a/MLCP axis to suppress actomyosin contractility.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and trypsin digestion was performed as previously described (Wilkes et al., 2015). Briefly, primary mouse endothelial cells  were washed twice with cold PBS (supplemented with 1mM Na3VO4 and 1 mM NaF) and lysed with 300 µL of urea buffer (8M urea in 20 mM in HEPES pH 8.0 supplemented with 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1mM Na4P2O7 and 1 mM sodium β-glycerophosphate) for 30 min. Cell lysates were scraped from the flasks, snap frozen and stored at -80C until further processing. Cell lysates were further homogenized by sonication (60 cycles of 30s on 40s off; Diagenode Bioruptor® Plus, Liege, Belgium). Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 20.000 x g for 10 min at 5 oC and protein in the cell extracts was quantified by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) analysis.  We used published methods for phosphoproteome analyses, (Gruhler et al., 2005; Larsen et al., 2005; Montoya et al., 2011) with some modifications. Briefly, 250 µg of protein were reduced and alkylated by sequential incubation with 10 mM DTT and 16.6 mM iodoacetamyde for 1h. Urea concentration was diluted to 2M with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 80 µL of trypsin beads [(50% slurry of TLCK-trypsin (Thermo-Fisher Scientific; Cat. #20230)] pre-conditioned with 3 washes of 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) were added and samples were incubated for 16h at 37 oC with agitation. Trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation at 2,000 x g for 5 min at 5 oC. Following trypsin digestion, peptide solutions were desalted using 10 mg OASIS-HLB cartridges (Waters, Manchester, UK). Briefly, OASIS cartridges were accommodated in a vacuum manifold (-5 mmHg), activated with 1 mL ACN and equilibrated with 1.5 mL washing solution (1% ACN, 0.1% TFA). After loading the samples, cartridges were washed with 1 mL of washing solution. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 500 µL of glycolic acid buffer 1 (1 M glycolic acid, 50% ACN, 5% TFA) and subjected to phosphoenrichment.  Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 (GL Sciences) as previously described with some modifications (Wilkes et al., 2015). Sample volumes were normalized to 1 mL using glycolic acid buffer 2 (1 M glycolic acid, 80% ACN, 5% TFA),  50 µL of TiO2 beads (50% slurry in 1% TFA) were added to the peptide mixture,  incubated for 5 min at room temperature with agitation and centrifuged for 30s at 1500xg. For each sample, 80% of the supernatant was transfer to fresh tubes and stored in ice and the remaining 20% used to resuspend the bead pellets that were loaded into an empty prewashed PE-filtered spin-tips (Glygen, MD, USA) and packed by centrifugation at 1500 x g for 3 min. After loading the remaining volume of the supernatant by centrifugation at 1500xg for 3 mim, spin tips were sequentially washed with 100 µL of glycolic acid buffer 2, ammonium acetate buffer (100 mM ammonium acetate in 25% ACN) and 10% ACN by RT centrifugation for 3 min at 1500xg. For phosphopeptide recovery, the addition 50 µL of 5% ammonium water followed by centrifugation for 5 min at 1500 x g was repeated 4 times. Eluents were snap frozen in dry ice, dried in a speed vac (RVC 2-25, Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen GmbH, Osterode am Harz, Germany) and peptide pellets stored at -80 oC.  Peptide pellets were resuspended in 12 µL of reconstitution buffer (20 fmol/µL enolase in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and 5.0 µL were loaded onto an LC-MS/MS system consisting of a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC directly coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trap in a μ-pre-column (catalog no 160454) and separated in an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100 ;catalog no 164569). The following parameters were used: 3% to 23% B gradient for 120 min and a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min.  As they eluted from the nano-LC system, peptides were infused into the online connected Q-Exactive Plus system operating with a 2.1s duty cycle. Acquisition of full scan survey spectra (m/z 375-1,500) with a 70,000 FWHM resolution was followed by, data-dependent acquisition in which the 20 most intense ions were selected for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) and MS/MS scanning (200-2,000 m/z) with a resolution of 17,500 FWHM. A 30 s dynamic exclusion period was enabled with an exclusion list with 10 ppm mass window. Overall duty cycle generated chromatographic peaks of approximately 30 s at the base, which allowed the construction of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) with at least 10 data points.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification Mascot Daemon 2.5.0 was used to automate peptide identification from MS data. Peak list files (MGFs) from RAW data were generated with Mascot Distiller v2.5.1.0 and loaded into the Mascot search engine (v2.5) in order to match MS/MS data to peptides (Perkins et al., 1999). The searches were performed against the SwissProt Database (SwissProt_2012Oct.fasta for proteomics or uniprot_sprot_2014_08.fasta for phosphoproteomics analysis) with a FDR of ~1% and the following parameters: 2 trypsin missed cleavages, mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for the MS scans and ±25 mmu for the MS/MS scans, carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification, PyroGlu on N-terminal Gln and oxidation of Met as variable modifications. For phosphoproteomics experiments Phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr was also included as variable modifications. The in-house developed Pescal software was used for label-free peptide quantification (Cutillas, 2017), XICs for all the peptides identified across all samples were constructed with ±7 ppm and ±2 min mass and retention time windows, respectively. Peak areas from all XICs were calculated. Undetectable peptides were given an intensity value of 0. Values of 2 technical replicates per sample were averaged and intensity values for each peptide were normalized to total sample intensity. Normalized quantitative data were used to calculate fold changes between groups and statistical significance (assessed by Student’s t-test) when necessary. Volcano plots and heatmatps were constructed in an R computing environment. KSEA Kinase substrate enrichment analysis (KSEA) was performed as described before (Casado et al., 2013). Briefly, peptides differentially phosphorylated between a set of samples (p < 0.05) were grouped into substrate sets known to be phosphorylated by a specific kinase as annotated in the PhosphoSite database (Hornbeck et al., 2015). To infer enrichment of substrate groups across sets of samples the hypergeometric test was used, followed by Benjamini Hochberg multiple testing correction. To calculate the fold difference of a given substrate group peptides were first normalized to those of the non-differentiated cells and then subjected to log2 transformation.

### Publication Abstract
Angiogenesis is a dynamic process relying on endothelial cell rearrangements within vascular tubes, yet the underlying mechanisms and functional relevance are poorly understood. Here we show that PI3K&#x3b1; regulates endothelial cell rearrangements using a combination of a PI3K&#x3b1;-selective inhibitor and endothelial-specific genetic deletion to abrogate PI3K&#x3b1; activity during vessel development. Quantitative phosphoproteomics together with detailed cell biology analyses in vivo and in vitro reveal that PI3K signalling prevents NUAK1-dependent phosphorylation of the myosin phosphatase targeting-1 (MYPT1) protein, thereby allowing myosin light chain phosphatase (MLCP) activity and ultimately downregulating actomyosin contractility. Decreased PI3K activity enhances actomyosin contractility and impairs junctional remodelling and stabilization. This leads to overstretched endothelial cells that fail to anastomose properly and form aberrant superimposed layers within the vasculature. Our findings define the PI3K/NUAK1/MYPT1/MLCP axis as a critical pathway to regulate actomyosin contractility in endothelial cells, supporting vascular patterning and expansion through the control of cell rearrangement.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Mascot, Pescal, Qexactive-plus, Mice

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling
Centre for Heamato-Oncology / Barts Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Pedro Casado-Izquierdo

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R. Cutillas
Centre for Heamato-Oncology / Barts Cancer Institute


