### Accession
PXD021803

### Title
Mitotic activity shapes stage-specific histone modification profiles during Xenopus embryogenesis

### Description
Here we investigate the possible relationship between the propagation of epigenetic information and the developmental cell proliferation during Xenopus embryogenesis. We systemically inhibited cell proliferation during the G1/S-transition in gastrula embryos and followed their development until the tadpole stage. We quantified by mass spectrometry the abundance of a large set of histone modification states, which reflects the developmental maturation of the embryonic epigenome.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclei were isolated from the four developmental stages of Xenopus laevis. Histones were extracted from the nuclei following acid extraction protocol, and then ran on a gradient SDS-Page gel. The histones bands were visualised by Coomassie staining and then excised from the gel. Naturally unmodified and monomethylated Lysine residues were propionylated; a library of the isotopically heavy-labelled spiketides were added in each sample in an equimolar concentration; and in-gel Trypsin digested performed. Histone peptised were desalted by sequential C18 Stagetips and TipTop Carbon tips, and then the samples were analysed at the QExactive-HF mass spectrometer. The MS was operated in a scheduled PRM mode to identify and quantify specific fragment ions of N-terminal peptides histone proteins. In this mode, the mass spectrometer automatically switches between one survey scan and 9 MS/MS acquisitions of the m/z values described in the inclusion list containing the precursor ions, modifications, and fragmentation conditions. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 270–730) were acquired with resolution 60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x10^6). PRM spectra were acquired with resolution 30,000 to a target value of 2x10^5, maximum IT 60 ms, isolation window 0.7 m/z and fragmented at 27% or 30% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with the Skyline (version 3.7) by using doubly and triply charged peptide masses for extracted ion chromatograms (XICs). Selection of respective peaks was identified based on the retention time and fragmentation spectra of the spiked in heavy-labelled peptides. Integrated peak values (Total Area MS1) were exported as csv. file for further calculations. Total area MS1 from endogenous peptides was normalized to the respective area of heavy-labelled peptides. The sum of all normalized total area MS1 values of the same isotopically modified peptide in one sample resembled the amount of total peptide. The relative abundance of an observed modified peptide was calculated as percentage of the overall peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone modification; epigenetics; cell cycle; xenopus; development

### Affiliations
Ludwig Maximilian University of munich, BMC
Molecular Biology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Munchen

### Submitter
Daniil Pokrovsky

### Lab Head
Dr Ralph AW Rupp
Molecular Biology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Munchen


