### Accession
PXD019861

### Title
Proteomic analysis of mycelial exudate of Ustilaginoidea virens

### Description
Rice false smut (RFS) is a kind of fungal disease transforming panicles and spikelets into greenish spore balls, caused by Ustilaginoidea virens. During artificial cultivation process, macroscopic exudates could be observed, which is a common feature in many kinds of fungi. We characterized the proteome of exudate associated with this plant pathogen. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was used to identify proteins in the pathogen exudate. A total of 685 proteins comprising 3,949 peptides were identified from the exudate. This study regarded the biological characteristics of U. virens as an entry point. By studying the protein components of the exudates of U. virens, it is helpful to better understand the occurrence and pathogenic mechanism of pathogen and provide a theoretical basis for the control of RFS.

### Sample Protocol
The three representative U. virens strains (SyUv-01, DdUv-05 and PjUv-07) used in this study were isolated from infected Oryza sativa in Shenyang, Dandong and Panjin of Liaoning Province of China, respectively. The isolates were placed in potato sucrose agar (PSA) medium at 25 ± 1°C. After 5 days cultivation, the mycelium on the outer edge of the colony was picked up by inoculation needle into a new PSA medium. After the isolates were cultured on the new PSA medium for 25 days, the exudate was collected from the mycelium. The exudate sample was stored in a 1.5 mL tube (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China) and quickly passed through liquid nitrogen, then stored at -80℃.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis The peptide segments of the sample were separated by Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptide was first loaded to a trap column (100 μm*20 mm, 5 μm, C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and passed through chromatographic analysis column (75 µm*150 mm, 3 µm, C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) for gradient separation at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient was set as following: 3% to 8% buffer B (0.1% formic acid) from 0 min to 2min, 8% to 26% buffer B from 2 min to 170 min, 26% to 40% buffer B from 170 min to 206 min, 40% to 100% buffer B from 206 min to 216 min, 100% buffer B kept till to 240 min. The peptide segments were separated by a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mass spectrometry analysis. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top 20 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (350-1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. The full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and 17,500 at m/z 200 for MS/MS scan. The maximum injection time of MS and MS/MS were both set to 50 ms. Normalized collision energy was 27 and the isolation window was set to 2.0 Th. Sequence Database Searching The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0. MS data were searched against the UniProtKB U. virens database. The trypsin was seleted as digestion enzyme. The maximal two missed cleavage sites and the mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions were defined for database search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while acetylation of protein N-terminal, oxidation of Methionine were set as variable modifications for database searching. The database search results were filtered and exported with <1% false discovery rate (FDR) at peptide-spectrum-matched level, and protein level, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Rice false smut (RFS) disease, which is caused by <i>Ustilaginoidea virens</i>, has been widespread all over the world in recent years, causing irreversible losses. Under artificial culture conditions, exudates will appear on colonies of <i>U. virens</i> during the growth of the hyphae. Exudation of droplets is a common feature in many fungi, but the functions of exudates are undetermined. As the executors of life functions, proteins can intuitively reflect the functions of exudates. Shotgun proteomics were used in this study. A total of 650 proteins were identified in the exudate of <i>U. virens</i>, and the raw data were made available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD019861. There were 57 subcategories and 167 pathways annotated with Gene Ontology (GO) classification and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis, respectively. Through protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis, it was found that 20 proteins participated in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites. Two separate PPI analyses were performed for carbon metabolism and microbial metabolism in diverse environments. After comparing and annotating the functions of proteins of the exudate, it was speculated that the exudate was involved in the construction and remodeling of the fungal cell wall. Pathogenicity, sporulation, and antioxidant effects might all be affected by the exudate.

### Keywords
Exudate; ustilaginoidea virens;lc-ms

### Affiliations
Shenyang Agricultural University
Department of Plant Protection, Shenyang Agricultural University

### Submitter
Songhong Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Songhong Wei
Department of Plant Protection, Shenyang Agricultural University


