### Accession
PXD004734

### Title
Identification of novel SHARPIN binders

### Description
Sharpin, a multifunctional adaptor protein with oncogenic properties, regulates several signalling pathways. For example, Sharpin enhances signal-induced NF-κB signalling as part of the linear ubiquitin assembly complex (LUBAC) and inhibits integrins, the T cell receptor, caspase1 and PTEN. However, despite recent insights into Sharpin and LUBAC function, a systematic approach to identify signalling pathways regulated by Sharpin has not been reported. Here, we present the first ‘Sharpin interactome’, which identifies a large amount of novel potential Sharpin interactors. These data suggest that Sharpin and LUBAC might regulate a larger number of biological processes than previously identified, such as endosomal trafficking, RNA processing, metabolism and cytoskeleton regulation. Importantly, using the Sharpin interactome we have identified a novel role for Sharpin in lamellipodium formation. We demonstrate that Sharpin interacts with the Arp2/3 complex, a protein complex that catalyses actin filament branching, and that Sharpin and Arp2/3 colocalize in lamellipodia. We identified the Arp2/3-binding site in Sharpin and demonstrate using a specific Arp2/3-binding deficient mutant that the Sharpin-Arp2/3 interaction promotes lamellipodia formation in a LUBAC-independent fashion.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-tagged proteins were pulled down from cell lysates using GFP-Trap agarose beads (Chromotek) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 293T cells, previously transfected with GFP or sharpin-GFP, were either kept in suspension or plated on FN (10ug.ul; sigma) for 1h prior to lysis (0.5% (wt/vol) NP-40, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.2, 250 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 10% (wt/vol) glycerol, 10 μg/ml leupeptin, 10 μg/ml aprotinin, 0.5 mM 4-(2-aminoethyl)benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride, 2 mM Na3VO4). Lysates were then sonicated (3 pulses of 10 s; VibraCell VCX 500; Sonics & Materials) and centrifuged at 200g for 5min. Clarified lysates were incubated with GFP-Trap agarose beads for 1h at 4°C. Complexes bound to beads were isolated by centrifugation, washed three times with ice-cold lysis buffer and eluted in Laemmli reducing sample buffer.  Mass spectrometric data acquisition and analysis Protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and allowed to migrate 20 mm into a 4–12% polyacrylamide gel. Following staining with InstantBlue (Expedeon), gel lanes were sliced into ten 2-mm bands and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin as described (Shevchenko et al. 1996)   with modifications (Byron et al. 2015). Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% FA in water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 44 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 75 mm x 250 μm i.d. 1.7 M BEH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were automatically selected for fragmentation by data-dependant analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data files were searched for protein identification using Proteome Discoverer (1.4) connected to in-house Mascot (v. 2.4) software. Data was searched against the SwissProt database (release 2015_08). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was allowed as a variable modification. Only tryptic peptides were considered, with up to one missed cleavage permitted. Monoisotopic precursor mass values were used, and only doubly and triply charged precursor ions were considered. Data were validated in Scaffold (version 3.6) using a threshold of identification of at least 50% probability at the peptide level, at least 99% probability at the protein level and assignment of at least two unique, validated peptides. These acceptance criteria resulted in an estimated protein false discovery rate of 0.1% for all datasets.

### Publication Abstract
Sharpin, a multifunctional adaptor protein, regulates several signalling pathways. For example, Sharpin enhances signal-induced NF-&#x3ba;B signalling as part of the linear ubiquitin assembly complex (LUBAC) and inhibits integrins, the T cell receptor, caspase 1 and PTEN. However, despite recent insights into Sharpin and LUBAC function, a systematic approach to identify the signalling pathways regulated by Sharpin has not been reported. Here, we present the first 'Sharpin interactome', which identifies a large number of novel potential Sharpin interactors in addition to several known ones. These data suggest that Sharpin and LUBAC might regulate a larger number of biological processes than previously identified, such as endosomal trafficking, RNA processing, metabolism and cytoskeleton regulation. Importantly, using the Sharpin interactome, we have identified a novel role for Sharpin in lamellipodium formation. We demonstrate that Sharpin interacts with Arp2/3, a protein complex that catalyses actin filament branching. We have identified the Arp2/3-binding site in Sharpin and demonstrate using a specific Arp2/3-binding deficient mutant that the Sharpin-Arp2/3 interaction promotes lamellipodium formation in a LUBAC-independent fashion.This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Human, Gfp pull-down, Sharpin

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland,

### Submitter
Guillaume Jacquemet

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Pouwels
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland,


