### Accession
PXD043674

### Title
HRD1 IP-MS in WT and SEL1L deficiency HEK293T cells

### Description
To gain further insights into the role and importance of SEL1L in HRD1 ERAD, we performed unbiased proteomics LC-MS analyses to map SEL1L and HRD1 interactomes in WT and SEL1L-/-, WT and HRD1-/- HEK293T cells, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
For HRD1-IP in HEK293T cells, immunoprecipitation of endogenous HRD1 in WT, SEL1L-/- or HRD1-/- HEK293T cells were performed using 10 mg proteins from each sample lysed with the NP-40 lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors, protein phosphatase inhibitors, and 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide. The cell lysates were first incubated anti-HRD1 (home-made or Cell Signaling #14773) at 4°C overnight, followed by incubation with Protein A agarose (Invitrogen, #20333) at 4°C for 2 hours. An IP reaction with IgG using cell lysate of SEL1L-/- or HRD1-/- cells was included as a negative control for SEL1L- or HRD1-IP, respectively.   The beads were resuspended in 50 µl of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH~8). Cysteines were reduced by adding 50 µl of 10 mM DTT and incubating at 45 C for 30 min. Samples were cooled to room temperature and alkylation of cysteines was achieved by incubating with 65 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, under darkness, for 30 min at room temperature. An overnight digestion with 1 µg sequencing-grade modified trypsin was carried out at 37 C with constant shaking in a Thermomixer. Digestion was stopped by acidification and peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges using manufacturer’s protocol (Waters). Samples were completely dried using vacufuge. Resulting peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile solution and were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50 cm, ThermoScientific) using a 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid/95% acetonitrile (Buffer B) gradient at 300 nl/min over a period of 180 min (2-25% buffer B in 110 min, 25-40% in 20 min, 40-90% in 5 min followed by holding at 90% buffer B for 10 min and re-equilibration with Buffer A for 30 min). Eluent was directly introduced into Q exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA) using an EasySpray source. MS1 scans were acquired at 60K resolution (AGC target=3x106; max IT=50 ms). Data-dependent collision induced dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired using Top speed method (3 seconds) following each MS1 scan (NCE ~28%; 15K resolution; AGC target 1x105; max IT 45 ms).  Proteins were identified by searching the MS/MS data against UniProt entries using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Scientific). Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.2 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were considered as potential modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with an FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
SEL1L- and HRD1-interacting proteins were selected based on the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) from the label-free IP-MS results. For each protein hit, the PSM value from the IgG sample must be smaller than one-tenth of the WT sample from the same experiment; the PSMs ratio of the bait KO sample to WT sample must be smaller than the ratio of the corresponding bait; specifically for the hits passed selection in two but not all three experiments, a minimal PSM value of 2 in at least one WT sample is reinforced. Common contaminating proteins in IP experiments, including keratin, keratin-associated proteins, ribosomal proteins and nuclear proteins were excluded. The proteins in association with both SEL1L and HRD1 were identified from the overlapping protein hits passed the selection criteria in SEL1L- and HRD1-immunoprecipitants.  The topology of the interacting proteins in association with the SEL1L-HRD1 complex was mapped based on their dependency on either SEL1L or HRD1. The hits with reduced PSMs in SEL1L-/- relative to WT in HRD1 IP-MS, and comparable PSM values in WT and HRD1-/- cells in SEL1L IP-MS were categorized hits matching this pattern as SEL1L-dependent hits, referred to as Group I. The hits with comparable PSM values in WT and SEL1L-/- cells in HRD1 IP-MS and low HRD1-/- to WT PSM ratios in SEL1L IP-MS, were classified as HRD1-dependent hits, or Group II

### Publication Abstract
The SEL1L-HRD1 protein complex represents the most conserved branch of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation (ERAD); however, definitive evidence for the importance of SEL1L in HRD1 ERAD is lacking. Here we report that attenuation of the interaction between SEL1L and HRD1 impairs HRD1 ERAD function and has pathological consequences in mice. Our data show that <i>SEL1L</i> variant <i>p.Ser658Pro</i> ( <i>SEL1L</i> <sup><i>S</i> 658 <i>P</i></sup> ) previously identified in Finnish Hound suffering cerebellar ataxia is a recessive hypomorphic mutation, causing partial embryonic lethality, developmental delay, and early-onset cerebellar ataxia in homozygous mice carrying the bi-allelic variant. Mechanistically, <i>SEL1L</i> <sup><i>S</i> 658 <i>P</i></sup> variant attenuates the SEL1L-HRD1 interaction and causes HRD1 dysfunction by generating electrostatic repulsion between SEL1L F668 and HRD1 Y30 residues. Proteomic screens of SEL1L and HRD1 interactomes revealed that the SEL1L-HRD1 interaction is prerequisite for the formation of a functional HRD1 ERAD complex, as SEL1L recruits not only the lectins OS9 and ERLEC1, but the E2 UBE2J1 and retrotranslocon DERLIN, to HRD1. These data underscore the pathophysiological importance and disease relevance of the SEL1L-HRD1 complex, and identify a key step in organizing the HRD1 ERAD complex.

### Keywords
Sel1l-hrd1 erad, Erad complex formation, Hek293t

### Affiliations
University of Michigan Medical School

### Submitter
Liangguang Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Ling Qi
University of Michigan Medical School


