### Accession
PXD027654

### Title
PROTEOMIC CHARACTERIZATION OF DRY BLOOD SPOTS OF HEALTHY WOMEN DURING SIMULATION THE MICROGRAVITY EFFECTS USING DRY IMMERSION

### Description
This study is unique in that it was the first time that it was the female response to microgravity simulated by 3-day dry immersion that was analyzed. The result of the choice of the object of research fell on dry blood spots, since the technique of capillary blood sampling is less invasive and allows sampling with a greater frequency. This allows researchers to analyze the changes caused by dry immersion in stages and observe the unfolding of the adaptive response taking into account the time of exposure to the experimental conditions.

### Sample Protocol
The dried blood spot was excised and placed in a 1.5 ml polypropylene Eppendorf tube. Proteins were extracted in 1 ml of a solution of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1% sodium deoxycholate, and 5 mM TCEP (tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride) (Thermo Scientific) at 60 °C with vortexing at 1000 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf) for one hour. The sample preparation method included reduction with 0.1 M dithiothreitol in 0.1 M Tris buffer (pH 8.5) containing 8 M urea for 30 minutes at 47 °C, as well as alkylation with 0.05 M iodoacetate and incubation for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Then precipitation was carried out with 5 volumes of acetone in the presence of 0.1% TFA at -20 °C overnight. The sample preparation procedure was completed by trypsinolysis in 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer. To the precipitated mixture of proteins were added 100 μl of the buffer and 2 μl of trypsin solution at a concentration of 1 μg/μl in 50 mM acetic acid. Incubation was carried out overnight in a thermomixer at 37 ° C with shaking at 750 rpm. Then, 1 μl of a 10% aqueous formic acid solution was added to inactivate trypsin and precipitate DOC. The sample was centrifuged at 21000 g for 10 min, and 20 μl of the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. At this stage, the sample was ready for mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data obtained were analyzed using PEAKS Studio 8.5 according to the following parameters: parent mass error tolerance −20 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance −0.03 Da; enzyme - trypsin; missed cleavages – 3; fixed modifications - Carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications - Oxidation (M), Acetylation (N-term). The search was carried out using the SwissProt database. False discovery rate threshold was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Healty human, Dry immersion, Label-free, Mass-spectrometry

### Affiliations
IBP RAS
V.I. Kulakov National Medical Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology,
Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Alexander Brzhozovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey Kononikhin
IBP RAS


