### Accession
PXD045279

### Title
Hepatic Huwe1 loss protects mice from non-alcoholic fatty liver disease through lipid metabolic rewiring

### Description
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most prevalent form of liver disease worldwide and is estimated to affect nearly a third of the population. Huwe1, also known as ARF-BP1, MULE, and HectH9, is a HECT (homology to E6-APC terminus)-domain E3 ubiquitin ligase originally identified as a binding partner of the tumor suppressor ARF, as well as a direct negative regulator of the tumor suppressor p53. To further elucidate the in vivo role of Huwe1, we generated a liver-specific Huwe1 (Huwe1LKO) knockout mouse model. Surprisingly, liver-specific knockout of Huwe1 protected mice from the development of age-induced hepatic steatosis. To elucidate the mechanism underlying this phenotype, mass spectrometry analysis was performed on liver tissues from 1-year-old Huwe1LKO and Huwe1WT mice.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were fractionated with sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Stained gel bands were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin. The tryptic peptides were extracted with 100 µl of 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 100 µl of 70% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA, consecutively. Nanospray LC-MS/MS analyzed tryptic peptides in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed and quantified using MaxQuant software (MaxQuant V1.5.2.8)1. MaxQuant-integrated Andromeda search engine (version 1.5.2.8) identifies proteins. The MaxLFQ algorithm of MaxQuant measures the area under the curve of high-intensity paired peptides’ signals from multiple samples in each group. Comparison between groups was then estimated as fold change.

### Publication Abstract
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most pervasive liver pathology worldwide. Here, we demonstrate that the ubiquitin E3 ligase Huwe1 is vital in NAFLD pathogenesis. Using mass spectrometry and RNA sequencing, we reveal that liver-specific deletion of Huwe1 (<i>Huwe1</i><sup><i>LKO</i></sup>) in 1-year-old mice (approximately middle age in humans) elicits extensive lipid metabolic reprogramming that involves downregulation of <i>de novo</i> lipogenesis and fatty acid uptake, upregulation of fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation, and increased oxidative phosphorylation. ChEA transcription factor prediction analysis inferred these changes result from attenuated PPAR&#x251;, LXR, and RXR activity in <i>Huwe1</i><sup><i>LKO</i></sup> livers. Consequently, <i>Huwe1</i><sup><i>LKO</i></sup> mice fed chow diet exhibited significantly reduced hepatic steatosis and superior glucose tolerance compared to wild-type mice. <i>Huwe1</i><sup><i>LKO</i></sup> also conferred protection from high-fat diet-induced hepatic steatosis by 6-months of age, with increasingly robust differences observed as mice reached middle age. Together, we present evidence that Huwe1 plays a critical role in the development of age- and diet-induced NAFLD.

### Keywords
Nafld, Ppar, Rxr, Steatosis

### Affiliations
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Department of Biological Sciences, Kent State University, USA

### Submitter
William Feng

### Lab Head
Dr Manabu Kurokawa
Department of Biological Sciences, Kent State University, USA


