### Accession
PXD019084

### Title
γ-glutamylcysteine (GGC) supplementation and p-LPS challenge causes distinct proteomic changes to primary airway epithelial cell models of Cystic Fibrosis

### Description
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a life limiting inherited condition associated with recurrent bacterial infections, inflammation, oxidative stress and loss of lung function. CF is characterised by deficiencies in both intra- and extracellular glutathione (GSH) levels. This GSH depletion is exacerbated by bacterial infections which further contributes to cellular oxidative stress and the inadequate control of inflammatory pathways in CF patients. A considerable body of research supports targeting the GSH biosynthesis pathway as a therapeutic strategy, however, current therapies have not demonstrated relevant improvements in CF clinical outcomes. It has previously shown that the immediate pre-cursor to glutathione, γ-glutamylcysteine (GGC) is effective in increasing intracellular levels of GSH in vivo in healthy humans. In this in-vitro primary cell line study, we study the proteomic changes involved in treating  airway epithelial cells with GGC both prior to and post-LPS challenge, and without LPS challenge.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was determined by homogenising the cells in RIPA buffer (Life Technologies 89900) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11836153001). Samples were sonicated using the Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode B01060010) for 10 min. Protein concentrations were determined using the 2-D Quant kit (GE Life Sciences 80648356). Samples were reduced (5 mM DTT, 37C, 30 min), alkylated (10 mM IA, RT, 30 min) then incubated with trypsin at a protease:protein ratio of 1:20  (w/w) at 37°C for 18 h, before being subjected to SCX clean-ups (Thermo Fisher, SP341) following manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted peptides from each clean-up were reconstituted in 20 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Proteolytic peptide samples were separated by nanoLC using an Ultimate nanoRSLC UPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands). Samples were concentrated and desalted with a micro C18 precolumn with H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % TFA) at 15 µL/min and a fritless nano column (75 µm x 15 cm) containing C18-AQ media (Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen Germany). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % formic acid) to H2O:CH3CN (64:36, 0.1 % formic acid) at 200 nL/min over 30 min. Eluting peptides were ionized using positive ion mode nano-ESI by applying 2000 volts to a low volume titanium union with the tip positioned ~0.5 cm from the heated capillary (T=275°C) of a Tribrid Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). A survey scan m/z 350-1750 was acquired in the orbitrap (resolution = 120,000 at m/z 200, with an accumulation target value of 400,000 ions) and lockmass enabled (m/z 445.12003). Peptide ions (>2.5×104 counts, charge states +2 to +5) were sequentially selected for MS/MS using data dependent acquisition, with the total number of dependent scans maximized within 2 sec cycle times. Product ions were generated via higher energy collision dissociation (collision energy = 30; maximum injection time = 250 milliseconds; MSn AGC = 5×104; inject ions for all available parallelizable time enabled) and mass analyzed in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to: n times =1, exclusion duration 20 seconds, ± 10ppm.

### Data Protocol
Raw peak lists derived from the above experiments were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10) with the Andromeda algorithm. Search parameters were: ±4.5 ppm tolerance for precursor ions and ±0.5 Da for peptide fragments; carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification; oxidation (M) and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications; and enzyme specificity as trypsin with two missed cleavages possible. Peaks were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (August 2018 release). Label-free protein quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm with default parameters and statistical analysis of differential protein abundance were performed in Perseus (version 1.6.5.0). Functional analysis of differentially abundant proteins was performed with IPA (QIAGEN Inc.). Mass spectrometry data are available at the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXDXXXXX (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/XXXX). The full list of identified proteins and differentially abundant protein analysis is available upon request.

### Publication Abstract
Systemic glutathione deficiency, inflammation, and oxidative stress are hallmarks of cystic fibrosis (CF), an inherited disease that causes persistent lung infections and severe damage to the respiratory system and many of the body organs. Improvements to current antioxidant therapeutic strategies are needed. The dietary supplement, &#x3b3;-glutamylcysteine (GGC), which is the immediate precursor to glutathione, rapidly boosts cellular glutathione levels following a single dose in healthy individuals. Efficacy of GGC against oxidative stress induced by <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>, which is a common and chronic pathogen infecting lungs of CF patients, remains unassessed. Primary mucocilliary differentiated airway (bronchial and/or nasal) epithelial cells were created from four individuals with CF. Airway oxidative stress and inflammation was induced by <i>P. aeruginosa</i> lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Parameters including global proteomics alterations, cell redox state (glutathione, oxidative stress), pro-inflammatory mediators (IL-8, IDO-1), and cellular health (membrane integrity, stress granule formation, cell metabolic viability) were assayed under six experimental conditions: (1) Mock, (2) LPS-challenged (3) therapeutic, (4) prophylactic (5) therapeutic and prophylactic and (6) GGC alone. Proteomic analysis identified perturbation of several pathways related to cellular respiration and stress responses upon LPS challenge. Most of these were resolved when cells were treated with GGC. While GGC did not resolve LPS-induced IL-8 and IDO-1 activity, it effectively attenuated LPS-induced oxidative stress and stress granule formation, while significantly increasing total intracellular glutathione levels, metabolic viability and improving epithelial cell barrier integrity. Both therapeutic and prophylactic treatments were successful. Together, these findings indicate that GGC has therapeutic potential for treatment and prevention of oxidative stress-related damage to airways in cystic fibrosis.

### Keywords
Γ-glutamylcysteine, Oxidative stress, Qlc-ms/ms, Cystic fibrosis, Airway epithelial cells, Lps, Glutathione

### Affiliations
UNSW Australia
Molecular and Integrative Cystic Fibrosis (miCF) Research Laboratory, School of Women’s and Children’s Health, UNSW Medicine, UNSW Sydney (lab head)

### Submitter
Alexander Capraro

### Lab Head
Dr Shafagh Waters
Molecular and Integrative Cystic Fibrosis (miCF) Research Laboratory, School of Women’s and Children’s Health, UNSW Medicine, UNSW Sydney (lab head)


