### Accession
PXD004212

### Title
AP-MS analysis of sirtuin-2 interactions and whole-cell proteome analysis in human fibroblasts

### Description
Sirtuins are NAD+-dependent deacylases with diverse enzymatic activities and substrates. They were implicated in regulation of cancer progression, neurodegeneration, aging, and viral infection. Sirtuin-2 localizes to the cytoplasm and is known to deacetylate alpha-tubulin. Current knowledge on sirtuin-2 interactions and its effect on gene expression in normal cells is very limited. We used proteomics approach to define its interactions and its effect on global protein levels in human fibroblasts.

### Sample Protocol
SIRT2 immunoisolates or whole-cell lysates were reduced in 20mM TCEP, alkylated in 20mM chloroacetamide and subjected to overnight tryspin digestion at 37C in solution using filter-assisted sample preparation method.Peptides were collected into spin columns and subjected to desalting on 3M SDB-RPS Empore discs assembled into StageTips. Eluted peptides were analyzed by nLC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC coupled directly to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos ETD mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptide mixture was first separated by reverse-phase chromatography on EASY-Spray column, 50cm x 75µm ID, PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 250nL/min. For peptide mixture from IP experiments, 180min 4% to 40%B linear acetonitrile gradient was applied (mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid and 0.1% acetic acid in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% formic acid and 0.1% acetic acid in 97% acetonitrile). For shRNA experiment peptide mixture, 360min 4% to 35%B gradient was applied.  Mass spectrometer was set to data-dependent acquisition mode with FTMS preview scan disabled, enabled predictive automatic gain control, enabled dynamic exclusion (repeat count: 1, exclusion duration: 60), and enabled lock mass (mass list 371.101233). Other parameters included: FT MS1 target value of 1e6 and 500ms maximum injection time, ion trap MS2 target values of 1e4 and 100ms maximum injection time. One acquisition cycle comprised a single full-scan mass spectrum (m/z=350.0-1700.0) in Orbitrap (r = 30,000 for regular IP, r = 60,000 for I-DIRT IP, or r=100,000 for shRNA experiment at m/z = 400), followed by collision-induced dissociation on top 20 precursor ions in the dual-pressure linear ion trap with isolation width of 2.0Th, normalized collision energy of 35 and activation time of 10ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from MS analysis was extracted and subjected to search against UniProt Swiss-Prot sequence database (22630 entries including human, herpesvirus, and common contaminants, downloaded in August, 2013) in Proteome Discoverer (v. 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific) by Sequest HT algorithm (v1.3, ThermoFisher Scientific) or in  in MaxQuant (v. 1.5.3.8 ) using Andromeda search engine. The following search criteria were used: full trypsin specificity, maximum 2 missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance of 10ppm and 0.5Da, respectively; dynamic modifications: oxidation (+15.995 Da (M)), phospho (+79.966Da (S,T,Y)); static modifications: carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da(C)). Peptide spectral match probabilities were calculated against decoy database by Percolator in Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Human sirtuin 2 (SIRT2) is an NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent deacetylase that primarily functions in the cytoplasm, where it can regulate &#x3b1;-tubulin acetylation levels. SIRT2 is linked to cancer progression, neurodegeneration, and infection with bacteria or viruses. However, the current knowledge about its interactions and the means through which it exerts its functions has remained limited. Here, we aimed to gain a better understanding of its cellular functions by characterizing SIRT2 subcellular localization, the identity and relative stability of its protein interactions, and its impact on the proteome of primary human fibroblasts. To assess the relative stability of SIRT2 interactions, we used immunoaffinity purification in conjunction with both label-free and metabolic labeling quantitative mass spectrometry. In addition to the expected associations with cytoskeleton proteins, including its known substrate TUBA1A, our results reveal that SIRT2 specifically interacts with proteins functioning in membrane trafficking, secretory processes, and transcriptional regulation. By quantifying their relative stability, we found most interactions to be transient, indicating a dynamic SIRT2 environment. We discover that SIRT2 localizes to the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC), and that this recruitment requires an intact ER-Golgi trafficking pathway. Further expanding these findings, we used microscopy and interaction assays to establish the interaction and coregulation of SIRT2 with liprin-&#x3b2;1 scaffolding protein (PPFiBP1), a protein with roles in focal adhesions disassembly. As SIRT2 functions may be accomplished via interactions, enzymatic activity, and transcriptional regulation, we next assessed the impact of SIRT2 levels on the cellular proteome. SIRT2 knockdown led to changes in the levels of proteins functioning in membrane trafficking, including some of its interaction partners. Altogether, our study expands the knowledge of SIRT2 cytoplasmic functions to define a previously unrecognized involvement in intracellular trafficking pathways, which may contribute to its roles in cellular homeostasis and human diseases.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Human fibroblasts

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Princeton University, Department of Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Hanna Budayeva

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M. Cristea
Princeton University, Department of Molecular Biology


