### Accession
PXD017148

### Title
Classically-activated macrophages rely on glucose-derived glycerol and external fatty acid for TAG synthesis

### Description
Altered lipid metabolism in macrophages is associated with various important inflammatory conditions. Although lipid metabolism is an important target for therapeutic intervention, the metabolic requirement involved in lipid accumulation during pro-inflammatory activation of macrophages remains incompletely characterized. We show here that macrophage activation with IFNγ results in increased aerobic glycolysis, iNOS-dependent inhibition of respiration, and accumulation of triacylglycerol. Surprisingly, metabolite tracing with 13C-labeled glucose revealed that the glucose contributed to the glycerol groups in triacylglycerol (TAG), rather than to de novo synthesis of fatty acids. This is in stark contrast to the otherwise similar metabolism of cancer cells, and previous results obtained in activated macrophages and dendritic cells.  Our results establish a novel metabolic pathway whereby glucose provides glycerol to the headgroup of TAG during classical macrophage activation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were incubated in the presence or absence of IFNγ for 24 hours, after which they were washed three times with cold PBS. They were then scrapped off, counted, spun down, resuspended in PBS, and kept frozen at -80 °C until further quantitative proteomic analysis as described previously (PMID: 26412744). In brief, proteins were extracted, reduced, alkylated and digested using LysC and trypsin. After desalting, peptide samples were analyzed by nanoscale liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) and identified by database searching against all predicted proteins for Mus musculus downloaded from SwissProt (2016/10/05).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were quantified by MS1-based label-free quantification and statistical analysis was performed using SafeQuant (PMID: 26412744). GSEA analysis (PMC2605959) was performed using 1,000 sample permutations. Protein sets obtained from the KEGG pathway database were tested for enrichment within our proteome data set ranked according to the signal-to-noise metric. Pathways identified in this way with a FDR q < 0.05 were considered as discoveries.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Infection, Tag, Macrophages

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


