### Accession
PXD028003

### Title
Pathogenesis of enamel-renal syndrome associated gingival fibromatosis: a proteomic approach

### Description
The enamel renal syndrome (ERS) is a rare disorder featured by amelogenesis imperfecta, gingival fibromatosis and nephrocalcinosis. Gingival fibromatosis is a hallmark of the disease; it is characterized by the accumulation of a collagen-rich, dense connective tissue and of mineral deposits throughout the gingiva. ERS is caused by biallelic mutations in the FAM20A gene encoding a pseudokinase, likely acting as an allosteric activator of FAM20C, the Golgi casein kinase. How mutations in FAM20A may modify the gingival connective tissue homeostasis and cause fibromatosis is currently unknown. Conditioned media of gingival fibroblasts (GF) obtained from four unrelated ERS patients carrying distinct mutations and three control subjects were used. Secretomic analysis identified 109 dysregulated proteins whose abundance had increased (69 proteins) or decreased (40 proteins) at least 1.5-fold compared to control GF. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis revealed biological processes significantly over-represented or under-represented in the ERS GF. Proteins over-represented were mainly involved in extracellular matrix organization, collagen fibril assembly, and biomineralization whereas those under-represented were extracellular matrix-associated proteins. Accordingly, GO disease analysis indicated un significant enrichment of tumoral angiogenesis and fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, peptide fractions were solubilized in FA 0.1% (v/v) and analyzed on a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite apparatus coupled to an Easy nanoLC II system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto an enrichment column (C18 Pepmap100, Thermo Scientific). The separation was carried out with an analytical column needle (NTCC-360/100-5-153, Nikkyo-Technos). The flow rate was 300 nL/min and the mobile phase composed of H2O/0.1% FA (buffer A) and ACN/0.1% FA (buffer B). The elution gradient duration was 120 minutes: 0-106 min, 2-40% B; 106-110 min, 40-100% B; 110-120 min, 100% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode with CID fragmentation. For mass spectrometry settings, the capillary voltage was 1.5 kV and the temperature of the capillary was 275°C. The m/z detection range was 400-1800 in MS scan at a resolution of 60 000. The 20 most intense peptide ions were selected and the fragmentation occurred with a normalized collision energy of 35. Dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursor ions was applied for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
After MS analysis, raw data were imported in Progenesis LC-MS software (NonLinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). To perform quantification, one sample was set as a reference and retention times of all others samples were aligned. After alignment and normalization, statistical analysis was performed using one-way ANOVA software calculation. MS/MS spectra were then exported for peptide identification with Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.6.0). Database searches were performed with the following parameters: taxonomy: human (22,244 sequences); 1 missed cleavage; variable modification: carbamidomethyl of cysteine and oxidation of methionine. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were 10 ppm and 0.35 Da respectively. False discovery rates were calculated using a decoy-fusion approach in Mascot. Identified spectrum matches with -10logP value of 20 or higher were kept, at a FDR threshold of 5%. Mascot search results were imported into Progenesis. For each condition, the total cumulative abundance of protein was calculated by summing abundances of peptides. Proteins identified with less than 2 peptides were discarded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The enamel renal syndrome (ERS) is a rare disorder featured by amelogenesis <i>imperfecta</i>, gingival fibromatosis and nephrocalcinosis. ERS is caused by bi-allelic mutations in the secretory pathway pseudokinase FAM20A. How mutations in <i>FAM20A</i> may modify the gingival connective tissue homeostasis and cause fibromatosis is currently unknown. We here analyzed conditioned media of gingival fibroblasts (GFs) obtained from four unrelated ERS patients carrying distinct mutations and control subjects. Secretomic analysis identified 109 dysregulated proteins whose abundance had increased (69 proteins) or decreased (40 proteins) at least 1.5-fold compared to control GFs. Proteins over-represented were mainly involved in extracellular matrix organization, collagen fibril assembly, and biomineralization whereas those under-represented were extracellular matrix-associated proteins. More specifically, transforming growth factor-beta 2, a member of the TGF&#x3b2; family involved in both mineralization and fibrosis was strongly increased in samples from GFs of ERS patients and so were various known targets of the TGF&#x3b2; signaling pathway including Collagens, Matrix metallopeptidase 2 and Fibronectin. For the over-expressed proteins quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed increased transcript levels, suggesting increased synthesis and this was further confirmed at the tissue level. Additional immunohistochemical and western blot analyses showed activation and nuclear localization of the classical TGF&#x3b2; effector phospho-Smad3 in both ERS gingival tissue and ERS GFs. Exposure of the mutant cells to TGFB1 further upregulated the expression of TGF&#x3b2; targets suggesting that this pathway could be a central player in the pathogenesis of the ERS gingival fibromatosis. In conclusion our data strongly suggest that TGF&#x3b2; -induced modifications of the extracellular matrix contribute to the pathogenesis of ERS. To our knowledge this is the first proteomic-based analysis of FAM20A-associated modifications.

### Keywords
Pathogenesis of enamel-renal syndrome associated gingival fibromatosis: a proteomic approach

### Affiliations
Normandie Université, PISSARO Proteomic Facility, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB), F-76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan, France.
Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Université de Paris, Oral Molecular Pathophysiology, F-75006, France

### Submitter
Clement GUILLOU

### Lab Head
Dr Kozyraki Renata
Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Université de Paris, Oral Molecular Pathophysiology, F-75006, France


