### Accession
PXD019302

### Title
Vibrio fluvialis A8 secretome nanoLC-MS/MS

### Description
Vibrio fluvialis A8 was a newly isolated strain that possessed a good agarase production ability. The Secretomic analysis using nanoLC-MS/MS was performed to study the molecular properties including molecular weight, pI and relative abundance of the agarases in the secretome of this strain.

### Sample Protocol
Label‑free quantitative LC–MS/MS was performed to study the soluble extracellular proteins of Vibrio fluvialis A8. The extracellular proteins were isolated by ammonium sulfate fractionation (30%~60% ammonium sulfate saturation), redissolved in phosphate buffer solution (0.05 mol/L, pH 7.0), and then desalted by dialysis bag. The Bradford method was used to determine the protein concentration of sample. The protein sample (120 μg) was digested using trypsin (Promega）at 37 °C overnight. Equal volume of 1% formic acid was mixed with digested sample and centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with 1 mL of washing solution (0.1% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile) three times, then eluted twice by 0.4 mL of elution buffer (0.1% formic acid and 75% acetonitrile). The eluents were lyophilized and reconstituted in 10 μL of 0.1% formic acid. Peptide samples were injected and analyzed using a Q ExactiveTM HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo) coupled with nanoEASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC (Thermo). Peptides were first trapped onto a home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (2 cm×75 μm, 3 μm) and then eluted onto a home-made analytical column (15 cm×150 μm, 1.9 μm) via a 60 min gradient of 2% to 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 600 nL/min (0–2 min: 4.8%; 2–49 min: 4.8-8%; 49-52 min: 4.8–24%; 52–54 min: 24-28%; 54–55 min: 28-40%; 55-60 min: 40-80%). MS full scan ranged from m/z 350 to 1500 with a target value of 3,000,000 at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200). The top 40 precursors of the highest abundant in the full scan were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation and analyzed in MS/MS with an automatic gain control target value of 50,000 and normalized collision energy of 27%.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were searched against the genome of Vibrio fluvialis A8 using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo). The MS/MS search was performed with the following settings: (1) mass tolerance for precursor ion was 10 ppm and mass tolerance for product ion was 0.02 Da; (2) carbamidomethyl was selected as fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus were selected as variable modifications; (3) a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites were allowed. For abundance calculation (label-free quantification), mass spectrometric signal intensities of peptide precursor ions belonging to each protein were divided by the total abundance of all detected proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Agarose-oligosaccharide production from agar degradation by agarase exhibits lots of advantages and good application prospects. In this study, a novel agar-degrading bacterium <i>Vibrio</i> sp. A8 was isolated from a red algae in the South China Sea. The whole genome sequencing with comparative genomic and secretomic analysis were used to better understand its genetic components about agar degradation. This strain exhibited good agarase production in artificial seawater after culture optimization. The complete genome (4.88 Mb) of this strain comprised two circular chromosomes (3.19 and 1.69 Mb) containing 4,572 protein-coding genes, 108 tRNA genes and 31 rRNA genes. This strain was identified as <i>Vibrio fluvialis</i> A8 by comparative genomic analysis based on genome phylogenetic tree and average nucleotide identity (ANI) similarity. Different from other 20 similar strains including three strains of the same species, <i>V. fluvialis</i> A8 possessed unique agar degradation ability with four &#x3b2;-agarases (GH50) and one &#x3b1;-1,3-L-NA2 hydrolase (GH117) due to the horizontal gene transfer. Secretomic analysis showed that only &#x3b2;-agarase (gene 3152) was abundantly expressed in the secretome of <i>V. fluvialis</i> A8. This agarase had a good substrate specificity and wide work conditions in complex environments, suggesting its potential application for agarose-oligosaccharide production.

### Keywords
Vibrio fluvialis a8; secretome; nanolc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences

### Submitter
Chunsheng Li

### Lab Head
Dr Chunsheng Li
South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences


