### Accession
PXD028409

### Title
The novel peptide ScrA acts through the SaeRS two component system to regulate virulence gene expression in Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive opportunistic pathogen, which is carried by approximately 30 % of the population at any time. In addition to being a commensal S. aureus can cause an array of infections, ranging from mild skin and soft tissue infections to life threatening endocarditis and septicemia. S. aureus encodes a variety of virulence factors that facilitate its pathogenic lifestyle. Genes encoding these virulence factors are under tight control by a complex regulatory network, which includes, sigma factors, sRNAs, and protein-based systems, such as Two-Component Systems (TCS). Previous work in our lab demonstrated that overexpression of the sRNA tsr37 leads to an increase in cellular aggregation in the absence of host serum. We determined that the clumping phenotype was dependent on a previously unannotated 88 amino acid protein encoded within the tsr37 sRNA transcript (which we named ScrA for S. aureus clumping regulator A).  In addition to increased clumping, overexpression of ScrA also leads to increased biofilm formation. To investigate the mechanism of action of ScrA we performed mass spectrometry proteomics and RNA-sequencing in the ScrA overexpressing strain. A variety of virulence factors, including several surface adhesins were upregulated while several proteases were downregulated. Moreover, results showed a significant upregulation of the SaeRS two component system, suggesting that ScrA is influencing SaeRS activity. We go on to demonstrate that overexpression of ScrA in a saeR mutant abrogates the clumping/biofilm phenotypes confirming that ScrA functions via the Sae system. Finally, we identified the ArlRS TCS as a potential positive regulator of scrA expression. Collectively our results show that ScrA is an activator of the SaeRS system and suggests that ScrA may act as an intermediary between the ArlRS and SaeRS systems.

### Sample Protocol
S. aureus cultures were grown at 37°C with shaking in tryptic soy broth (TSB). 5 ml of overnight starter culture was diluted 1:100 into 10 ml of fresh, prewarmed TSB and grown for 3 h to mid-exponential phase. Cultures were then diluted into 25 ml of fresh TSB to a starting OD600 of 0.05 and grown overnight (15 h). 9 ml of cell free culture supernatant was combined with 1 ml of trichloroacetic acid and incubated at 4° C for 24 h. Precipitated proteins were pelleted at 4° C and washed 3x with ice cold acetone. Samples were prepared by filter assisted sample preparation (FASP). Samples were resuspended in 4 % (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.4, 100 mM DTT, with protease inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher Scientific), clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 G for 10 min, and protein concentration determined by Pierce 600 nm protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were then standardized to 100 µg and reduced at 37 °C for 1 h. Urea was added to a final concentration of 6 M with 20 mM Tris pH 8.5, and samples were placed in a 30 kDa Mw protein concentrator column (Millipore Sigma). All centrifugation steps performed from this point were performed at 12,000 G for 3-5 min until column was almost empty. Three washes were performed with 8 M urea, 20 mM Tris pH 8.5 (urea buffer), prior to alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide in urea buffer, and incubation in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Washes were performed as above, followed by three more washes with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8 (TEAB). Trypsin was added in TEAB at 1:100 trypsin: protein (1 µg), and incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. Digested samples were eluted by centrifugation, desalted using C18 columns (Waters) and resuspended in 2 % ACN 0.1 % formic acid.Digested peptides (5 µl) were separated on a 50 cm Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 reversed-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an Ultimate3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 60 (in-gel digest) or 180 (whole proteome) min gradient (2 to 32 % acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid). Peptides were analyzed on a hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Q Exactive Plus; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using data-dependent acquisition in which the top 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the S. aureus USA300 proteome (UniProt ID: UP000001939) using MaxQuant (www.maxquant.org) and the integrated Andromeda search engine. Digestion was set as trypsin/P, variable modifications included oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term), and carbamidomethylation (C) was fixed. Label free quantification was used, with peptides matched between runs. Other settings were left as defaults. The resulting protein groups files were further processed using Perseus, and for whole proteome experiments this included an imputation step with default settings. Unpaired T-test with Welch’s correction was used to establish significant changes in protein abundance (LFQ intensity) between strains. Proteins with a p-value less than 0.05 and a fold change greater than 2 up or down were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus is a Gram-positive commensal that can also cause a variety of infections in humans. S. aureus virulence factor gene expression is under tight control by a complex regulatory network, which includes, sigma factors, sRNAs, and two-component systems (TCS). Previous work in our laboratory demonstrated that overexpression of the sRNA tsr37 leads to an increase in bacterial aggregation. Here, we demonstrate that the clumping phenotype is dependent on a previously unannotated 88 amino acid protein encoded within the tsr37 sRNA transcript (which we named ScrA for S. aureus clumping regulator A). To investigate the mechanism of action of ScrA we performed proteomics and transcriptomics in a ScrA overexpressing strain and show that a number of surface adhesins are upregulated, while secreted proteases are downregulated. Results also showed upregulation of the SaeRS TCS, suggesting that ScrA is influencing SaeRS activity. Overexpression of ScrA in a saeR mutant abrogates the clumping phenotype confirming that ScrA functions via the Sae system. Finally, we identified the ArlRS TCS as a positive regulator of scrA expression. Collectively, our results show that ScrA is an activator of the SaeRS system and suggests that ScrA may act as an intermediary between the ArlRS and SaeRS systems.

### Keywords
Virulence, Saers, Small peptides, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Ohio University
Ohio University

### Submitter
Ronan Carroll

### Lab Head
Dr Ronan Carroll
Department of Biological Sciences, Ohio University


