### Accession
PXD005970

### Title
Toxicoproteomic and lipidomic analysis of human lung cells chronically exposed to MWCNT

### Description
Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) present a wide variety of exciting application opportunities. As MWCNT are produced in large quantities, occupational exposure and human health is of particular concern. However, there is no consensus regarding their potential harmful effects. In particular, chronic exposure to MWCNT and mechanisms of their action at protein and lipid levels are unknown. In this study, we aimed to investigate effects of long-term chronic exposure to MWCNT on cellular proteome and lipidome. Since the lung is the major target organ, an in vitro normal bronchial epithelial cell model was used. To better mimic exposure at occupational settings, cells were chronically exposed for 13 weeks to low-doses of MWCNT. MWCNT-treatment increased ROS levels in cells without increasing DNA damage and resulted in differential expression of multiple apoptotic proteins. A shotgun proteomic and lipidomic analysis of the MWCNT-exposed cells showed that of amongst the >5000 identified protein s,groups; more than 200 were altered in treated cells.  Functional analysis revealed association of these differentially regulated proteins in various cellular processes such as cell death and survival, cellular assembly and organization. Similarly, the lipid profile of the MWCNT treated cells showed accumulation of multiple lipid classes. This is first study to present results indicating that long-term MWCNT-exposure of human normal lung cells at occupationally relevant low-dose may alter both the proteome and the lipidome profile of target epithelial cells in the lung.

### Sample Protocol
The protein was precipitated out of solution by methanol/chloroform/water precipitation52. Briefly, 600 µL of methanol were added to the sample, followed by the addition of 150 µL chloroform and vortexing. Then 450 µL of water were added, samples were thoroughly mixed using a vortex and centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 minutes. The upper layer was then discarded without disturbing the protein layer and further 600 µL of methanol were added to the sample, followed by another round of vortexing and centrifugation. After removing the supernatant, the proteins were reconstituted in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich). Next, the proteins were reduced with 1.5 µmoles of DTT (Sigma Aldrich) at room temperature for 30 minutes, then they were alkylated using 6 µmoles of iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched by adding 4 µmoles of DTT (Sigma Aldrich) and incubating in the dark for 20 minutes. Finally, proteins were digested using 1.25 g trypsin (Thermo Scientific) at 37 oC overnight. The peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific) interfaced with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 trap column (75 μm i.d., 2 cm long, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and further separated on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 analytical column (75 μm i.d., 50 cm long, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) using a 240-minute multi-step gradient (5 min 2%-7% B, 205 min 7%-25% B, 15 min 25%-32% B, 10 min 32%-100% B, 10 min at 100% B; where B is 0.1% formic acid in CH3CN) at 250 nl/min flow. Peptides were analysed in positive ion mode under data dependent acquisition (DDA) using the following parameters: Electrospray voltage 2.5 kV, CID fragmentation with normalized collision energy 35. Each MS scan (400 to 1600 m/z, 1 m/z isolation width, profile) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM in the Orbitrap analyser, followed by Rapid MS/MS scans (2 m/z isolation width, centroid) triggered for the 20 most intense ions, with a 60 s dynamic exclusion and analysed in the Linear Ion trap. Charge exclusion was set to unassigned and 1.

### Data Protocol
The raw files from the experiments were inspected with Preview 2.3.5 (Protein Metrics Inc.) to determine optimal search criteria53. These were plugged in Max Quant v 1.5.5.154 mapping the spectra over Human canonical proteome with Isoforms downloaded in May 2016 from Uniprot55. The following search parameters were used: enzyme specified as trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages allowed; Deamidation of Asparagine/Glutamine, Oxidation of Methionine, Protein N-terminal acetylation, and Methylation of Lysine/Arginine as variable modifications; precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm with fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. False discovery rate was set to 0.01 (high confidence) for peptide as well as protein group identification. Label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm56 was used to estimate the protein amounts in the sample using match between the runs with alignment time of 20 minutes and match time window of 1 minute.

### Publication Abstract
The effects of long-term chronic exposure of human lung cells to multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) and their impact upon cellular proteins and lipids were investigated. Since the lung is the major target organ, an in vitro normal bronchial epithelial cell line model was used. Additionally, to better mimic exposure to manufactured nanomaterials at occupational settings, cells were continuously exposed to two non-toxic and low doses of a MWCNT for 13-weeks. MWCNT-treatment increased ROS levels in cells without increasing oxidative DNA damage and resulted in differential expression of multiple anti- and pro-apoptotic proteins. The proteomic analysis of the MWCNT-exposed cells showed that among more than 5000 identified proteins; more than 200 were differentially expressed in the treated cells. Functional analyses revealed association of these differentially regulated proteins to cellular processes such as cell death and survival, cellular assembly, and organization. Similarly, shotgun lipidomic profiling revealed accumulation of multiple lipid classes. Our results indicate that long-term MWCNT-exposure of human normal lung cells at occupationally relevant low-doses may alter both the proteome and the lipidome profiles of the target epithelial cells in the lung.

### Keywords
Human, Long-term exposure, Label free quantification, Lc-msms, Genotoxicity, Carbon nanotubes, Lipidomics, Mwcnt, Toxicoproteomics, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Professor i molekylærbiologi og faglig leder av PROMEC Institutt for kreftforskning og molekylær medisin Fakultet for medisin og helsevitenskap NTNU, Trondheim, Norway
Engineer at NTNU, Norway

### Submitter
Animesh Sharma

### Lab Head
Dr Geir Slupphaug
Professor i molekylærbiologi og faglig leder av PROMEC Institutt for kreftforskning og molekylær medisin Fakultet for medisin og helsevitenskap NTNU, Trondheim, Norway


