### Accession
PXD000917

### Title
Proteomic identification of anti-tetanus toxoid antibodies from human serum (HD1)

### Description
Proteomic identification and characterization of antibodies comprising the serological response to antigen can provide unique insight into the functional dynamics of adaptive immunity.  We have developed a novel method to overcome the technical challenges which previously limited the direct analysis of immunoglobulin proteins in serum, as demonstrated by the identification of human anti-tetanus toxoid (TT) immunoglobulin G (IgG) proteins following booster vaccination.  We analyzed the serum IgG repertoire across four time-points corresponding to pre-vaccination, 7 days, 3 months, and 9 months post vaccination.  Antigen-specific antibodies were affinity purified against immobilized TT protein and sequenced by bottom-up nanoLC-MS/MS.  Interpretation of mass spectra required a custom reference database of IgG heavy and light chain variable sequences determined by NextGen RNA sequencing of the donor's circulating plasmablasts and memory B cells following booster vaccination.

### Sample Protocol
IgG was purified from serum with protein G, and F(ab')2 fragments were generated by digestion with pepsin. Anti-tetanus toxoid F(ab')2 fragments were isolated by affinity chromatography, denatured, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin for analysis by nanoLC-MSMS on an Orbitrap Velos Pro. Data-dependent acquisition was utilized, with up to 20 MS2 scans collected per MS1 (100K resolution).  Precursor ions of charge >+1 were fragmented by CID. Monoisotopic precursor selection, charge state screening, and 45-s dynamic exclusion were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against a custom target protein sequence database consisting of IgG heavy chain and light chain variable genes determined by NextGen RNA sequencing (454) of human donor plasmablasts and memory B cells.  The database was supplemented with IgG constant region sequences (IGMT) and human protein-coding sequences from Ensembl (release 64), as well as common contaminants (MaxQuant).  Searches were performed by SEQUEST (Proteome Discoverer 1.4), with mass tolerances of 5 ppm (MS1) and 0.5 Da (MS2). Fully tryptic peptides (600-6000 Da) with up to 2 missed cleavage sites were permitted. Oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification and cabamidomethyl modification of cysteine as static modification were considered.  High confidence PSMs (<1% FDR) were determined by Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
Characterizing the in vivo dynamics of the polyclonal antibody repertoire in serum, such as that which might arise in response to stimulation with an antigen, is difficult due to the presence of many highly similar immunoglobulin proteins, each specified by distinct B lymphocytes. These challenges have precluded the use of conventional mass spectrometry for antibody identification based on peptide mass spectral matches to a genomic reference database. Recently, progress has been made using bottom-up analysis of serum antibodies by nanoflow liquid chromatography/high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry combined with a sample-specific antibody sequence database generated by high-throughput sequencing of individual B cell immunoglobulin variable domains (V genes). Here, we describe how intrinsic features of antibody primary structure, most notably the interspersed segments of variable and conserved amino acid sequences, generate recurring patterns in the corresponding peptide mass spectra of V gene peptides, greatly complicating the assignment of correct sequences to mass spectral data. We show that the standard method of decoy-based error modeling fails to account for the error introduced by these highly similar sequences, leading to a significant underestimation of the false discovery rate. Because of these effects, antibody-derived peptide mass spectra require increased stringency in their interpretation. The use of filters based on the mean precursor ion mass accuracy of peptide-spectrum matches is shown to be particularly effective in distinguishing between "true" and "false" identifications. These findings highlight important caveats associated with the use of standard database search and error-modeling methods with nonstandard data sets and custom sequence databases.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Antibody proteomics, Orbitrap velos, Igg

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology Department of Molecular Biosciences University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Daniel Boutz

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Marcotte
Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology Department of Molecular Biosciences University of Texas at Austin


