### Accession
PXD005648

### Title
Proteomic analysis of eleven tissues of Chinese Giant Salamander (Andrias davidianus)

### Description
The Chinese giant salamander (CGS, Andrias davidianus) is the largest and longest-lived amphibian. Global and quantitative proteome analysis of multiple tissues would indicate tissue-specific mechanisms and investigate the function of each protein from a whole-organism perspective. Herein, this study performed proteome analysis of eleven tissues collected from adult female CGS using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) coupled with LC-MS/MS methods. Based on the predicted protein database from CGS transcriptome database previously obtained, we identified a total of 4607 proteins with quantitative information. Among them, 2153 proteins were shared by two iTRAQ 8-plex experiments with liver as common sample, and these proteins were used for subsequent analysis. Our data will be useful for future research into this large-genome species, as well as for vertebrate-wide comparative genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic studies.

### Sample Protocol
The giant salamanders were heavily anesthetized by anaesthetic MS-222 and sacrificed by dissection before sample collection. Multiple tissues (skin, spleen, lung, heart, kidney, liver, pancreas, stomach, small intestine, large intestine and brain) from five giant salamanders were collected. Then protein extraction and trypsin digestion were performed. Subsequently, The 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119 and 121 tags in one iTRAQ Reagent-8plex Multiplex Kit, were respectively utilized to label the tryptic peptides from liver, heart, brain, spleen, lung, pancreas, small intestine and large intestine samples. Meantime, 117, 118, 119 and 121 in another iTRAQ Reagent-8plex Multiplex Kit, were respectively utilized to label the tryptic peptides from liver, skin, stomach, and kidney samples. Liver sample was served as common internal. The iTRAQ labeled peptides in each Reagent Kit were pooled and vacuum-died. Strong cation exchange chromatography was performed. A total of 33 fractions were collected over the gradient in one experiment, but some were pooled to give a final total of 15 fractions based on SCX chromatogram. The fractions were desalted using a PepClean C-18 spin column (Sigma, USA), and dried by vacuum centrifugal concentrator (Eppendorf Concentrator plus). Finally, each fraction was separated by Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Finnigan, USA) and analyzed by Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, USA).

### Data Protocol
For peptide data analysis, raw mass spectrometry data were processed using Proteome Discover 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the predicted protein database from the transcriptome database of Chinese giant salamander (SRA accession number: SRP092015) using Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK). The search parameters were set as follows: MS/MS ion search, trypsin as the digestion enzyme with allowance for a maximum of two missed cleavage, Carbamidomethyl (C) and iTRAQplex modification (K and N-terminus) as a fixed modification, Oxidation (M) as a variable modifications, peptide mass tolerance of ± 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da, unrestricted protein mass. In order to measure the false discovery rate (FDR), the peptide mass spectra datasets were used to search a decoy peptide database. The filter parameter of FDR≤0.01 was used in this study. The iTRAQ reporter ion intensities were analyzed by Proteome Discover 1.4 software. Only unique peptides were utilized to determine protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The Chinese giant salamander (Andrias davidianus, CGS) is the largest extant amphibian species in the world. Global quantitative proteome analysis of multiple tissues would indicate tissue-specific physiological processes and clarify the function of each protein from a whole-organism perspective. This study performed proteome analysis of eleven tissues collected from adult CGSs using iTRAQ coupled with LC-MS/MS technology. Based on the predicted protein database from previously obtained CGS transcriptome data, 2153 proteins were identified for subsequent analysis. A weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) clustered 2153 proteins into 17 co-expressed modules, which will be useful for predicting the functions of unannotated proteins. The protein levels of molecular complexes with housekeeping functions, such as ribosomes, spliceosomes and mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes, were tightly regulated in different tissues of the CGS, as they are in mammalian tissues. Transcription regulator, pathway and bio-functional analysis of tissue-specific proteins showed that highly expressed proteins largely reflected the physiological functions of specific tissues. Our data, as an initial atlas of protein expression of an amphibian species, will be useful for further molecular biology research on CGS.

### Keywords
Organ tissue, Lc-ms/ms, Chinese giant salamander (andrias davidianus), Itraq

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base for Cell Differentiation Regulation, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang, Henan Province, China
henan normal university

### Submitter
cunshuan xu

### Lab Head
Dr Cunshuan Xu
State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base for Cell Differentiation Regulation, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang, Henan Province, China


