### Accession
PXD007591

### Title
Proteomic characterization of human exhaled breath condensate

### Description
The establishment and public sharing of comprehensive proteome maps of human tissues and biofluids are essential to improve biomedical knowledge and to support biomarker discovery studies. In this study, we performed an in-depth proteomics characterization of the exhaled breath condensate (EBC), a non-invasive sample obtained from the condensation of the airway lining fluid. Two pooled samples of EBC, each combined from 10 healthy donors, were lyophilized and their protein content analyzed by high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Two “technical” negative control samples were processed in parallel with the pooled samples to correct for exogenous protein contamination and avoid erroneous identifications.

### Sample Protocol
Exhaled breath condensate from 30 healthy volunteers (12 males and 18 females)  was collected using the RTube© collection device (Respiratory Research Inc., USA). Volunteers breathed normally into the device during 15 to 20 min, using a nose clip to prevent nasal inhalation and exhalation. During EBC sampling procedure, gloves and gowns were used to minimize keratin contamination. For each volunteer, the collected sample corresponded to 120 L of exhaled breath condensed in a final volume of 1.5 to 2 mL containing about 50 ng of proteins. Samples were immediately frozen, dried by lyophilization (- 47°C, 9 kPa, 12 h) and stored at - 80°C. Individual samples were combined to constitute 2 pools of 10 samples each. To constitute each pool, 25 µL of Laemmli buffer (glycerol, β mercaptoethanol, SDS, bromophenol blue (1%), Tris-Cl pH 6.8) was first added to the first dried sample (sample 1) and centrifuged at 800 g, 4°C, during 1 min. Sample 1 was pipetted and was added to dried sample 2. These steps were successively repeated until sample 10. Proteins from pooled samples were stacked on the top of a precast polyacrylamide gel (NuPAGE™ 4-12% bis-Tris protein gel, Invitrogen) and revealed by Coomassie blue staining. Gel pieces containing EBC proteins were manually excised and proteins were digested in-gel with trypsin. Two control samples (distilled water) were included and processed in parallel with the EBC pools to monitor protein contaminations along the preanalytical procedure. Peptide resulting from trypsin digestion were analysed by nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (Ultimate 3000 coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30. Spectra were searched against the SwissProt database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, December 2015 version) and the pig trypsin sequence. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor mass error tolerances were set respectively at 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches. Fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
To improve biomedical knowledge and to support biomarker discovery studies, it is essential to establish comprehensive proteome maps for human tissues and biofluids, and to make them publicly accessible. In this study, we performed an in-depth proteomics characterization of exhaled breath condensate (EBC), a sample obtained non-invasively by condensation of exhaled air that contains submicron droplets of airway lining fluid. Two pooled samples of EBC, each obtained from 10 healthy donors, were processed using a straightforward protocol based on sample lyophilization, in-gel digestion and liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry analysis. Two 'technical' control samples were processed in parallel to the pooled samples to correct for exogenous protein contamination. A total of 229 unique proteins were identified in EBC among which 153 proteins were detected in both EBC pooled samples. A detailed bioinformatics analysis of these 153 proteins showed that most of the proteins identified corresponded to proteins secreted in the respiratory tract (lung, bronchi). Eight proteins were salivary proteins. Our dataset is described and has been made accessible through the ProteomeXchange database (dataset identifier: PXD007591) and is expected to be useful for future MS-based biomarker studies using EBC as the diagnostic specimen.

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Homo sapiens, Exhaled breath condensate

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


