### Accession
PXD013710

### Title
Proteomic analysis of urinary microvesicles reveal biomarkers for neurologic disease

### Description
Background- Extracellular vesicles (EVs) harbor thousands of proteins that hold promise for biomarker development. Usually difficult to purify, EVs in urine are relatively easily obtained and have demonstrated efficacy for kidney disease prediction. Herein, we further characterize the proteome of urinary EVs to explore the potential for biomarkers unrelated to kidney dysfunction, focusing on Parkinson’s disease (PD). Methods- Using a quantitative mass spectrometry approach, we measured urinary EV proteins from a discovery cohort of 50 subjects. EVs in urine were classified into subgroups and EV proteins were ranked by abundance and variability over time. Enriched pathways and ontologies in stable EV proteins were identified and proteins that predict PD were further measured in a cohort of 108 subjects.  Findings- Hundreds of commonly expressed urinary EV proteins with stable expression over time were distinguished from proteins expressed in few individual with high variability over time.  Bioinformatic analyses reveal a striking enrichment of endolysosomal proteins linked to Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s, Huntington’s disease, and other neurologic disorders. Tissue and biofluid enrichment analyses show broad representation of EVs from across the body without bias towards kidney or urine proteins. Among the proteins linked to neurological diseases, SNAP23 and calbindin were the most elevated in PD cases with 86% prediction success for disease diagnosis in the discovery cohort and 76% prediction success in the replication cohort.

### Sample Protocol
~90 mL of urine samples previously biobanked in two 50 mL polypropylene centrifuge tubes (Corning orange-caps) were quick-thawed from -80C storage with a shaking 42C water bath and placed on ice immediately after thawing. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000x g for 30 mins at 4C and supernatant was transferred and then centrifuged at 100,000x g for 1 hour at 4C. Resultant EV pellets were washed in 1 mL PBS and centrifuge a final time at 100,000x g for 1 hour at 4C.  Urinary ECV pellets resultant from ~90 mL of urine were reconstituted in 400 L of M-PER Mammalian Protein Extraction Buffer (Thermo) supplemented with 1x Halt Protease Inhibitors (Thermo) and sonicated in an ultrasonic water bath for 15 min. Lysates were exchanged into ~40 L of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate using Amicon Ultra-0.5, 3k columns (Millipore). Resultant lysates were quantified using EZQ (Invitrogen) and ~10 g of protein per sample were diluted in 35 L of LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen). Proteins were reduced with addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and denatured at 70°C for 10 min prior to loading into NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen), with electrophoresis of samples to maximum ~1cm from the wells. Gels were stained overnight with Colloidal Blue dye (Invitrogen) and following de-staining each lane was excised and equilibrated into 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBc) with digestion overnight with Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Promega). Peptides were finally reconstituted into 0.1% formic acid to a concentration of 1 g L-1. Peptides were injected into a 1260 Infinity nHPLC (Agilent) with separation from a Jupiter C-18 column, 300 Å, 5 m, Phenomenex) inline with a LTQ XL ion trap mass spectrometer or a Thermo Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo), both equipped with a nano-electrospray source (Thermo). All fragmentation data were collected in CID mode. The nHPLC was configured with binary mobile phases that included solvent A (0.1% formic acid), and solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 85% acetonitrile) as follows; 10 min at 5% B, 180 min (LTQ XL) or 90 min (Orbitrap) @ 5%-40%B (linear: 0.5nL/ min, analyze), 5min @ 70%B (2µL/ min, wash), 10min @ 0%B (2µL/ min, equilibrate). The LTQ XL operated in data-dependent triple play mode, with a survey scan range of 300-1200m/z, followed by a zoom scan for charge state determination, and an MS2 scan, both carried out with 2.0 da isolation widths on the three most intense ions. Data were collected in profile modes for all scan types. Charge state screening and dynamic exclusion were enabled with a minimum signal intensity of 2,000, a repeat count of two, and exclusion duration of 90 sec for ions +/- 1.5 m/z of the parent ion. The automatic gain control and scan time settings were set to default modes for both instruments. Activation times, activation Q, and normalized collision energies were set at 30 ms, 0.25, and 35% respectively for both instruments. Spray voltages were set at 1.9 kV, with a capillary temperature of 170°C.

### Data Protocol
XCalibur RAW files were centroided and converted to MzXML and the MGF files were created using both ReAdW and MzXML2Search respectively (http://sourceforge.net/projects/sashimi/). Data were analyzed with SEQUEST (v.27 rev12, .dta files), set for two missed cleavages, a precursor mass window of 0.45 da for LTQ-XL data, and 20 ppm for Orbitrap Velos Pro data, tryptic enzyme, variable modification M @ 15.9949, and static modifications C at 57.0293. Searches were performed with UniRef100 database  which includes common contaminants like digestion enzymes and human keratins.  Peptide identifications were filtered using Scaffold (Protein Sciences). Filter cut-offs were set with minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids with no MH+1 charge states, with peptide probabilities of >80% C.I., and with the number of peptides per protein two or more. Protein probabilities were set to a >99.0% C.I. with FDR<1.0. Relative quantification across experiments were then performed via spectral counting, and when relevant, spectral count abundances were then normalized between samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomarkers; neurodegeneration; exosomes; parkinson's disease; alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Director of the UAB CCC Mass Spectrometry Shared Facility
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
james mobley

### Lab Head
Dr James A. Mobley
Director of the UAB CCC Mass Spectrometry Shared Facility


