### Accession
PXD017495

### Title
Acute experimental infection of bats and ferrets with Hendra virus: insights into the early host response of the reservoir host and susceptible model species

### Description
Bats are the natural reservoir host for a number of zoonotic viruses, including Hendra virus (HeV) which causes severe clinical disease in humans and other susceptible hosts. Our understanding of the ability of bats to avoid clinical disease following infection with viruses such as HeV has come predominantly from in vitro studies focusing on innate immunity. Information on the early host response to infection in vivo is lacking and there is no comparative data on responses in bats compared with animals that succumb to disease. In this study, we examined the sites of HeV replication and the immune response of infected Australian black flying foxes and ferrets at 12, 36 and 60 hours post exposure (hpe). Viral antigen was detected at 60 hpe in bats and was confined to the lungs whereas in ferrets there was evidence of widespread viral RNA and antigen by 60 hpe. The mRNA expression of IFNs revealed antagonism of type I and III IFNs and a significant increase in the chemokine, CXCL10, in bat lung and spleen following infection. In ferrets, there was an increase in the transcription of IFN in the spleen following infection. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on lung tissue from bats and ferrets was performed at 0 and 60 hpe to obtain a global overview of viral and host protein expression. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of immune pathways revealed that six pathways, including a number involved in cell mediated immunity were more likely to be upregulated in bat lung compared to ferrets. GO analysis also revealed enrichment of the type I IFN signaling pathway in bats and ferrets. This study contributes important comparative data on differences in the dissemination of HeV and the first to provide comparative data on the activation of immune pathways in bats and ferrets in vivo following infection.

### Sample Protocol
Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) tryptic digest of tissue proteins Lysate (400 µg of protein) from lung tissue of uninfected (0 hpe) and infected (60 hpe) bats and ferrets was added to a Nanosep® 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter (OD010C34; Pall) and processed using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) Protein Digestion Kit (Expedeon Inc) as described by manufacturers and by Wisniewski et al. All buffers were provided in the kit except for trypsin. Briefly, detergent was removed in a series of 8 M urea washes and cysteine residues were alkylated with the addition of iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark. Proteins were washed twice with urea before being equilibrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteomics grade porcine trypsin (T6567; Sigma) was added at a 1:80 (w/w) ratio of trypsin to protein and proteins were digested at 37 °C overnight. The next day, tryptic fragments were eluted with the addition of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 500 mM NaCl and particulates were removed by centrifugation at 16000 x g for 10 min. Each tissue sample was independently subjected to FASP tryptic digestion three times (experimental triplicates). Reversed phase-high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) separation of peptides To increase the depth of detection, tryptic peptides were subjected to first-dimensional off-line RP-HPLC. Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a 50 mm x 4.6 mm internal diameter monolithic C18 RP-HPLC column (Chromolith Speed Rod; Merck) using an EttanLC HPLC system (GE Healthcare) with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid [TFA]) and buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile [ACN], 0.1% (v/v) TFA) as mobile phases. Peptides were resolved over a gradient of 5% B to 40% B over 30 min. Fractions were vacuum concentrated at 40 °C to 100 µL and every 7th fraction was pooled (concatenate pooling). Identification of tryptic peptides by LC-MS/MS Concatenated fractions were vacuum concentrated once more until approximately 5 µL and then reconstituted to a total volume of 30 µL with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA), sonicated in a water bath for 15 min and centrifuged at 16000 x g for 10 min to remove particulates. Using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Scientific), each sample was loaded via a trap column (100 μm x 2 cm nanoViper™ PepMap 100; Thermo Scientific) in 2% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA at a flow rate of 15 μL/min onto an analytical nanocolumn (75 μm x 50 cm PepMap 100 C18 3 μm 100Å; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 μL/min. Peptides were separated using increasing concentrations of 80% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA (buffer B) (2.5% B to 42.5% B over 20 min) and analysed with a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Up to 12 MS/MS spectra were acquired per cycle with maximum accumulation time of 50 ms and 100 ms for MS1 and MS2, respectively. To prevent multiple sequencing of the same peptide (dynamic exclusion), MS1 masses were excluded for 10 secs.

### Data Protocol
Samples were processed in two separate batches. Samples from bats B1-0 (0 hpe) and B8-60 (60 hpe) and ferrets F1-0 (0 hpe) and F8-60 (60 hpe) were first analyzed by LC-MS/MS. A second set of samples from bats B2-0 (0 hpe) and B9-60 (60 hpe) and ferrets F2-0 (0 hpe) and F9-60 (60 hpe) were analyzed separately. Due to differences in the LC instrumentation between the two runs, the raw data from each pair could not be cross-compared. Fold change between 0 and 60 hpe was therefore calculated within samples run at the same time for bats and ferrets. To obtain peptide sequence information, mass spectrometry data files were converted using MSConvert (ProteoWizard 3.0) and analysed using ProteinPilot software v5.0 (SCIEX). Data was searched against UniProtKB databases of either the P. alecto proteome or the M. p. furo proteome with the HeV proteome (HeV/Australia/Horse/2008/Redlands) appended. Proteins were considered to be present in a sample if two non-redundant peptides (above the 1% false discovery rate cut off) were detected by LC-MS/MS. Data analysis was automated by an R script. Quantitation of host proteins was determined by label free quantitation (LFQ) using MaxQuant software v1.5.6.2. The LFQ value for each peptide was determined and statistical analysis was performed in the ancillary program, Perseus v1.4.1.3. Protein entries were retained only if LFQ values in all three experimental replicates at either time point (0 hpe or 60 hpe) were higher than zero. All retained LFQ values were log(2) transformed and a Student’s T test was performed to generate fold change values.

### Publication Abstract
Bats are the natural reservoir host for a number of zoonotic viruses, including Hendra virus (HeV) which causes severe clinical disease in humans and other susceptible hosts. Our understanding of the ability of bats to avoid clinical disease following infection with viruses such as HeV has come predominantly from in vitro studies focusing on innate immunity. Information on the early host response to infection in vivo is lacking and there is no comparative data on responses in bats compared with animals that succumb to disease. In this study, we examined the sites of HeV replication and the immune response of infected Australian black flying foxes and ferrets at 12, 36 and 60 hours post exposure (hpe). Viral antigen was detected at 60 hpe in bats and was confined to the lungs whereas in ferrets there was evidence of widespread viral RNA and antigen by 60 hpe. The mRNA expression of IFNs revealed antagonism of type I and III IFNs and a significant increase in the chemokine, CXCL10, in bat lung and spleen following infection. In ferrets, there was an increase in the transcription of IFN in the spleen following infection. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on lung tissue from bats and ferrets was performed at 0 and 60 hpe to obtain a global overview of viral and host protein expression. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of immune pathways revealed that six pathways, including a number involved in cell mediated immunity were more likely to be upregulated in bat lung compared to ferrets. GO analysis also revealed enrichment of the type I IFN signaling pathway in bats and ferrets. This study contributes important comparative data on differences in the dissemination of HeV and the first to provide comparative data on the activation of immune pathways in bats and ferrets in vivo following infection.

### Keywords
Immune response, Bat, Ferret, Lung, Proteomics, Hendra virus, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Monash University
Monash University, Clayton, Australia

### Submitter
Nathan Croft

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Monash University, Clayton, Australia


