### Accession
PXD045804

### Title
Identification of strategies to overcome resistance in HER2 positive breast cancer.

### Description
The use of trastuzumab and pertuzumab in combination with docetaxel for initial treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer patients has resulted in notable clinical benefits in comparison to docetaxel administered with trastuzumab alone. Nevertheless, although therapeutic success is evident at the outset, the majority of tumours eventually advance, rendering metastatic disease and subsequent recurrence in patients who have developed acquired resistance. There is an urgent requirement to enhance our comprehension of the mechanisms governing resistance, enabling us to develop targeted therapeutic approaches to improve efficacy. We produced four HER2-positive-derived cell lines through prolonged exposure to trastuzumab and pertuzumab, determining their resistance rates. We confirmed long-term resistance through a notable increase in colony formation capacity of the derived cells. We confirmed the molecular identity of the new cell lines using immunohistochemistry of their receptors and profiling of point mutations. We detected HER2 overexpression in all cell lines and resistance to trastuzumab and pertuzumab did not result in variations in ER, PR and HER2 receptor expression. Finally, a study using proteomics analysis confirmed a significant alteration in the abundance patterns of over 600 proteins. This has implications for various vital biological processes such as ribosome creation, mitochondrial functionality, and metabolism. These mechanisms may play a crucial role in developing resistance in HER2-positive breast cancer. We conclude that these BCCLs resistant to trastuzumab plus pertuzumab-based anti-HER2 therapy could be a useful resource to enhance comprehension of resistance acquisition mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
2.5 x 106 cells of SK-BR3 and SK-BR3.rTP cell lines were seeded in a P100 plate and allowed to adhere for 24 h in complete medium. Then, cells were washed with cold PBS and lysates were obtained by scraping the cells in RIPA lysis buffer supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitors. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay kit. The proteomic analysis was performed in the Proteomics Unit of Complutense University of Madrid. Cell lysate triplicates of 100 µg were precipitated with methanol/chloroform. The pellet, which contains the proteins, was resuspended in 20 μl of 8 M Urea for digestion. The precipitated proteins were reduced with DTT at 56 °C for 1 h, then alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at RT. Lysates were incubated with a ratio of 1 μg of recombinant trypsin overnight at 37 °C. Desalination and concentration were performed with Poros R2 and quantified by fluorimetry (Qubit). They were dried by vacuum centrifugation (SpeedVac, Savant) and reconstituted to have a concentration each of 0.2 µg/µl of 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid and stored at -20 °C until analysis. Peptides (1 μg) were analysed by liquid nanochromatography (nano Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific, Germany) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF high-resolution mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were concentrated on-line by reverse phase chromatography using an Acclaim PepMap 100 guard column (Thermo Scientific) and then separated on a Picofrit C18 reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific). MS/MS data were acquired in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode of the MS.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra acquired on the samples were analysed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software (Thermo Scientific) with the MASCOT v.2.8 search engine. The UniProt database with taxonomic restriction to humans was used (release 2023_03). To determine the abundance of the identified peptides and proteins in different isolates, a label-free experiment based on the intensity of the precursor signal was performed. The percolator algorithm was used to estimate the false positive rate (FDR) and filtered by a q-value < 0.01 for proteins identified with high confidence. The number of proteins, peptides and identified spectra in the database used was summarized in a final report.

### Publication Abstract
The combination of trastuzumab and pertuzumab as first-line therapy in patients with HER2-positive breast cancer has shown significant clinical benefits compared to trastuzumab alone. However, despite initial therapeutic success, most patients eventually progress, and tumors develop acquired resistance and invariably relapse. Therefore, there is an urgent need to improve our understanding of the mechanisms governing resistance in order to develop targeted therapeutic strategies with improved efficacy. We generated four novel HER2-positive cell lines via prolonged exposure to trastuzumab and pertuzumab and determined their resistance rates. Long-term resistance was confirmed by a significant increase in the colony-forming capacity of the derived cells. We authenticated the molecular identity of the new lines via both immunohistochemistry for the clinical phenotype and molecular profiling of point mutations. HER2 overexpression was confirmed in all resistant cell lines, and acquisition of resistance to trastuzumab and pertuzumab did not translate into differences in ER, PR, and HER2 receptor expression. In contrast, changes in the expression and activity of other HER family members, particularly HER4, were observed. In the same vein, analyses of the receptor and effector kinase status of different cellular pathways revealed that the MAPK pathway may be involved in the acquisition of resistance to trastuzumab and pertuzumab. Finally, proteomic analysis confirmed a significant change in the abundance patterns of more than 600 proteins with implications in key biological processes, such as ribosome formation, mitochondrial activity, and metabolism, which could be relevant mechanisms in the generation of resistance in HER2-positive breast cancer. We concluded that these resistant BCCLs may be a valuable tool to better understand the mechanisms of acquisition of resistance to trastuzumab and pertuzumab-based anti-HER2 therapy.

### Keywords
Breast cancer; her2-positive; targeted therapy; trastuzumab; pertuzumab; resistance; label-free proteomics.

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital Health Research Institute (IIS—FJD, UAM)—CIBERONC, Madrid 28040, Spain.
UCM

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Madoz-Gúrpide
Department of Pathology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital Health Research Institute (IIS—FJD, UAM)—CIBERONC, Madrid 28040, Spain.


