### Accession
PXD000759

### Title
Phosphopeptide enrichment on synthetic libraries and HeLa cells digest

### Description
2 phosphopeptide enrichment methods (TiO2 and Ti-IMAC) were evaluated on synthetic libraries and HeLa cells digest. The resulting peptides were compared to the ones without enrichment with regards to the nature of the phosphorylation site (serine, threonine, tyrosine) and the characteristics of the peptide enriched. It was found that the enrichment methods are unbiased for these properties and that the result of the enrichment reflects the original condition of the sample.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides from synthetic libraries of HeLa cells digests were enriched with TiO2 or TiO2. Samples before and after enrichment were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite with a data dependent decision tree method combining CID and ETD fragmention.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra were searched with Proteome Discoverer, Mascot as a search engine and phosphoRS as a localization tool. PSMs were filtered according to several criteria (rank 1, Mascot delta score, Mascot score, localization score, known sequence information for the library peptides) and then grouped into peptide sequences. An area was calculated as the median of the PSMs area.

### Publication Abstract
Outcomes of comparative evaluations of enrichment methods for phosphopeptides depend highly on the experimental protocols used, the operator, the source of the affinity matrix, and the samples analyzed. Here, we attempt such a comparative study exploring a very large synthetic library containing thousands of serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylated peptides, being present in roughly equal abundance, along with their nonphosphorylated counterparts, and use an optimized protocol for enrichment by TiO2 and Ti(4+)-immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) by a single operator. Surprisingly, our data reveal that there are minimal differences between enrichment of phosphopeptides by TiO2 and Ti(4+)-IMAC when considering biochemical and biophysical parameters such as peptide length, sequence surrounding the site, hydrophobicity, and nature of the amino acid phosphorylated. Similar results were obtained when evaluating a tryptic digest of a cellular lysate, representing a more natural source of phosphopeptides. All the data presented are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD000759.

### Keywords
['Hela', 'Synthetic library', 'Ti-imac', 'Phosphopeptide enrichment', 'Tio2']

### Affiliations
['Utrecht University']

### Submitter
['Lucrece Matheron']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Utrecht University', 'email': 'A.J.R.Heck@uu.nl', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Albert Heck', 'id': '1300100'}]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
characteristics[organism part]: ['not applicable']
characteristics[disease]: ['epithelial cervix carcinoma' 'not applicable']
characteristics[cell type]: ['epithelial' 'not applicable']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=LTQ Orbitrap Elite;AC=MS:1001910']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Phospho;TA=S,T,Y;AC=UNIMOD:21;MT=variable']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Oxidation;MT=Variable;TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35']
comment[modification parameters].2: ['NT=Acetyl;AC=UNIMOD:67;PP= Protein N-term;MT=Variable']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']

