### Accession
PXD033289

### Title
Zika virus impacts extracellular vesicle composition and cellular gene expression in macaque early gestation trophoblasts

### Description
Zika virus (ZIKV) infection at the maternal-placental interface is associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes including fetal demise and pregnancy loss. To determine how infection impacts placental trophoblasts, we utilized rhesus macaque trophoblast stem cells (TSC) that can be differentiated into early gestation syncytiotrophoblasts (ST) and extravillous trophoblasts (EVT). TSCs and STs, but not EVTs, were highly permissive to productive infection with ZIKV strain DAK AR 41524. The impact of ZIKV on the cellular transcriptome showed that infection of TSCs and STs increased expression of immune related genes, including those involved in type I and type III interferon responses. ZIKV exposure altered extracellular vesicle (EV) protein, mRNA, and miRNA cargo, regardless of productive infection. These findings suggest that early gestation macaque TSCs and STs are permissive to ZIKV infection, and that EV analysis may provide a foundation for identifying non-invasive biomarkers of placental infection in a highly translational model.

### Sample Protocol
Digests were desalted using OMIX C18 SPE cartridges (Agilent) per manufacturer protocol and eluted in 20µl of 50/50/0.1% ACN/H2O/TFA. Dried to completion in the speed-vac and finally reconstituted in 20µl of 0.1% formic acid. Samples were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ platform, where 1µl was injected using Dionex UltiMate™3000 RSLCnano delivery system (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray™ electrospray source (held at constant 50°C).  Chromatography of peptides prior to mass spectral analysis was accomplished using capillary emitter column (PepMap® C18, 2µM, 100Å, 500 x 0.075mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). NanoHPLC system delivered solvents A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid , and B: 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at 0.30 µL/min to load the peptides at 2% (v/v) B, followed by quick 1 minute gradient to 5% (v/v) B and gradual analytical gradient from 5% (v/v) B to 37.5% (v/v) B over 73 minutes when it concluded with rapid ramp to 95% (v/v) B for a 5minute flash-out. As peptides eluted from the HPLC-column/electrospray source survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 followed by HCD-type MS2 fragmentation into Ion Trap (32% collision energy) under ddMSnScan 1 second cycle time mode with peptides detected in the MS1 scan from 350 to 1600 m/z; redundancy was limited by dynamic exclusion and MIPS filter mode ON.

### Data Protocol
Lumos acquired MS/MS data files were searched using Proteome Discoverer (ver. 2.2.0.388) Sequest HT search engine against Uniprot Rhesus macaque proteome database (UP000006718, 11/19/2020 download, 44,378 total entries). Static cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable methionine oxidation plus asparagine and glutamine deamidation, 2 tryptic miss-cleavages and peptide mass tolerances set at 15 ppm with fragment mass at 0.6 Da were selected. For detection of ZIKV proteins, the Uniprot Zika virus (ZIKV) reference proteome polyprotein was used (UP000054557, 1/12/2022 download, 1 polyprotein entry) was used. Peptide and protein identifications were accepted under strict 1% FDR cut offs with high confidence XCorr thresholds of 1.9 for z=2 and 2.3 for z=3 and at least 2 PSMs per protein identification. Strict principles of parsimony were applied for protein grouping. Chromatograms were aligned for feature mapping and area-based quantification using unique and razor peptides. Normalization was performed on total peptide amount and scaling on all average.

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) infection at the maternal-placental interface is associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes including fetal demise and pregnancy loss. To determine how infection impacts placental trophoblasts, we utilized rhesus macaque trophoblast stem cells (TSC) that can be differentiated into early gestation syncytiotrophoblasts (ST) and extravillous trophoblasts (EVT). TSCs and STs, but not EVTs, were highly permissive to productive infection with ZIKV strain DAK AR 41524. The impact of ZIKV on the cellular transcriptome showed that infection of TSCs and STs increased expression of immune related genes, including those involved in type I and type III interferon responses. ZIKV exposure altered extracellular vesicle (EV) mRNA, miRNA and protein cargo, including ZIKV proteins, regardless of productive infection. These findings suggest that early gestation macaque TSCs and STs are permissive to ZIKV infection, and that EV analysis may provide a foundation for identifying non-invasive biomarkers of placental infection in a highly translational model.

### Keywords
Placenta, Exosome, Trophoblast, Zika virus, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
UW-Madison
UPenn
University of Wiscosin Madison Wisconsin National Primate Research Center

### Submitter
Lindsey Block

### Lab Head
Dr Thaddeus Golos
University of Wiscosin Madison Wisconsin National Primate Research Center


