### Accession
PXD000883

### Title
RBDmap -  Comprehensive Identification of RNA-Binding Domains in Human Cells

### Description
The RNA interactomes of HeLa and HEK293 cells jointly comprise 1106 RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), with almost half of these lacking well-defined RNA-binding domains (RBDs), suggesting the existence of numerous unknown RNA-binding architectures. Here, we report on “RBDmap”, a new method built on interactome capture, to comprehensively identify the RBDs of native RBPs in HeLa cells. Making use of in vivo UV-crosslinking of RBPs to polyadenylated RNAs, capture on oligo(dT) magnetic beads, sequential proteolytic digestion and LC-MS/MS combined with a sophisticated scoring algorithm, RBDmap “re-discoveres” many known RNA-binding sites (e.g. RRM, KH) of numerous well characterized RBPs and suggests novel RBDs.

### Sample Protocol
In vivo RNA-binding proteins in HeLa cells were crosslinked to RNA using UV irradiation. Cells were lysed and polyadenylated RNA was pulled down using oligo(dT) magnetic beads. Captured mRNA-binding proteins were digested into peptides using a first protease (e.g. LysC or ArgC) to release peptides that are not directly crosslinked to RNA. A second cycle of oligo(dT) capture was employed to pull down remaining polypeptides crosslinked to polyadenylated RNA. Both fractions were further digested with trypsin, labeled using stable isotope dimethyl labeling and analyzed by high-resolution LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap instrument. Identified peptides were mapped to the protein sequences and the ratio between the two fractions was used to identify peptides which are located close to the RNA-crosslinked site.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) (4). MS/MS spectra were searched against the human UniProt database (version 12_2013) concatenated to a database containing protein sequences of common contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids. The mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm for the first search, 6 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da for product ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Match between runs (time window 2 min) and re-quantify options were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian cells harbor more than a thousand RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), with half of these employing unknown modes of RNA binding. We developed RBDmap to determine the RNA-binding sites of native RBPs on a proteome-wide scale. We identified&#xa0;1,174 binding sites within 529 HeLa cell RBPs,&#xa0;discovering numerous RNA-binding domains (RBDs). Catalytic centers or protein-protein interaction domains are in close relationship with RNA-binding sites, invoking possible effector roles of RNA in the control of protein function. Nearly half of the RNA-binding sites map to intrinsically disordered regions, uncovering unstructured domains as prevalent partners in protein-RNA interactions. RNA-binding sites represent hot spots for defined posttranslational modifications such as lysine acetylation and tyrosine phosphorylation, suggesting metabolic and signal-dependent regulation of RBP function. RBDs display a high degree of evolutionary conservation and incidence of Mendelian mutations, suggestive of important functional roles. RBDmap thus yields profound insights into native protein-RNA interactions in living cells.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Rna binding domain

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Genome Biology Unit Meyerhofstr. 1 69117 Heidelberg Germany

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Genome Biology Unit Meyerhofstr. 1 69117 Heidelberg Germany


