### Accession
PXD042288

### Title
Subcellular fractionation of Drosophila S2 cells upon foldamer treatment

### Description
The use of synthetic chemicals to selectively interfere with chromatin and the chromatin-bound proteome represents a great opportunity for pharmacological intervention. Recently, synthetic foldamers that mimic the charge surface of double-stranded DNA have been shown to interfere with selected protein-DNA interactions. However, to better understand their pharmacological potential and to improve their specificity and selectivity their effect on complex chromatin needs to be investigated. We therefore systematically studied the influence of these DNA-mimicking foldamers on the chromatin-bound bound proteome using an in vitro chromatin assembly extract. Our studies revealed an efficient interference with the chromatin-associated origin recognition complex that plays an important role in initiating eukaryotic chromatin replication. This interference is mediated by a strong direct interaction between the foldamers and the origin recognition complex and has an effect in tissue culture cells where the addition of foldamer led to an S-phase arrest. Foldamers that mimic double-stranded nucleic acids thus emerge as a powerful tool with designable features to alter chromatin assembly and selectively interfere with biological mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Drosophila L2-4 cells were seeded at 1 mio cells/ml in 6 well plates (Sarstedt, Ref: 83.3920), in medium (gibco, Schneider Drosophila medium, Ref: 21720-024) with 10 µM foldamer in medium or without foldamer as control and harvested after 48 h. Harvested cells were prepared by spinning down of cells at 1000 x g, 4 min and washing the pellet twice with 2 ml ice cold PBS each. Then, the cells were fractionated using the Subcellular Protein Fractionation Kit for Cultured Cells (Thermo, Ref: 78840) following the manufacturers instructions. Adjustments were included for Drosophila cell size, treating the pellet of each well of cells as 5µl packed cell volume and adjusting buffer volumes accordingly, while also doubling the amount of enzyme and tripling incubation time in MNase digest step. All fractions were stored at -20 C until they were prepared for Proteomic Analysis. For LC-MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) and separated in a 25-cm analytical column (75µm ID, 1.6µm C18, IonOpticks) with a 50-min gradient from 2 to 37% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) or an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo) both operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. For Qexactive HF measurements, survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105 ,and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts. For Orbitrap Exploris 480 measurements, survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 350 to 1,200) were acquired with resolution R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3 × 106). The 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1 × 105 and fragmented at 30% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; heated capillary temperature, 275°C; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.  For subcellular fractions were prepared for proteomic analysis using improved sample technology (iST, Preomics, Ref: P.O.00027) with a SP3 add on (Preomics, Ref: P.O.00107), following manufacturers instructions. Afterwards, samples were acidified using trrifluorioacetic acid (TFA) and underwent a final filtering step over a C8 column, was redissolved in 15µl MS loading buffer (Preomics) and stored at -20 °C until further processing.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 2.1.0.0 was used to identify proteins and quantify by label free quantification (LFQ) with the following parameters: Uniprot_UP000000803_Drome_20220306.fasta; MS tol, 10 ppm; MS/MS tol, 20 ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 min; Peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Data were handled with Perseus software (version 1.6.7.0 and version 2.0.9.0) (38) and R Studio (version 4.0.3). For analysis in Perseus, the output protein_groups.txt file from MaxQuant processing was imported, then protein hits associated Subcellular fractionation proteome – three biological replicates of 10 µM 48 h foldamer treated and untreated cells were fractionated, acquired and analyzed. All LFQ values were log2(x) transformed. The dataset was filtered so that only proteins with at least 2/3 valid values in at least one fraction across both conditions (treated and untreated) remained. Then missing values were replaced by random numbers from a standard deviation (width 0.3, downshift 1.8). For analysis of chromatin bound fraction, proteins were filtered so that only those with 2/3 valid values before imputation in at least one condition in the chromatin bound fraction (CBE) remained.

### Publication Abstract
The use of synthetic chemicals to selectively interfere with chromatin and the chromatin-bound proteome represents a great opportunity for pharmacological intervention. Recently, synthetic foldamers that mimic the charge surface of double-stranded DNA have been shown to interfere with selected protein-DNA interactions. However, to better understand their pharmacological potential and to improve their specificity and selectivity, the effect of these molecules on complex chromatin needs to be investigated. We therefore systematically studied the influence of the DNA mimic foldamers on the chromatin-bound proteome using an in vitro chromatin assembly extract. Our studies show that the foldamer efficiently interferes with the chromatin-association of the origin recognition complex in vitro and in vivo, which leads to a disturbance of cell cycle in cells treated with foldamers. This effect is mediated by a strong direct interaction between the foldamers and the origin recognition complex and results in a failure of the complex to organise chromatin around replication origins. Foldamers that mimic double-stranded nucleic acids thus emerge as a powerful tool with designable features to alter chromatin assembly and selectively interfere with biological mechanisms.

### Keywords
Subcellular fractionation, Drosophila s2 cells, L2-4, Dna mimics

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Protein Analysis Unit Molecular Biology Department Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried
Biomedical Center-LMU

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Axel Imhof
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Protein Analysis Unit Molecular Biology Department Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried


