### Accession
PXD014479

### Title
N-terminomics/TAILS profiling of proteases and their substrates in ulcerative colitis

### Description
Dysregulated protease activity is often implicated in the initiation of inflammation and immune cell recruitment in gastrointestinal inflammatory diseases. Using N-terminomics/TAILS (terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates), we compared proteases, along with their substrates and inhibitors, between colonic mucosal biopsies of healthy patients and those with ulcerative colitis (UC). Among the 1,642 N-termini enriched using TAILS, increased endogenous processing of proteins was identified in UC compared to healthy patients. Changes in the reactome pathways for proteins associated with metabolism, adherens junction proteins (E-cadherin, liver-intestinal cadherin, catenin alpha-1 and catenin delta-1) and neutrophil degranulation were identified between the two groups. Increased neutrophil infiltration and distinct proteases observed in ulcerative colitis may result in extensive break down, altered processing or increased remodeling of adherens junctions and other cellular functions. Analysis of the proteolytic preferred cleavage sites indicated that the majority of proteolytic activity and processing comes from host proteases, but that key microbial proteases may also play a role in maintaining homeostasis.  Thus, the identification of distinct proteases and processing of their substrates improves the understanding of dysregulated proteolysis in normal intestinal physiology and ulcerative colitis.

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun proteomics preTAILS and N-terminomics enrichment of N-termini using TAILS was performed on colon biopsies from healthy and ulcerative colitis patients.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were matched to peptide sequences in the human UniProt protein database using the Andromeda algorithm as implemented in the MaxQuant software package v.1.6.0.1, at a peptide-spectrum match FDR of  < 0.01. Search parameters included a mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m. for the parent ion, 0.5 Da for the fragment ion, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464 Da), variable N-terminal modification by acetylation (+42.010565 Da), and variable methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da). N-terminal and lysine heavy (+34.063116 Da) and light (+28.031300 Da) dimethylation were defined as labels for relative quantification. The cleavage site specificity was set to semi-ArgC (search for free N-terminus) for the TAILS data and was set to semi-ArgC (search for only lysines) for the preTAILS data, with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Significant outlier cutoff values were determined after log(2) transformation by boxplot-and-whiskers analysis using the BoxPlotR tool.

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulated protease activity is often implicated in the initiation of inflammation and immune cell recruitment in gastrointestinal inflammatory diseases. Using N-terminomics/TAILS (terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates), we compared proteases, along with their substrates and inhibitors, between colonic mucosal biopsies of healthy patients and those with ulcerative colitis (UC). Among the 1642 N-termini enriched using TAILS, increased endogenous processing of proteins was identified in UC compared to healthy patients. Changes in the reactome pathways for proteins associated with metabolism, adherens junction proteins (E-cadherin, liver-intestinal cadherin, catenin alpha-1, and catenin delta-1), and neutrophil degranulation were identified between the two groups. Increased neutrophil infiltration and distinct proteases observed in ulcerative colitis may result in extensive break down, altered processing, or increased remodeling of adherens junctions and other cellular functions. Analysis of the preferred proteolytic cleavage sites indicated that the majority of proteolytic activity and processing comes from host proteases, but that key microbial proteases may also play a role in maintaining homeostasis. Thus, the identification of distinct proteases and processing of their substrates improves the understanding of dysregulated proteolysis in normal intestinal physiology and ulcerative colitis.

### Keywords
Protease, Biopsies, Tails, Ulcerative colitis

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology 
Physiology and Pharmacology  McCaig Institute Southern Alberta Mass Spectrometry Core facility University of Calgary

### Submitter
Antoine Dufour

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
Physiology and Pharmacology  McCaig Institute Southern Alberta Mass Spectrometry Core facility University of Calgary


