### Accession
PXD018291

### Title
A decision tree searching strategy to boost the identification of cross-linked peptides

### Description
We describe an efficient decision tree searching strategy (DTSS) to boost the identification of cross-linked peptides. The DTSS approach allows the identification of a wealth of complementary information to facilitate the construction of more protein-protein interaction networks for human cell lysate, which was tested by the use of a recently reported cross-linking dataset (ACS Cent. Sci. 2019, 5, 1514−1522). A variant of the PhoX-linker, named pDSPE was synthesized and applied to cross-link E.coli cell lysate to demonstrate that the acquisition of doubly charged ions can significantly improve identifica-tion results. The method can be seamlessly integrated to other search engines to maximize the number of identified cross-links

### Sample Protocol
Urea and Tris-HCL (pH 8) were added to the cross-linked sample, the final concentration was 50 mM and 20 mM respectively. The sample was then incubated with DTT (10 mM) at 56 ℃ for 15 min. The reduced sample was further alkylated using IAA (30 min in in the dark at room tem-perature). Then the sample was incubated with trypsin (protein: trypsin=100:1) for 6 hours at 37 ℃. The tryptic digested peptides were desalted using C18 SPE column. The cross-linked peptides were then by TiO2 beads as de-scribed in our previous report

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data files were analyzed using an in house written RCPP script (https://github.com/wchenSHT/DecisiontreeXlink). Both the pDSPE cross-linked MS files which were ac-quired in this study and the PhoX dataset which was ac-quired by Scheltema et.al30 were first searched using prote-ome discover 2.2. The obtained type 0 linked peptides list were used as the 1st peptide sequence list. For PhoX sample, the identified proteins from proteome discover were ex-ported to a FASTA file and was used as the second data-base. For pDSPE sample, a database containing around 5000 E.coli sequences was used as the whole database.   MetaMorpheus was also used to search cross-linking peptides. For both MetaMorpheus and the in house written script, the searching mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS were set to 10 and 20 ppm respectively, Carb(C) was con-sidered as fixed modification

### Publication Abstract
We describe an efficient decision tree searching strategy (DTSS) to boost the identification of cross-linked peptides. The DTSS approach allows the identification of a wealth of complementary information to facilitate the construction of more protein-protein interaction networks for human cell lysate, which was tested by the use of a recently reported cross-linking data set (<i>ACS Cent. Sci.</i> <b>2019</b>, <i>5</i>, 1514-1522). A variant of the PhoX-linker, named <b>pDSPE</b>, was synthesized and applied to cross-link <i>Escherichia coli</i> cell lysate to demonstrate that the acquisition of doubly charged ions can significantly improve identification results. The method can be seamlessly integrated to other search engines to maximize the number of identified cross-links.

### Keywords
Xlink-ms, Data-analysis

### Affiliations
Shanghaitech University
SIAIS, ShanghaiTech University

### Submitter
Wenzhang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr wenzhang chen
SIAIS, ShanghaiTech University


