### Accession
PXD036363

### Title
Targeting N-linked Glycosylation for the Therapy of Human Lymphoma

### Description
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is an aggressive cancer with two major biological subtypes, activated B-cell like (ABC) and germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) DLCBL.  Self-antigen engagement of B-cell receptors (BCRs) in ABC tumors promotes their clustering in the plasma membrane, thereby initiating chronic active signaling and downstream activation of the pro-survival NF-B and PI3 kinase pathways.  The potential of therapeutics targeting chronic active BCR signaling in ABC DLBCL is highlighted by the frequent response of these tumors to inhibitors of BTK, a kinase that links BCR signaling to NF-B activation.  Here we used genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screens to identify regulators of the IRF4, a direct NF-kB target and essential transcription factor in ABC cells.  Unexpectedly, inactivation of the oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) complex, which mediates N-linked protein glycosylation, reduced IRF4 expression and NF-B activity in ABC cells, resulting in cell death.  Using functional glycoproteogenomics we linked this phenomenon to defective BCR glycosylation.  Pharmacologic inhibition of OST reduced the size and abundance of BCR microclusters in the plasma membrane and blocked their internalization.  These reorganized BCRs associated with the inhibitory coreceptor CD22, which attenuated proximal BCR signaling, thereby reducing NF-B and PI3 kinase activation.  OST inhibition also blocked the trafficking of TLR9 to the endolysosomal compartment, preventing its association with the BCR in the My-T-BCR signaling complex that activates NF-B in ABC cells.  In GCB DLBCL, OST inhibition also attenuated constitutive BCR signaling, reducing PI3 kinase signaling and triggering cell death.  Our data highlight the therapeutic potential of OST inhibitors for the treatment of diverse B cell malignancies in which constitutive BCR signaling is essential.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry To metabolically label cells for mass spectrometry, we used “stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture” (SILAC) as described previously49. Cells were grown for two weeks in RPMI medium (Silantes) lacking lysine and arginine with 10% dialyzed FCS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Life technologies). Medium was supplemented with amino acids were “Light” medium contained regular amino acids (Sigma), “Medium” medium contained 13C614N4-L-arginine/L-lysine-4,4,5,5-D4 and “Heavy” 13C615N4-L-arginine/13C615N2-L-lysine (Eurisotop).   Non-SILAC samples were labeled with “tandem mass tag” (TMT)-labels (ThermoFisher) following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce 660 nm kit (Thermo Fisher). 100 µg protein per sample was reduced using TCEP and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Next, proteins were precipitated using acetone, tryptic digested and labeled with the TMT tags. To profile the global proteome SILAC labeled cells were washed two times in ice cold PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer (1% NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris at pH 7.5–7.8, 5 mM NaF, 0.5% NP40, 1 mM sodium vanadate, complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) for 10-30 min on ice. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (17,000xg, 4°C) for 15 min. SILAC labeled cleared protein lysates were separated by SDS-PAGE, stained with Coomassie blue and cut into 23 slices. Proteins in each slice were subjected to tryptic digestion. Eluted peptides (in 2% acetonitrile/0.05% TFA) were separated on an HPLC system (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher) and analyzed using Orbitrap Q Exactive series or Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher). Glycoproteomics N-linked glycoproteomic analyses were carried out as described previously50. Briefly, indicated cell lines were washed twice with PBS and lysed in 4% SDS (w/v) in 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.5) and sonicated. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation and protein anounts were determined using the Pierce BCA protein kit (Thermo Fisher). Next, proteins were reduced and alkylated using TCEP and iodoacetamide. Pre-washed Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (GE Healthcare) were added at a ratio of 10:1 (beads to protein), acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 70%, supernatant was removed and beads were washed three times in ACN. Next, beads were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES buffer with trypsin and incubated overnight (37 °C). Peptides were collected and labeled with TMT reagents as described above.  For enrichment of glycopeptides, TMT labeled peptides were subjected to Ultisil HILIC Amphion II columns (Welch) for five times and washed three times with 75% ACN/1% TFA. Retained glycopeptides were eluted using TFA and vacuum dried. Enriched glycopeptides were then subjected to XBridge C18 columns (Waters) for fractionation on an Agilent 1100 HPLC. MS analysis was done on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Raw files were processed using GlycoBinder as previously described50. A maximum of two missed cleavages and a mass tolerance of 10-20 ppm was allowed.  Cysteine carbamidomethylation and lysine residues were set as fixed modifications. Methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. Glycopeptide-to-spectra matches were reported using the human protein database Swiss-Prot (October 2020, human, 20370 entries). Log2 fold changes were normalized to global proteome data. Phosphoproteomics Tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides were enriched using an IP-based method as described previously51. In brief, 100 million cells were lysed in 5 ml urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate), reduced using DTT, alkylated using iodoacetamide and digested using trypsin. Peptides were purified using Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters) and phosphorylated peptides were immuno-precipitated using the Phospho-Tyrosine Rabbit mAb Kit (Cell Signaling). Enriched phospho-peptides were subjected to mass spectrometry as described above.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS output files were analyzed using MaxQuant52 (version 1.6.5.0, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) . For protein identification and quantitation, spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome and a database of 245 common contaminants using the Andromeda search engine53. The mass tolerance was set to 6 and 20 ppm, minimal length of tryptic peptides was 7 amino acids with a false discovery rate of 1% on peptide and protein level. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. In case of SILAC experiments, at least two ratio counts were required for protein quantitation. Further data processing was done using Perseus (version 1.6.0.7, MPI of Biochemistry).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dlbcl, Phosphoproteomics, Nf-kb, Functional glycoproteomics, B cell receptor, Lymphoma

### Affiliations
Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
Lymphoid Malignancies Branch Center for Cancer Research National Cancer Institute National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland

### Submitter
Sebastian Scheich

### Lab Head
Dr Louis M. Staudt
Lymphoid Malignancies Branch Center for Cancer Research National Cancer Institute National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland


