### Accession
PXD030143

### Title
DIA-MS of plethodontid salamander sperm

### Description
Plethodontid salamanders are the largest family of salamanders and are classic models for studying the effect of rapidly evolving courtship pheromones on mating behavior and reproductive success. Despite interests in plethodontid reproduction, very little is known about the molecular composition of salamander gametes, as the extraordinary sizes of their genomes have impaired the development of various omic-scale resources. To identify what proteins may be expressed in salamander sperm, we performed DIA-MS on sperm samples from two plethodontid species, Plethodon shermani and Desmognathus ocoee. As the first detailed study of salamander sperm, this study partially fills in a critical taxonomic gap in the study of fertilization proteins in vertebrates.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were generated from plethodontid sperm proteins purified using S-Traps (Protifi) and trypsin proteolysis for 2 hours. Tryptic peptides were separated with a Thermo Easy nLC 1200 and emitted into a Thermo Exploris 480 using a 75 μm inner diameter fused silica capillary with an in-house pulled tip. Six gas-phase fractionated data independent acquisition (GPF-DIA) experiments were acquired of each sample (120,000 precursor resolution, 30,000 fragment resolution, fragment AGC target of 1000%, max IIT of 55 ms, NCE of 27, +3H assumed charge state) using 4 m/z precursor isolation windows in a staggered window pattern with optimized window placements (i.e., 398.4 to 502.5 m/z, 498.5 to 602.5 m/z, 598.5 to 702.6 m/z, 698.6 to 802.6 m/z, 798.6 to 902.7 m/z, and 898.7 to 1002.7 m/z).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to demultiplexed mzML files with Proteowizrd MSConvert and searched using EncyclopeDIA v.1.2.2 using Prosit predicted libraries (HCD 2020 model) based on predicted proteins from a PacBio IsoSeq transcriptome prepared from testis and ovary of plethodontid salamanders along with published mental gland EST sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Reproductive proteins evolve at unparalleled rates, resulting in tremendous diversity of both molecular composition and biochemical function between gametes of different taxonomic clades. To date, the proteomic composition of amphibian gametes is largely a molecular mystery, particularly for Urodeles (salamanders and newts) for which few genomic-scale resources exist. In this study, we provide the first detailed molecular characterization of gametes from two salamander species (<i>Plethodon shermani</i> and <i>Desmognathus ocoee</i>) that are models of reproductive behavior. Long-read PacBio transcriptome sequencing of testis and ovary of both species revealed sex-specific expression of many genes common to vertebrate gametes, including a similar expression profile to the egg coat genes of <i>Xenopus</i> oocytes. In contrast to broad conservation of oocyte genes, major testis transcripts included paralogs of salamander-specific courtship pheromones (PRF, PMF, and SPF) that were confirmed as major sperm proteins by mass spectrometry proteomics. Sperm-specific paralogs of PMF and SPF are likely the most abundant secreted proteins in <i>P. shermani</i> and <i>D. ocoee</i>, respectively. In contrast, sperm PRF lacks a signal peptide and may be expressed in cytoplasm. PRF pheromone genes evolved independently multiple times by repeated gene duplication of sperm PRF genes with signal peptides recovered through recombination with PMF genes. Phylogenetic analysis of courtship pheromones and their sperm paralogs support that each protein family evolved for these two reproductive contexts at distinct evolutionary time points between 17 and 360 million years ago. Our combined phylogenetic, transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of plethodontid reproductive tissues support that the recurrent co-option and recombination of TFPs and cytokine-like proteins have been a novel driving force throughout salamander evolution and reproduction.

### Keywords
Plethodontid, Sperm, Salamander

### Affiliations
The Ohio State University
Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, United States

### Submitter
Damien Wilburn

### Lab Head
Dr Brian Searle
Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, United States


