### Accession
PXD015879

### Title
High glucose treatment promotes extracellular matrix proteome remodeling in Müller glial cells

### Description
The underlying pathomechanisms in diabetic retinopathy (DR) remains incompletely understood. The aim of this study was to add to the current knowledge about the particular role of retina Müller glial cells (RMG) in the initial processes of DR. Applying a mass spectrometric workflow, we investigated proteome changes of primary porcine RMG under short term diabetic cell culture treatment. We revealed global changes in RMG proteome indicated by a fundamental remodeling of ECM and focal adhesion processes which potentially leads to destabilization of the retinal inner limiting membrane. This is in line with our previous findings of a disrupted ILM in the retinae of a diabetic pig model and suggests an involvement of RMG in this process. Additionally, employing porcine organotypic retinal explant cultures, we demonstrate a specific decrease of RMG-associated SPP1 expression as a result of osmotic challenge induced by high glucose levels. We assume a loss of neuroprotective potential administrated by RMG and subsequent acceleration of neurodegenerative processes in DR.

### Sample Protocol
After three days of treatment, cells were washed trice in ice cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Plates were put on ice and 100 μl lysis buffer (PBS with 1% NP40, Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) was added per well. After two minutes of incubation, cells from each well were scraped and collected separately. Lysis was performed by shear force and ultrasonication followed by centrifugation for ten minutes at 10.000 rcf. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay and equal total protein amounts (10 µg) per replicate were digested with a modified FASP procedure (Wiśniewski, Zougman, Nagaraj, & Mann, 2009), (Grosche et al., 2016). Briefly, protein lysates were diluted with ammonium bicarbonate buffer (Millipore Sigma, Darmstadt, Germany) to a final volume of 400 µl, followed by reduction using 1 µl of 1 M dithiothreitol (Millipore Sigma, Darmstadt, Germany) for 30 min at 60 °C. After cooling down to room temperature, 8 M urea buffer pH 8.5 (Millipore Sigma, Massachusetts, USA) was added to a final volume of 1 ml and proteins were carbamidomethlylated with 10 µl of 300 mM iodoacetamide (Millipore Sigma, Darmstadt, Germany) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. 2 µl of 1 M dithiothreitol was added to quench unreacted iodoacetamide, and protein lysates passed 30 kDa centrifugal filters, Vivacon 500 (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany). After washing three times with 200 µl of urea buffer and three times with 100 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, the proteins on the filters were subjected to a two hours digest at room temperature with 0.5 g of Lysyl Endopeptidase (Wako, Osaka, Japan) followed by tryptic digest (1g of trypsin, Promega, Madison, USA) over-night at 37 °C. Peptides were collected by centrifugation through the filter and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, USA) to a final pH 2. Approximately 0.5 µg of peptides per sample were measured in a randomized fashion on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer online coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Ulm, Germany) in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode as previously described (Lepper et al., 2018), (Mattugini et al., 2018). Briefly, peptides were loaded automatically on a trap column (300 μm inner diameter × 5 mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, USA) prior to C18 reversed phase chromatography on the analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm; Waters, Milford, USA) at 250 nl/min flow rate in a 105 minute non-linear acetonitrile gradient from 3 to 40% in 0.1% formic acid. Profile precursor spectra from 300 to 1650 m/z were recorded at 120000 resolution and a maximum injection time of 120 ms for achieving an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3e6. Subsequently fragment spectra were recorded in 37 overlapping DIA isolation windows (1 Da overlap on each side) of variable size covering in total 300 to 1650 m/z, each at 30000 resolution with an AGC target of 3e6 and a normalized collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
The recorded raw files were analyzed using the Spectronaut software (version 12, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland; (Bruderer et al., 2015), (Bruderer, Bernhardt, Gandhi, & Reiter, 2016)) with a peptide identification false discovery rate setting of < 1%, using an in-house pig spectral library which was generated using Biognosys Spectronaut 12 and the Ensembl Pig database (release 75, Sscrofa10.2). Quantification was based on MS2 area levels of all unique proteotypic peptides per protein fulfilling the percentile 0.2 setting. Normalized protein quantifications were exported and used for calculations of fold-changes and significance values. Each group originally included six replicates; in the normoglycemic control group two replicates were excluded due to a deviating abundance response that could not be solved by normalization.  All mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (Perez-Riverol et al., 2019) with the dataset identifier PXDXXXXX. To analyze the differential protein abundance between the different treatment groups, an unpaired student`s t-test  was performed on log2 transformed normalized abundances. Proteins were considered to be significantly changed upon the following criteria: (a) quantified with ≥2 unique peptides and (b) t-test p-value < 0.05. If mentioned an additional criteria of an average increase or decrease of abundance level of ≥ 1.33-fold or ≤ 0.75-fold was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hyperglycemia, Diabetic retinopathy (dr), Neurodegeneration, Extracellular matrix (ecm), Müller cells (rmg), Secreted phosphoprotein 1 (spp1), Inner limiting membrane (ilm)

### Affiliations
LMU München
Helmholtz Zentrum München
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Sagmeister

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M Hauck
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Center Munich, Germany


