### Accession
PXD004495

### Title
Detection of Aggressive Prostate Cancer-Associated Glycoproteins in Urine using Glycoproteomics and Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Clinical management of prostate cancer remains a significant challenge due to the lack of available tests for guiding treatment decisions. The blood Prostate-Specific Antigen (PSA) test has facilitated early detection and intervention of prostate cancer. However, blood PSA levels are less effective in distinguishing aggressive from indolent prostate cancers and other benign prostatic diseases. Thus, the development of novel approaches specific for prostate cancer that can differentiate aggressive from indolent disease remains an urgent medical need. In the current study, we evaluated urine specimens from prostate cancer patients instead of serum using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), with the aim of identifying effective prostate cancer biomarkers. Glycoproteins from urine samples of prostate cancer patients with different Gleason scores were characterized via solid phase extraction of N-linked glycosite-containing peptides and LC-MS/MS. In total, 2923 unique glycosite-containing peptides were identified. Comparison of urine-based glycoproteins with those identified from aggressive and non-aggressive prostate cancer tissues as well as sera from prostate cancer patients revealed that the majority of aggressive prostate cancer-associated glycoproteins were more readily detected in patient urine than serum samples. Our data collectively indicate that urine provides a highly reliable source for biomarker testing in patients with aggressive prostate cancer.

### Sample Protocol
2.2 Clinical Specimens Clinical specimens and medical information were obtained with informed consent, and experiments performed with the approval of the Institutional Review Board of The Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore, USA). Urine samples from prostate cancer patients (n=40, Table S1) were collected during office visits in the department of Urology. Serum samples from prostate cancer (n=119) and non-prostate cancer (n=48) subjects were collected at the Clinical Chemistry laboratory (Table S2). Tissue samples were collected as described previously [15, 16]. Fresh urine samples were centrifuged at 3000 g for 20 min at 4°C to remove cells and debris. Centrifuged urine samples and sera from all patients were stored at -80°C until use. 2.3 N-linked Glycosite-containing Peptide Isolation from Urine of Prostate Cancer Patients Urine samples were thawed at room temperature and vortexed for 2 min. Samples (15 mL) were concentrated to <1 mL using 10K centrifugal devices. Protein concentrations of the urine samples were determined using the BCA assay. Proteins were denatured in 8M urea/1M ammonium bicarbonate buffer [27], reduced with 10 mM TCEP at 37°C for 1 h and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Next, solutions were diluted 5-fold with deionized water. Sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI; protein:enzyme, 50:1, w/w) was added to samples and incubated at 37°C overnight with shaking. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min to remove particulate matter and purified via C18 solid phase extraction. Peptides were eluted from the C18 column in 60% Acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and concentrations measured with the BCA assay.  N-linked glycosite-containing peptides were extracted using SPEG (hydrazide chemistry) as described previously [15, 26], with minor modifications [28]. Briefly, peptides in the solution were oxidized with 10 mM sodium periodate solution at room temperature in the dark for 1 h. Samples were diluted with 0.1% TFA in 5% ACN and cleaned using the C18 column. The elution solution was collected directly into equilibrated hydrazide beads (300 μL of 50% slurry for each sample) and incubated with 100 mM aniline at room temperature for 1 h. Beads were washed three times each with 50% ACN, 1.5M NaCl, water and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Former N-glycopeptides were released via 3 μL PNGase F (New England Biolabs, Beverly, MA) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer at 37°C overnight with shaking. Glycosite-containing peptides were collected in supernatant/wash solutions (200 μL of 50% ACN), dried via vacuum and resuspended in 50 μL 0.2% formic acid (pH<3) for HPLC fractionation.  2.4 Isolation of N-linked Glycosite-containing Peptides from Serum samples of Prostate Cancer Patients Serum N-linked glycosite-containing peptides were isolated using SPEG as described previously [29]. Briefly, 40 mL serum samples were diluted 10-fold with 500 mM sodium acetate buffer and oxidized with 15 mM sodium periodate. After desalting, samples were coupled to hydrazide beads, followed by tryptic digestion and extensive washing. N-linked glycosite-containing peptides were released from hydrazide beads using PNGase-F.  2.5 Fractionation of N-linked glycosite-containing peptides from urine samples Equal amounts of N-linked glycosite-containing peptides isolated from urine samples of prostate cancer patients with Gleason scores ≥8 (n=8) and 6 (n=12) were pooled. Fractionation of samples was performed using high pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) on the 1220 Infinity LC system with a Zorbax Extended-C18 analytical column containing 1.8 μM particles (Agilent Technologies, Inc. CA) at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. The mobile phase A consisted of 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) while B contained 10 mM ammonium formate and 90% ACN (pH 10). Sample separation was accomplished using the following linear gradient: 0 to 2% B in 10 min, 2% to 8% B in 5 min, 8% to 35% B in 85 min, 35% to 95% B in 5 min and 95% B for an additional 15 min. Peptides were detected at 215 nm, and 96 fractions collected, along with the LC separation in a time-based mode from 16 to 112 min. Fractions were concatenated into 24 fractions by combining every 24 fractions (for instance, 1, 25, 49, 73; 2, 26, 50, 74). Samples were dried in a speed vacuum and stored at −80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
2.6 LC–MS/MS Analysis Peptides (～1 μg) were separated through a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific) with a 75 μm × 50 cm Acclaim PepMap100 RSLC column (Thermo Scientific). The mobile phase flow rate was 250 nL/min and included phase A (0.1% formic acid and 2% ACN in water) and B (0.1% formic acid and 95% ACN in water). The gradient profile was set as follows: 5%–40% B for 68 min, 40%–95% B for 5 min, 90% B for 10 min. MS analysis was performed using a Thermo Q Exactive mass spectrometer (QE-MS; Thermo Scientific). The spray voltage was set at 1.8 kV. The QE spectral (AGC) target for MS1 was set as 1 × 106 in 60 ms maximum time and AGC target for MS/MS as 1 × 105 (at a resolution of 17,500 and maximum IT 75 ms) of the 20 most abundant ions. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and equal or more than eight protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 15s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions. 2.7 Glycoprotein and Glycopeptide Quantification  Acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against the RefSeq human protein database (downloaded on 12/30/2013) using the SEQUEST search engine (Thermo Proteome Discoverer v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database search parameters were set as follows: a maximum of two missed cleavage sites permitted for trypsin digestion, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.06 Da fragment mass tolerance, carbamidomethylation (C, +57.0215Da) as a fixed modification, oxidization (M, +15.9949Da) and deamidation (N, +0.98Da) as dynamic modifications. The results were filtered with 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Spectral counting was used to quantify the peptides identified from LC-MS/MS data [30]. 2.8 Statistics  Student’s t-test was used to calculate the p-value of differentially expressed glycoproteins. Data were considered significant at p-values ≤0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prostate cancer/aggressive/glycoprotein/urine/mass spectrometry-lc-ms/ms/ biomarkers/ body fluids

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Clinical Chemistry
Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
Weiming Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Hui zhang
Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Clinical Chemistry


