### Accession
PXD013306

### Title
An open-format enteroid culture system for interrogation of interactions between Toxoplasma gondii and the intestinal epithelium

### Description
When transmitted through the oral route, Toxoplasma gondii first interacts with its host at the small intestinal epithelium. This interaction is crucial to controlling initial invasion and replication, as well as shaping the quality of the systemic immune response. It is therefore an attractive target for the design of novel vaccines and adjuvants. However, due to a lack of tractable infection models, we understand surprisingly little about the molecular pathways that govern this interaction.  The in vitro culture of small intestinal epithelium as host-pathogen intreaction shows great promise for modelling the epithelial response to infection. However, the enclosed luminal space makes the application of infectious agents to the apical epithelial surface challenging. Here, we have developed three novel enteroid-based techniques for modelling T. gondii infection. In particular, we have adapted enteroid culture protocols to generate collagen-supported epithelial sheets with an exposed apical surface. These cultures retain epithelial polarization, and the presence of fully differentiated epithelial cell populations. They are susceptible to infection with, and support replication of, T. gondii.   Using quantitative label-free mass spectrometry, we show that T. gondii infection of the enteroid epithelium is associated with up-regulation of proteins associated with cholesterol metabolism, extracellular exosomes, intermicrovillar adhesion, and cell junctions. Inhibition of host cholesterol and isoprenoid biosynthesis with Atorvastatin resulted in a dramatic reduction in parasite replication. These novel models therefore offer tractable tools for investigating how interactions between T. gondii and the host intestinal epithelium influence the course of infection.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Matrigel®-grown enteroids were harvested by removal of culture medium, followed by pipetting in PBS. Enteroids were pelleted by centrifugation (300g for 10 min at 4oC) then washed three times in PBS. For collagen-supported epithelial sheets, culture medium was removed, cultures were washed three times with PBS and incubated with equal volumes of 0.1mg/mL type VIII collagenase from Clostridium histolytica (Sigma) for 30 min at incubated at 37oC in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. An equal volume of complete media was added, and cells were washed three times with PBS. In both cases, dry pellets were stored at -80oC for mass spectrometry. Protein digest for mass spectrometry Buffer (50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.2% w/v Rapigest, Waters) was added to washed enteroid pellets before sonication using sonicating water-bath (Jencons) for 3 x 10 minutes on ice. Samples were then heated at 80⁰C for 10 minutes. Protein content was determined using the Coomassie plus protein assay kit (Pierce) according the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein content was normalised between samples using 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein were then reduced with 3 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) at 60⁰C for 10 minutes then alkylated with 9 mM iodoacetimde (Sigma) at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteomic grade trypsin (Sigma) was added at a protein: trypsin ratio of 50:1 and samples incubated at 37⁰C overnight. Rapigest was removed by adding TFA to a final concentration of 1% (v/v) and incubating at 37⁰C for 2 hours. Peptide samples were centrifuged at 12,000g for 60 min (4⁰C) to remove precipitated Rapigest.  NanoLC Ms Peptides were analysed by on-line nanoflow LC using the Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) at 5 μl min−1 with an aqueous solution containing 0.1 %( v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. After 3 min, the trap column was set in-line an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) fused to a silica nano-electrospray emitter (Dionex).  The column was operated at a constant temperature of 35°C and the LC system coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatography was performed with a buffer system consisting of 0.1 % formic acid (buffer A) and 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of 3.8 – 50 % buffer B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge states +2 to +5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 50ms, respectively, and the ion target value was set to 1E6 for survey scans and 1E5 for the MS/MS scans. MS/MS events were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. Repetitive sequencing of peptides was minimized through dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 20s.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were imported into Progenesis LC–MS (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). Runs were time aligned using default settings and using an auto selected run as reference. Peaks were picked by the software and filtered to include only peaks with a charge state of between +2 and +6. Peptide intensities were normalised against the reference run by Progenesis LC-MS and these intensities are used to highlight differences in protein expression between control and treated samples with supporting statistical analysis (ANOVA p-values) calculated by the Progenesis LC-MS software. Spectral data were transformed to .mgf files with Progenesis LC–MS and exported for peptide identification using the Mascot (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) search engine. Tandem MS data were searched against the murine Mus musculus predicted proteome (Uniprot, UP000000589, Feb 2017), T. gondii predicted proteomes (T. gondii ME49 V13 and T. gondii VEG V13 ,EuPathDB) and a contaminanant database (common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database,‘cRAP’, GPMDB, 2012),. Mascot search parameters were as follows; precursor mass tolerance set to 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.05 Da. One missed tryptic cleavage was permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) set as a variable modification. Mascot search results were further processed using the machine learning algorithm Percolator. The false discovery rate was < 1%. Individual ion scores > 13 indicated identity or extensive homology (p < 0.05).  Protein identification results were imported into Progenesis LC–MS as .xml files.

### Publication Abstract
When transmitted through the oral route, <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> first interacts with its host at the small intestinal epithelium. This interaction is crucial to controlling initial invasion and replication, as well as shaping the quality of the systemic immune response. It is therefore an attractive target for the design of novel vaccines and adjuvants. However, due to a lack of tractable infection models, we understand surprisingly little about the molecular pathways that govern this interaction. The <i>in vitro</i> culture of small intestinal epithelium as 3D enteroids shows great promise for modeling the epithelial response to infection. However, the enclosed luminal space makes the application of infectious agents to the apical epithelial surface challenging. Here, we have developed three novel enteroid-based techniques for modeling <i>T. gondii</i> infection. In particular, we have adapted enteroid culture protocols to generate collagen-supported epithelial sheets with an exposed apical surface. These cultures retain epithelial polarization, and the presence of fully differentiated epithelial cell populations. They are susceptible to infection with, and support replication of, <i>T. gondii</i>. Using quantitative label-free mass spectrometry, we show that <i>T. gondii</i> infection of the enteroid epithelium is associated with up-regulation of proteins associated with cholesterol metabolism, extracellular exosomes, intermicrovillar adhesion, and cell junctions. Inhibition of host cholesterol and isoprenoid biosynthesis with Atorvastatin resulted in a reduction in parasite load only at higher doses, indicating that <i>de novo</i> synthesis may support, but is not required for, parasite replication. These novel models therefore offer tractable tools for investigating how interactions between <i>T. gondii</i> and the host intestinal epithelium influence the course of infection.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, 3d enteroids, Host-pathogen interaction

### Affiliations
Department of Infection Biology Institute of Infection and Global Health University of Liverpool
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Janine Coombes
Department of Infection Biology Institute of Infection and Global Health University of Liverpool


