### Accession
PXD046286

### Title
DCAF1-based PROTACs with activity against clinically validated targets overcoming intrinsic- and acquired-degrader resistance

### Description
Targeted protein degradation (TPD) mediates protein level through small molecule induced redirection of E3 ligases to ubiquitinate neo-substrates and mark them for proteasomal degradation. TPD has recently emerged as a key modality in drug discovery. So far only a few ligases have been utilized for TPD. Interestingly, the workhorse ligase CRBN has been observed to be downregulated in settings of resistance to immunomodulatory inhibitory drugs (IMiDs). Here we show that the essential E3 ligase receptor DCAF1 can be harnessed for TPD utilizing a selective, non-covalent DCAF1 binder. We confirm that this binder can be functionalized into an efficient DCAF1-BRD9-PROTAC. Chemical and genetic rescue experiments validate specific degradation via the CRL4(DCAF1) E3 ligase. Additionally, a dasatinib-based DCAF1 PROTAC successfully degrades cytosolic and membrane-bound tyrosine kinases. A potent and selective DCAF1-BTK-PROTAC (DBt-10) degrades BTK in cells with acquired resistance to CRBN-BTK-PROTACs while the DCAF1-BRD9-PROTAC (DBr-1) provides an alternative strategy to tackle intrinsic resistance to VHL-degrader, highlighting DCAF1-PROTACS as a promising strategy to overcome ligase mediated resistance in clinical settings.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 and TMD8 cells were cultured according to protocol and 3 million cells were plated per sample and recovered for 24 h. The following day, cells were treated with indicated compounds at corresponding concentrations for 6 h. Cells were then harvested and washed 2× with PBS before removing all liquid and snap freezing in liquid nitrogen before sample preparation for proteomics. TMT-labeled peptides were generated with the iST-NHS kit (PreOmics) and TMT10plex (duplicates per condition) or TMT18plex (triplicates per condition) reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal amounts of labeled peptides were pooled and separated on a high pH fractionation system with a water-acetonitrile gradient containing 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 11. Alternating rows of the resulting 72 fractions were pooled into 24 samples, dried and resuspended in water containing 0.1% formic acid. The LC-MS analysis was carried out on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated over 115 min or 180 min with a water-acetonitrile gradient containing 0.1% formic acid on a 25 cm long Aurora Series UHPLC column (Ion Opticks) with 75 μm inner diameter. MS1 spectra were acquired at 120k resolution in the Orbitrap, MS2 spectra were acquired after CID activation in the ion trap and MS3 spectra were acquired after HCD activation with a synchronous precursor selection approach using 5 or 8 notches and 60k or 50k resolution in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, spectra were searched with Sequest HT against the Homo sapiens UniProt protein database and common contaminants (2019, 21494 entries). The database search criteria included: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, maximum three missed cleavage sites, dynamic modification of 15.995 Da for methionines, static modifications of 113.084 Da for cysteines and 229.163 Da or 304.207 Da for peptide N-termini and lysines. TMT reporter ions of the MS3 spectra were integrated with a 20 ppm tolerance and the reporter ion intensities were used for quantification. The Percolator algorithm was applied to the Sequest HT results.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted protein degradation (TPD) mediates protein level through small molecule induced redirection of E3 ligases to ubiquitinate neo-substrates and mark them for proteasomal degradation. TPD has recently emerged as a key modality in drug discovery. So far only a few ligases have been utilized for TPD. Interestingly, the workhorse ligase CRBN has been observed to be downregulated in settings of resistance to immunomodulatory inhibitory drugs (IMiDs). Here we show that the essential E3 ligase receptor DCAF1 can be harnessed for TPD utilizing a selective, non-covalent DCAF1 binder. We confirm that this binder can be functionalized into an efficient DCAF1-BRD9 PROTAC. Chemical and genetic rescue experiments validate specific degradation via the CRL4<sup>DCAF1</sup> E3 ligase. Additionally, a dasatinib-based DCAF1 PROTAC successfully degrades cytosolic and membrane-bound tyrosine kinases. A potent and selective DCAF1-BTK-PROTAC (DBt-10) degrades BTK in cells with acquired resistance to CRBN-BTK-PROTACs while the DCAF1-BRD9 PROTAC (DBr-1) provides an alternative strategy to tackle intrinsic resistance to VHL-degrader, highlighting DCAF1-PROTACS as a promising strategy to overcome ligase mediated resistance in clinical settings.

### Keywords
Dcaf1, Protac, Tpd, Tmt

### Affiliations
Biomedical Research Novartis Pharma AG
NIBR

### Submitter
Andreas Hofmann

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Josef
Biomedical Research Novartis Pharma AG


