### Accession
PXD041782

### Title
CRTAC1 Enhances the Chemosensitivity of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer to Cisplatin by Eliciting RyR-mediated Calcium Release and Inhibiting Akt1 Expression

### Description
Sensitivity to platinum-based combination chemotherapy is associated with a favorable prognosis in the patients of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Here, our results obtained from analyses of the Gene Expression Omnibus database of NSCLC patients showed that cartilage acidic protein 1 (CRTAC1) plays a role in the response to platinum-based chemotherapy. Overexpression of CRTAC1 increased sensitivity to cisplatin in vitro, whereas knockdown of CRTAC1 decreased chemosensitivity of NSCLC cells. In vivo mouse experiments showed that CRTAC1 overexpression increased the antitumor effects of cisplatin. CRTAC1 overexpression promoted NFAT transcriptional activation by increasing intracellular Ca2+ levels, thereby inducing its regulated STUB1 mRNA transcription and protein expression, accelerating Akt1 protein degradation, and in turn enhancing cisplatin-induced apoptosis. Taken together, the present results indicate that CRTAC1 overexpression increases the chemosensitivity of NSCLC to cisplatin treatment by inducing Ca2+-dependent Akt1 degradation and apoptosis, suggesting the potential of CRTAC1 as a biomarker for predicting cisplatin chemosensitivity. Our results further reveal that modulating the expression of CRTAC1 could be a new strategy for increasing the efficacy of cisplatin in chemotherapy of NSCLC patients.

### Sample Protocol
The non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines H1299 stably overexpressing of CRTAC1 and the control cells (Vector) were successfully constructed. After H1299-CRTAC1 and H1299-Vector cells were treated with 20μM cisplatin and 0μM cisplatin for 48h, respectively. Four groups cells (H1299 Vector + 0μM CDDP; H1299 CRTAC1 + 0μM CDDP; H1299-Vector+20μM CDDP; H1299-CRTAC1 + 20 μM CDDP) were collected, and the proteins of each group were extracted for protein expression profile analysis.

### Data Protocol
Based on a Raw file obtained by mass spectrometry detection, 1) constructing a sample specific protein database according to the source condition of a sample, and then searching the database by using analysis software; 2) performing quality control analysis of peptide segments and protein levels based on the database search resu <; 3) annotating common functional databases of the identified proteins, including GO, KEGG, InterPro, COG and STRING databases; 4) performing quantitative analysis of the proteins, including quantitative distribution and repeatability analysis; 5) performing difference screening according to the quantitative results, and drawing statistical charts related to difference analysis; 6) carrying out functional classification statistical analysis on the differential proteins, including GO secondary classification, KEGG pathway classification and COG/KOG classification statistics; 7) carrying out enrichment analysis by adopting a Fisher exact test method based on the statistical results obtained by different classification methods; 8) When there are multiple experimental groups in the project, the functional relationship of the differential proteins under different experimental conditions is compared by enrichment clustering analysis; 9) Then the key regulatory proteins under specific experimental conditions are screened by PPI (protein-protein interaction, protein interaction network) analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Sensitivity to platinum-based combination chemotherapy is associated with a favorable prognosis in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Here, our results obtained from analyses of the Gene Expression Omnibus database of NSCLC patients showed that cartilage acidic protein 1 (CRTAC1) plays a role in the response to platinum-based chemotherapy. Overexpression of CRTAC1 increased sensitivity to cisplatin in vitro, whereas knockdown of CRTAC1 decreased chemosensitivity of NSCLC cells. In vivo mouse experiments showed that CRTAC1 overexpression increased the antitumor effects of cisplatin. CRTAC1 overexpression promoted NFAT transcriptional activation by increasing intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> levels, thereby inducing its regulated STUB1 mRNA transcription and protein expression, accelerating Akt1 protein degradation and, in turn, enhancing cisplatin-induced apoptosis. Taken together, the present results indicate that CRTAC1 overexpression increases the chemosensitivity of NSCLC to cisplatin treatment by inducing Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent Akt1 degradation and apoptosis, suggesting the potential of CRTAC1 as a biomarker for predicting cisplatin chemosensitivity. Our results further reveal that modulating the expression of CRTAC1 could be a new strategy for increasing the efficacy of cisplatin in chemotherapy of NSCLC patients.

### Keywords
Non-small cell lung cancer; chemosensitivity; crtac1; akt1; ca2+

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University
School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China

### Submitter
Zihui Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Haishan Huang
School of Laboratory Medicine and Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China


