### Accession
PXD020269

### Title
Proteolytic processing converts pro-tumorigenic Angiopoietin-like 4 into an inhibitor of metastasis

### Description
Preclinical and clinical studies have solidly established the concepts of concomitant tumor resistance (CTR), the inhibition of metastases formation by the primary tumor. Yet, the mechanisms of CTR are poorly understood and bench-to-bedside studies are largely missing. Here, we show that proteolytic processing of ANGPTL4 liberated the potent CTR-inducing capacity of the N-terminal cleavage fragment, nANGPTL4. Full-length ANGPTL4 was primarily detected in tumor tissues, whereas nANGPTL4 predominated in the systemic circulation, whose concentrations correlated inversely with disease progression. Comparative studies in multiple preclinical tumor models revealed distinctly opposing functions of the ANGPTL4 cleavage fragments. Full length and cANGPTL4 promoted tumor growth and metastasis leading to reduced overall survival. Conversely, nANGPTL4 inhibited metastasis formation and enhanced overall survival. The experiments identified proteolytic cleavage as regulatory mechanism converting pro-tumorigenic ANGPTL4 into anti-metastatic nANGPTL4. Moreover, the results revitalize the concept that primary tumors may suppress metastases through systemic release of metastasis-inhibiting cytokines

### Sample Protocol
Elutes from immuno-precipitated Angptl-4 were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. After adding n- and c-term specific heavy labeled reference peptides (JPT.com) to the samples at 5 fmol/ug of total protein, peptide standards and together with their endogenous counterparts were specifically monitored using LC-MS and parallel-reaction monitoring.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data was analyzed using Skyline software V2.1, https://brendanx-uw1.gs.washington.edu/labkey/project/home/software/Skyline/begin.view).

### Publication Abstract
Primary tumors and distant site metastases form a bidirectionally communicating system. Yet, the molecular mechanisms of this crosstalk are poorly understood. Here, we identified the proteolytically cleaved fragments of angiopoietin-like 4 (ANGPTL4) as contextually active protumorigenic and antitumorigenic contributors in this communication ecosystem. Preclinical studies in multiple tumor models revealed that the C-terminal fragment (cANGPTL4) promoted tumor growth and metastasis. In contrast, the N-terminal fragment of ANGPTL4 (nANGPTL4) inhibited metastasis and enhanced overall survival in a postsurgical metastasis model by inhibiting WNT signaling and reducing vascularity at the metastatic site. Tracing ANGPTL4 and its fragments in tumor patients detected full-length ANGPTL4 primarily in tumor tissues, whereas nANGPTL4 predominated in systemic circulation and correlated inversely with disease progression. The study highlights the spatial context of the proteolytic cleavage-dependent pro- and antitumorigenic functions of ANGPTL4 and identifies and validates nANGPTL4 as a novel biomarker of tumor progression and antimetastatic therapeutic agent.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Prm, Angptl4

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


