### Accession
PXD003373

### Title
Chemical Proteomics Reveals Ferrochelatase as a Common Off-target of Kinase Inhibitors

### Description
Protein kinases are key components in signal transduction pathways and are established drug targets in oncology. Consequently, small molecule kinase inhibitors are on the rise but often show a rather broad target spectrum, potentially leading to toxic side effects. As a result, a broad assessment of the target space is desirable for proper interpretation of observed biological effects. The enzyme Ferrochelatase (FECH), which catalyzes the conversion of protoporphyrin IX into heme, was recently found to be an off-target of the BRAF inhibitor Vemurafenib potentially explaining the often severe phototoxicity associated with this drug in melanoma patients. However, the extent to which kinase inhibitors bind to FECH in general is currently unclear. Here, we used a chemical proteomics approach based on the kinobead technology to profile 226 clinical kinase inhibitors for their potential to bind FECH. Surprisingly, low or sub-micromolar FECH binding was detected for 29 (13%) of all compounds tested and isothermal dose response measurements confirmed drug binding to FECH in cells. We also show that Vemurafenib, Linsitinib, Neratinib and MK-2461 reduce heme levels in K562 cells, verifying that drug binding leads to loss of FECH activity. Further experiments identified the protoporphyrin pocket in FECH as one major binding site for small molecule inhibitors. Since genetic loss of FECH function leads to photosensitivity in humans, we suggest that FECH inhibition by kinase inhibitors is the molecular mechanism triggering photosensitivity in patients and should therefore be part of the pre-clinical tox package for kinase inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Kinobead selectivity profiling was performed as described previously (Medard, G., Pachl, F., Ruprecht, B., Klaeger, S., Heinzlmeir, S., Helm, D., Qiao, H., Ku, X., Wilhelm, M., Kuehne, T., Wu, Z., Dittmann, A., Hopf, C., Kramer, K., and Kuster, B. (2015) Optimized chemical proteomics assay for kinase inhibitor profiling, J Proteome Res 14, 1574-1586.) Briefly, 5 mg of a protein mixture of the four cell lines or a single cell line were incubated with compound dilution series in DMSO (3 nM, 10 nM, 30 nM, 100 nM, 300 nM, 1 µM, 3 µM, 30 µM and DMSO) or single compound dose (5 µM) for 45 min at 4°C. The preincubation step was followed by incubation with kinobeads (35 µl settled beads). Bound proteins were eluted with LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE, Invitrogen) containing 50 mM DTT. For the calculation of a correction factor, the flowthrough of the DMSO control was incubated with fresh beads for a second time. Eluates were alkylated wit CAA and ingel digestion was performed. Peptides were then measured via LC-MS/MS on a nanoLCUltra 1D+ (Eksigent) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Elite. Up to 15 precursorer where subjected to fragmentation by HCD in a data dependent setup. A kinase peptide inclusionl ist was enabled

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.4.0.5), searching against a human Uniprot reference database (version 22.07.13, annotated with PFAM) with Andromeda. Label free quantification and match between runs were enabled. Search results were filtered for 1% peptide and protein FDR, contaminants and reverse identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Many protein kinases are valid drug targets in oncology because they are key components of signal transduction pathways. The number of clinical kinase inhibitors is on the rise, but these molecules often exhibit polypharmacology, potentially eliciting desired and toxic effects. Therefore, a comprehensive assessment of a compound's target space is desirable for a better understanding of its biological effects. The enzyme ferrochelatase (FECH) catalyzes the conversion of protoporphyrin IX into heme and was recently found to be an off-target of the BRAF inhibitor Vemurafenib, likely explaining the phototoxicity associated with this drug in melanoma patients. This raises the question of whether FECH binding is a more general feature of kinase inhibitors. To address this, we applied a chemical proteomics approach using kinobeads to evaluate 226 clinical kinase inhibitors for their ability to bind FECH. Surprisingly, low or submicromolar FECH binding was detected for 29 of all compounds tested and isothermal dose response measurements confirmed target engagement in cells. We also show that Vemurafenib, Linsitinib, Neratinib, and MK-2461 reduce heme levels in K562 cells, verifying that drug binding leads to a loss of FECH activity. Further biochemical and docking experiments identified the protoporphyrin pocket in FECH as one major drug binding site. Since the genetic loss of FECH activity leads to photosensitivity in humans, our data strongly suggest that FECH inhibition by kinase inhibitors is the molecular mechanism triggering photosensitivity in patients. We therefore suggest that a FECH assay should generally be part of the preclinical molecular toxicology package for the development of kinase inhibitors.

### Keywords
Photosensitivity, Vemurafenib, Fech, Ferrochelatase, Kinase inhibitor, Kinobeads, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TUM

### Submitter
Susan Klaeger

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universität München, Germany


