### Accession
PXD016061

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis identifies TUBB2A as a novel protein biomarker for prediction of distant metastatic breast cancer

### Description
Metastasis of breast cancer to other distant organs is fatal to patients. However, few studies have revealed biomarkers associated with distant metastatic breast cancer. Furthermore, the inability of current biomarkers such as HER2, ER and PR, in accurately differentiating between distant metastatic breast cancers from non-distant metastatic ones necessitates the development of novel biomarkers. An integrated proteomics approach that combines filter-aided sample preparation, tandem mass tag labeling (TMT), high pH fractionation, and high resolution MS was applied to acquire in-depth proteome data of distant metastatic breast cancer FFPE tissue. Bioinformatics analyses for gene ontology and signaling pathways using differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were performed to investigate molecular characteristics of distant metastatic breast cancer. In addition, real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and invasion/migration assays were performed to validate the differential regulation and functional capability of biomarker candidates. A total of 9,459 and 8,760 proteins were identified from the pooled sample set and the individual sample set, respectively. Through our stringent criteria, TUBB2A was selected as a novel biomarker. The metastatic functions of the candidate were subsequently validated. Bioinformatics analysis using DEPs were able to characterize the overall molecular features of distant metastasis as well as investigate the differences across breast cancer subtypes. Our study is the first to explore the distant metastatic breast cancer proteome using FFPE tissue. The depth of our dataset enabled the discovery of novel biomarker and the investigation of proteomic characteristics of distant metastatic breast cancer. The distinct molecular features of breast cancer subtypes were also observed. Our proteomic data has important utility as a valuable resource for the research on distant metastatic breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
The preparation of FFPE tissue samples was performed by our own method. The culture of breast cancer cell lines was performed by our own method. An integrated proteomics approach that   combines BCA assays for measurement of protein concentration, tryptophan assay for measurement of peptide concentration, filter-aided sample preparation for digestion, 6-plexs tandem mass tag labeling (TMT) for peptide chemical labeling, peptide desalting using HLB OASIS column, high pH fractionation, and high resolution MS (Q-Exactive) was applied to acquire in-depth proteome data of distant metastatic breast cancer FFPE tissue. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode was used for MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was used to search the resulting RAW files. The full-MS and MS/MS spectra search were conducted using the SEQUEST HT algorithm against a modified version of the Uniprot human database (2014 December, 88,717 protein entries, http://www.uniprot.org), which included chicken ovalbumin. The database search process was performed by means of the target-decoy strategy. The search parameters were as follows: a precursor ion mass tolerance value of 20 ppm (monoisotopic mass); a fragment ion mass tolerance value of 0.02 Da (monoisotopic mass); full enzyme digest with trypsin (After KR/−) up to 2 missed cleavages; static modifications value of 229.163 Da on lysine residues and peptide N-termini for TMT labeling and value of 57.02 Da on cysteine residues with carbamidomethylation; additionally, dynamic modifications values of 42.01 Da for protein N-term acetylation, 0.984 Da on asparagine deamidation and 15.99 Da on methionine oxidation. A false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% and 5% at the peptide and protein level for each was used as the confidence criteria. Proteins were quantified by computing reporter ion relative intensities by using the “Reporter Ions Quantifier” node which is in Proteome Discoverer. The co-isolation threshold value was applied to 70%.  The protein abundance was standardized based on ovalbumin levels detected in each TMT channel. The fold-change values were calculated by dividing the average value of normalized protein abundance in dis-meta group into that of non dis-meta group. Statistical analysis for the proteomic data were conducted by the normalized protein abundance by using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5). The statistical cut-off for significance was applied as p-value < 0.05 for the Student’s t-test. In addition, p-value < 0.05 was set for the ANOVA test.   The Gene Ontology (GO) of the proteins was classified using DAVID bioinformatics tool (version 6.8). The GO classification was assessed by Fisher’s exact test to get a series of p-values that were filtered using a statistical significance of 0.05. Canonical pathways and downstream biological functions were enriched employing Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA). The analytical algorithms of IPA were used a to predict not only downstream effects on known biological pathways, but also putative upstream regulators such as transcription factors and growth factors based on the inputted list of differentially expressed proteins. IPA allocates activation scores on activated or inhibited status to putative regulators, biological functions or pathways underlying the quantitative values of proteins. Fisher’s exact test was used to acquire a p-value while degree of activation was measured using Z-scores. In this study, the p-value cut-off was set to 0.05 and the predictive activation Z-score cut off value was set to a magnitude of 1.  The preparation of FFPE tissue samples was performed by our own method. The culture of breast cancer cell lines was performed by our own method. An integrated proteomics approach that combines BCA assays for measurement of protein concentration, tryptophan assay for measurement of peptide concentration, filter-aided sample preparation for digestion, 6-plexs tandem mass tag labeling (TMT) for peptide chemical labeling, peptide desalting using HLB OASIS column, high pH fractionation, and high resolution MS (Q-Exactive) was applied to acquire in-depth proteome data of distant metastatic breast cancer FFPE tissue. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode was used for MS analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tandem mass tag (tmt), Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (ffpe) tissue, Quantitative proteomics, Distant metastatic breast cancer, Biomarkers

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of Medicine 103 Daehakro Seoul 30380, Korea.
Seoul National University

### Submitter
Dongyoon Shin

### Lab Head
Dr Youngsoo Kim
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of Medicine 103 Daehakro Seoul 30380, Korea.


