### Accession
PXD032977

### Title
Yeast ORC sumoylation status fine-tunes origin activity

### Description
Sumoylation is emerging as a post-translation modification important for chromosome duplication and stability. The origin recognition complex (ORC), which directs DNA replication initiation by loading the MCM replicative helicases onto origins, is sumoylated in both yeast and human cells. However, the biological consequences of ORC sumoylation are largely unclear. Here we report the effects of hyper- and hypo-sumoylation of yeast ORC using multiple approaches. We show that ORC hyper-sumoylation preferentially reduces the activity of a subset of early origins, while Orc2 hypo-sumoylation has an opposing effect. Mechanistically, ORC hyper-sumoylation leads to reduced MCM loading in vitro and diminished MCM chromatin association in vivo. The importance of an appropriate level of ORC sumoylation is suggested by the data that either hyper- or hypo-sumoylation of ORC results in genome instability and a dependence on other genome maintenance factors for cell fitness. Thus, yeast ORC sumoylation status needs to be fine-tuned to achieve optimal origin activity control and genome stability.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of endogenously sumoylated Orc2 for mass spectrometry. Eight liters of cell cultures from strains containing 8His-Smt3 and Orc2-HA were harvested. Note that in order to facilitate SUMO (Smt3) identification in Mass spectrometry, the most C-terminal Ile of Smt3 was replaced by Arg to enable trypsin cleavage at this site. This variant of Smt3 (I96R) has been shown to support normal SUMOylation function (Albuquerque et al. 2015) . Cells were frozen in droplets with liquid nitrogen, and then ground into powder in a freezer mill (Freezer/Mill 6875D). The powder was thawed on ice, and cell extracts brought to a final concentration of 14% TCA and pelleted by centrifugation. After removing TCA, the pellets were washed with acetone and then resolubilized in buffer A as described above with shaking at 30˚C. Cleared supernatant supplemented with 0.05 % Tween 20 and 4.4 mM imidazole was then incubated with Ni-NTA resin (Qiagen) at room temperature overnight. Beads were washed once with buffer A containing 0.05% Tween 20 and once with buffer C as described above with 0.05% Tween 20. HU buffer described above was used to elute proteins from the beads. Eluted protein was then dialyzed for 2 h at room temperature against the RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH7.4, 5 mM EDTA, 1.25% Triton X-100, 10 mM N-ethylmelamide). Protein extract was then incubated with agarose beads crosslinked to HA antibodies and rotated overnight at 4˚C. Beads were washed once with RIPA buffer and with triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (Sigma) before elution with 5% SDS in TEAB. Samples loaded onto a 4-12% gradient Tris-Glycine gel (BioRad) were examined by immunoblotting with anti-HA antibody and confirmed the presence of Orc2 sumoylated forms prior to mass spectrometry.  Samples enriched for sumoylated Orc2 were reduced in 4 mM TCEP (Pierce), alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma), and then quenched using 10 mM DTT (Fisher) with 30 min reaction time at each step at room temperature in the dark. The resulting sample was then loaded onto S-traps (Protifi) according to the manufacturer's instructions, and then digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Promega). Digested peptides were eluted from the S-trap and lyophilized for 48 h. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Fisher) and fractionated with high-pH reversed-phase chromatography (Pierce). Fractionated peptides were lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. Peptide concentrations of the fractions were estimated with Fluorometric Quantitative Peptide Assay (Pierce). 250 ng peptides from each fraction were loaded onto a Bruker nano-elute UPLC in line with a Bruker TIMS-TOF pro mass spectrometer and eluted with a 45 min acetonitrile gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw TOF data were searched with PEAKS Studio X+ (Bioinformatic Solutions Inc.) against a yeast proteome downloaded from Uniprot (uniprot.org), with precursor and fragment mass accuracy at 10ppm, two missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification, methionine oxidation, peptide N-terminal acetylation and diglycylyl lysine (GlyGly) as variable modifications, and five modifications allowed per peptide. Identified sites were verified by manual inspection of MS2 spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Sumoylation is emerging as a posttranslation modification important for regulating chromosome duplication and stability. The origin recognition complex (ORC) that directs DNA replication initiation by loading the MCM replicative helicase onto origins is sumoylated in both yeast and human cells. However, the biological consequences of ORC sumoylation are unclear. Here we report the effects of hypersumoylation and hyposumoylation of yeast ORC on ORC activity and origin function using multiple approaches. ORC hypersumoylation preferentially reduced the function of a subset of early origins, while Orc2 hyposumoylation had an opposing effect. Mechanistically, ORC hypersumoylation reduced MCM loading in vitro and diminished MCM chromatin association in vivo. Either hypersumoylation or hyposumoylation of ORC resulted in genome instability and the dependence of yeast on other genome maintenance factors, providing evidence that appropriate ORC sumoylation levels are important for cell fitness. Thus, yeast ORC sumoylation status must be properly controlled to achieve optimal origin function across the genome and genome stability.

### Keywords
Sumo, Yeast, Orc2

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology Program,  Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,  New York, USA
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center

### Submitter
Gemma Regan-Mochrie

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaolan Zhao
Molecular Biology Program,  Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,  New York, USA


