### Accession
PXD042934

### Title
Regulation of human granulosa cells by oxygen

### Description
Human granulosa cells (GCs), obtained during medical reproductive procedures can be cultured and are a cellular model for the human ovary. Oxygen concentrations are regarded as important regulators of GCs. We examined consequences of low (1%) O2 versus standard atmospheric conditions in cultured human GCs for four days.  A proteomic analysis of three pools of human GCs was performed. While differences between the pools of GCs were noted, the abundance of 133 proteins was significantly increased in hypoxia in all samples, whereas the abundance of 391 proteins was decreased.

### Sample Protocol
Human granulosa cells (human GCs) were isolated from follicular fluids obtained from patients undergoing medical reproductive procedures such as in-vitro fertilization (IVF) or oocyte cryopreservation. For these experiments, we focused on cells derived from patients with male factor as the reason for fertility treatment. For proteomic analysis, human GCs cultured four days under atmospheric or and hypoxic (1%) condition were washed once with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), trypsinized and counted. Next, the cells were again washed 5 times with PBS. Cells were processed using the iST-Kit (Preomics) as recommended by the manufacturer. Resulting peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) and separated in a 25-cm Aurora column (Ionopticks) with a 50-min gradient from 4 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 350-1200) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 6 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 30% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 275ºC; intensity selection threshold, 3x105.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 2.1.0.0 was used to identify proteins and quantify by LFQ with the following parameters: Database, Uniprot_UP000005640_Hsapiens_20210521.fasta; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 20ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Significant proteins were obtained after comparing the two groups using the adjusted multi t-test (n=9 FDR=0.01, s0=0.1, permutations 2000) in the Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Oxygen (O2) concentrations have recently been discussed as important regulators of ovarian cells. Human IVF-derived granulosa cells (human GCs) can be maintained in vitro and are a widely used cellular model for the human ovary. Typically, GCs are cultured at atmospheric O2 levels (approximately around 20%), yet the O2 conditions in vivo, especially in the preovulatory follicle, are estimated to be much lower. Therefore, we comprehensively evaluated the consequences of atmospheric versus hypoxic (1% O2) conditions for 4&#x2009;days on human GCs. We found lower cellular RNA and protein levels but unchanged cell numbers at 1% O2, indicating reduced transcriptional and/or translational activity. A proteomic analysis showed that 391 proteins were indeed decreased, yet 133 proteins were increased under hypoxic conditions. According to gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, pathways associated with metabolic processes, for example amino acid-catabolic-processes, mitochondrial protein biosynthesis, and steroid biosynthesis, were downregulated. Pathways associated with glycolysis, chemical homeostasis, cellular response to hypoxia, and actin filament bundle assembly were upregulated. In accordance with lower CYP11A1 (a cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme) levels, progesterone release was decreased. A proteome profiler, as well as IL-6 and IL-8 ELISA assays, revealed that hypoxia led to increased secretion of pro-inflammatory and angiogenic factors. Immunofluorescence studies showed nuclear localization of hypoxia-inducible factor 1&#x3b1; (HIF1&#x3b1;) in human GCs upon acute (2&#x2009;h) exposure to 1% O2 but not in cells exposed to 1% O2 for 4&#x2009;days. Hence, the role of HIF1&#x3b1; may be restricted to initiation of the hypoxic response in human GCs. The results provide a detailed picture of hypoxia-induced phenotypic changes in human GCs and reveal that chronically low O2 conditions inhibit the steroidogenic but promote the inflammatory phenotype of these cells.

### Keywords
Ovary, Hypoxia, Proteomic analysis, Inflammation

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Department for Cell Biology BioMedizinisches Centrum - BMC LMU Muenchen, Med. Faculty Großhaderner Straße 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. med. Artur Mayerhofer
Department for Cell Biology BioMedizinisches Centrum - BMC LMU Muenchen, Med. Faculty Großhaderner Straße 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried


