### Accession
PXD016726

### Title
Characterization of Macrophage Galactose-type Lectin (MGL) ligands in colorectal cancer cell lines

### Description
Background The Ca2+-dependent C-type lectin receptor Macrophage Galactose-type Lectin (MGL) is highly expressed by tolerogenic dendritic cells (DC) and macrophages. MGL exhibits a high binding specificity for terminal alpha- and beta-linked GalNAc residues found in Tn, sTn and LacdiNAc antigens. These glycan epitopes are often overexpressed in colorectal cancer (CRC), and, as such, MGL can be used to discriminate tumor from the corresponding healthy tissues. Moreover, the high expression of MGL ligands is associated with poor disease-free survival in stage III of CRC tumors. Nonetheless, the glycoproteins expressed by tumor cells that are recognized by MGL have hitherto remained elusive. Methods Using a panel of three CRC cell lines (HCT116, HT29 and LS174T), recapitulating CRC diversity, we performed FACS staining and pull-down assays using a recombinant soluble form of MGL (and a mutant MGL as control) combined with mass spectrometry-based (glyco)proteomics.  Results HCT116 and HT29, but not LS174T, are high MGL-binding CRC cell lines. On these cells, the major cell surface binding proteins are receptors (e.g. MET, PTK7, SORL1, PTPRF) and integrins (ITGB1, ITGA3). From these proteins, several N- and/or O-glycopeptides were identified, of which some carried either a LacdiNAc or Tn epitope.

### Sample Protocol
We used three colorectal cancer cell lines: HT29, LS174T, and HCT116. Cells were cultivated in RPMI-1640 (for HCT116 and HT29) or in DMEM (for LS174T) medium containing L-glutamine, 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Invitrogen) and streptomycin/penicillin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 5% CO2 and 37°C. Cells were maintained until approximately 80% confluence under sterile conditions. For harvesting, cells were washed twice with 1x PBS and incubated for approximately 5 minutes in 1x trypsin/EDTA solution in 1x PBS, whose activity was inhibited by the addition of serum containing medium following visual cell detachment. Cells were subsequently harvested and counted using the CountessTM Automated Cell Counter (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) based on trypan blue staining. Aliquots of 2 x 107 viable cells were washed with 1x PBS and centrifuged at 1500 rpm to obtain cell pellets. Cell pellets were stored at -20°C until use. Before pull-down experiments, cells were lysed as described before, for 20 min on ice in lysis buffer (10 mM triethanolamine pH 8.2, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2 and 1% (volume/volume) Triton X-100, containing EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche Diagnostics)). Protein quantification was performed using BCA assay (BCA Protein Assay Kit, Pierce™ ), following the manufacturer’s instructions. MGL ligands were pulled down from 1 mg of protein extracts using either 2 µg of chimeric MGL-Fc or mutant-MGL-Fc, coupled to 50 µl Dynabeads protein G (Invitrogen) as previously described. Following washing, the elution of specific ligands was performed using 100 mM EDTA. SDS-PAGE and NanoLC-MS/MS analysis  For sample clean-up, a short SDS-PAGE run (NuPAGE™ 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gels, Thermo Fisher Scientific) of the samples obtained from the MGL pull-down was performed. Gels were stained with SimplyBlue™ SafeStain (Invitrogen) for 3 hours and washed with distilled water. Bands corresponding to the whole lane were cut from the gel, and the proteins were then subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol (10 mM), alkylation with iodoacetamide (50 mM) and in-gel trypsin digestion with Promega™ Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific), manually or using a Proteineer DP digestion robot (Bruker).  Peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were resuspended in 17 µl of 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA. 5µl of each sample were loaded onto a C-18 precolumn (300 µm inner diameter x 5 mm, Dionex) at 20 µl/min in 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C-18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 50 cm; in-house packed with Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). The peptides were eluted using a 5% to 50% gradient of solvent B at 300 nl/min flow rate for 160 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software. Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 400-1500 m/z range with a resolution of 120000 (m/z 400). The most intense ions per survey scan were selected for higher‐energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (time between Master scans: 3 s), the resulting fragments were analyzed at a resolution of 30000 in the Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 60 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide. For the characterization of glycopeptides, tryptic peptides were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode (top-10) with collision energy at 32 V and recording the MS/MS spectrum in the Orbitrap. During acquisition of MS/MS spectra, the HexNAc oxonium ion at m/z 204.087 was set as Product Ion Trigger in order to execute three additional MS/MS scans of the same precursor with HCD collision energies 32, 37 and 41 V, respectively, and with CID at 35 V.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, raw data was converted to mzXML using Proteowizard. Peptide and protein identification as well as the after statistical validation were performed in Trans Proteomics Pipeline version 5.1.0 using included software pipeline: X! Tandem Jackhammer TPP (2013.06.15.1-LabKey, Insilicos, ISB) search engine, PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet. The parameters were set as follows: parent mass error of 10 ppm, fragment mass error of 0.04 Da, carbamidomethyl (Cys) and oxidation (Met) as fixed and variable modifications respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer type worldwide. It is characterized by a high expression of aberrantly glycosylated ligands, such as the Tn antigen (GalNAc&#x3b1;1-Ser/Thr), which is a major ligand for the C-type lectin macrophage galactose-type lectin (MGL). We have previously determined that a high level of MGL ligands in colorectal tumors is associated with lower disease-free survival in patients with late stage disease, which we could attribute to the presence of oncogenic BRAFV600E mutations. Here we aimed to elucidate the downstream pathway of BRAFV600E governing high MGL ligand and Tn antigen expression. We focused on glycosylation-related enzymes involved in the synthesis or elongation of Tn antigen, N-acetylgalactosamine-transferases (GALNTs) and C1GalT1/COSMC, respectively. Both the activity and expression of C1GalT1 and COSMC were unrelated to the BRAF mutational status. In contrast, GALNT3, GALNT7 and GALNT12 were increased in colorectal cancer cells harboring the BRAFV600E mutation. Through CRISPR-Cas9 gene knockouts we could establish that GALNT3 increased MGL ligand synthesis in the HT29 cell line, while GALNT7 and GALNT12 appeared to have redundant roles. Together our results highlight a novel mechanistic pathway connecting BRAFV600E to aberrant glycosylation in colorectal cancer through GALNT3.

### Keywords
: glycoproteomics; c-type lectin; colorectal cancer; lacdinac; tn antigen

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medcial Center
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J. Hensbergena
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands


