### Accession
PXD037731

### Title
Isolation of interstitial fluids reveals novel secreted bioactive proteins from muscle and fat tissues

### Description
Proteins are secreted from various cells to send information to neighboring cells or distant tissues. Because of the highly integrated nature of energy balance systems, there has been a great deal of interest in myokines and adipokines, proteins secreted from muscle and fat tissues, respectively. These have been challenging to study through proteomics because serum is loaded with super-abundant proteins that limit the detection of proteins that have a low, hormone-like abundance. We show here that interstitial fluids (IFs) can be harvested easily from muscle and fat tissues of mice by very low-speed centrifugation and these fluids show a very different protein constellation than that of plasma or tissues. Under several different perturbations in vivo, like exercise or cold, quantitative Mass Spectrometry of these IFs allowed for the identification of many novel myokines and adipokines, including factors both increased and decreased in abundance. Finally, we identify prosaposin, a well-known neurotrophic factor, as a secreted product of both muscle and fat tissues; recombinant prosaposin stimulates a gene program related to thermogenesis in primary fat cells, indicating one potential function for PSAP.

### Sample Protocol
50-100 µg of immunodepleted IF, immunodepleted serum, or soluble fraction of muscle lysates were mixed 1:1 with protein lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.8, 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), Phosphatase Inhibitor (Sigma Aldrich, 04906837001), Protease Inhibitor (Sigma Aldrich, 11836170001)) and vortexed for 2 min. Samples were placed at 60 ˚C for 30 min and subsequently cooled down to room temperature (RT) for 10 min. To reduce disulfide bonds and alkylate cysteine residues, 14 mM iodoacetamide was added and incubated for 45 min at RT in the dark. DTT was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated 15 min in the dark. Next, proteins were precipitated. Therefore, 1 volume of TCA stock (Sigma Aldrich, T0699) was added to 4 volumes of protein sample, mixed thoroughly, and placed on ice to precipitate overnight. Subsequently, samples were centrifuged at 17,000 g for 10 min at 4 ˚C. Protein pellets were washed 4X with 1 ml of ice cold HPLC grade methanol (Fisher Scientific, A4544). Protein pellets were dried and resuspended in 200 mM EPPS buffer (Fisher Scientific, J61476). For protein digestion LysC (1/100 enzyme/protein ratio) and trypsin (1/200 enzyme/protein ratio) were added and incubated overnight at 37 ˚C. Next, samples were acidified with formic acid (FA) to a pH ∼2. Peptides were labeled using 16-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). 5.0 mg of reagents were dissolved in 252 μl acetonitrile (ACN) and 1/10 of the solution was added to 100 μg of peptides dissolved in 100 μl of 200 mM EPPS. After 1 hour (RT), the reaction was quenched by adding 3 μl of 5 % hydroxylamine. Labeled peptides were combined and acidified prior to C18 SPE on Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters, WAT054955). Peptides were eluted in 70% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were resuspended in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, 5% acetonitrile and fractionated by basic pH reverse phase HPLC. In total 24 fractions were collected. The fractions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid and desalted by stage-tip. Final peptides were eluted in, 70% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid, dried, and finally resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid. In the end, 12 of 24 fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data acquisition  Data were collected on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 LC pump (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 90-min gradient at 500 nL/min on a 30-cm column (i.d. 100 μm, Accucore, 2.6 μm, 150 Å) packed inhouse. High-field asymmetric-waveform ion mobility spectroscopy (FAIMS) was enabled during data acquisition with compensation voltages (CVs) set as −40 V, −60 V, and −80 V [5]. MS1 data were collected using the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution; maximum injection time 50 ms; AGC 4 × 105). Determined charge states between 2 and 6 were required for sequencing, and a 60 s dynamic exclusion window was used. Data dependent mode was set as cycle time (1 s). MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap with HCD fragmentation (isolation window 0.5 Da; 50,000 resolution; NCE 36%; maximum injection time 86 ms; AGC 1 × 105).  Mass spectrometry data analysis  Raw files were first converted to mzXML, and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle [6]. Database searching included all mouse entries from Uniprot (downloaded in July, 2014). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Sequences of common contaminant proteins (e.g., trypsin, keratins, etc.) were appended as well. Searches were performed using the comet search algorithm. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. TMTpro on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) [7]. PSM filtering was performed using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) as described previously [8], while considering the following parameters: comet log expect, different sequence delta comet log expect (percent difference between the first hit and the next hit with a different peptide sequence), missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, precursor mass accuracy, and fraction of ions matched. Each run was filtered separately. Protein-level FDR was subsequently estimated at a data set level. For each protein across all samples, the posterior probabilities reported by the LDA model for each peptide were multiplied to give a protein-level probability estimate. Using the Picked FDR method [9], proteins were filtered to the target 1% FDR level. For reporter ion quantification, a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the most intense m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were filtered to include only those with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) of 160 or greater across all channels. For each protein, the filtered peptide TMTpro SN values were summed to generate protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins are secreted from cells to send information to neighboring cells or distant tissues. Because of the highly integrated nature of energy balance systems, there has been particular interest in myokines and adipokines. These are challenging to study through proteomics because serum or plasma contains highly abundant proteins that limit the detection of proteins with lower abundance. We show here that extracellular fluid (EF) from muscle and fat tissues of mice shows a different protein composition than either serum or tissues. Mass spectrometry analyses of EFs from mice with physiological perturbations, like exercise or cold exposure, allowed the quantification of many potentially novel myokines and adipokines. Using this approach, we identify prosaposin as a secreted product of muscle and fat. Prosaposin expression stimulates thermogenic gene expression and induces mitochondrial respiration in primary fat cells. These studies together illustrate the utility of EF isolation as a discovery tool for adipokines and myokines.

### Keywords
Brown fat, Muscle, Interstial fluid

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jonathan Van Vranken

### Lab Head
Dr Bruce Spiegelman
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School


