### Accession
PXD009073

### Title
Label-free quantitative analysis of PKA-dependent proteome changes in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Protein kinase A (PKA), the main effector of second messenger cAMP, is highly conserved among eukaryotes and a paradigm for the mechanisms of regulation of protein kinases by ligands. The unique PKA holoenzymes in the phylogenetically distant protozoan parasite Trypanosoma are unresponsive to cAMP in vitro and in vivo. By small molecule screening and optimization, we designed direct, membrane-permeable activators binding with a kD of 9 nM to the CNB pockets of the T. brucei regulatory PKA subunit. 7-Cyano-7-deazainosine has low toxicity and thus is a perfect tool to explore cAMP-independent PKA signaling in these important pathogens. This project describes the PKA-inducible proteome of the bloodstream stage of T. brucei.

### Sample Protocol
Trypanosomes treated or not with 2 µM 7-Cyano-7-deazainosine (time course: 0 h, 6 h, 12 h) were washed twice in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and lysed in Laemmli sample buffer to a concentration of 2.5×105 cells/µl. Protein concentration was determined by Coomassie staining and densitometry. 20 µg of protein was loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples had entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into small pieces and proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q-Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). 1 µg of each peptide extract was loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 20 µl/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 300-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3×106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1×105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Other settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27 eV and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0, which incorporates the Andromeda search engine, using default settings and the Trypanosoma brucei TriTrypDB-36_TbruceiTREU927 protein database. Carbamidomethyl-cystein was set as fixed modification and oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-terminal, K) and deamidation (N, Q) as dynamic modifications. The MaxQuant output was loaded into Perseus version 1.6.0.7 and filtered to exclude proteins ‘only identified by site’, reverse hits and potential contaminants. Stringent selection criteria were applied in order to exclude potential outliers: only proteins that were identified with LFQ values greater than zero in all wild type samples at time points 0 and 6 hours or 6 and 12 hours were included in the following analysis. Moreover, the LFQ values of these proteins in the pkar knock out samples had to be either all equal to zero or all unequal zero. The LFQ values of the remaining proteins were log2 transformed and missing values were imputed from normal distributions. The statistical significance of changes in protein abundance was analyzed by a two-sided Welch t-test for LFQ values +/- compound treatment (6 h, 12 h) in wild type trypanosomes as well as in the pkar deletion mutant followed by visualization of all comparisons by volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
Protein kinase A (PKA), the main effector of cAMP in eukaryotes, is a paradigm for the mechanisms of ligand-dependent and allosteric regulation in signalling. Here we report the orthologous but cAMP-independent PKA of the protozoan Trypanosoma and identify 7-deaza-nucleosides as potent activators (EC<sub>50</sub>&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;6.5&#x2009;nM) and high affinity ligands (K<sub>D</sub>&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;8&#x2009;nM). A co-crystal structure of trypanosome PKA with 7-cyano-7-deazainosine and molecular docking show how substitution of key amino acids in both CNB domains of the regulatory subunit and its unique C-terminal &#x3b1;D helix account for this ligand swap between trypanosome PKA and canonical cAMP-dependent PKAs. We propose nucleoside-related endogenous activators of Trypanosoma brucei&#xa0;PKA&#xa0;(TbPKA). The existence of eukaryotic CNB domains not associated with binding of cyclic nucleotides suggests that orphan CNB domains in other eukaryotes may bind undiscovered signalling molecules. Phosphoproteome analysis validates 7-cyano-7-deazainosine as powerful cell-permeable inducer to explore cAMP-independent PKA signalling in medically important neglected pathogens.

### Keywords
Protein kinase a, Trypanosoma, Pka, 7-cyano-7-deazainosine, Label-free quantitative proteome analysis

### Affiliations
Biocenter, Faculty of Biology, Genetics, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), 82152 Martinsried, Germany
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Boshart
Biocenter, Faculty of Biology, Genetics, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), 82152 Martinsried, Germany


