### Accession
PXD010930

### Title
Human Ku70 WT AP-MS -  Mapping the Ku interactome using proximity-dependent biotin identification in human cells

### Description
Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry is often used as a complementary technique to BioID experiments, and the data presented here complements another project. To infer processes involving Ku70, we used AP-MS to identify candidate proteins that may interact with Ku70 and compared these results to those acquired using BioID with Ku70.

### Sample Protocol
We conducted large scale co-immunoprecipitation experiments using a Ku70 antibody (3 biological replicates) or a mouse IgG (1 negative control), and eluted, methanol:chloroform precipitated, and trypsin digested the proteins. To identify candidate protein interactors, samples were submitted for Liquid Chromatograpy Electrospray Ionizing Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) using an ACQUITY M-Class UHPLC system (Waters) connected to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched on PEAKS Studio (version 8.5) using the Uniprot human database. Protein and peptide FDR was set to 1%. From PEAKS, data was exported and viewed on Scaffold (version 4.8.7) where data was filtered by peptide (>95%) and protein (>95%, with at least 2 unique peptides) probabilities before the spectral counts were exported from Scaffold for analysis with SAINTexpress (web-based server) to identify a list of high confidence protein interactors.

### Publication Abstract
The Ku heterodimer, composed of Ku70 and Ku80, is best characterized for its role in repairing double-stranded DNA breaks but is also known to participate in other regulatory processes. Despite our understanding of Ku protein interplay during DNA repair, the extent of Ku's protein interactions in other processes has never been fully determined. Using proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) and affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) with wild-type Ku70, we identified candidate proteins that interact with the Ku heterodimer in HEK293 cells, in the absence of exogenously induced DNA damage. BioID analysis identified approximately 250 nuclear proteins, appearing in at least two replicates, including known Ku-interacting factors such as MRE11A, WRN, and NCOA6. Meanwhile, AP-MS analysis identified approximately 50 candidate proteins. Of the novel protein interactors identified, many were involved in functions already suspected to involve Ku such as transcriptional regulation, DNA replication, and DNA repair, while several others suggest that Ku may be involved in additional functions such as RNA metabolism, chromatin-remodeling, and microtubule dynamics. Using a combination of BioID and AP-MS, this is the first report that comprehensively characterizes the Ku protein interaction landscape, revealing new cellular processes and protein complexes involving the Ku complex.

### Keywords
Ku70, Ap-ms, Hek293

### Affiliations
University of Western Ontario
Biochemistry, Schild-Poulter Lab, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Sanna Abbasi

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Schild-Poulter
Biochemistry, Schild-Poulter Lab, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, Canada


