### Accession
PXD011647

### Title
LC-MS/MS of Human Plasma Peptides

### Description
Discrepancies in blood sample collection and processing could have a significant impact on levels of peptides in the blood, thus sample quality control is critical for successful biomarker identification and validation. In this study, we analyzed the effects of several pre-analytical processing conditions, including different storage times and temperatures of blood or plasma samples and different centrifugation forces, on the levels of peptides in human plasma samples using ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) as an anticoagulant. Both time and temperature were identified as major factors for peptide variation.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 20 healthy fasting volunteers, including nine women and eleven men with an age range of 24 to 64 years and a BMI range of 21.3 to 29.9, were recruited in the study. Six tubes of K2-EDTA blood samples were obtained from each subject. The tubes were randomly assigned to one of six defined pre-analytical conditions and each sample was processed to plasma. The six pre-analytical conditions include: 1) immediately processed to plasma (control); 2) processed to plasma under a centrifugal force of 1300 × g; 3) blood was kept on wet ice (0 °C) for 6 hours, then processed to plasma; 4) blood was kept at room temperature (RT) for 6 hours, then processed to plasma; 5) blood processed to plasma and then stored at 4 °C for 24 hours; 6) blood processed to plasma and then stored at RT for 24 hours. Apart from the low centrifugal force (1300 × g), blood was processed to plasma with a centrifugal force of 2500 × g for all the other conditions. The collection tubes were stratified over the six blood processing groups to reduce variability between the collection tubes due to physiological changes in the vein during blood draw. Peptides were extracted by ultrafiltration. Plasma (50 μL) was mixed with 150 μL of 40% acetonitrile (ACN) (ThermoFisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ) and 20 μL of 50fmol/ μL iRT standard peptides (Pierce, Rockford, IL). The mixtures were transferred to a 10 kDa MWCO filter (Millipore, Bedford, MA) for centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 30 min. The filtrates were vacuum-speed dried and stored at -20 oC. The peptides were re-suspended with 50 μL of 0.1% formic acid (FA) (Fluka, Milwaukee, WI) and analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, Milford, MA). Solvent A was 0.1% FA in water, and solvent B was 0.1% FA in ACN. Peptides (4 μL) were loaded into a UPLC Symmetry trap column (180 μm i.d. × 2 cm packed with 5 μm C18 resin, Waters) and washed with 2% solvent B for 8 min at 6 μL/min. Peptides were eluted at 500 nL/min using the following gradient conditions: 5 to 9% solvent B over 2 min, 9 to 27% solvent B over 43 min, 27 to 42% solvent B over 5 min, 42 to 98% solvent B over 5 min, and hold at 98% solvent B for 5 min. To minimize carry-over and re-equilibrate the column between sample injections, 2 μL of solvent A was injected between each sample (30 min run). The full MS scan used an m/z range from 300 to 1800 and was collected with a resolution of 120,000 in centroid mode in the Orbitrap, followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans in the linear trap on the 15 most abundant ions. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled. Ions subjected to MS/MS were excluded from repeated analysis for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were processed and searched by the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3) with the Andromeda search engine against the human Swiss-Prot database (released 2017_04, with 20198 entries) under the following criteria: the digestion mode was unspecific, the precursor tolerance was set to 20 ppm in the first search for mass calibration and 4.5 ppm in the main search, the peptide spectrum matching the false-discovery rate (FDR) was 0.01 and protein FDR was 0.05, and variable modification included methionine oxidation. Peptides identified from MaxQuant search and iRT peptides were imported into Skyline 3.6 to be manually verified and quantified with MS1 peak area. Each iRT peptide was normalized to its median of 118 samples, and then the peptide peak area was divided by the mean of 10 iRT peptide medians to reduce run-to-run variation.

### Publication Abstract
Discrepancies in blood sample collection and processing could have a significant impact on levels of metabolites, peptides, and protein biomarkers of inflammation in the blood; thus, sample quality control is critical for successful biomarker identification and validation. In this study, we analyzed the effects of several preanalytical processing conditions, including different storage times and temperatures for blood or plasma samples and different centrifugation forces on the levels of metabolites, peptides, and inflammation biomarkers in human plasma samples using ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) as an anticoagulant. Temperature was found to be the major factor for metabolite variation, and both time and temperature were identified as major factors for peptide variation. For inflammation biomarkers, temperature played different roles depending on the sample type (blood or plasma). Low temperature affected inflammation biomarkers in blood, while room temperature impacted inflammation biomarkers in plasma.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Peptides, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Biomarkers and Alternative Models Branch  Division of Systems Biology  National Center for Toxicological Research  U.S. Food and Drug Administration 3900 NCTR Rd., HFT-233 Jefferson, AR 72079 USA
National Center for Toxicological Research, FDA

### Submitter
Li-Rong Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Li-Rong Yu
Biomarkers and Alternative Models Branch  Division of Systems Biology  National Center for Toxicological Research  U.S. Food and Drug Administration 3900 NCTR Rd., HFT-233 Jefferson, AR 72079 USA


