### Accession
PXD032330

### Title
Structure of the plant 80S ribosome.

### Description
The 80S ribosome was purified from tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) leaves. part of the extract was analysed by mass spectrometry and the rest was used for cryo-EM investigations of the structure of the 80S ribosome.

### Sample Protocol
Tobacco leaves were ground and the ribosomes were purified on a sucrose cushion. Two extraction buffers were tested, one with detergent, one without. Five replicates were produced per condition (10 samples in total) A fraction of the extracts was digested using trypsin. Peptide were purified using zip-tips. Peptides were separated on a C18 reversed phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted using a non-linear 5% - 34% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO at a flow of 300 nL min-1. The gradient lasted 28 min. After the gradient, the column was cleaned for 10 min with 85% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO. Eluted peptides were transferred to an NSI source and sprayed into an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS was run in positive ion mode. For full MS scans, the following settings were used: resolution: 70000, AGC target: 3E6, maximum injection time: 100 ms, scan range: 200 to 2000 m/z. For dd-MS2, the following settings were used: resolution: 175000, AGC target: 1E5, maximum injection time: 50 ms, loop count: 15, isolation window: 4.0 m/z, NCE: 30. The following data-dependent settings were used: underfill ratio: 1%, apex trigger: off, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 5, 5–8, >8, peptide match: preferred, exclude isotypes: on, dynamic exclusion: 20.0 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw files obtained from Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were uploaded into MaxQuant and queried against an in-house database containing protein sequences from 21 plant species including Nicotiana Tabacum. Default parameters were used, except that label-free quantification (LFQ) and intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) were activated. The five replicates corresponding to each condition were combined to obtain two lists of proteins: PLUS (5 replicates with detergent) and MINUS (the 5 rpelicates without detergent)

### Publication Abstract
In plant cells, translation occurs in three compartments: the cytosol, the plastids and the mitochondria. While the structures of the (prokaryotic-type) ribosomes in plastids and mitochondria are well characterized, high-resolution structures of the eukaryotic 80S ribosomes in the cytosol have been lacking. Here the structure of translating tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) 80S ribosomes was solved by cryo-electron microscopy with a global resolution of 2.2&#x2009;&#xc5;. The ribosome structure includes two tRNAs, decoded mRNA and the nascent peptide chain, thus providing insights into the molecular underpinnings of the cytosolic translation process in plants. The map displays conserved and plant-specific rRNA modifications and the positions of numerous ionic cofactors, and it uncovers the role of monovalent ions in the decoding centre. The model of the plant 80S ribosome enables broad phylogenetic comparisons that reveal commonalities and differences in the ribosomes of plants and those of other eukaryotes, thus putting our knowledge about eukaryotic translation on a firmer footing.

### Keywords
Tobacco, Plant, Ribosome

### Affiliations

Martin-Luther-University, Halle-Wittenberg
Institut für Medizinische physik und biophysik, Charité, corporate member of Frei universität berlin, Humboldt Universität zu berlin and Berlin institute of Health. berlin, germany

### Submitter
Etienne Meyer

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Spahn
Institut für Medizinische physik und biophysik, Charité, corporate member of Frei universität berlin, Humboldt Universität zu berlin and Berlin institute of Health. berlin, germany


