### Accession
PXD042626

### Title
p38γ and p38δ modulate innate immune response by regulating MEF2D activation

### Description
Evidence implicating p38γ and p38δ (p38γ/p38δ) in inflammation are mainly based on experiments using p38γ/p38δ deficient (p38γ/δ-/-) mice, which show low levels of TPL2, the kinase upstream of MKK1-ERK1/2 in myeloid cells. This could obscure p38γ/p38δ roles, since TPL2 is essential for regulating inflammation. Here we generated a p38γD171A/D171A/p38δ-/- (p38γ/δKIKO) mouse, expressing kinase-inactive p38γ and lacking p38δ. This mouse exhibited normal TPL2 levels, making it an excellent tool to elucidate specific p38γ/p38δ functions. p38γ/δKIKO mice showed a reduced inflammatory response and less susceptibility to LPS-induced septic shock and Candida albicans infection than wild-type mice. Gene expression analyses in LPS-activated WT and p38γ/δKIKO macrophages revealed that p38γ/p38δ regulated numerous genes implicated in innate immune response. Additionally, phospho-proteomic analyses and in vitro kinase assays showed that the transcription factor myocyte enhancer factor-2D (MEF2D) was phosphorylated at Ser444 via p38γ/p38δ. Mutation of MEF2D Ser444 to the non-phosphorylatable residue Ala increased its transcriptional activity and the expression of iNOS and IL-1β mRNA. These results suggest that p38γ/p38δ govern innate immune responses by regulating MEF2D phosphorylation and transcriptional activity.

### Sample Protocol
Following determination of protein by Bradford, 0.5 mg peritoneal macrophage protein lysate (samples were in triplicate) were reduced and alkylated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride; Thermo Fisher Scientific), 55 mM chloroacetamide(Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h at 37°C. Samples were digested with 10 μg of trypsin for 8 h at 37°C and dried down in a speed-vac. For phosphopeptide enrichment on titanium oxide (TiO2) columns (GL Sciences), tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.25 M lactic acid/3% trifluoracetic acid (TFA)/70% acetonitrile (ACN) and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was loaded on the TiO2 microcolumn previously equilibrated with 100 μl of 3% TFA/70% ACN. Each microcolumn was washed with 100 μl of lactic acid solution and 200 μl of 3% TFA/70% ACN. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 200 μl of 1% NH4OH pH 10 in water and acidified with 7 μl of TFA. Eluates were desalted using Oasis HLB cartridges, dried down and resolubilized in 5% ACN-0.2% formic acid (FA). The phosphopeptides were separated on a home-made reversed-phase column (150-μm i.d. by 150 mm) with a 240-min gradient from 10 to 30% ACN-0.2% FA and a 600-nl/min flow rate on a Nano-LC-Ultra-2D (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) connected to a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Each full MS spectrum acquired at a resolution of 70,000 was followed by 12 tandem-MS (MS-MS) spectra on the most abundant multiply charged precursor ions. Tandem-MS experiments were performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a collision energy of 25%. The data were processed using PEAKS 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) and a Uniprot mouse database. Mass tolerances on precursor and fragment ions were 10 ppm and 0.01 Da, respectively. Variable selected posttranslational modifications were carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), acetyl (N-term) and phosphorylation (STY).

### Data Protocol
Data were normalized with total ion current. Data were processed with Perseus 1.6.3.0. Samples with less than 3 valid values in at least one condition were filtered out. Imputation was performed on missing values by replacing them with random numbers taken from the lower end of the normal distribution (Perseus default values were used width:0.3 and shift 1.8) Two sample t-tests were performed on sample group pairs to get the volcano plots

### Publication Abstract
Evidence implicating p38&#x3b3; and p38&#x3b4; (p38&#x3b3;/p38&#x3b4;) in inflammation are mainly based on experiments using <i>Mapk12/Mapk13</i>-deficient (p38&#x3b3;/&#x3b4;KO) mice, which show low levels of TPL2, the kinase upstream of MKK1-ERK1/2 in myeloid cells. This could obscure p38&#x3b3;/p38&#x3b4; roles, since TPL2 is essential for regulating inflammation. Here, we generated a <i>Mapk12</i><sup>D171A/D171A</sup>/<i>Mapk13</i><sup>-/-</sup> (p38&#x3b3;/&#x3b4;KIKO) mouse, expressing kinase-inactive p38&#x3b3; and lacking p38&#x3b4;. This mouse exhibited normal TPL2 levels, making it an excellent tool to elucidate specific p38&#x3b3;/p38&#x3b4; functions. p38&#x3b3;/&#x3b4;KIKO mice showed a reduced inflammatory response and less susceptibility to lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced septic shock and <i>Candida albicans</i> infection than wild-type (WT) mice. Gene expression analyses in LPS-activated wild-type and p38&#x3b3;/&#x3b4;KIKO macrophages revealed that p38&#x3b3;/p38&#x3b4;-regulated numerous genes implicated in innate immune response. Additionally, phospho-proteomic analyses and in vitro kinase assays showed that the transcription factor myocyte enhancer factor-2D (MEF2D) was phosphorylated at Ser444 via p38&#x3b3;/p38&#x3b4;. Mutation of MEF2D Ser444 to the non-phosphorylatable residue Ala increased its transcriptional activity and the expression of <i>Nos2</i> and <i>Il1b</i> mRNA. These results suggest that p38&#x3b3;/p38&#x3b4; govern innate immune responses by regulating MEF2D phosphorylation and transcriptional activity.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Inflammation, P38δ, P38γ, Mef2d

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, Madrid, Spain
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Cuenda
Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, Madrid, Spain


