### Accession
PXD040449

### Title
A causal model of ion interference enables assessment and correction of ratio compression in multiplex proteomics

### Description
We thoroughly characterize isobaric labeling (TMT)-associated reporter ion interference at the MS2 level using a defined two-proteome experimental system with known ground truth. We discover remarkably poor agreement between the apparent precursor purity in the isolation window and the actual level of observed reporter ion interference in MS2-scans - a discrepancy that we find resolved by considering co-fragmentation of peptide ions hidden within the spectral “noise” of the MS1 isolation window. On this basis, we establish a comprehensive regression modeling strategy for predicting accurate, feature-wise estimates of reporter ion interference. Finally, we demonstrate the utility of accurate ion purity estimates for accurate fold change estimation and unbiased PTM site-to-protein normalization.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of whole cell extracts: Frozen yeast cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris buffer pH8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM PMSF, 5 mM sodium butyrate, benzonase and protease inhibitor cocktail) and lysed by bead-beating (FastPrep®-24 device, MP Biomedicals). Frozen Jurkat cells were dissolved in lysis buffer and lysed via sonication. Samples were cleared of debris by centrifugation at 16,000 x g at 4°C for 10 min, and precipitated by the addition of cold acetone. Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 15,000 x g and dissolved in 8 M Urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer.  MS sample preparation: Disulfide bonds were reduced using 10 mM DTT (Dithiothreitol) for 45 min, cysteines were alkylated by adding 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubation for 30 min in the dark. The remaining IAA was quenched and samples were diluted to 4 M urea. Proteolytic digestion: Samples were mixed with Lys-C 1:50 (w/w) and incubated for 2 h at room temperature, and subsequently further diluted to a final concentration of 1 M urea. Digestion with trypsin 1:50 (w/w) was carried out overnight at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters), vacuum dried and lyophilized. Lyophilized tryptic yeast and human peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to reach a peptide concentration of 3 μg/μl each. Four distinct artificial two-proteome mixtures were created: A constant amount of human peptide solution (300 μl) was initially prepared for each mixture. Then, a small, variable amount of yeast peptide solution was added to each solution, namely 0, 18, 27 and 36 μl, respectively - resulting in theoretical fold changes of 1.33, 1.5 and 2.0. The yeast-human mixtures were subsequently lyophilized and again reconstituted in 120 μl 100 mM TEAB (Sigma). Each mixture was split into 3 technical replicates, resulting in 12 peptide samples in total.  Isobaric labeling: TMT labeling was conducted according to a labeling scheme that minimizes isotopic interference across groups. A thirteenth sample without peptides was labeled in parallel using TMT label 126C to interrogate the effect of hydrolyzed and quenched label on ion interference. Dried TMTpro 16plex 0.5 mg label reagents (Thermo Fisher) were taken up in 30 μl anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and combined with 30 μl 100 mM TEAB peptide solution, resulting in a ratio of TMT label to peptide of approximately 2:1 (w/w); and a final peptide concentration of about 4.2 μg/μl per 60 μl labeling reaction. Labeling reactions were quenched by addition of 7 μl of 5% hydroxylamine and incubation for 25 min at 400 rpm at RT, combined 1:1, desalted via SepPak C18 cartridges, vacuum centrifuged and lyophilized. High pH fractionation: Dried labeled peptides were reconstituted in 100 μl 10 mM ammonium formate pH 6.8 and fractionated using an UltiMate 3000 Dual LC pHPLC System equipped with a C18 column (xBridge Peptide BEH C18, 25 cm x 4.6 mm, 3.5 µm, Waters). 1 ml fractions were collected during separation on a 5-50% ACN 1 ml/min gradient in 10 mM ammonium formate buffer pH 6.8 at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. The resulting 1 ml fractions were vacuum centrifuged, pooled according to a cyclical pooling scheme to create six sample pools of reduced complexity (labelled P1-P6), desalted via SepPak C18 cartridges and stored at -80°C.  PTM enrichment: Acetylated peptides were enriched using the PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif Kit (Cell Signaling) according to manufacturer's protocol. Enrichment of phosphorylated peptides enrichment was achieved using a standard TiO2-based enrichment protocol.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant Settings: Raw files were searched with MaxQuant (version 1.6.14) against a concatenated yeast and human database (Uniprot release 2020.01, canonical sequences) and a common contaminants database, while allowing up to two missed cleavages on tryptic peptides. Oxidation of methionine as well as N-terminal acetylation were set as variable, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification. TMTpro label modifications on N-termini and lysine residues were searched as either variable or fixed. The results were filtered to reach an expected FDR of 1% at the PSM level. Raw files generated by FAIMS-quantification were split into distinct subfiles using FreeStyle 1.7 (Thermo Scientific) based on scan’s compensation voltages prior to database searching. FragPipe settings: Thermo raw files were converted to the mzML file format by MSConvert and subsequently database-searched (closed search) against a concatenated yeast and human database including common contaminants using the FragPipe database search software. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was specified as a fixed modification (+57.022). Oxidation on methionine (+15.995), acetylation on peptide N-terminus (+42.011) and TMTpro 16plex label modification on lysine and N-terminal amino groups (+304.207) were searched as variable. PSM-validation was conducted with Percolator, PSMs were filtered at 1% FDR; and protein inference was conducted with ProteinProphet filtered at 1% FDR. Additional filters were set in the TMT Integrator: A minimum PSM probability of 0.9 and a minimum best peptide probability of 0.9. Normalization was set to “None”. Proteome Discoverer Settings: Thermo raw files were searched against a concatenated yeast and human database using the Protoeme Discoverer software MSAmanda v2.0 with the following search parameters: Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as static modification; N-terminal TMTpro 16plex modification as semi-static modification; and oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamate as well as TMTpro 16plex modification on lysine were set as dynamic modifications. The maximum number of missed cleavages per peptide was set to 2. The results were filtered for 1% FDR on PSM and protein level by the integrated Percolator algorithm, and additionally filtered at a minimum MS Amanda Score threshold of 150 at PSM level.

### Publication Abstract
Multiplex proteomics using isobaric labeling tags has emerged as a powerful tool for the simultaneous relative quantification of peptides and proteins across multiple experimental conditions. However, the quantitative accuracy of the approach is largely compromised by ion interference, a phenomenon that causes fold changes to appear compressed. The degree of compression is generally unknown, and the contributing factors are poorly understood. In this study, we thoroughly characterized ion interference at the MS2 level using a defined two-proteome experimental system with known ground-truth. We discovered remarkably poor agreement between the apparent precursor purity in the isolation window and the actual level of observed reporter ion interference in MS2 scans-a discrepancy that we found resolved by considering cofragmentation of peptide ions hidden within the spectral "noise" of the MS1 isolation window. To address this issue, we developed a regression modeling strategy to accurately predict reporter ion interference in any dataset. Finally, we demonstrate the utility of our procedure for improved fold change estimation and unbiased PTM site-to-protein normalization. All computational tools and code required to apply this method to any MS2 TMT dataset are documented and freely available.

### Keywords
Ratio compression, Isobaric label, Ion interference, Tmt

### Affiliations
Division of Immunobiology, Institute of Immunology, Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Moritz Madern

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hartl
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna


