### Accession
PXD022168

### Title
Proteome of Listeria monocytogenes FBUNT biofilm cells and response to bacteriocin AL705

### Description
L. monocytogenes FBUNT is able to form biofilm after six days at 10 ºC. Proteome under planktonic growth, lactocin AL705-treated and untreated biofilms was analyzed. Compared to planktonic cells, protein abundance shifts associated with ribosomes function and biogenesis, cell membrane functionality, carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism and transport were observed in sessile cells. When sessile cells were treated with lactocin AL705, proteins up-regulation were mostly related to carbohydrate metabolism and nutrient transport in an attempt to compensate for impaired energy generation caused by bacteriocin interacting with the cytoplasmic membrane. Notably, transport systems as β-glucosidase IIABC (lmo0027), cellobiose (lmo2763) and trehalose (lmo1255) specific PTS proteins were highly overexpressed.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 100 µg proteins of each sample were used. Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega V5111) and peptides were purified and desalted with ZipTip C18 columns (Millipore). Digests were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS in a Thermo Scientific QExactive Mass Spectrometer coupled to a nanoHPLC EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). For LC-MS/MS analyzes, approximately 1 μg of peptides was loaded onto the column and eluted for 120 min using a reverse phase column (C18, 2 µm, 100A, 50 µm x 150 mm) Easy-Spray Column PepMap RSLC (P/N ES801) suitable for separating protein complexes with a high resolution degree. The MS equipment has a high collision dissociation cell (HCD) for fragmentation and an Orbitrap analyzer (Thermo Scientific, Q-Exactive).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer and Perseus software. Protein database of Listeria monocytogenes EGD-e was used for peptide identification. Proteome Discoverer calculated an area for each protein in each condition using the area under the curve of the 3 most intense peptides for a protein. Areas were calculated for each of the three triplicates and normalized. The data obtained for the area for each protein were processed with the Perseus program (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 1.5.5.3 version, available for free) that allows a deeper statistical analyzes. Different scatter plots were done according to the compared samples. For each couple of samples, we plotted Log p value (-Log Student T-test p-value A_B) on the y-axis versus Student T-test Difference A-B in x-axis. Proteins that appear in the volcano plot with a fold change greater than 2 (less than -1 or greater than 1 on the x-axis of the graph) and a p value below 0.05 (above 1.3 on the y-axis of the graph) were considered as differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Listeria monocytogenes</i> is one of the major food-related pathogens and is able to survive and multiply under different stress conditions. Its persistence in industrial premises and foods is partially due to its ability to form biofilm. Thus, as a natural strategy to overcome <i>L. monocytogenes</i> biofilm formation, the treatment with lactocin AL705 using a sublethal dose (20AU/ml) was explored. The effect of the presence of the bacteriocin on the biofilm formation at 10&#xb0;C of <i>L. monocytogenes</i> FBUNT was evaluated for its proteome and compared to the proteomes of planktonic and sessile cells grown at 10&#xb0;C in the absence of lactocin. Compared to planktonic cells, adaptation of sessile cells during cold stress involved protein abundance shifts associated with ribosomes function and biogenesis, cell membrane functionality, carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism, and transport. When sessile cells were treated with lactocin AL705, proteins' up-regulation were mostly related to carbohydrate metabolism and nutrient transport in an attempt to compensate for impaired energy generation caused by bacteriocin interacting with the cytoplasmic membrane. Notably, transport systems such as &#x3b2;-glucosidase IIABC (lmo0027), cellobiose (lmo2763), and trehalose (lmo1255) specific PTS proteins were highly overexpressed. In addition, mannose (lmo0098), a specific PTS protein indicating the adaptive response of sessile cells to the bacteriocin, was downregulated as this PTS system acts as a class IIa bacteriocin receptor. A sublethal dose of lactocin AL705 was able to reduce the biofilm formation in <i>L. monocytogenes</i> FBUNT and this bacteriocin induced adaptation mechanisms in treated sessile cells. These results constitute valuable data related to specific proteins targeting the control of <i>L. monocytogenes</i> biofilm upon bacteriocin treatment.

### Keywords
L. monocytogenes, Bacteriocin, Proteomic, Biofilm

### Affiliations
CERELA-CONICET

### Submitter
Lucia Mendoza

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia Mendoza
CERELA-CONICET


