### Accession
PXD048981

### Title
Lack of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase VPS34 in regulatory T cells leads to a fatal lymphoproliferative disorder without affecting their development

### Description
Regulatory T (Treg) cells are essential for the maintenance of immunological tolerance, yet the molecular components required for their maintenance and effector functions remain incompletely defined. Inactivation of VPS34 in Treg cells led to an early, lethal phenotype, with massive effector T cell activation and inflammation, like mice lacking Treg cells completely. However, VPS34-deficient Treg cells developed normally, populated the peripheral lymphoid organs and effectively supressed conventional T cells in vitro.  Our data suggest that VPS34 is required for the maturation of Treg cells or that mature Treg cells depend on VPS34 for survival. Functionally, we observed that lack of VPS34 activity impairs cargo processing upon transendocytosis, that defective autophagy contributes to, but is not sufficient to explain this lethal phenotype, and that loss of VPS34 activity induces a state of heightened metabolic activity that may interfere with metabolic networks required for maintenance or suppressive functions of Treg cells.

### Sample Protocol
Treg cells from mosaic Foxp3YFP-Cre/WTPik3c3flox and Foxp3YFP-Cre/WT control mice were isolated by magnetic enrichment followed by FACS, as described above. Sorted cells were washed twice in HBSS and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Proteomics sample preparation and tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling Cell pellets were lysed in 400 μl lysis buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (pH 8.5) and 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride). Lysates were boiled and sonicated with a BioRuptor (30 cycles: 30 s on and 30 s off) before alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 22 °C in the dark. The lysates were subjected to the SP3 procedure for protein clean-up before elution into digest buffer (0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (pH 8.5) and 1 mM CaCl2) and digested with LysC and Trypsin, each at a 1:50 (enzyme:protein) ratio. TMT labeling and peptide clean-up were performed according to the SP3 protocol. After labeling, samples were eluted into 2% DMSO in water, combined and dried in vacuo.  Peptide fractionation The TMT samples were fractionated using off-line high-pH reverse-phase chromatography: samples were loaded onto a 4.6 mm × 250 mm XbridgeTM BEH130 C18 column with 3.5 μm particles (Waters). Using a Dionex BioRS system, the samples were separated using a 25-min multistep gradient of solvents A (10 mM formate at pH 9 in 2% acetonitrile) and B (10 mM ammonium formate at pH 9 in 80% acetonitrile), at a flow rate of 1 ml min−1. Peptides were separated into 48 fractions, which were consolidated into 24 fractions. The fractions were subsequently dried, and the peptides were dissolved in 5% formic acid and analyzed by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry.  Liquid chromatography electrospray–tandem mass spectrometry analysis For each fraction, 1 μg was analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Dionex ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography system (RSLCnano). Reversed-phase liquid chromatography was performed using a Dionex RSLCnano high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected onto a 75 μm × 2 cm PepMap-C18 pre-column and resolved on a 75 μm × 50 cm RP C18 EASY-Spray temperature-controlled integrated column-emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 4-h multistep gradient from 5% B to 35% B with a constant flow of 200 nl/min. The mobile phases were: 2% acetonitrile incorporating 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 80% acetonitrile incorporating 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). The spray was initiated by applying 2.5 kV to the EASY-Spray emitter, and the data were acquired under the control of Xcalibur software in a data-dependent mode using the top speed and 4 s duration per cycle. The survey scan was acquired in the Orbitrap covering the m/z range from 400–1,400 Thomson units (Th), with a mass resolution of 120,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2.0 × 105 ions. The most intense ions were selected for fragmentation using collision-induced dissociation in the ion trap with 30% collision-induced dissociation energy and an isolation window of 1.6 Th. The AGC target was set to 1.0 × 104, with a maximum injection time of 70 ms and a dynamic exclusion of 80 s. During the MS3 analysis for more accurate TMT quantifications, ten fragment ions were co-isolated using synchronous precursor selection, a window of 2 Th and further fragmented using a higher-energy collisional dissociation energy of 55%. The fragments were then analyzed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. The AGC target was set to 1.0 × 105 and the maximum injection time was set to 300 ms.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed, searched and quantified with the MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.8.3). Proteins and peptides were identified using the UniProt mouse database (SwissProt and Trembl) and the contaminants database integrated in MaxQuant, using the Andromeda search engine with the following search parameters: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, as well as TMT modification on peptide amino termini and lysine side chains, were fixed modifications; methionine oxidation and acetylation of amino termini of proteins were variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for positive identification at the protein and peptide-to-spectrum match level. The dataset was filtered to remove proteins categorized as ‘contaminants’, ‘reverse’ and ‘only identified by site’. Copy numbers were calculated after allocating the summed MS1 intensities to the different experimental conditions according to their fractional MS3 reporter intensities. The accuracy of quantification was established using the following guidelines: proteins categorized as high accuracy had more than eight unique and razor peptides and a ratio for unique/unique + razor of ≥0.75; proteins categorized as medium accuracy had at least three unique and razor peptides, and a ratio for unique/unique + razor of ≥0.5; and any proteins below these thresholds were classified as low accuracy.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Pi3k, T regs, Vps34, T cells

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Signalling & Immunology, University of Dundee
Cell Signalling & Immunology, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Alejandro Brenes

### Lab Head
Dr Doreen Cantrell
Division of Cell Signalling & Immunology, University of Dundee


