### Accession
PXD016314

### Title
Wnt Regulation: Exploring Axin-Disheveled interactions and defining mechanisms by which the SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase is recruited to the destruction complex

### Description
Wnt signaling plays key roles in development and disease, by regulating the stability of its key effector βcat.  In the absence of Wnt signals, βcat is phosphorylated by the Wnt-regulatory destruction complex, ubiquitinated by an SCF-class E3 ubiquitin ligase, and destroyed by the proteasome.  Binding of Wnt ligands to their Frizzled/LRP receptors stabilizes βcat, via the cytoplasmic effector Dsh.  Here we explore two important questions in the field:  Is there a direct transfer of βcat from the destruction complex to the E3 ligase, and how does Dsh interaction with the destruction complex protein Axin regulate destruction complex function?

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with pCMV-Flag-APC2 and stable cell lines where established using puromycin resistance. Immunoblotting was used to confirm expression. M2 anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma) was used to pulldown Flag-APC2. Cells were washed 3 times with PBS and then harvested in RIPA buffer. The lysate was pre-cleared with protein A beads for 2 hours at 4°C before the anti-FLAG antibody was added overnight at 4°C. Next day proteins A beads where added to the samples and incubated for 2h at 4C. Washes were conducted with RIPA buffer. Trypsin digestion was performed to elute proteins/peptides. Trypsinized peptides were separated by reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation). Peptides were trapped on a 2 cm column (Pepmap 100, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and separated on a 25 cm EASYspray analytical column (75 μm internal diameter, 2.0 μm C18 particle size, 100 Å pore size). The analytical column was heated to 35˚C. A 150 min gradient from 1% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 35% buffer B at flowing at 300 nl/min was used. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed by an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The ion source was operated at 2.6 kV with the ion transfer tube temperature set to 300 °C. Full MS scans (300–2000 m/z) were acquired by the Orbitrap analyzer at 120,000 resolution, and data-dependent MS2 spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap on the 15 most intense ions using a 2.0 m/z isolation window and collision-induced dissociation (35% normalized collision energy). Precursor ions were selected based on charge states (+2 and +3) and intensity thresholds (above 1e5) from the full scan; dynamic exclusion was set to one repeat during 30 sec and a 60 sec exclusion time. A lock mass of 445.120030 was used.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data files were searched in MaxQuant (1.6.2.3) using the following parameters: specific tryptic digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl fixed modification, variable protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation, match between runs, label-free quantification (LFQ) with minimum ratio count of 2, and the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human canonical and isoform sequence database (release 02/2017). A 1% false discovery rate was applied to all protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Wnt signaling plays key roles in embryonic development and adult stem cell homeostasis and is altered in human cancer. Signaling is turned on and off by regulating stability of the effector &#x3b2;-catenin (&#x3b2;-cat). The multiprotein destruction complex binds and phosphorylates &#x3b2;-cat and transfers it to the SCF-TrCP E3-ubiquitin ligase for ubiquitination and destruction. Wnt signals act though Dishevelled to turn down the destruction complex, stabilizing &#x3b2;-cat. Recent work clarified underlying mechanisms, but important questions remain. We explore &#x3b2;-cat transfer from the destruction complex to the E3 ligase, and test models suggesting Dishevelled and APC2 compete for association with Axin. We find that Slimb/TrCP is a dynamic component of the destruction complex biomolecular condensate, while other E3 proteins are not. Recruitment requires Axin and not APC, and Axin's RGS domain plays an important role. We find that elevating Dishevelled levels in <i>Drosophila</i> embryos has paradoxical effects, promoting the ability of limiting levels of Axin to turn off Wnt signaling. When we elevate Dishevelled levels, it forms its own cytoplasmic puncta, but these do not recruit Axin. Superresolution imaging in mammalian cells raises the possibility that this may result by promoting Dishevelled:Dishevelled interactions at the expense of Dishevelled: Axin interactions when Dishevelled levels are high.

### Keywords
Wnt signaling, E3 ubiquitin ligase

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Peifer
Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA


