### Accession
PXD002565

### Title
Targeting the lineage-specific long non-coding RNA LINC01212 as an effective anti-melanoma therapeutic strategy

### Description
Focal amplifications of 3p13-3p14 occur in about 10% of melanoma and are associated with poor prognosis. The melanoma-specific oncogene MITF resides at the epicenter of this amplicon1 . However, whether other loci present in this amplicon also contribute to melanomagenesis is unknown. Here we show that the recently annotated long non-coding RNA gene LINC01212 is consistently cogained with MITF. In addition to being amplified, LINC01212 is a target of the lineage-specific transcription factor SOX10 and, consequently, it is expressed in more than 90% of human melanomas, but not in normal adult tissues. Whereas exogenous LINC01212 functions in trans to increase melanoma clonogenic potential, LINC01212 knock-down drastically decreases the viability of melanoma cells irrespective of their transcriptional cell state, BRAF, NRAS or TP53 status and increases their sensitivity to MAPK-targeting therapeutics both in vitro and in Patient-Derived Xenograft (PDX) models. Mechanistically, LINC01212 interacts with p32, a master regulator of mitochondrial homeostasis and metabolism, to increase its mitochondrial targeting and pro-oncogenic function. Our results indicate that targeting the lineage addiction oncogene LINC01212, especially in combination with BRAFV600Einhibitors, disrupts vital mitochondrial functions in a cancer-cell specific manner and is therefore expected to deliver highly effective and tissuerestricted anti-melanoma therapeutic responses.

### Sample Protocol
For affinity purification of LINC01212 protein targets, 100 µg of Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance (GE healthcare) was coupled to 400 pmoles of biotinylated probes against LINC01212 (Biosearch Technologies) overnight at 4°C. Cells, 60 x 106 cells per sample were lysed in 2 ml of pull-out buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl; pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.05% Igepal, 60 U Superase-In/ml (Ambion), 1 mM DTT, and a cocktail of protease inhibitors) and incubated for 3 h with the beads at 4 °C. As a negative control, an additional sample was digested with 10 µg/ml RNase-A digestion for 10 min at room temperature before incubation with LINC01212 probes. Samples were processed by a short separation on SDS-PAGE gels (Biorad) to remove contaminants possibly interfering with downstream analysis. After excision, washing and drying of the gel band, digestion buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, 5 µg/ml trypsin) was added to fully submerge the dried gel band, and the sample was digested for 16 h at 37°C. The generated peptide mixtures were acidified, dried and re-dissolved in a 2% CH3CN (acetonitrile), 0,1% formic acid solution. 39 The obtained peptide mixtures were introduced into an LC−MS/MS system through an ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample mixture was first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 µm internal diameter (i.d.) × 20 mm, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, AmmerbuchEntringen, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm i.d. × 150 mm, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) packed in the nanospray needle (PicoFrit SELF/P PicoTip emitter, PF360-75-15-N-5, NewObjective, Woburn, USA). Peptides were loaded with loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water) and separated with a linear gradient from 98% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 40% solvent B′(0.08% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. This was followed by a 15 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 3.4 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2000, AGC target 3 × 106 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms) acquired at a resolution of 70000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 10 tandem MS scans (resolution 17500  40 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling the defined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104 ions, maximum ion injection time 60 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.7xE4 , exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, and >8 charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 20 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ions at 445.120025 Da were used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
From the MS/MS data in each LC run, Mascot Generic Files were created using Distiller software (version 2.4.3.3, Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com/Distiller). While generating these peak lists, grouping of spectra was allowed in Distiller with a maximal intermediate retention time of 30 s and a maximal intermediate scan count of 5 was used where possible. Grouping was done with 0.005 Da precursor ion tolerance. A peak list was only generated when the MS/MS spectrum contains more than 10 peaks. There was no de-isotoping and the relative signal to noise limit was set at 2. These peak lists were then searched using the Mascot search engine (MatrixScience)52 with the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science). Spectra were searched against the human protein entries in the Swiss-Prot database (SP2014_07; 20284 sequence entries). Variable modifications were set Methionine oxidation, pyro-glutamate formation of amino terminal  41 Glutamine, propionamide formation on Cysteine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The mass tolerance on precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and on fragment ions to 20 mmu. The instrument setting was put on ESI-QUAD. Enzyme was set to trypsin, allowing for one missed cleavage. Only peptides that were ranked first and scored above the threshold score, set at 99% confidence, were withheld. The protein candidates that were pursued in this work were consistently identified with at least two different peptides in the relevant conditions (no peptides detected in the bead controls).

### Publication Abstract
Focal amplifications of chromosome 3p13-3p14 occur in about 10% of melanomas and are associated with a poor prognosis. The melanoma-specific oncogene MITF resides at the epicentre of this amplicon. However, whether other loci present in this amplicon also contribute to melanomagenesis is unknown. Here we show that the recently annotated long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) gene SAMMSON is consistently co-gained with MITF. In addition, SAMMSON is a target of the lineage-specific transcription factor SOX10 and its expression is detectable in more than 90% of human melanomas. Whereas exogenous SAMMSON increases the clonogenic potential in trans, SAMMSON knockdown drastically decreases the viability of melanoma cells irrespective of their transcriptional cell state and BRAF, NRAS or TP53 mutational status. Moreover, SAMMSON targeting sensitizes melanoma to MAPK-targeting therapeutics both in vitro and in patient-derived xenograft models. Mechanistically, SAMMSON interacts with p32, a master regulator of mitochondrial homeostasis and metabolism, to increase its mitochondrial targeting and pro-oncogenic function. Our results indicate that silencing of the lineage addiction oncogene SAMMSON disrupts vital mitochondrial functions in a cancer-cell-specific manner; this silencing is therefore expected to deliver highly effective and tissue-restricted anti-melanoma therapeutic responses.

### Keywords
Lncrna protein binding melanoma

### Affiliations
Medical Biotechnology Center, VIB, Ghent, Belgium. Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium;
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sven Eyckerman

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
Medical Biotechnology Center, VIB, Ghent, Belgium. Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium;


