### Accession
PXD033436

### Title
Impact of graded calorie restriction on mouse liver protein expression

### Description
Calorie restriction (CR) extends lifespan by modulating the mechanisms involved in aging. We quantified the hepatic proteome of male C57BL/6 mice exposed to graded levels of CR (0% to 40% CR) for three months, and evaluated which signaling pathways were most affected.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were digested using the filter-aided proteome sample preparation (FASP) method by sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). The resultant tryptic peptides from each sample were then labeled with the 8-plex iTraq-reagents (AB Sciex Inc., MA, USA). The labeled samples were mixed together with an equal molar ratio. After prefrcationed by off-line reversed phase (RP)-high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), the peptides were analyzed by a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX) coupled online to an Eksigent nanoLC Ultra in Information Dependent Mode and with iTRAQ reagent collision energy adjustment on.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed with the ProteinPilot 4.5 software (AB SCIEX) using the Paragon database search algorithm. The Mus musculus proteome sequences downloaded from UniProt were used for the database searching and the mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) analysis was performed using the software PSPEP integrated with the ProteinPilot. The confidence of quantitation for differentially expressed proteins was analyzed with the ProteinPilot Descriptive Statistics Template (PDST) (beta v3.07p, AB SCIEX).

### Publication Abstract
Calorie restriction (CR) extends life span by modulating the mechanisms involved in aging. We quantified the hepatic proteome of male C57BL/6 mice exposed to graded levels of CR (0%-40% CR) for 3&#xa0;months, and evaluated which signaling pathways were most affected. The metabolic pathways most significantly stimulated by the increase in CR, included the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway, the pentose phosphate pathway, the fatty acid degradation pathway, the valine, leucine, and isoleucine degradation pathway, and the lysine degradation pathway. The metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome P450 pathway was activated and feminized by increased CR, while production in major urinary proteins (Mups) was strongly reduced, consistent with a reduced investment in reproduction as predicted by the disposable soma hypothesis. However, we found no evidence of increased somatic protection, and none of the 4 main pathways implied to be linked to the impact of CR on life span (insulin/insulin-like growth factor [IGF-1], nuclear factor-&#x3ba;B [NF-&#x3ba;B], mammalian Target of Rapamycin [mTOR], and sirtuins) as well as pathways in cancer, were significantly changed at the protein level in relation to the increase in CR level. This was despite previous work at the transcriptome level in the same individuals indicating such changes. On the other hand, we found Aldh2, Aldh3a2, and Aldh9a1 in carnitine biosynthesis and Acsl5 in carnitine shuttle system were up-regulated by increased CR, which are consistent with our previous work on metabolome of the same individuals. Overall, the patterns of protein expression were more consistent with a "clean cupboards" than a "disposable soma" interpretation.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Calorie restriction, Proteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Shenzhen key laboratory of metabolic health, Center for Energy Metabolism and Reproduction, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China

### Submitter
Xiahe Huang

### Lab Head
Dr John Roger Speakman
Shenzhen key laboratory of metabolic health, Center for Energy Metabolism and Reproduction, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China


