### Accession
PXD005513

### Title
Orthogonal ubiquitin transfer identifies ubiquitination substrates under differential control by the two ubiquitin activating enzymes

### Description
Protein ubiquitination is mediated sequentially by ubiquitin activating enzyme E1, ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2, and ubiquitin ligase E3. Uba1 was thought to be the only E1 until the recent identification of Uba6 as an alternative. To differentiate the biological functions of Uba1 and Uba6, we applied a novel orthogonal ubiquitin transfer (OUT) technology to profile their ubiquitination targets in mammalian cells. By expressing pairs of an engineered ubiquitin and engineered Uba1 or Uba6 that were generated for exclusive interactions, we identified 697 Uba6 targets and 529 Uba1 targets with 258 overlaps. Bioinformatics revealed substantial differences in pathways involving Uba1- and Uba6-specific targets. We demonstrated that polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of ezrin and CUGBP1 require Uba6, but not Uba1, and Uba6 is involved in the control of ezrin localization and epithelial morphogenesis. These data reveal the distinctive substrate pools for Uba1 and Uba6 and manifest non-redundant biological roles for Uba6.

### Sample Protocol
Bead solutions were treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 25°C for 30 minutes, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide (IAA) at 25°C for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples were digested with 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 25°C for 2 hours and further digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 25°C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters) and dried under vacuum.  Derived peptides were resuspended in peptide 20 uL of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile). Peptide mixtures (6 uL) were separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 um Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (25 cm x 75 uM internal diameter (ID); New Objective, Woburn, MA) by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano and monitored on a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific , San Jose, CA). Peptides were loaded onto the column in 1% buffer B at a flowrate of 300 nl/min for 25 minutes.  Elution was then performed over a 140 minute multistep gradient at a rate of 300nl/min with buffer B ranging from 3% to 99% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer was programmed to collect at the top speed for 3 second cycles. The MS scans (400-1600 m/z range, 200,000 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 in profile mode and the HCD MS/MS spectra (2 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 10,000 AGC target, 35 ms maximum ion time) were detected in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 20 seconds within a 10 ppm window. Precursor ions with +1, and +8 or higher charge states were excluded from sequencing.  Bead solutions were treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 25°C for 30 minutes, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide (IAA) at 25°C for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples were digested with 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 25°C for 2 hours and further digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 25°C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters) and dried under vacuum.  Derived peptides were resuspended in peptide 20 uL of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile). Peptide mixtures (6 uL) were separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 um Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (25 cm x 75 uM internal diameter (ID); New Objective, Woburn, MA) by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano and monitored on a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific , San Jose, CA). Peptides were loaded onto the column in 1% buffer B at a flowrate of 300 nl/min for 25 minutes.  Elution was then performed over a 140 minute multistep gradient at a rate of 300nl/min with buffer B ranging from 3% to 99% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer was programmed to collect at the top speed for 3 second cycles. The MS scans (400-1600 m/z range, 200,000 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 in profile mode and the HCD MS/MS spectra (2 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 10,000 AGC target, 35 ms maximum ion time) were detected in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 20 seconds within a 10 ppm window. Precursor ions with +1, and +8 or higher charge states were excluded from sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Spectgra were searched using the Proteome Discoverer 2.0 platform with an embedded SEQUEST HT search engine (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) against human Uniprot database (90,300 target sequences). Searching parameters included fully tryptic restriction and a parent ion mass tolerance (± 20 ppm). Methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da), asparagine and glutamine deamidation (+0.98402 Da), lysine ubiquitination (+114.04293 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.03670) were variable modifications (up to 3 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.021465 Da). Percolator was used to filter the peptide spectrum matches to a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Protein ubiquitination is mediated sequentially by ubiquitin activating enzyme E1, ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2 and ubiquitin ligase E3. Uba1 was thought to be the only E1 until the recent identification of Uba6. To differentiate the biological functions of Uba1 and Uba6, we applied an orthogonal ubiquitin transfer (OUT) technology to profile their ubiquitination targets in mammalian cells. By expressing pairs of an engineered ubiquitin and engineered Uba1 or Uba6 that were generated for exclusive interactions, we identified 697 potential Uba6 targets and 527 potential Uba1 targets with 258 overlaps. Bioinformatics analysis reveals substantial differences in pathways involving Uba1- and Uba6-specific targets. We demonstrate that polyubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of ezrin and CUGBP1 require Uba6, but not Uba1, and that Uba6 is involved in the control of ezrin localization and epithelial morphogenesis. These data suggest that distinctive substrate pools exist for Uba1 and Uba6 that reflect non-redundant biological roles for Uba6.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Ubiquitination, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology, 303 E. Superior Street, Lurie 3-103, Chicago, IL 60611
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Hiroaki Kiyokawa
Department of Pharmacology, 303 E. Superior Street, Lurie 3-103, Chicago, IL 60611


