### Accession
PXD012099

### Title
Interactome of C9orf72 arginine-rich dipeptide proteins

### Description
A GGG GCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion within the C9orf72 gene is the most common genetic cause of both amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Sense and antisense repeat-containing transcripts undergo repeat associated non-AUG-initiated translation to produce five dipeptide proteins (DPRs). The polyGR and polyPR DPRs are extremely toxic when expressed in Drosophila neurons. To determine the mechanism that mediates this toxicity, we purified DPRs from the Drosophila brain and used mass spectrometry to identify the irst in vivo neuronal DPR interactome. PolyGR and polyPR interact with ribosomal proteins, and inhibit translation in both human iPSC-derived motor neurons, and adult Drosophila neurons.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source. The sample was first desalted on a PepMap C18 nano-trap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100Å, 5µm) at 10 µL/min for 15 min, then separated on a PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 250 mm, 100 Å, 2 µm) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min in a linear gradient of 4-32% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid in 90 min, with total 130 min acquisition time.  The HPLC, columns and mass spectrometer were all from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The Orbitrap mass spectrometer was operated in the standard “top 15” data-dependant acquisition mode while the preview mode was disabled. The MS full scan was set at m/z 380 – 1600 with the resolution at 30,000 at m/z 400 and AGC at 1x106 with a maximum injection time at 200 msec. The siloxane ion at 445.120030 was used as lock mass.  The 15 most abundant multiply-charged precursor ions (z ≥ 2), with a minimal signal above 3000 counts, were dynamically selected for CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) fragmentation in the ion trap, which had the AGC set at 5000 with the maximum injection time at 100 msec. The precursor isolation width was set at 2 Da.  The normalized collision energy for CID MS/MS was set at 35%. The dynamic exclusion duration time for selected ions for MS/MS was set for 60 sec with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width.

### Data Protocol
The raw iles were processed with Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo). Database searches were performed with Mascot (Matrix Science) against the Drosophila Uniprot database (v. December 2015). The search parameters were: trypsin digestion, two missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modiications of carbamidomethyl (C), N-acetylation (protein), oxidation (M), and pyro-glu (NtermQ). Database search results were reined through Mascot Percolator (FDR < 1%). High-conidence peptides were apportioned to proteins using Mascot Protein Family summary. Protein identiication required at least one high-conidence peptide (FDR < 1%) and a minimum Mascot protein score of 20. External contaminants were removed for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
A GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion within the C9orf72 gene is the most common genetic cause of both amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Sense and antisense repeat-containing transcripts undergo repeat-associated non-AUG-initiated translation to produce five dipeptide proteins (DPRs). The polyGR and polyPR&#xa0;DPRs are extremely toxic when expressed in&#xa0;Drosophila&#xa0;neurons. To determine the mechanism that mediates this toxicity, we purified DPRs from the&#xa0;Drosophila&#xa0;brain and used mass spectrometry to identify the&#xa0;in vivo&#xa0;neuronal DPR interactome. PolyGR and polyPR interact with ribosomal proteins, and inhibit translation in both human iPSC-derived motor neurons, and adult&#xa0;Drosophila&#xa0;neurons. We next performed a screen of 81 translation-associated proteins in GGGGCC repeat-expressing Drosophila to determine whether this translational repression can be overcome and if this impacts neurodegeneration. Expression of the translation initiation factor eIF1A&#xa0;uniquely&#xa0;rescued DPR-induced toxicity&#xa0;in vivo, indicating that restoring translation is a potential therapeutic strategy.&#xa0;These data directly implicate translational repression in C9orf72 repeat-induced neurodegeneration&#xa0;and identify eIF1A as a novel modifier of&#xa0;C9orf72&#xa0;repeat toxicity.

### Keywords
Brain, Ap-ms, Drosophila, Lc-ms/ms, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute & The Institute of Cancer Research
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute & The Institute of Cancer Research


