### Accession
PXD006513

### Title
A microsomal proteomics view of H2O2- and ABA-dependent responses

### Description
The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) modulates a number of plant developmental processes and responses to stress. In planta, ABA has been shown to induce reactive oxygen species (ROS) production through the action of plasma membrane-associated NADPH oxidases. Although quantitative proteomics studies have been performed to identify ABA- or hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)-dependent proteins, little is known about the ABA- and H2O2-dependent microsomal proteome changes. Here, we examined the effect of 50 µM of either H2O2 or ABA on the Arabidopsis microsomal proteome using tandem mass spectrometry and identified 86 specifically H2O2-dependent and 52 specifically ABA-dependent proteins that are differentially expressed. We observed differential accumulation of proteins involved in the TCA cycle notably in response to H2O2. Of these, aconitase 3 responded to both H2O2 and ABA. Additionally, over 30 proteins linked to RNA biology responded significantly to both treatments. Gene ontology categories such as ‘response to stress’ and ‘transport’ were enriched, suggesting that H2O2 or ABA directly and/or indirectly cause complex and partly overlapping cellular responses.

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Treatments of Arabidopsis cell suspension culture Cells derived from Arabidopsis thaliana (ecotype Columbia-0) roots were grown in Gamborg’s B5 basal salt mixture (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), as described in [26,27]. At day 7 post-subculturing, three biological replicate flasks containing cells were treated with 50 μM ABA or 50 μM H2O2 for 0 min (mock treatment), 5 min and 20 min. Cells were then harvested by draining off the media using Stericup® filter unit (Millipore, Billerica, MA), immediately flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -140°C until further use.   2.2 Microsomal protein isolation Approximately 1 g of cells was ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen and subjected to microsomal isolation, as described in [28]. The powder was incubated in a sucrose buffer [50 mM Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (pH 8.0), 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 2 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 0.25 M sucrose and 1 × protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO)] and centrifuged at 8,000 × g for 15 min. The supernatant was subjected to ultracentrifugation using an Optima™ L-100K ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter, CA, USA) at 100,000 × g for 1 h. The supernatant, representing the cytosolic fraction, was pipetted out. The pellet, the microsomal fraction, at the bottom of the tube, was washed once in sucrose buffer and centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 1 h. The microsomal fraction corresponding to the final pellet was suspended in sucrose buffer, aliquoted into separate tubes and either used immediately or stored at -80°C.  2.3 Trypsin digestion and protein identification by tandem mass spectrometry Microsomal protein extracts were separately reduced and alkylated with DTT and iodoacetamide, respectively, prior to trypsin digestion, as described in [27]. After desalting with Sep-Pak Vac tC18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), peptides were suspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and analysed by LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo-Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed by MASCOT (Matrix Science, London, UK) and validated with Scaffold version 4.0.4 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA), as described in [29]. Identified proteins were considered positive with molecular weight search (MOWSE) score ≥32, and 95% protein and peptide probability and false discovery rate (FDR) ≤1%. Label-free quantitative analysis was performed with Scaffold software. Proteins were deemed responsive to treatment when present in at least two replicates with a fold change (FC) greater or equal to |±2|, verified by Student t-test (p-value ≤0.05) in comparison to the mock treated samples. All proteomics methods are extensively detailed elsewhere [26,29-31].

### Publication Abstract
The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) modulates a number of plant developmental processes and responses to stress. In planta, ABA has been shown to induce reactive oxygen species (ROS) production through the action of plasma membrane-associated nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)-oxidases. Although quantitative proteomics studies have been performed to identify ABA- or hydrogen peroxide (H&#x2082;O&#x2082;)-dependent proteins, little is known about the ABA- and H&#x2082;O&#x2082;-dependent microsomal proteome changes. Here, we examined the effect of 50 &#xb5;M of either H&#x2082;O&#x2082; or ABA on the Arabidopsis microsomal proteome using tandem mass spectrometry and identified 86 specifically H&#x2082;O&#x2082;-dependent, and 52 specifically ABA-dependent proteins that are differentially expressed. We observed differential accumulation of proteins involved in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle notably in response to H&#x2082;O&#x2082;. Of these, aconitase 3 responded to both H&#x2082;O&#x2082; and ABA. Additionally, over 30 proteins linked to RNA biology responded significantly to both treatments. Gene ontology categories such as 'response to stress' and 'transport' were enriched, suggesting that H&#x2082;O&#x2082; or ABA directly and/or indirectly cause complex and partly overlapping cellular responses. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006513.

### Keywords
Hydrogen peroxide (h2o2); abscisic acid (aba); microsomal proteomics; quantitative proteomics; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Biology and Biotechnology, University of Perugia, Italy
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Claudius Marondedze

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Gehring
Department of Chemistry, Biology and Biotechnology, University of Perugia, Italy


