### Accession
PXD011131

### Title
Proteome-wide detection of cysteine nitrosylation targets and motifs using bio-orthogonal cleavable linker based enrichment and switch technique (Cys-BOOST)

### Description
Cysteine (Cys) reversible post-translational modifications (PTMs) are emerging as important players in cellular signaling and redox homeostasis. Here we present Cys-BOOST a novel strategy for LC-MS/MS based quantitative analysis of reversibly modified Cys using switch technique, enrichment via bio-orthogonal cleavable linker and quantification using tandem mas tag (TMT) reagents. We performed direct comparison of Cys-BOOST (n=3) with iodo-TMT (n=3) by analyzing the total CysCys from HeLa cell extracts. As a result higher sensitivity (25,019 vs 9,966 Cys peptides), specificity (98 vs 74 %) and technical reproducibility were obtained by Cys-BOOST. In addition, the application of Cys-BOOST for the analysis of Cys nitrosylation (SNO) in S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO) treated and non-treated HeLa cell extracts lead to the identification of unprecedented number of SNO proteins (3,537), SNO peptides (9,314) and unique SNO sites (8,304). Based on the quantitative data we describe SNO consensus motifs for endogenous SNO and SNO sites with differential reactivity to GSNO. Collectively, our findings suggest Cys-BOOST as a concurrent method of choice for Cys PTM analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Total Cys residues from HeLa cell lysate were analyzed by Cys-BOOST and iodoTMT. Reversibly modified Cys were reduced with TCEP, the lysate was divided into 6 equal aliquots, and all free Cys were switched with IAA-alkyne (n=3) or iodoTMT (n=3) respectively. Next, proteins were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). For Cys-BOOST peptides were labeled with TMT 10plex™ according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For Cys-BOOST the Cys peptides were enriched using conjugated of IAA-alkyne labeled peptides via copper(I)-catalyzed alkyne-azide cycloaddition (CuAAC) to the bio-orthogonal cleavable linker, binding to streptavidin beads and chemical elution. IodoTMT labeled peptides were enriched via specific binding to anti-TMT antibody followed by elution at acidic pH. SNO analysis of GSNO treated (n=3) and non-treated (n=3) HeLa cell extracts were performed using the specific reduction of SNO by sodium ascorbate and enriched using Cys-BOOST workflow. The complexity of all eluates for both methods was reduced before LC-MS/MS by on-tip pH 10 fractionation, n=5 fractions were generated.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer (PD) v2.2 (Thermo Scientific), using Sequest HT and a human Uniprot database (downloaded November 2016) and a common contaminants database. The search was performed using the following settings: mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and product ions, respectively, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin. For iodoTMT analysis, iodoTMT6plex (+329.227 Da) and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. For Cys-BOOST cl-DDE (cleaved form of the linker) on Cys (+195.112 Da) and oxidation of methionine (Met; +15.995 Da) were set as dynamic modifications, TMT10plex (+229.163 Da) on any N-terminus and lysine were set as static modifications. For SNO analysis, carbamidomethylation (CAM) of Cys (+57.021 Da) was set as a dynamic modification. Percolator v3 was used for false discovery rate (FDR) estimation and data was filtered at ≤1% FDR on PSM, peptide and protein levels. Site probabilities of Cys dynamic modifications were determined using ptmRS2.2 . Only unique Cys peptides that passed the FDR criteria and had site localization probabilities ≥99% were considered. Quantification was done based on the TMT reporter ion intensities, only spectra with co-Isolation threshold ≤20 and average reporter S/N threshold ≥10 were considered for quantification. P-values for all experiments were defined by ANOVA (individual proteins) hypostasis test using PD v2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Cysteine modifications emerge as important players in cellular signaling and homeostasis. Here, we present a chemical proteomics strategy for quantitative analysis of reversibly modified Cysteines using bioorthogonal cleavable-linker and switch technique (Cys-BOOST). Compared to iodoTMT for total Cysteine analysis, Cys-BOOST shows a threefold higher sensitivity and considerably higher specificity and precision. Analyzing S-nitrosylation (SNO) in S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO)-treated and non-treated HeLa extracts Cys-BOOST identifies 8,304 SNO sites on 3,632 proteins covering a wide dynamic range of the proteome. Consensus motifs of SNO sites with differential GSNO reactivity confirm the relevance of both acid-base catalysis and local hydrophobicity for NO targeting to particular Cysteines. Applying Cys-BOOST to SH-SY5Y cells, we identify 2,151 SNO sites under basal conditions and reveal significantly changed SNO levels as response to early nitrosative stress, involving neuro(axono)genesis, glutamatergic synaptic transmission, protein folding/translation, and DNA replication. Our work suggests SNO as a global regulator of protein function akin to phosphorylation and ubiquitination.

### Keywords
Cysteine, Ptm, Nitrosylation

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre,Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital

### Submitter
Ruzanna Mnatsakanyan

### Lab Head
Dr René P. Zahedi
Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre,Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital


