### Accession
PXD004161

### Title
Quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis of H37Ra and H37Rv strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causative agent of tuberculosis accounts for 1.5 million annual deaths worldwide. The two well-characterized strains of the parental H37 strain namely, H37Ra and H37Rv show different pathogenic phenotypes. In order to identify factors that are responsible for virulence, we compared the proteome and the phosphoproteome profiles of virulent (H37Rv) and virulence attenuated (H37Ra) strains of M. tuberculosis. Quantitative proteomic analysis resulted in the identification and quantitation of 2,709 proteins and 505 phosphosites. Comparative analysis revealed over 5-fold overexpression of several proteins associated with virulence. Our data indicates that there are definable molecular differences between H37Rv and H37Ra strains at both the proteome and phosphoproteome levels which may explain the virulence and phenotypic differences.

### Sample Protocol
M. tuberculosis H37Rv and H37Ra were grown in Middlebrook 7H9 culture mediumsupplemented with OADC (Oleic acid, dextrose and catalase). The two strains were harvested at logarithmic and stationary phase. The cells were washed and lysed in 2% SDS buffer with phosphatase inhibitors.Equal amount of lysate from each condition was reduced, alkylated and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion. The lysates in equal amount from each condition was taken and labeled using TMT. TMT labeled peptides were pooled, fractionated and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed to generate peak list files using Proteome Discoverer Software version 2.0.1. The protein database used for MS/MS search for M. tuberculosis H37Rv and Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Ra was downloaded from Tuberculist and NCBI respectively. MASCOT and SEQUEST search algorithms were used to analyze the data.The search parameter included trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme with 1 missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification, whereas, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT modification at peptide N-terminus and lysine was set as static modification. For phosphoproteomic data, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine was considered as additional dynamic modification. Phosphosites were predicted using PhosphoRS3.1 node in Proteome Discoverer. Precursor ion mass tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were allowed with 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively and all the PSMs were identified with 1% FDR. Reporter ions quantifier node of Proteome Discoverer was used for relative quantitation of proteins. PhosphoRS 3.1 node of Proteome Discoverer was used to calculate the probability of the phosphorylation site. Phosphopeptides with > 75% localization probability were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causative agent of tuberculosis, accounts for 1.5 million human deaths annually worldwide. Despite efforts to eradicate tuberculosis, it still remains a deadly disease. The two best characterized strains of M. tuberculosis, virulent H37Rv and avirulent H37Ra, provide a unique platform to investigate biochemical and signaling pathways associated with pathogenicity. To delineate the biomolecular dynamics that may account for pathogenicity and attenuation of virulence in M. tuberculosis, we compared the proteome and phosphoproteome profiles of H37Rv and H37Ra strains. Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis was performed using high-resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry. Analysis of exponential and stationary phases of these strains resulted in identification and quantitation of 2709 proteins along with 512 phosphorylation sites derived from 257 proteins. In addition to confirming the presence of previously described M. tuberculosis phosphorylated proteins, we identified 265 novel phosphorylation sites. Quantitative proteomic analysis revealed more than five-fold upregulation of proteins belonging to virulence associated type VII bacterial secretion system in H37Rv when compared to those in H37Ra. We also identified 84 proteins, which exhibited changes in phosphorylation levels between the virulent and avirulent strains. Bioinformatics analysis of the proteins altered in their level of expression or phosphorylation revealed enrichment of pathways involved in fatty acid biosynthesis and two-component regulatory system. Our data provides a resource for further exploration of functional differences at molecular level between H37Rv and H37Ra, which will ultimately explain the molecular underpinnings that determine virulence in tuberculosis.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Phosphoproteomics, Virulence attenuation

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore-560066, India

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr Keshava Prasad T.S.
Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore-560066, India


