### Accession
PXD025737

### Title
RhoJ controls EMT associated resistance to chemotherapy

### Description
The resistance of cancer cell to therapy is responsible of the death of most cancer patients. Epithelial to mesenchymal transitions (EMT) has been associated with resistance to therapy in different cancer cells. However, the mechanisms by which EMT mediates resistance to therapy remain poorly understood. Here, using a mouse model of skin squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) undergoing spontaneous EMT during tumorigenesis, we identified EMT tumor subpopulations displaying different intrinsic resistance mechanisms to a wide range of anti-cancer therapy both in-vivo and in-vitro. We found that RhoJ, a small GTPase, preferentially expressed in EMT cancer cells controls resistance to therapy. Using genome-wide transcriptomic and proteomic profiling combined with functional assays following loss of RhoJ functions, we found that RhoJ regulated EMT associated resistance to chemotherapy by promoting DNA damage response and the formation of new replication forks allowing EMT tumor cells to repair DNA lesions more rapidly and survive under the replicative stress induced by chemotherapy. Altogether, our study uncovers RhoJ as a key regulator of EMT associated resistance to chemotherapy with important implications for the development of new strategies to overcome resistance to therapy in cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation A total of 24 samples was prepared for LC-MS/MS analyses, corresponding to 3 replicates of Epcam+ tumor cells (TCs), 3 of Epcam- TCs, 3 of Epcam- RhoJ sh TCs and 3 of Epcam- Control sh treated for 24h with CDDP/5FU as described above or with vehicle control (DMSO). Cells were harvested by manual scraping in Tris-buffered saline on ice and were flash frozen as dry pellet. Cell pellets (15 million cells per pellet) were lysed in 1 ml urea lysis buffer containing 9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche, 1 tablet/10 ml buffer). The samples were sonicated with 3 pulses of 15 s at an amplitude of 20% using a 3 mm probe, with incubation on ice for 1 minute between pulses. After centrifugation for 15 minutes at 20,000 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components, proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The protein concentration was measured using a Bradford assay (Bio-rad) and from each sample 1 mg protein was used to continue the protocol. Samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 10 µg LysC (Wako) (1/100, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were again diluted to 2 M urea and digested with 10 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15 minutes incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 1,780 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on SampliQ SPE C18 cartridges (Agilent). Columns were first washed with 1 ml 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and pre-equilibrated with 3 ml of solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the column. After peptide binding, the column was washed again with 2 ml of solvent A and peptides were eluted twice with 750 µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (20:80, v/v)). 75 µl of the eluate was dried completely in a speedvac vacuum concentrator for shotgun analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis Purified peptides were re-dissolved in 30 µl solvent A and half of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr Maisch, Germany). The peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2% to 56% solvent B (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/ACN (20:80, v/v)) over 145 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 10 min wash reaching 99% solvent B and re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The column temperature was kept constant at 50 °C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation).  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375 to 1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60 000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3 000 000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13 000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100 000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200 to 2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15 000 in the orbitrap analyzer. The S-lens RF level was set at 55, and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states from fragmentation selection. QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of the shotgun data was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the mouse proteins in the Swiss-Prot database (database release version of September 2017 containing 16,931 mouse protein sequences, (http://www.uniprot.org)). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues, acetylation of protein N-termini and phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine residues, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 5,354 proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. 
Further data analysis of the shotgun results was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits, potential contaminants and hits only identified by site were removed, LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit leading to a list of 4,239 quantified proteins that was used for further data analysis. To reveal proteins of which the expression level was significantly regulated between the different conditions, sample groups were defined based on the treatment (Ctrl vs. Treated) and RhoJ expression (with vs. without RhoJ) and a two-way ANOVA test was performed. For each protein, this test calculated a p-value (actually -log p-value) for treatment, a p-value for RhoJ expression and a p-value for the interaction between treatment and RhoJ expression. Proteins with a p-value < 0.05 in at least one of these 3 conditions were considered to be significantly regulated. 99 proteins of interest were selected, the log2 transformed intensities of these proteins were Z-scored and these values were plotted in a heatmap after non-supervised hierarchical clustering.

### Publication Abstract
The resistance of cancer cells to therapy is responsible for the death of most patients with cancer<sup>1</sup>. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been associated with resistance to therapy in different cancer cells<sup>2,3</sup>. However, the mechanisms by which EMT mediates resistance to therapy remain poorly understood. Here, using a mouse model of skin squamous cell carcinoma undergoing spontaneous EMT during tumorigenesis, we found that EMT tumour cells are highly resistant to a wide range of anti-cancer therapies both in vivo and in vitro. Using gain and loss of function studies in vitro and in vivo, we found that RHOJ-a small GTPase that is preferentially expressed in EMT cancer cells-controls resistance to therapy. Using genome-wide transcriptomic and proteomic profiling, we found that RHOJ regulates EMT-associated resistance to chemotherapy by enhancing the response to replicative stress and activating the DNA-damage response, enabling tumour cells to rapidly repair DNA lesions induced by chemotherapy. RHOJ interacts with proteins that regulate nuclear actin, and inhibition of actin polymerization sensitizes EMT tumour cells to chemotherapy-induced cell death in a RHOJ-dependent manner. Together, our study uncovers the role and the mechanisms through which RHOJ acts as a key regulator of EMT-associated resistance to chemotherapy.

### Keywords
Cancer; emt; therapy resistance; rhoj

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Université libre de Buxelles (ULB), Laboratory of Stem Cells and Cancer, 808 route de Lennik, 1070 Brussels, Belgium ; WELBIO, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), 1070 Bruxelles, Belgium

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Cédric Blanpain
Université libre de Buxelles (ULB), Laboratory of Stem Cells and Cancer, 808 route de Lennik, 1070 Brussels, Belgium ; WELBIO, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), 1070 Bruxelles, Belgium


