### Accession
PXD005265

### Title
Colistin resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii MDR-ZJ06 revealed by a multiomics approach

### Description
To explore how multiple drug-resistant A. baumannii response to colistin resistance, we compared the genomic, transcriptional and proteomic profile of A. baumannii MDR-ZJ06 to that of induced colistin resistant strain ZJ06-200P5-1.

### Sample Protocol
A. baumannii MDR-ZJ06 and ZJ06-200P5-1 were grown overnight at 37 oC in LB broth. Strains were subculture 1/100 into fresh LB broth and grown at 37 oC for 2 hr. The cells were collected at 4 oC and sent to Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co. Ltd. The cell pellets were wash twice with PBS, and 500 ?l SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, pH7.6) were added. After being sonicated for 2 min on ice, the cells were centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 30 min at 4 oC. The protein concentration of supernatant were determined by BCA method.  In brief, 300 ?g of proteins were added into 200 ?l UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), and ultrafiltered (Sartorius, 10 kD) with UA buffer. To block reduced cysteine residues, 100 ?l IAA buffer (50 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added, centrifuged at 600 rpm for 1 min, and incubated for 30 min in the dark. The filter were washed twice with 100 ?l UA buffer and twice with 100 ?l Dissolution buffer (50 mM triethylammoniumbicarbonate pH8.5). Finally, the proteins were digested with 2 ?g trypsin (Promega) in 40 ?l Dissolution buffer at 37oC for 16-18h. then, the peptides were collected as a filtrate, and its content was estimated at OD280.

### Data Protocol
For the iTRAQ labelling, the peptides were labelled with the 4-plex iTRAQ reagent followed the manufacturer?s instructions (AB SCIEX). The peptides from MDR-ZJ06 were labelled with 114 and 116 isobaric reagent, and the peptides from ZJ06-200P5-1 were labeled with 115 and 117 isobaric reagent.  RP-HPCL online coupled to MS/MS (LC-MS/MS) analysis of the iTRAQ labelled peptides was carried out on a nanoflow LC system, EASY-nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connetcted to an Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After being reconstituted and acidified with buffer A (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water), A set-up of pre-column and analytical column was used. The pre-column was a 2 cm EASY-column (100 µm, 5 µm C18) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) while the analytical column was a 10 cm EASY-column (75 µm, 3 µm, C18; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The 120 min linear gradient from 0 to 100% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 80 % acetonitrile) at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min was follow: 0-100 min, 0-35% buffer B; 100-108 min, 35-100% buffer B; 108-120 min, 100% buffer B. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300-180 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. The Dynamic exclusion was set to a repeat count of 1 with a 30 s duration. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200, and the resolution for HCD spectra was set to 15,000 at m/z 200. The normalized collision energy was 35 eV, and the underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%.  The MS/MS spectra were searched using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, Londn, UK; version 2.2) against the A. baumannii MDR-ZJ06 fasta database. False discovery rates (FDR) were calculated via running all spectra against the fasta database using the MASCOT software. The following options were used to identify proteins: peptide mass tolerance = 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.1 Da, Enzyme = Trypsin, Max missed cleavages = 2, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ 4plex (N-term), iTRAQ 4plex (K), Variable modification: Oxidation (M). The quantification was performed based on the peak intensities of the reporter ions in the MS/MS spectra. The proteins were considered over express when the iTRAQ ratio was above 1.5, while they were considered under expressed when the iTRAQ ratio was lower than 0.67 [17].

### Publication Abstract
<i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> has emerged as an important opportunistic pathogen due to its ability to acquire resistance to most currently available antibiotics. Colistin is often considered as the last line of therapy for infections caused by multidrug-resistant <i>A. baumannii</i> (MDRAB). However, colistin-resistant <i>A. baumannii</i> strain has recently been reported. To explore how multiple drug-resistant <i>A. baumannii</i> responded to colistin resistance, we compared the genomic, transcriptional and proteomic profile of <i>A. baumannii</i> MDR-ZJ06 to the induced colistin-resistant strain ZJ06-200P5-1. Genomic analysis showed that <i>lpxC</i> was inactivated by IS<i>Aba1</i> insertion, leading to LPS loss. Transcriptional analysis demonstrated that the colistin-resistant strain regulated its metabolism. Proteomic analysis suggested increased expression of the RND efflux pump system and down-regulation of FabZ and &#x3b2;-lactamase. These alterations were believed to be response to LPS loss. In summary, the <i>lpxC</i> mutation not only established colistin resistance but also altered global gene expression.

### Keywords
Colistin; acinetobacter baumannii

### Affiliations
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Xiaoting Hua

### Lab Head
Dr Yunsong Yu
Zhejiang University


