### Accession
PXD020401

### Title
TPL-2 kinase induces phagosome acidification to promote macrophage killing of Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
Tumor Progression Locus 2 (TPL-2) kinase mediates Toll-like Receptor (TLR) activation of ERK1/2 and p38-alpha MAP kinases in myeloid cells to modulate expression of key cytokines in innate immunity. This study identified a novel MAP kinase-independent regulatory function for TPL-2 in phagosome maturation, an essential process for killing of phagocytosed bacteria. TPL-2 catalytic activity was demonstrated to induce phagosome acidification and proteolysis in primary mouse and human macrophages following uptake of latex beads. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed that blocking TPL-2 catalytic activity significantly altered the protein composition of phagosomes, particularly reducing the abundance of V-ATPase proton pump subunits. Furthermore, TPL-2 was shown to stimulate the phosphorylation of DMXL1, a critical regulator of V-ATPases, to induce phagosome acidification. Consistent with these results, TPL-2 catalytic activity was required for phagosome acidification, activation of phagosome acid-sensitive cathepsins and the efficient killing of Staphylococcus aureus following phagocytic uptake by macrophages. These results indicate that TPL-2 controls the innate immune response of macrophages to bacteria via MAP kinase regulation of gene expression and V-ATPase induction of phagosome maturation.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) were isolated from femurs of 6 to 12-week-old mice and used for latex-bead phagosome isolations. Phagosomes were lysed in 5% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 7.5 by sonication, and protein concentration was determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce). Proteins were reduced in 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 30 min at room temperature followed by alkylation in 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min. Samples were processed using S-trap spin columns (ProtiFi) as recommended by the supplier. On column digestion was performed at 47 °C for 2 h using trypsin (1:10) (Pierce). After tryptic digestion, peptides were eluted sequentially using 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.0, followed by 0.2% FA, and finally 0.2% FA, 50% ACN. Peptides were then dried under vacuum. Peptide samples were analysed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Samples were injected on a C18 PepMap trapping column (2 cm x 100 µm ID, C18, 5 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo Scientific) at 300 nL/min. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% FA and Buffer B of 80% ACN, 0.1% FA. Peptides were separated with a linear gradient of 3-35% Buffer B over 160 minutes followed by a step from 35-90% ACN, 0.1% FA in 0.5 min and held at 90% for 4 min. Next, buffer B was decreased to 3% in 0.5 minutes and the column was equilibrated at 3% for 10 min before the next injection. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data dependent, positive ion mode. Precursor scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer in the range of 375-1,500 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. An automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4E5 and an ion injection time of 50 ms was allowed. Precursor ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, and fragmented using HCD with a collision energy of 30%. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z. An AGC target of 5E4 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms was allowed. The number of MS2 events between full scans was determined on-the-fly to maintain a 3 s fixed duty cycle. Dynamic exclusion of ions within a ± 10 ppm m/z window was implemented using a 60 s exclusion duration. An electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV and capillary temperature of 275°C, with no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, was used.

### Data Protocol
All spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 and searched against the SwissProt Mus musculus database. The proteome database was downloaded from Uniprot on 27 July 2017. Peak list generation was performed within MaxQuant and searches were performed using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The enzyme specificity was set to consider fully tryptic peptides. Oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and glutamic acid and aspartic acid conversion to pyro-Glu was allowed as variable modification, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was allowed as a fixed modification. A protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was employed in MaxQuant. Label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm in MaxQuant. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus 1.5.1.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Macrophage; phagosome, Staphylococcus aureus; tpl-2; v-atpase

### Affiliations
Newcastle University
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE24HH, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE24HH, United Kingdom


