### Accession
PXD025753

### Title
MDA-MB-231 MS analysis of ISGylome, GDI2 interactome and total proteome changes in different ISGylation models

### Description
Analysis of ISG15 conjugation (Isgylation)role as driver of poor prognosis in non HER2+ breast cancer tumours. The project includes an analysis of total proteome and ISGylome characterization of MDA-MB-231 cells, wild-type or knock-out for the ISGyltaion associated genes, ISG15, UBE2L6 and USP18. Additionally interactome analysis of the ISGylation target GDI2 was perfored in the same lines.

### Sample Protocol
Whole proteome analysis: Samples were processed using the FASP method (Wisniewski JR et al. 2009). Samples were lysed and sonicated in SDS containing buffer, proteins subjected to sequential proteolysis using Lys-C and Trypsin (both at 1:100). Peptides were desalted using Home-made C18 Stage tips, eluted in 80% Acetonitrile 0.1% TFA, lyophilized and resuspended into a final concentration of 1 mg/ml in 0.1% TFA. 5microliters were injected into the MS. IP experiments: Immunocomplexes were digested in urea buffer with trypsin (0.25µg).Peptides were desalted using Home-made C18 Stage tips, eluted in 80% Acetonitrile 0,1% TFA, lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 12 microliters. 5microliters were injected into the MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed by label-free quantification using the MaxQuant software suite with, carbamidomethyl cysteine set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modification . Whole proteome analysis: normalization by protein loading, Fold change and two tails t-test with minimum peptide detection (2 or more) used to determined altered protein expression. IP: Normalisation by bait and fold change.

### Publication Abstract
ISG15 is an ubiquitin-like modifier that is associated with reduced survival rates in breast cancer patients. The mechanism by which ISG15 achieves this however remains elusive. We demonstrate that modification of Rab GDP-Dissociation Inhibitor Beta (GDI2) by ISG15 (ISGylation) alters endocytic recycling of the EGF receptor (EGFR) in non-interferon stimulated cells using CRISPR-knock out models for ISGylation. By regulating EGFR trafficking, ISGylation enhances EGFR recycling and sustains Akt-signalling. We further show that Akt signalling positively correlates with levels of ISG15 and its E2-ligase in basal breast cancer cohorts, confirming the link between ISGylation and Akt signalling in human tumours. Persistent and enhanced Akt activation explains the more aggressive tumour behaviour observed in human breast cancers. We show that ISGylation can act as a driver of tumour progression rather than merely being a bystander.

### Keywords
Gdi2, Breast cancer, Egfr recycling, Isg15

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre Principal investigator and Mass Spectrometry Facility Manager

### Submitter
Alfonso Bolado

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander von Kriegsheim
Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre Principal investigator and Mass Spectrometry Facility Manager


