### Accession
PXD014105

### Title
Deng Lab RRM2 Acetylation Study

### Description
RRM2 Acetylation Mass Spectrometry Data including PD result files, raw mass spectrometry data and curated results.

### Sample Protocol
IP beads in-solution digestion with LysC and Trypsin.  Fusion mass spectrometer with IT MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Use of Proteome Discoverer Suite version 2.1 against Uniprot human database

### Publication Abstract
Ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) catalyzes the de novo synthesis of deoxyribonucleoside diphosphates (dNDPs) to provide dNTP precursors for DNA synthesis. Here, we report that acetylation and deacetylation of the RRM2 subunit of RNR acts as a molecular switch that impacts RNR activity, dNTP synthesis, and DNA replication fork progression. Acetylation of RRM2 at K95 abrogates RNR activity by disrupting its homodimer assembly. RRM2 is directly acetylated by KAT7, and deacetylated by Sirt2, respectively. Sirt2, which level peak in S phase, sustains RNR activity at or above a threshold level required for dNTPs synthesis. We also find that radiation or camptothecin-induced DNA damage promotes RRM2 deacetylation by enhancing Sirt2-RRM2 interaction. Acetylation of RRM2 at K95 results in the reduction of the dNTP pool, DNA replication fork stalling, and the suppression of tumor cell growth in vitro and in vivo. This study therefore identifies acetylation as a regulatory mechanism governing RNR activity.

### Keywords
Deng rrm2 acetylation

### Affiliations
Emory University
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Xingming Deng
Emory University


