### Accession
PXD032224

### Title
Increased microtubule growth is required for extracellular vesicle mediated HER2 paracrine signaling to promote melanoma cancer cell invasion

### Description
The acquisition of cell invasiveness is the key transition from benign melanocyte hyperplasia to aggressive melanoma. Recent work using non-melanoma cancer cells has provided an intriguing new link between the presence of supernumerary centrosomes and increased cell invasion. Moreover, supernumerary centrosomes were shown to drive non-cell-autonomous invasion of cancer cells. Although centrosomes are the principle microtubule organizing centers the role of dynamic microtubules for non-cell-autonomous invasion remains unexplored, in particular in melanoma. We investigated the role of supernumerary centrosomes and dynamic microtubules in melanoma cell invasion and found that highly invasive melanoma cells are characterized by the presence of supernumerary centrosomes and by increased microtubule growth rates, both of which are functionally interlinked. We demonstrate that enhanced microtubule growth is required for increased 3D melanoma cell invasion. Moreover, we show that the activity to enhance microtubule growth can be transferred to adjacent non-invasive cells through extracellular vesicles harboring HER2 that are required for increased cell invasion of melanoma cells into 3D matrices. Hence, our study suggests that suppressing microtubule growth, either directly using anti-microtubule drugs or through HER2 inhibitors might be therapeutically beneficial to inhibit cell invasiveness and thus, metastasis of malignant melanoma.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis extracellular vesicles (EVs) were isolated from non-invasive SK-Mel-173 cells with or without PLK4 overexpression as described above. EVs were resuspended in lysis buffer (6 M guanidinium chloride, 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine(TCEP), 40 mM CAA chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5) and incubated for 10 min at 96 °C. Samples were sonicated 5 min in a sonication water bath (Bandelin Sonorex) and protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). 25 μg of protein was diluted tenfold with digestion buffer (10 % acetonitrile, 25 mM Tris pH 8.5)was digested with LysC (1:50 w/w, Wako, Germany) and trypsin (1:50 w/w, Sigma, Germany)for 16 h at 37 °C. Soluble peptides were desalted, samples were vacuum dried and resolubilized in buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in MS grade water). Peptides were separated by nano-high pressure liquid chromatography (nano-HPLC) on an Easy nLC 1200 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and sprayed directly into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany).

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed using MaxQuant Version 1.6.17. To identify proteins enriched in EV from SK-MEL 173 cells overexpressing PLK4 compared to cells transfected with the control vector, label-free quantified intensities were filtered to contain at least five valid values in total. Missing values were imputed and a modified t-test implemented in Perseus witha permutation-based FDR control was used to call significantly up- or downregulated  proteins (FDR=0.05, S0=1) as described previously.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Paracrine signaling, Microtubule

### Affiliations
Technical University Kaiserslautern
Molecular Genetics, Technical University Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Räschle
Molecular Genetics, Technical University Kaiserslautern


