### Accession
PXD035873

### Title
Integrated omics reveal time-resolved insights into T4 phage infection of E. coli on proteome and transcriptome level

### Description
Bacteriophages are highly abundant viruses of bacteria. The major role of phages in microbial ecology to shape bacterial communities and their emerging medical potential as antibacterial agents have triggered a rebirth of phage research. It is of particular interest to understand the molecular mechanisms by which phages gain control over their host. Omics technologies such as next-generation sequencing and protein-profiling technologies can provide novel insights into transcriptional and translational events occurring during the infection process. Thereby, the temporal organization of the transcriptome and proteome of the phage and their bacterial hosts can be monitored. In this study, we performed next-generation sequencing and proteomics to study the transcriptome and proteome of the T4 phage and its host during the infection in a time-resolved manner. Our data shows the temporally resolved appearance of bacteriophage T4 transcripts and proteins, confirming previously described subgrouping of T4 gene products into early, middle and late infection phases. We observe specific early transcripts giving rise to middle or late proteins indicating the existence of previously not reported post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms controlling the translation of T4 mRNAs. Moreover, we investigated the stability of E. coli-originated transcripts and proteins in the course of infection, identifying degradation of E. coli transcripts and preservation of the host proteome. This study provides the first comprehensive insights into the transcriptomic and proteomic takeover by the bacteriophage T4, exemplifying the power and value of high-throughput technologies to simultaneously characterize multiple gene expression events. Moreover, we created a user-friendly application available to the entire scientific community to access gene expression patterns for their host and phage genes of interest.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS (liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry) analysis was performed on an Exploris 480 instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 rapid-separation liquid chromatography (RSLC) nano instrument and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out on a reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) column (75 μm x 42 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.4 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH). First, peptides were loaded on a C18 precolumn (preconcentration set-up), For total proteome analysis, peptide elution was performed in backflush mode with a separating gradient from 98 % solvent A (0.15 % formic acid) and 2 % solvent B (99.85 % ACN, 0.15 % formic acid) to 25 % solvent B over 40 min, followed by up to 60 min with 25 % to 35 % of solvent B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Label-free quantification (LFQ) data sets of total proteomes were performed in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. A high-resolution MS 1 scan at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200) was acquired with a scan range from 350 to 1650 m/z, followed by MS/MS scans within 2s (Cycle 2s) of the most intense ions at a resolution of 15,000. Charge state inclusion was set between 2 and 6. The ion accumulation time was set to 25 ms for MS and AUTO for MS/MS. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 300 % for MS survey scans and 200 % for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
DDA-LFQ analysis was performed using MaxQuant in standard settings using an E.coli (Proteome: UP000000625) and Bacteriophage T4 (Proteome: UP000009087) fusion database. The “proteinGroups.txt” MaxQuant output file was further evaluated with the SafeQuant R script updated to modify MaxQuant outputs.

### Publication Abstract
Measuring host-bacteriophage dynamics is an important approach to understanding bacterial survival functions and responses to infection. The model <i>Microviridae</i> bacteriophage &#x3c6;X174 is endemic to the human gut and has been studied for over 70 years, but the host response to infection has never been investigated in detail. To address this gap in our understanding of this important interaction within our microbiome, we have measured host <i>Escherichia coli</i> C proteomic and transcriptomic response to &#x3c6;X174 infection. We used mass spectrometry and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to identify and quantify all 11 &#x3c6;X174 proteins and over 1,700 <i>E. coli</i> proteins, enabling us to comprehensively map host pathways involved in &#x3c6;X174 infection. Most notably, we see significant host responses centered on membrane damage and remodeling, cellular chaperone and translocon activity, and lipoprotein processing, which we speculate is due to the peptidoglycan-disruptive effects of the &#x3c6;X174 lysis protein E on MraY activity. We also observe the massive upregulation of small heat shock proteins IbpA/B, along with other heat shock pathway chaperones, and speculate on how the specific characteristics of holdase protein activity may be beneficial for viral infections. Together, this study enables us to begin to understand the proteomic and transcriptomic host responses of <i>E. coli</i> to <i>Microviridae</i> infections and contributes insights to the activities of this important model host-phage interaction.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> A major part of the healthy human gut microbiome is the <i>Microviridae</i> bacteriophage, exemplified by the model &#x3c6;X174 phage, and their <i>E. coli</i> hosts. Although much has been learned from studying &#x3c6;X174 over the last half-century, until this work, the <i>E. coli</i> host response to infection has never been investigated in detail. We reveal the proteomic and transcriptomic pathways differentially regulated during the &#x3c6;X174 infection cycle and uncover the details of a coordinated cellular response to membrane damage that results in increased lipoprotein processing and membrane trafficking, likely due to the phage antibiotic-like lysis protein. We also reveal that small heat shock proteins IbpA/B are massively upregulated during infection and that these holdase chaperones are highly conserved across the domains of life, indicating that reliance on them is likely widespread across viruses.

### Keywords
E.coli, Bateriophage t4

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Marburg Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Marburg Germany


