### Accession
PXD005407

### Title
Tumor suppressor TAp73 is required to maintain pluripotency of cancer stem cells

### Description
Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are resistant to conventional chemotherapy and are hence responsible for cancer relapse. Pluripotency is a characteristic of CSCs which allows them to rapidly proliferate while maintaining the ability to differentiate into various lineages. We found that TAp73, but not its homologue p53, is required for the pluripotency of CSCs. TAp73 knockdown (KD) decreased SOD1 levels, increased ROS production and disturbed metabolism which induced differentiation and abrogated pluripotency in CSCs. TAp73 related decrease in pluripotency is linked to increased autophagy and senescence in CSCs. Furthermore, TAp73 KD also decreased the levels of pluripotency factor Sox-2 within heterogeneous cancer cell lines. Interestingly, TAp73-deficient CSCs strongly lose tumorigenic potential in mice and tumors that did form had significantly lower levels of SOD1 and pluripotency marker Oct4. Our findings reveal a unique role of TAp73 in CSCs development that is important to consider while devising future therapeutic strategies against cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Pelleted cells were lysed in 2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.5) containing complete mini protease inhibitor mixture (1 tablet per 10 ml) (Roche). Lysis was performed using a probe sonicator for 12 sec on ice. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 13 000 x g for 5 min and protein concentrations were determined using a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher). Cysteine residues were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol for 40 min at room temperature, then alkylated using 14 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min in the dark followed by methanol chloroform precipitation. Protein was resuspended in 8M Urea, 50 mM Tris and protein concentration was assessed using a BCA assay. Aliquots containing 100 μg of protein were diluted to 1M Urea, 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and digested overnight with trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:100 trypsin/protein, then again at a ratio of 1:100 trypsin/protein for 4 hrs. Digested peptides were desalted using 60 mg solid-phase C18 extraction cartridges (Waters) and lyophilized. Dried peptides were labelled using 10-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher) as previously described (Murphy et al., 2015). Samples were mixed equally, desalted using solid-phase C18 extraction cartridges (Waters), and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
TMT10-labeled samples were fractionated using high-pH reversed phase chromatography performed with an Onyx monolithic 100 x 4.6 mm C18 column (Phenomenex). The flow rate was 800 μL/min and a gradient of 5% to 40% acetonitrile (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8) was applied over 60 min using an Agilent 1100 pump (Agilent) from which 12 fractions were collected. Fractions were desalted using homemade stage-tips as previously described (Rappsilber et al., 2003) and lyophilized. Each fraction was analyzed using an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) using an MS3 method as previously described (Ting et al., 2011). Protein identification was performed using a database search against a human proteome database (downloaded from UniprotKB September, 2014) concatenated to a database of common proteomic contaminants. All FDR filtering and protein quantitation was performed as previously described (Murphy et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stem cells, P73

### Affiliations
Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University
Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Patrick Murphy

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Shashi Gujar
Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University


