### Accession
PXD033331

### Title
Proteomic analysis of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) exposed to microplastics

### Description
The pollution of the environment with microplastics has been recognized as an emerging threat worldwide. Due to an exponential increase in production of plastic over the last eight decades and its longevity in the environment, accumulating amounts of microplastic are polluting rivers, lakes and the ocean. Their entry pathways are diverse and still only incompletely understood. Since microplastics are usually defined smaller than 5 mm, it can be ingested by a wide range of aquatic organisms including teleost fish. There are different approaches to study the detrimental effects of pollutants on aquatic organisms. On the one hand, generic baseline parameters such as growth and mortality are regularly considered, often accompanied by established stress parameters such as cortisol, heat shock proteins or lipid oxidation. The conflicting findings to date suggest that these parameters might not be sensitive enough to indicate the physiological effects of environmentally relevant microplastic concentrations. For this reason, more sophisticated biological approaches could provide new insights into whether and how microplastics harm fish. To date, proteomic approaches have been used only sporadically when investigating the effects of microplastic exposure on aquatic organisms. So far, this approach has not been used to address potential microplastic impacts in fish. In the present study, a proteomic approach was trialed alongside established methods in an investigation of fish experiencing long-term exposure to environmentally relevant concentrations of microplastics. Two groups of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss were exposed to microplastic concentrations and sizes currently encountered in wild fish and an increased concentration, expected to occur in the near future. These groups where compared to a control group maintained in MP free conditions. Five fish of each treatment were sampled at three time points (week 1, week 4, week 17). The experiments were performed in triplicates, resulting in 45 samples used in the proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion using pressure cycling technology (PCT): For each individual the liver was dissected and cleaned with 1x PBS (phosphate-buffered saline). The tissue was then dried with a cloth and stored in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes at -80 °C. The samples were prepared by measuring 0.2 to 1.1 mg of tissue into a 150 µL FEP (fluorinated ethylene propylene) MicroTube (Pressure BioSciences Inc., South Easton, USA) with 30 µL of freshly prepared lysis buffer (8 M Urea; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA). 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), 1x complete protease Inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) were then added and the tubes sealed using a PTFE (polytetraflouroethylene) MicroCap (50 µL, PBI). Tubes were placed in the Barocycler (NEP2320; Pressure BioSciences Inc., South Easton, USA) and pressure alternated for 60 cycles according to the following plan: high pressure (45 000 psi) for 50 s followed by ambient pressure for 10 s. The temperature of the reaction chamber was maintained at a steady 33 °C using a circulating water bath. The MicroTubes were sonicated for 20 s in a water bath sonicator (VWR, Radnor, USA). The MicroCap was removed and Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and iodoacetamide (IAA; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) were added to a final concentration of 10 mM and 40 mM, respectively. The solutions were mixed by pipetting up and down and the tubes were then sealed with the MicroCap and incubated for 30 min at 25 °C in a Thermo Shaker (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at 600 rpm. The samples were diluted to 6 M Urea with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals Europe GmbH, Neuss, Germany) was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:40 w/w. The tubes were placed in the Barocycler and pressure in the tube was alternated for 45 cycles of high pressure (20 000 psi) for 50 s followed by ambient pressure for 10 s, again at 33 °C. The samples were diluted to 1.6 M Urea with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate and Trypsin (Promega) in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 w/w. The tubes were sealed using a 150 µL MicroCap and placed in the Barocycler. Pressure in the tube was alternated for 90 cycles of high pressure (20 000 si) for 50 s followed by ambient pressure for 10 s, at 33 °C. The samples were transferred to a fresh 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Honeywell, Charlotte, USA) to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were cleaned with C18 Stagetip (selfmade). The samples were dried and re-solubilized in 3 % acetonitrile (ACN; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and 0.1 % formic acid (FA; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) for MS analysis and the peptide concentration was normalized by with Nanodrop (DS-F11 FX+; DeNovix, Wilmington, USA; Abs at 280 nm).  Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis: Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective, Littleton, USA) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Ultra-Performance Liquid Chromatography; Waters, Milford, USA). Solvent compositions in the two channels were 0.1 % formic acid for channel A and 0.1 % formic acid, 99.9 % acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample, 3 μL of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm; Waters, Milford, USA) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters, Milford, USA). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 8 to 27 % B in 85 min, 35 % B in 5 min and 80 % B in 1 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectrum (350−1,400 m/z) at a resolution of 120 000 at 200 m/z, after accumulation to a target value of 3 000 000, followed by HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation on the twenty most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15 000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100 000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled. Single, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 250 000 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200. The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS;Türker et al. 2010).

### Data Protocol
In order to analyse the results of the LFQ, protein fold changes were computed based on peptide intensity values reported by MaxQuant, using linear mixed-effects models (Bates et al., 2015). The reported peptide intensities were pre-processed as follows: all proteins with only one identified peptide and intensities equal zero were removed. Non-zero intensities were log2 transformed and modified using robust z-score transformation (using the median and median average deviation). For each protein, a linear mixed-effects model was fitted to the peptide intensities: medpolish ~ Sampling time * Exposure level. Fold changes and p-values for each contrast were computed using the R package lmerTest (Kuznetsova et al., 2017) and filtered for Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR; Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) to adjust p-values (hereafter referred to as q-value). An overview of all computed contrasts is provided in Table S3. To estimate fold-changes for proteins for which a mixed-effects model could not have been fitted because of an excess in missing measurements, the mean intensity of all peptides for each condition was computed first. For the proteins with no measurements in that condition, the peptide intensities were imputed using the mean of the 10 % smallest average peptide intensities calculated in step one. Afterward, the contrasts (differences between conditions) for each peptide were computed. Finally, the median of the peptide estimates was used to provide a per protein fold change estimate (pseudo estimate). Only proteins with fold-change values > ǀ2ǀ were considered as “differentially expressed”. These proteins (with unique UniprotIDs) were re-annotated using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool for amino-acid sequences (BLASTP) tolerating only > 80 % sequence coverage and identity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Q exactive hf-x, Liver, Rainbow trout, Microplastics, Oncorhynchus mykiss

### Affiliations
Fisheries Research Station Baden-Württemberg
Agricultural Center Baden-Württemberg, Fisheries Research Station, Germany

### Submitter
Samuel Roch

### Lab Head
Dr Samuel Roch
Agricultural Center Baden-Württemberg, Fisheries Research Station, Germany


