### Accession
PXD012712

### Title
Absolute quantification of cohesin and its regulators in human cells

### Description
The organisation of mammalian genomes into loops and topologically associated domains (TADs) regulates gene expression. The formation and maintenance of loops and TADs depends on the protein complex cohesin, which also holds replicated sister chromatids together from S phase until mitosis. To understand how cohesin functions, it is essential to know how many cohesin complexes and regulators exist in a typical cell and how they are distributed genome-wide. Here, we have used quantitative mass spectrometry, fluorescence-correlation spectroscopy and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching to measure the absolute number and dynamics of core subunits and regulators of the cohesin complex in human cells. We find that 60000 – 134000 cohesin complexes are bound to chromatin per G1 HeLa cell, suggesting that cohesin most likely does not occupy all its binding sites concurrently. We incorporate our data into mathematical models and discuss implications for how cohesin might contribute to genome organisation and sister chromatid cohesion.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture HeLa Kyoto cells were cultured as described previously (Nishiyama et al, 2010). Cells were synchronized in G2 phase by a double thymidine block (24h block in 2 mM thymidine, 8h release and 16h block in 2 mM thymidine) followed by a 6h release into G2 phase. Cells were synchronized in Prometaphase by a double thymidine block followed by a 6h release and a 4h block in Prometaphase using a final concentration of 100 ng/ml nocodazole. Prometaphase cells were harvested by shake off. Cells were synchronized in G1 phase using the same procedure as described for Prometaphase cells, but after mitotic shake off, cells were washed twice and cultured for a further 6h. Cells were counted using a CASY counter (Schärfe, D) and cells counts were verified by manual counting.  Preparation of soluble and chromatin extracts 2e7 cells in G1, G2 and Prometaphase were re-suspended in 0.5 ml lysis buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.2% NP40, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM sodium butyrate, 1 mM EDTA and protease inhibitor cocktail) and cells were lysed with 20 strokes using a dounce homogenizer. Chromatin and soluble fractions were separated by centrifugation at 1000 g for 3 min at 4°C. The soluble supernatant was centrifuged for a further 20 min at 20000 g at 4°C (soluble extract). The chromatin pellet was washed by resuspension in 1 ml lysis buffer and centrifugation at 1000 g for 3 min at 4 oC. Washing was repeated for a total of 10 times. The chromatin pellet was then re-suspended in 250 μl nuclease buffer (lysis buffer complimented with a final concentration of 0.04 units/μl micrococcal nuclease, 0.1 mg/ml RNase A, 20 mM CaCl2 and 0.04 μl Turbo DNase per μl nuclease buffer), incubated for 2 h at 4°C and for 15 min at 37°C and finally centrifuged at 20000 g for 5 min (chromatin extract). 90% of soluble and chromatin extracts were used for immunoprecipitation and 10% (corresponding to 2e6 cells) were precipitated using acetone. To compensate for losses during acetone precipitation the protein concentration was measured before and after precipitation using Bradford reagent (on average 17% loss). The protein pellets were resuspended in 1 ml 500 mM tetraethylammonium chloride (TEAB, Fluka) (soluble extract) and 50 μl 500 mM TEAB (chromatin extract), respectively. Proteolysis of soluble and chromatin total cell extracts was performed using a double digest protocol. After reduction in 1mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 56°C for 30 min and alkylation in 2 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Fluka) for 30 min, proteins were digested with 500 ng LysC per 20 μl extract (Wako, Richmond, VA) at 37°C for 4h. Proteins were then digested with 500 ng trypsin per 20 μl extract (MS grade trypsin gold, Promega) for 16h at 37°C.  Absolute quantification of cohesin in total cell extracts using SRM on 5500 QTRAP Immediately before LC-SRM analysis digested soluble and chromatin cell extracts were labeled with the light version of the mTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For quantification in total soluble extracts, 1.5 μg (experiment 1) and 2 μg (experiment 2) of HeLa extract were used. The mTRAQ light-labeled extract was spiked with heavy labeled reference peptides (2.5 and 5 fmol for the soluble extract and 10 fmol for the chromatin extract). Samples were then separated on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano-HPLC equipped with a C18 PepMap100 column (75 μm ID × 500 mm length, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size) (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) using the following gradient of solvents A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and B (80% ACN, 10% TFE, 0.08% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min: from 2%B to 40% B over 300 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in scheduled SRM mode with the following parameters: Multiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM) detection window of 360 sec, target scan time of 2.5 sec, curtain gas of 20, ion source gas 1 of 15, declustering potential of 75, entrance potential of 10. Q1 and Q3 were set to unit resolution. The pause between mass ranges was set to 2.5 ms. Three SRM transitions per peptide were monitored.   Immunoprecipitation of cohesin complexes Immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed as described (Holzmann et al 2011). In brief, extracts were incubated on a rotary shaker with 30 μl SCC1 antibody-conjugated beads for 2h at 4°C. Beads were then collected by centrifugation and washed three times with 30 beads volume lysis buffer and three times with 30 beads volume lysis buffer minus detergent and protease inhibitor. Finally, beads were washed once with 30 bead volumes of 5 mM Hepes pH 7.8 and 150 mM NaCl. 10 μl of beads were used for elution with 0.2 M glycine pH 2.0 and analyzed using SDS-PAGE. 20 μl of beads were re-suspended with 40 μl 500 mM TEAB buffer and subjected to protease elution essentially as described (Holzmann et al 2011). Proteolysis was performed using a double digest protocol using LysC and trypsin (Holzmann et al 2011).

### Data Protocol
SRM data analysis SRM data was analyzed in Skyline (version 2.5.0.6157). Peptides were quantified based on the height of the elution apex to prevent incomplete quantification due to partially covered elution peaks within the scheduled measurements. Transitions were manually reviewed, and low-quality transitions retracted from subsequent quantification. Quantitative results were further analyzed in R (version 3.4.3).  Analysis of shotgun proteomics data For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific). All MS/MS spectra were searched using MS Amanda (Search Engine Version 2.2.6.11097) (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679-84). RAW-files were searched against the human swissprot database (2017-04-02; 20.153 sequences; 11,315.842 residues), using following search parameters: The peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 0.8 Da. Trypsin was specified as proteolytic enzyme, cleaving after lysine and arginine except when followed by proline. The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation on methionine was set as variable modification. Proteins were grouped applying strict parsimony principle and filtered to 1 % FDR on PSM and protein level using Percolator algorithm (Käll L. et al., Nat. Methods. 2007 Nov; 4(11):923-5) as integrated in Proteome Discoverer. Proteins identified by single spectra were removed.

### Publication Abstract
The organisation of mammalian genomes into loops and topologically associating domains (TADs) contributes to chromatin structure, gene expression and recombination. TADs and many loops are formed by cohesin and positioned by CTCF. In proliferating cells, cohesin also mediates sister chromatid cohesion, which is essential for chromosome segregation. Current models of chromatin folding and cohesion are based on assumptions of how many cohesin and CTCF molecules organise the genome. Here we have measured absolute copy numbers and dynamics of cohesin, CTCF, NIPBL, WAPL and sororin by mass spectrometry, fluorescence-correlation spectroscopy and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching in HeLa cells. In G1-phase, there are ~250,000 nuclear cohesin complexes, of which ~ 160,000 are chromatin-bound. Comparison with chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing data implies that some genomic cohesin and CTCF enrichment sites are unoccupied in single cells at any one time. We discuss the implications of these findings for how cohesin can contribute to genome organisation and cohesion.

### Keywords
Genome organization, Cell cycle, Sister chromatid cohesion, Cohesin, Mass spectrometry, Fluorescence-correlation spectroscopy

### Affiliations
GMI/IMP/IMBA
IMP - Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Gerhard Dürnberger

### Lab Head
Dr Jan-Michael Peters
IMP - Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria


