### Accession
PXD014241

### Title
MFSD1 KO Liver - Lysosomes are a major site of intracellular acidic hydrolase-mediated proteolysis and cellular degradation

### Description
Lysosomes are a major site of intracellular acidic hydrolase-mediated proteolysis and cellular degradation. The export of low-molecular catabolic end products from the lysosomal lumen to the cytosol is facilitated by polytopic transmembrane proteins which mediate secondary active or passive transport. One of these proteins is MFSD1, a so far uncharacterized lysosomal 12 transmembrane domain-containing family member of the major facilitator superfamily. MFSD1 is, uncommon for a lysosomal membrane protein, not N-glycosylated. It contains a dileucine-based sorting motif that is essential for its transport to lysosomes. Lysosomes from mouse liver of MFSD1 knock-out mice were isolated and analyzed by TMT labelling, as well as whole liver protein extracts, both in comparison to wildtype controls.

### Sample Protocol
Subcellular fractionation. Lysosomes were isolated from the mouse liver as described previously (Markmann et al., 2017). Mice were injected with 4 μl/g bodyweight of a 17% (w/v in 0.9% NaCl) Triton WR1339 solution (Sigma Aldrich) 3 days prior to sacrifice. T homogenized in five volumes of ice-cold 0.25 m sucrose with three strokes with a Potter-Elvejhem homogenizer. Homogenates were centrifuged at 1000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and the pellet resuspended, followed by another centrifugation step at 1000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. Both supernatants were pooled (post nuclear supernatant, PNS) and centrifuged in an ultracentrifuge at 56,000 × g (70.1 Ti rotor, Beckmann, Coulter, Indianapolis, IN) for 7 min at 4 °C. After re-homogenization of the pellet with 0.25 m sucrose followed by another ultracentrifugation step, the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was resuspended in sucrose solution with a density of 1.21 (resulting in the ML-fraction, representing the mitochondrial-lysosomal fraction). The ML fraction (∼3.5 ml) was overlaid with 2.5 ml of sucrose solutions of 1.15, 1.14, and finally 1.06 density yielding a discontinuous sucrose gradient. The discontinuous gradient was centrifuged at 110,000 × g for 150 min in a swinging bucket rotor (SW41 Ti rotor, Beckmann Coulter), lysosomes / tritosomes were collected at the interphase between ρ 1.14 and 1.06 sucrose (F2-fraction). Sample preparation and tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling was performed as described (Koch and Dahl, 2018). In brief, 100 μg of tritosome fractions isolated from three wildtype and MFSD1 KO livers were digested by in-solution digest onto centrifugal filter units. Proteins were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol and thiol groups were alkylated with 40 mM acrylamide for 30 min at room temperature. 1 μg trypsin was added and digested overnight at 37°C. Peptides were collected in the filtrate and SDC was precipitated with TFA. Peptides were vacuum concentrated, redissolved in 20 mM TEAB, and labeled with isobaric TMTsixplex reagents (ThermoFisher Darmstadt, Germany). Peptides were pooled and desalted on Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). Eluates containing 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA) were dried and fractionated to 12 fractions by isoelectric point with an Offgel fractionator (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). Peptide pool fractions were dried and stored at -20°C. Peptide pool fractions were injected onto a C18 trap column (20 mm length, 100 μm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) made in-house. Bound peptides were eluted onto a C18 analytical column and separated during a linear gradient from 4% to 35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) within 120 min at 250 nl/min. The nanoHPLC was coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptide ions between 330 and 1600 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 30,000 followed by fragmentation of the 22 most intense precursor ions in the ion trap part of the instrument.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing and analysis of database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.1.1.21 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was done with an in house Mascot server version 2.5.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). MS2 data were searched against Swissprot database swissprot_2015_11 containing 549832 sequences, taxonomy: Mus Musculus. Precursor ion m/z tolerance was 8 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.02 Da. Tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages were searched. Propionamide on cysteines and TMT on N-terminus and lysine were set as static modifications. Oxidation was allowed as dynamic modification of methionine, acetylation as modification of the N-terminus. Mascot results were assigned posterior error probabilities (PEP) by the percolator algorithm version 2.05 as implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Spectra with identifications below 1% PEP were sent to a second round of database search with semitryptic enzyme specificity (one missed cleavage allowed) and dynamic propionamide modification. Other parameters were the same as the first round search. Proteins were included if at least two peptides were identified with <1% FDR. Only PSMs with co-isolation<10% and unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver, Lysosome, Mfsd1

### Affiliations
University Hospital Bonn Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology  Nussallee 11 53115 Bonn Germany
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University Bonn, Germany 

### Submitter
Melanie Thelen

### Lab Head
Dr Melanie Thelen
University Hospital Bonn Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology  Nussallee 11 53115 Bonn Germany


