### Accession
PXD009525

### Title
Dual-function thermogelling polymers as effective endotamponade for retinal detachment repair and reassembly of vitreous-like body in-situ

### Description
Endo-tamponade agents are crucial surgical adjuncts for vitreo-retinal surgery. Current clinical agents provide internal tamponade through buoyancy forces requiring the need for prolonged facing down post-operative positioning. Other disadvantages include temporary loss of vision, raised intra-ocular pressure, cataract formation and a need for an additional removal surgery. Therein lies an unmet clinical need to develop alternative biomaterials to overcome these key challenges. We describe a biocompatible and biodegradable thermogelling polymer which provides an internal tamponade effect through surface tension and viscosity. Furthermore, we demonstrate its surgical efficacy in the repair of retinal detachment in a non-human primate model. By three-month post-surgery, the thermogel undergoes biodegradation, and is replaced by a vitreous-like body, thereby mimicking the biophysical needs of the natural vitreous body. In summary, we demonstrate the potential superiority of our thermogel compared to current vitreous tamponade gold standards; and present a significant advancement in the use of biomaterials for vitreo-retinal surgery.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of vitreous proteome Protein Digestion and MS analysis Equal amount of vitreous proteins from three biological replicates of non-operated eye (native), EPC reformed vitreous at 1, 2, 3 and 6 months post-surgery, and BSS reformed vitreous  at 1, 2 and 3 months-post surgery were subjected to in-solution digestion. Briefly, proteins were denatured in 1% sodium deoxycholate/100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.0), followed by reduction (5 mM DTT, RT, 30 mins) and alkylation (10 mM IAA, RT, 30 mins in dark). The proteins were then subjected to overnight digestion with LysC (Wako) with a protease to protein ratio of 1:100 and incubated overnight at 37 °C overnight. Thereafter, sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) at a protease to protein ratio of 1:50 was added and incubated at 37 °C for 8 hrs. The resultant peptide solutions were acidified and centrifuged at 20 000 × g for 15 mins to remove sodium deoxycholate. The peptide solutions were further desalted by using C18-SD cartridge (3 M Empore).   LC/MS/MS  Reconstituted peptides were quantitated by using Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 2ug of peptides from each sample spiked with 0.25ug of MassPREP E.coli digested standard was analyzed  on an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were resolved and separated on a 50 cm analytical EASY-Spray column equipped with pre-column over a 180-min gradient ranging from 5 to 36% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 310–1510) were acquired with a resolution of 120k, an AGC target of 5 × 105, and a maximum injection time of 200 ms. The MS/MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 15k, an AGC target of 3 × 104, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, first mass filter set at m/z of 150, and dynamic exclusion set at 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data was processed by MaxQuant version 1.5.0.30 using the UniProt rabbit FASTA database with 21269 entries (UniProt release 2017_02) and with UniProt E.coli FASTA database (for normalization). Maximum false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 0.01 for both protein and peptide. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using default parameters of the MaxLFQ algorithm with match between run feature enabled and minimum ratio count set to 1. Protein was considered to be identified when supported by at least one unique or razor peptide. Data was normalized based on normalization factors obtained from total LFQ intensities of spiked-in E.coli proteins in each sample. The protein list was further filtered to only include proteins that were identified and quantified in all three biological replicates. The data was log transformed for all subsequent analysis. Missing values were imputed in each sample based on random numbers from a normal distribution to represent intensities from low abundant protein in Perseus software environment.

### Publication Abstract
Internal-tamponade agents are crucial surgical adjuncts in vitreoretinal surgery. Clinically used endotamponade agents act through buoyancy forces, yet can result in prolonged post-operative positioning, temporary loss of vision, raised intra-ocular pressure, cataract formation or the need for additional removal surgery. Here, we describe a thermogelling polymer that provides an internal tamponade effect through surface tension and swelling counter-forces. We tested the long-term biocompatibility of the polymer endotamponade in rabbit vitrectomy models, and its surgical efficacy and biocompatibility in a non-human primate retinal-detachment model. We also show that, while the thermogel biodegrades during the three months following surgery, it promotes the reformation of a vitreous-like body that mimics the biophysical properties of the natural vitreous. The thermogelling endotamponade might serve as a long-term vitreous substitute.

### Keywords
Eye, Vitreous, Thermogelling polymer, Rabbit, Retinal detachment repair

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
IMCB

### Submitter
Asfa Alli Shaik

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha GUNARATNE
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore


