### Accession
PXD020710

### Title
Multiple drug-induced stress responses inhibit formation of Escherichia coli biofilms

### Description
In most ecosystems, bacteria primarily exist as structured surface-associated biofilms that can be highly tolerant to antibiotics and thus represent an important health issue. Here we explored drug repurposing as a strategy to identify new antibiofilm compounds, screening over 1000 compounds from the Prestwick Chemical Library of approved drugs for specific activities that prevent biofilm formation by Escherichia coli. Most growth-inhibiting compounds, which include known antibacterial but also antiviral and other drugs, had also reduced biofilm formation. However, we also identified several drugs that were biofilm-inhibitory at doses where only weak or no effect on planktonic growth could be observed. Activities of the most specific antibiofilm compounds were further characterized using gene expression analysis, proteomics and microscopy. We observed that most of these drugs acted by repressing genes responsible for production of curli, major component of E. coli biofilm matrix. This repression apparently occurred through induction of several different stress responses, including DNA and cell-wall damage, and homeostasis of divalent cations, demonstrating that biofilm formation can be inhibited through a variety of molecular mechanisms. One tested drug, tyloxapol, inhibited biofilm formation independent of curli expression or growth, by suppressing bacterial attachment at the surface.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed with the same amount of PBS and then lysed by incubation with 100 μl of 2% sodium-lauroyl-sarcosinate (SLS) solution at 95°C for 15 min and subsequent sonication (Vial Tweeter, Hielscher, Germany). Cell lysates were then reduced by adding 5 mM Tris (2- caboxyethyl) phosphine and incubating at 95°C for 15 minutes followed by alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at 25°C). Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation and the total protein was estimated for each sample with Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Cell lysate containing 50 µg total protein was then digested with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) overnight at 30°C in 2% SLS and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for each sample. Next, SLS was removed by precipitation with 1.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifugation. Peptides were purified using C18 microspin columns according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Harvard Apparatus, USA).   Purified peptides were dried, resuspended in 0.1% TFA and analyzed using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry carried out on a Q-Exactive Plus instrument connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano with a Prowflow upgrade and a nanospray flex ion source (all Thermo Scientific, Germany). Peptide separation was performed on a reverse phase HPLC column (75 μm x 42 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (2.4 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The following separating gradient was used: 98% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 2% solvent B (99.85% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 25% solvent B over 105 minutes and to 35% B for additional 35 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 full width at half maximum (at m/z 200) followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most intense ions. To increase the efficiency of MS/MS attempts, the charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 seconds. The ion accumulation time was set to 50 ms for MS and 50 ms at 17,500 resolution for MS/MS. The automatic gain control was set to 3x106 for MS survey scans and 1x105 for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification (LFQ) of the data was performed as described previously (54, 55). In short, for LFQ the raw data was loaded into Progenesis (Version 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics) and exported .mgf files searched by MASCOT (Version 2.5, Matrix Science). Progenesis peptide measurement exports were then further evaluated using SafeQuant for false discovery adjustment and quality control. All experiments were performed in duplicates.

### Publication Abstract
In most ecosystems, bacteria exist primarily as structured surface-associated biofilms that can be highly tolerant to antibiotics and thus represent an important health issue. Here, we explored drug repurposing as a strategy to identify new antibiofilm compounds, screening over 1,000 compounds from the Prestwick Chemical Library of approved drugs for specific activities that prevent biofilm formation by <i>Escherichia coli</i> Most growth-inhibiting compounds, which include known antibacterial but also antiviral and other drugs, also reduced biofilm formation. However, we also identified several drugs that were biofilm inhibitory at doses where only a weak effect or no effect on planktonic growth could be observed. The activities of the most specific antibiofilm compounds were further characterized using gene expression analysis, proteomics, and microscopy. We observed that most of these drugs acted by repressing genes responsible for the production of curli, a major component of the <i>E. coli</i> biofilm matrix. This repression apparently occurred through the induction of several different stress responses, including DNA and cell wall damage, and homeostasis of divalent cations, demonstrating that biofilm formation can be inhibited through a variety of molecular mechanisms. One tested drug, tyloxapol, did not affect curli expression or cell growth but instead inhibited biofilm formation by suppressing bacterial attachment to the surface.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> The prevention of bacterial biofilm formation is one of the major current challenges in microbiology. Here, by systematically screening a large number of approved drugs for their ability to suppress biofilm formation by <i>Escherichia coli</i>, we identified a number of prospective antibiofilm compounds. We further demonstrated different mechanisms of action for individual compounds, from induction of replicative stress to disbalance of cation homeostasis to inhibition of bacterial attachment to the surface. Our work demonstrates the potential of drug repurposing for the prevention of bacterial biofilm formation and suggests that also for other bacteria, the activity spectrum of antibiofilm compounds is likely to be broad.

### Keywords
Drug, Lc-msms, Escherichia coli, Stress

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Strasse 10, 35043 Marburg, Germany  Center for Synthetic Microbiology (SYNMIKRO), Karl-von-Frisch Strasse 10, 35043 Marburg, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial MIcrobiology

### Submitter
Witold Szymanski

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Sourjik
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl-von-Frisch Strasse 10, 35043 Marburg, Germany  Center for Synthetic Microbiology (SYNMIKRO), Karl-von-Frisch Strasse 10, 35043 Marburg, Germany


