### Accession
PXD014915

### Title
Proteomics Study Reveals Involvement of Lysine Acetylation in Metabolic Disorder in Human Hepatocellular Carcinoma

### Description
Protein lysine acetylation is a vital post-translational modification (PTM) that plays important roles in biological processes and human diseases. However, its potential roles in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development remain largely unknown. Here we performed a quantitative acetylome analysis of tumor and normal liver tissues from HCC patients. Overall, we identified 792 lysine acetylation sites in 415 proteins, and almost half of their acetylation levels were significantly changed in HCC tumor tissues. The acetylated proteins mainly consisted of metabolic enzymes, which was consistent with the subcellular location analysis that they were primarily located in mitochondria and cytoplasm. Consistently, Bioinformatics analysis showed that differently acetylated proteins were mainly involved in metabolic pathways, such as glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, fatty acid oxidation, and glutamine metabolism. Then we selected two down-regulated enzymes and verified their acetylation levels in HCC liver tissues. In addition, transcription factors and proteins associated with oxidative stress were identified with aberrant acetylation levels in HCC tumor tissues. Our findings illustrate abundant lysine acetylation sites in HCC liver tissues, which provides insight into the role of lysine acetylation in HCC development, and further contributes to possible implications for its use in diagnose and therapy in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Samples Preparation Tumor tissues and para-carcinoma normal liver tissues from HCC patients (n=4) were surgically resected in the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, with approval from the Research Ethics Committee of Zhengzhou University and consent from the patients. The tumor tissues were washed in PBS and surrounding tissues were removed. The para-carcinoma normal liver tissues were managed with the same method. The whole process took place on ice, and it was finished within 30 minutes after the surgery. The collected tissues were divided into small pieces and then kept in liquid nitrogen. The selected samples were renamed with codes (A1, A2, C1, C2, D1, D2, F1, F2, the number 1 represented tumor tissues while 2 represented normal tissues) instead of the patient’s name in this study.  Protein Extraction and Digestion Samples were homogenized by a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in 1 mL lysis buffer (8 M urea, 3 μM TSA，50 mM NAM, 2 mM EDTA, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). Then the lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g for 10 minutes at 4℃, and the supernatant was transferred to new tubes. The concentration of the protein was determined by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Sangon Biotech, China) before use. For digestion, the protein was first reduced with DTT (5 mM) for 30 minutes at 56℃. Then iodoacetamide was added to the protein to make its final concentration of 11 mM, and the mixture was incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Finally, the concentration of urea in the protein solution was diluted to less than 2 M by adding triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, 100 mM). The protein was digested by trypsin with a trypsin/protein mass ratio of 1/50 at 37℃ overnight, and then additional trypsin was added to the protein with a trypsin/protein mass ratio of 1/100 and incubated at 37℃ for 4 hours.      TMT Labeling and Affinity Enrichment of Acetylated Peptides Tryptic peptides were freeze-dried after being desalted by using Strata X C18 (Phenomenex). Then the peptides were dissolved in TEAB (0.5 M) to be labeled by TMT tag according to the protocol of the TMT labeling kit (Thermo, USA). TMT reagents were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were incubated for 2 hours at room temperature, and then desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Next, TMT labeled peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH=8.0), and the supernatant was collected and incubated with agarose beads coupled to anti-acetyl antibody PTM-104 (PTM Bio, Jingjie, China) overnight at 4℃ with gentle shaking. After, the beads were washed with NETN buffer four times, and then twice with ddH2O. Finally, the bound peptides were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The eluent was vacuum-dried and then desalted by C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The TMT labeled peptides were freeze-dried for LC-MS/MS analysis. Protein Identification and Quantification by LC-MS/MS Analysis  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed according to the literature procedure. The EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system was used to separate peptides dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA). The mobile phase consisted of buffer A (0.1% FA and 2% acetonitrile in ddH2O) and buffer B (0.1% FA and 90% acetonitrile in ddH2O); it was eluted with a linear gradient of eluent, starting with 10% buffer B which was increased to 25% in 40 minutes, and then from 25% to 38% for 12 minutes, and later from 38% to 80% for 4 minutes, finally, it was kept at 80% buffer B for 4 minutes. The flow rate was 700 nL/min. The peptides were subjected to the NIS ion source and then performed MS/MS analysis by Orbitrap FusionTM (Thermo, USA) system. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. For MS1 scan, it was set at a resolution of 60,000 with a scan ranging from 350 to 1550 m/z. For MS2 scan, it was set at a resolution of 30,000 (100 m/z). Database Search The MS/MS data was performed by Maxquant search engine (v1.5.2.8), and tandem mass spectra was searched against SwissProt Human (20130 sequences) database. Furthemore, additional libraries were added for false discovery rate (FDR) calculation and elimination of contaminated protein’s influence. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 7 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm and 5 ppm for precursor ions of first and main searches, respectively, and mass error for fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fix modification, while oxidation on Met and acetylation on Lys and N-terminal of protein were specified as variable modifications. Quantitative method was set to TMT-10plex. FDR thresholds for protein, peptide and modification sites were specified at 1%.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics Analysis Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was performed from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA), and proteins were classified into three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis was based on the database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). Subcellular location was derived from the software named wolfpeort. Protein domain was annotated by soft InterProScan based on InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). Motif-x software was employed to analyze the model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of acetyl-21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site) in all the protein sequences. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis was performed by STRING 10.5 (http://www.string.embl.de/).

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation is a vital post-translational modification (PTM) of proteins, which plays an important role in cancer development. In healthy human liver tissues, multiple non-histone proteins were identified with acetylation modification, however, the role of acetylated proteins in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development remains largely unknown. Here we performed a quantitative acetylome study of tumor and normal liver tissues from HCC patients. Overall, 598 lysine acetylation sites in 325 proteins were quantified, and almost 59% of their acetylation levels were significantly changed. The differentially acetylated proteins mainly consisted of non-histone proteins located in mitochondria and cytoplasm, which accounted for 42% and 24%, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis showed that differentially acetylated proteins were enriched in metabolism, oxidative stress, and signal transduction processes. In tumor tissues, 278 lysine sites in 189 proteins showed decreased acetylation levels, which occupied 98% of differentially acetylated proteins. Moreover, we collected twenty pairs of tumor and normal liver tissues from HCC male patients, and found that expression levels of SIRT1 (<i>p</i> = 0.002), SIRT2 (<i>p</i> = 0.01), and SIRT4 (<i>p</i> = 0.045) were significantly up-regulated in tumor tissues. Over-expression of possibly accounted for the widespread deacetylation of non-histone proteins identified in HCC tumor tissues, which could serve as promising predictors of HCC. Taken together, our work illustrates abundant differentially acetylated proteins in HCC tumor tissues, and offered insights into the role of lysine acetylation in HCC development. It provided potential biomarker and drug target candidates for clinical HCC diagnosis and treatment.

### Keywords
Metabolic disorder, Oxidative stress., Ptm, Lysine acetylation, Hcc, Transcription factor

### Affiliations
Henan Institute of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Henan 450052, China
Zhengzhou University

### Submitter
Qianwei Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Jintao Zhang
Henan Institute of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Henan 450052, China


