### Accession
PXD000997

### Title
Comprehensive Identification of Phosphorylation Sites on the Numb Endocytic Adaptor Protein

### Description
Numb is an endocytic adaptor protein that functions in the endocytosis and intracellular trafficking of membrane receptors and adhesion molecules.  Numb localization and function have been shown to be regulated by phosphorylation through atypcial protein kinase C at several key sites.  Here, we use Liquid Chromatogrpahy, Tandem Mass Spectrometry to identify additional Numb phosphorylation sites not yet characterized.

### Sample Protocol
Amino and carboxy terminus tagged Numb was immunoprecipitated from cells.  IPs were digested with trypsin or GluC, and peptdies were cleaned up using C18 ZipTips.  Peptides were loaded onto a C18 column and eluted off with a 0-40% ACN gradient over 120 minutes, and introduced into a LTQ Orbitrap or LTQ Orbitrap Velos instrument.

### Data Protocol
Peaklists were generated using XCalibur software (Thermo-Fisher) and data was searched against the human database (with mouse Numb added in) using X!Tandem, Sequest, and PEAKS Software.  Data was visualzed using Scaffold and mzident files were exported from Scaffold for upload and for use in Scaffold PTM

### Publication Abstract
Numb is an adaptor protein that functions in the endocytosis and intracellular trafficking of membrane receptors and adhesion molecules. Previous studies have indicated that Numb localization and function are regulated through phosphorylation by atypical protein kinase C at several key sites. Here, using LC-MS/MS, we report the identification of 25 serine/threonine Numb phosphorylation sites, and a single tyrosine phosphorylation site. Amino acid sequences flanking several of the sites identified conform to consensus motifs for cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5). In vitro kinase assays and immunoblotting confirmed that CDK5 phosphorylates Numb. LC-MS/MS analysis identified specific CDK5-directed phosphorylation of Numb at position S288 and at two additional regions. Therefore, Numb is likely to exist in multiple phospho-isoforms, and may be subject to phosphorylation-mediated regulation downstream of CDK5. These findings provide a basis for further investigations into the complex role of Numb phosphorylation in regulating its subcellular localization, protein interactions, and function. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000997 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000997).

### Keywords
Numb; phosphorylation; cyclin d kinase 5; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc
Hospital For Sick Children

### Submitter
Jonathan Krieger

### Lab Head
Dr Jane McGlade
Hospital For Sick Children


