### Accession
PXD031664

### Title
LncRNA RUS shapes the gene expression program towards neurogenesis

### Description
The evolution of brain complexity correlates with an increased expression of long, non-coding (lnc) RNAs in neuronal tissues. Although prominent examples illustrate the potential of lncRNAs to scaffold and target epigenetic regulators to chromatin loci, only few cases have been described to function during neurogenesis. We present a first functional characterization of the lncRNA LINC01322, which we term RUS for ‘RNA upstream of Slitrk3’. The RUS gene is well conserved in mammals by sequence and synteny next to the neurodevelopmental gene Slitrk3. RUS is exclusively expressed in neural cells and its expression increases along with neuronal markers during neuronal differentiation of mouse embryonic cortical neural stem cells. Depletion of RUS locks neuronal precursors in an intermediate state towards neuronal differentiation, with arrested cell cycle and increased apoptosis. RUS associates with chromatin in the vicinity of genes involved in neurogenesis, most of which change their expression upon RUS depletion. The identification of a range of epigenetic regulators as specific RUS interactors suggests that the lncRNA may mediate gene activation and repression in a highly context-dependent manner.

### Sample Protocol
Stable pools of Neuro2A cells expressing 5xMS2-tagged RUS were generated as follows. 5x104 Neuro2A cells were transfected with 5 µl pLenti-FRT virus and 2 days later selected in GlutMax, 8% FCS  supplemented with 2 µg/ml puromycin and expanded. 106 Neuro2A-FRT cells were seeded on a 10 cm culture dish. On the next day, cells were transfected with 15 µg plasmid DNA, consisting of a molar ratio of 1:6 (up to 1:9) of pcDNA5-lncRNA-5xMS2: pCSFLPe (encoding the flipase). Plasmids were diluted appropriately in 300 µl 150 mM NaCl and 15 µl JetPEI (2.6 µg/µl) and mixed. After 30 min equilibration at RT, the solution was added dropwise to Neuro2-FRT cells. Two days later, cells were transferred to a new 10 cm dish and selected in GlutMax 8% FCS, 2 µg/ml puromycin, and 600 µg/ml hygromycin. The medium was replaced every second day to remove cell debris. Colonies formed 7-10 days after transfection. They were harvested and further cultivated.  Nuclear extract from MS2-tagged RUS-expressing Neuro2A cells was prepared typically from 8x107 cells without dialysis, according to (Dignam et al, 1983). Extract preparation and MS2-affinity purification were done at 4°C. Cell pellets were suspended in 5 vol buffer A (10 mM HEPES pH 7.9 at 4°C, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM DTT, 200 U/ml RNAsin) and incubated for 10 min. Cells were homogenized with a Dounce tissue grinder. Nuclei were pelleted at 500 g for 10 min, washed with 5 nuclear volumes (vol) buffer A, dissolved in one vol buffer C (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 25% (v/v) glycerol, 0.42 M KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM PMSF, 0.5 mM DTT, 200 U/ml RNAsin)  and homogenized again with a Dounce tissue grinder. After gentle rotation for 30 min, chromatin was pelleted at 17.000 g for 30 min. The supernatant was diluted with 1 vol buffer G (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM PMSF, 0.5 mM DTT, 200 U/ml RNAsin) and used for affinity purification. Standard MS2-affinity purification was done on supernatant containing 1 mg protein. To this, 760 pmol yeast t-RNA competitor and 120 pmol recombinant MS2BP-MBP (Jurica et al, 2002; Zhou & Reed, 2003) was added. After 2 h of gentle rotation, 50 µl equilibrated amylose resin (New England Biolabs) was added and incubation continued for 2 h. The resin was pelleted at 1900 g for 1 min and washed thrice with 900 µl buffer D (buffer G containing 0.1 M KCl and lacking RNasin) and thrice 900 µl buffer F (buffer D containing 1.5 mM MgCl2,). RNA-interacting proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. Interacting proteins were eluted with 50 µg RNAse A in 80 µl buffer D at 37°C for 10 min. The resin was pelleted at 1900 g for 1 min at 4°C and the supernatant subjected to Filter Aided Sample Preparation (Wiśniewski et al, 2009) and peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips, dried by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid.  Samples were analyzed on a Easy nLC 1000 coupled online to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, US). Eight µl peptide solution per sample were separated on a self-packed C18 column (30 cm × 75 µm; ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) using a 180 min binary gradient of water and acetonitrile supplemented with 0.1% formic acid (0 min., 2% B; 3:30 min., 5% B; 137:30 min., 25% B; 168:30 min., 35% B; 182:30 min., 60% B) at 50 °C column temperature. A top 10 DDA method was used. Full scan MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 70,000. Fragment ion spectra were recorded using a 2 m/z isolation window, 75 ms maximum trapping time with an AGC target of 10^5 ions.

### Data Protocol
The Raw Data were analyzed with the MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) software (Cox & Mann, 2008) using a one protein per gene canonical database of Mus musculus from Uniprot (download : 2021-04-09; 21998 entries). Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as a static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-terminus as well as oxidation of methionine set as variable modifications. Match between runs was enabled with a retention time window of 1 min. Two ratio counts of unique peptides were required for label-free quantification (LFQ).

### Publication Abstract
The evolution of brain complexity correlates with an increased expression of long, noncoding (lnc) RNAs in neural tissues. Although prominent examples illustrate the potential of lncRNAs to scaffold and target epigenetic regulators to chromatin loci, only few cases have been described to function during brain development. We present a first functional characterization of the lncRNA <i>LINC01322</i>, which we term <i>RUS</i> for "RNA upstream of Slitrk3." The <i>RUS</i> gene is well conserved in mammals by sequence and synteny next to the neurodevelopmental gene Slitrk3. <i>RUS</i> is exclusively expressed in neural cells and its expression increases during neuronal differentiation of mouse embryonic cortical neural stem cells. Depletion of <i>RUS</i> locks neuronal precursors in an intermediate state towards neuronal differentiation resulting in arrested cell cycle and increased apoptosis. <i>RUS</i> associates with chromatin in the vicinity of genes involved in neurogenesis, most of which change their expression upon <i>RUS</i> depletion. The identification of a range of epigenetic regulators as specific <i>RUS</i> interactors suggests that the lncRNA may mediate gene activation and repression in a highly context-dependent manner.

### Keywords
Rna protein interaction

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377  München  Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377  München  Germany


