### Accession
PXD037153

### Title
Nonionic surfactants can modify the thermal stability of globular and membrane proteins interfering with the thermal proteome profiling principles to identify protein targets

### Description
The membrane proteins are essential targets to understand cellular function. The unbiased identification of membrane protein targets is still the bottleneck for a system- level understanding of cellular response to stimuli or perturbations. It has been suggested to enrich the soluble proteome with membrane proteins by introducing nonionic surfactants in the solubilization solution. This strategy was aiming to simultaneous identify the globular and membrane protein targets by thermal proteome profiling principles. However, the thermal shift assay would surpass the cloud point temperature from the nonionic surfactants most frequently utilized for membrane protein solubilization.  It is expected that around the cloud point temperature, the surfactant micelles would suffer structural modifications altering the proteome solubility. Here, we show that the presence of nonionic surfactants can alter protein thermal stability from a mixed globular, and membrane proteome. In the presence of surfactant micelles, the changes in protein solubility analyzed after the thermal shift assay are affected by the thermal dependent modification of the micelles size, and their interaction with proteins. We demonstrate that the introduction of nonionic surfactants for the solubilization of membrane proteins is not compatible with the principles of target identification by thermal proteome profiling methodologies. Our results lead to explore thermal-independent strategies for membrane protein solubilization to assure confident membrane protein target identification. The proteome-wide thermal shift methods have already shown their capability to elucidate mechanism of actions from pharma, biomedicine, analytical chemistry, or toxicology and finding strategies, free from surfactants, to identify membrane protein targets would be the next challenge.

### Sample Protocol
Rat liver tissue was resuspended in buffer containing PBS (control), 0.4 % (v/v) of Igepal CA-630 or 0.4 % (v/v) Nonidet-P40 substitute (NP-40S). Tissue samples were mechanically homogenized using a TissueLyser (Qiagen). Unbroken cells were lysed by sonication. The insoluble fraction was sedimented by centrifugation at 100,000g for 60 min at 4 ◦C. The pellets were lysed with RIPA buffer to perform protein identification and quantification. The soluble proteome was used to perform the thermal proteome profiling assay. Briefly, samples were heated by duplicate at ten temperatures selected for the thermal shift assay. Aliquots containing 50 µg of protein were independently heated at the corresponding temperature for 3 min, followed by 3 min at room temperature. Samples were centrifugated at 100 000 g for 20 min at 4 °C to remove the proteins that had an alteration in solubility after the thermal shift assay. The soluble fraction in the supernatants from the thermal shift assay and the resuspended pellets from protein extraction were processed using a general bottom-up proteomics workflow and the purified peptides were analyzed by label-free nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis (nLC-MS/MS). Samples were digested following the UltraFASP method. Peptides were desalted by reverse phase chromatography in C18 top tips using acetonitrile (ACN; 60% v/v) with FA (0.1% v/v) for elution, and vacuum dried to be stored at -80 °C till further analysis. Peptides were analyzed in a QExactive quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were separated using an EASY nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) and tryptic peptides were injected into a pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100 Å, 75 um × 2 cm) and peptide separation was performed using an EASY-Spray C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 um, 100 Å, 75 um × 25 cm).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used for protein identification and quantification. The MS/MS spectra (. raw files) were searched by Sequest HT against the Rattus norvegicus database from Uniprot (UP000002494; 47,954 entries). A maximum of 2 tryptic cleavages were allowed, the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.01 and validation based on q-value were used as identified. The minimum peptide length considered was 6 and the FDR was set to 0.1. Proteins were quantified using the average of top three peptide MS1-areas, yielding raw protein abundances. Common contaminants like human keratin and bovine trypsin were also included in the database during the searches for minimizing false identifications.

### Publication Abstract
The membrane proteins are essential targets for understanding cellular function. The unbiased identification of membrane protein targets is still the bottleneck for a system-level understanding of cellular response to stimuli or perturbations. It has been suggested to enrich the soluble proteome with membrane proteins by introducing nonionic surfactants in the solubilization solution. This strategy aimed to simultaneously identify the globular and membrane protein targets by thermal proteome profiling principles. However, the thermal shift assay would surpass the cloud point temperature from the nonionic surfactants frequently utilized for membrane protein solubilization. It is expected that around the cloud point temperature, the surfactant micelles would suffer structural modifications altering protein solubility. Here, we show that the presence of nonionic surfactants can alter protein thermal stability from a mixed, globular, and membrane proteome. In the presence of surfactant micelles, the changes in protein solubility analyzed after the thermal shift assay was affected by the thermally dependent modification of the micellar size and its interaction with proteins. We demonstrate that the introduction of nonionic surfactants for the solubilization of membrane proteins is not compatible with the principles of target identification by thermal proteome profiling methodologies. Our results lead to exploring thermally independent strategies for membrane protein solubilization to assure confident membrane protein target identification. The proteome-wide thermal shift methods have already shown their capability to elucidate mechanisms of action from pharma, biomedicine, analytical chemistry, or toxicology, and finding strategies, free from surfactants, to identify membrane protein targets would be the next challenge.

### Keywords
Thermal proteome profiling, Micelles, Rat liver tissue, Igepal, Nonionic surfactants, Nonidet-p40 substitute

### Affiliations
Linköping University
Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden

### Submitter
Veronica Lizano-Fallas

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Cristobal
Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden


