### Accession
PXD016112

### Title
Immunopeptidome analysis of 4T1 murine breast cancer cells.

### Description
This study aimed to identify Tumor Associated Antigens (TAA)s by Immunoaffinity purification of MHC peptides and LCMS analysis, verifying their immunogenicity and testing their tumor control potential in a highly aggressive preclinical model of triple-negative breast cancer in mice. Among the MHC peptides thus identified, an Endogenous Retroviral (ERV) peptide was also found, and this peptide, as well as several other peptides from TAAs, were shown to possess tumor control potential in a cancer vaccine setting in mice, by restricting tumor growth compared to controls.

### Sample Protocol
MHC-I-peptide complexes were immunoaffinity purified from 4T1 mouse tumor cell line using MHC-I antibody against H-2Kd / H-2Dd. Purified MHC-I-peptides were desalted by C18 reversed phase solid phase extraction and detached from the MHC-I by acidification. Each dry sample was dissolved in 11 µl of LCMS solvent A (97% water, 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), of which 10 µl were injected into a C18 guard desalting column (Acclaim pepmap 100, 75µm x 2cm, nanoViper, Thermo). After 5min of flow at 5µl/min with the loading pump, the 10-port valve switched to analysis mode in which the NC pump provided a flow of 250nL/min through the guard column. The linear gradient then proceeded from 2% solvent B (95% acetonitrile, 5% water, 0.1% formic acid) to 25% B in 90min followed by wash at 99%B and re-equilibration. We used a nano EASY-Spray column (pepmap RSLC, C18, 2µm bead size, 100Å, 75µm internal diameter, 50cm long, Thermo) on the nano electrospray ionization (NSI) EASY-Spray source (Thermo) at 60ºC. The final raw file (20190121) was generated in the same system but using a shorter column and shorter gradient, 15cm and 30min, respectively. Online LC-MS was performed using a hybrid Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). FTMS master scans in profile mode with 120000 resolution (and mass range 300-750 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS in centroid mode on the top 10 ions using collision induced dissociation (CID) at 32% normalized collision energy, activation time of 10ms and activation Q of 0.25. Precursors were isolated with a 2m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e4 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100ms for MS1 and 100ms for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was used with 30s duration. Only precursors with charge state 2-4 were selected for MS2.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were searched by Byonic v3.6.0 (Protein Metrics Inc) using a target-decoy strategy. For the first two raw files, the database used was the uniprot mouse reference protein database (53378 protein entries, including Swissprot and TrEBML entries, downloaded from uniprot.org on 20180917). Precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and product mass tolerance of 0.36 Da for CID-ITMS2 was used. No enzyme specificity was used; and oxidation of methionine (common2) and phosphorylation on serine, threonine or tyrosine (rare2) were used as variable modifications. Maximum precursor mass was 1500, with only 1 precursor per MS2 spectrum allowed, and a smoothing width of 0.01 m/z. False discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 5% was employed at peptide level. For the final raw file (20190121), we performed a search against the wider uniprot database containing all Swissprot and TrEMBL murine protein entries (restricted to taxonomy 10090, Mus musculus, containing a total of 92607 sequences, downloaded from uniprot.org on 20201006). The settings were the same as above except that phosphorylations were not considered as modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Knowledge of clinically targetable tumor antigens is becoming vital for broader design and utility of therapeutic cancer vaccines. This information is obtained reliably by directly interrogating the MHC-I presented peptide ligands, the immunopeptidome, with state-of-the-art mass spectrometry. Our manuscript describes direct identification of novel tumor antigens for an aggressive triple-negative breast cancer model. Immunopeptidome profiling revealed 2481 unique antigens, among them a novel ERV antigen originating from an endogenous retrovirus element. The clinical benefit and tumor control potential of the identified tumor antigens and ERV antigen were studied in a preclinical model using two vaccine platforms and therapeutic settings. Prominent control of established tumors was achieved using an oncolytic adenovirus platform designed for flexible and specific tumor targeting, namely PeptiCRAd. Our study presents a pipeline integrating immunopeptidome analysis-driven antigen discovery with a therapeutic cancer vaccine platform for improved personalized oncolytic immunotherapy.

### Keywords
4t1, Mouse, Immunopeptidome, Mhc-i, Ligandome, Murine, Cancer, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology
Oncology-Pathology, Scilifelab, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Oncology-Pathology, Scilifelab, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


