### Accession
PXD028897

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the membrane-enriched fraction of trypomastigostes released from wild type, LAMP1/2 KO or LAMP2 KO fibroblasts

### Description
Trypanosoma cruzi invades non-professional phagocytic cells by subverting their membrane repair process, which is dependent on membrane injury and cell signaling, intracellular calcium increase and lysosome recruitment. Cells lacking Lysosome Associated Membrane Proteins 1 and 2 are less permissive to parasite invasion, however more prone to parasite intracellular multiplication. Several passages through a different intracellular environment can significantly change T. cruzi’s gene expression profile. We evaluated whether one single passage through LAMP deficient (KO) or wild type (WT) fibroblasts could influence invasion ability of T. cruzi Y strain trypomastigotes in L6 myoblasts and WT fibroblasts. Our results regarding their biological behavior clearly indicated that parasites released from WT cells (TcY-WT), LAMP1/2 KO cells (TcY-L1/2-/-) or LAMP2 KO (TcY-L2-/-) cells are distinct from each other. Since these alterations most likely would reflect differences among parasite surface molecules, we also evaluated their proteome. We identified few protein complexes, membrane and secreted proteins regulated in our dataset. Among those, some members of MASP, mucins, trans-sialidases and gp63 proteins family, which are known to play an important role during parasite infection and could correlate to TcY-WT, TcY-L1/2-/- and TcY-L2-/- biological behavior.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation, TMT labeling, HPLC fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis are detailed as follows:  (i) protein preparation: for obtaining the membrane proteins fraction, about 1x108 trypomastigotes forms released from WT or LAMP KO fibroblasts, presenting about 70-80 % purity regarding amastigote forms contamination, were centrifuged during 10 min at 2 200 g at 4 ºC and washed 2 times with PBS (pH 7.2). Samples were resuspended in 0.1 M sodium carbonate lysis buffer (pH 11.5) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail, submitted to two ultrasonic pulses during 20 sec on ice and incubated for 1 h on ice before ultracentrifugation at 150 000 g for 90 min at 4 ºC. Pellets were washed with 500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and again with 50 mM TEAB. (ii) trypsin digestion: samples were suspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM TEAB buffer, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at room temperature (RT), alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 1 h (RT) and, then digested for 3 h (RT) in 1:100 ratio with Lys-C and afterwards with 1:100 ratio trypsin for overnight at 37ºC. (iii) TMT labelling: for each biological replicate, equal amounts of the TMT-labelled samples were mixed and peptides were purified on an Oasis HLB 10 mg cartridge (Waters Corporation). (iv) HPLC fractionation: TMT labelled peptides were injected onto an C18 Acquity UPLC MClass CSH 1.7 µm, 300 µm X 100 mm (Waters), using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system. Different HPLC fractions were separated with a gradient of 2 % to 95 % acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9.3) and speed-dried. (v) LC-MS/MS analysis: peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid - FA) and loaded onto a 18 cm fused silica column with integrated emitter (75 µm inner diameter) packed in-house with reverse phase resin ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The gradient was comprised of 97 % phase A (0.1 % FA) to 28 % phase B (0.1 % FA, 95 % acetonitrile) for 64 min, 28 to 45 % phase B for 10 min, 45 to 10 0% phase B for 3 min and 100 % phase B for 8 min in a total of 86 min at 250 nL/min. The peptides were then subjected to the NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive HF - Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online with the EASY-nano LC system. The m/z scan range was set between 350–1500 and resolution 120,000 at m/z 200. A data-dependent acquisition that alternated between one MS scan followed by MS/MS of the 20 most intense ions (Top20) with 20.0 s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were viewed in Xcalibur v.4.2 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA), by searching raw files with SequestHT algorithm against a T. cruzi Y strain database (downloaded in May 2020), containing the proteins of the parasite found in the newly sequenced T. cruzi Y strain. Common contaminant proteins were also added to the database and all contaminant proteins identified were filtered and removed from the result lists. The searches were performed with the following parameters: MS accuracy 10 ppm, MS/MS accuracy 0.02 Da, trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine and peptide N-terminus TMT-6plex modification as fixed modifications and oxidized methionine and lysine modification by TMT-6plex as variable modifications. Number of proteins, protein groups and number of peptides were filtered for false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1 %, peptides with rank 1 and proteins with at least 2 peptides using Proteome Discoverer. ProteinCenter software (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) was used to generate FASTA formatted files of groups of proteins of interest.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Trypanosoma cruzi</i> invades non-professional phagocytic cells by subverting their membrane repair process, which is dependent on membrane injury and cell signaling, intracellular calcium increase, and lysosome recruitment. Cells lacking lysosome-associated membrane proteins 1 and 2 (LAMP1 and LAMP2) are less permissive to parasite invasion but more prone to parasite intracellular multiplication. Several passages through a different intracellular environment can significantly change <i>T. cruzi</i>'s gene expression profile. Here, we evaluated whether one single passage through LAMP-deficient (KO) or wild-type (WT) fibroblasts, thus different intracellular environments, could influence <i>T. cruzi</i> Y strain trypomastigotes' ability to invade L6 myoblasts and WT fibroblasts host cells. Parasites released from LAMP2 KO cells (TcY-L2<sup>-/-</sup>) showed higher invasion, calcium signaling, and membrane injury rates, for the assays in L6 myoblasts, when compared to those released from WT (TcY-WT) or LAMP1/2 KO cells (TcY-L1/2<sup>-/-</sup>). On the other hand, TcY-L1/2<sup>-/-</sup> showed higher invasion, calcium signaling, and cell membrane injury rates, for the assays in WT fibroblasts, compared to TcY-WT and TcY-L1/2<sup>-/-</sup>. Albeit TcY-WT presented an intermediary invasion and calcium signaling rates, compared to the others, in WT fibroblasts, they induced lower levels of injury, which reinforces that signals mediated by surface membrane protein interactions also have a significant contribution to trigger host cell calcium signals. These results clearly show that parasites released from WT or LAMP KO cells are distinct from each other. Additionally, these parasites' ability to invade the cell may be distinct depending on which cell type they interact with. Since these alterations most likely would reflect differences among parasite surface molecules, we also evaluated their proteome. We identified few protein complexes, membrane, and secreted proteins regulated in our dataset. Among those are some members of MASP, mucins, trans-sialidases, and gp63 proteins family, which are known to play an important role during parasite infection and could correlate to TcY-WT, TcY-L1/2<sup>-/-</sup>, and TcY-L2<sup>-/-</sup> biological behavior.

### Keywords
Tmt labeling, Membrane-enriched fraction, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Department of Morphology, Cell and Molecular Biology Laboratory (LBCM),Biological Sciences Institute (ICB), Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Brazil

### Submitter
Anny Carolline Silva Oliveira

### Lab Head
Dr Luciana de Oliveira Andrade
Department of Morphology, Cell and Molecular Biology Laboratory (LBCM),Biological Sciences Institute (ICB), Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Brazil


