### Accession
PXD029012

### Title
The proteome of neuroglobin-overexpressing SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells

### Description
Neuroglobin (NGB) is an oxygen-binding globin expressed in vertebrates mainly in the central and peripheral nervous system, but also in extra-neuronal cells. NGB is involved in oxygen transport, storage, and homeostasis. The role hypothesized for this globin is in fact related to neuroprotection against oxidative stress. Also, NGB is functionally and physically associated to mitochondria, possibly playing a role in ATP production and regulation. NGB actually exerts its function upon up-regulation. Thus, NGB-overexpressing SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells (NGB-FLAG) were analyzed by shotgun label-free quantitative proteomics in comparison with control cells (CTRL).

### Sample Protocol
SH-SY5Y cells were lysed and protein digestion was then performed using Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) on S-Trap (ProtiFi, Huntington, NY, USA) micro spin columns. Digested peptides were eluted from the S-Trap columns, vacuum-dried and resuspended in 0.2% formic acid in HPLC-grade water. Six biological sample replicates per both the experimental conditions were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer coupled with a EASY-nLC (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS runs were elaborated using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0). Normalized LFQ data were imported onto Perseus platform (version 1.6.14.0) for statistic and comparative analysis. The difference value between the log2-transformed means of the replicates for NGB-FLAG and CTRL samples was used as fold change. Statistically significant proteins were selected setting S0=0.5 and t-test FDR=0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Neuroglobin (NGB) is an O<sub>2</sub>-binding globin mainly expressed in the central and peripheral nervous systems and cerebrospinal fluid. Previously, it was demonstrated that NGB overexpression protects cells from hypoxia-induced death. To investigate processes promoted by NGB overexpression, we used a cellular model of neuroblastoma stably overexpressing an NGB-FLAG construct. We used a proteomic approach to identify the specific profile following NGB overexpression. To evaluate the role of NGB overexpression in increasing energetic metabolism, we measured oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and the extracellular acidification rate through Seahorse XF technology. The effect on autophagy induction was evaluated by analyzing SQSTM1/p62 and LC3-II expression. Proteomic analysis revealed several differentially regulated proteins, involved in oxidative phosphorylation and integral mitochondrial proteins linked to energy metabolism. The analysis of mitochondrial metabolism demonstrated that NGB overexpression increases mitochondrial ATP production. Indeed, NGB overexpression enhances bioenergetic metabolism, increasing OCR and oxygen consumption. Analysis of autophagy induction revealed an increase of LC3-II together with a significant decrease of SQSTM1/p62, and NGB-LC3-II association during autophagosome formation. These results highlight the active participation of NGB in several cellular processes that can be upregulated in response to NGB overexpression, playing a role in the adaptive response to stress in neuroblastoma cells.

### Keywords
S-trap, Ngb, Neuroglobin, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
 Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology - University of Naples Federico II
Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples "Federico II", Italy

### Submitter
Michele  Costanzo

### Lab Head
Dr Michele Costanzo
Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples "Federico II", Italy


