### Accession
PXD035891

### Title
Activity-Based Protein Profiling of Human and Plasmodium Serine Hydrolases and Interrogation of Potential Antimalarial Targets

### Description
Malaria remains a global health issue requiring the identification of novel therapeutic targets to combat drug resistance. Metabolic serine hydrolases are druggable enzymes playing essential roles in lipid metabolism. However, very few have been investigated in malaria-causing parasites. Here, we used fluorophosphonate broad-spectrum activity-based probes and quantitative chemical proteomics to annotate and profile the activity of more than half of predicted serine hydrolases in P. falciparum across the erythrocytic cycle. Using conditional genetics, we show that the activities of four serine hydrolases, previously annotated as essential (or important) in genetic screens, are actually dispensable for parasite replication. Importantly, we also identified eight human serine hydrolases that are specifically activated at different developmental stages. Chemical inhibition of two of them blocks parasite replication. This strongly suggests that parasites co-opt the activity of host enzymes and opens a new drug development strategy against which the parasite is less likely to develop resistance.

### Sample Protocol
P. falciparum has a 48h erythrocytic cycle starting with the invasion of a RBC by a merozoite, followed by parasite growth, nuclear division, formation of daughter parasites, and egress from the infected RBCs. During schizogony the parasite undergoes multiple rounds of asynchronous nuclear division followed by a final invagination of the plasma membrane and formation of up to 32 individual merozoites. We used synchronous culture techniques, combined with small molecule inhibitors to purify parasites at defined biological stages and identified changes in serine hydrolase activity using the biotin-FP probe.  The P. falciparum culture was kept synchronous and five stages collected: rings, trophozoites, early schizonts, mature schizonts and merozoites. A cGMP-dependent kinase inhibitor (PKGI) was used to arrest development 15 min before egress in order to achieve the mature schizont stage.  The different stages were labelled in vitro with the FP-azide at 500nM. Parasite pellets were then washed, saponin lysed to remove the red blood cell components, and frozen. Soluble protein was extracted (600ug per sample) and all samples (including no-probe controls) then underwent click chemistry to attach an alkyne-biotin tag to labelled proteins. Biotin labelled proteins were then enriched over neutravidin-agarose. The experiment was done in triplicate.  These were carbamidomethylated (DTT/iodoacetamide) and on-bead trypsin digested prior to TMT-10plex labelling. Combined TMT sets were high-pH fractionated into 8 fractions and vacuum centrifuged. Peptides were solubilised in 0.1% TFA and analysed by LC-MSMS via an Ultimate 3000 NanoLC coupled to a Thermo Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer.  Chromatographic separation was achieved at 250nl/min using a 50cm x 75um EasySpray C18 column over a 70 min binary gradient from 2-40% buffer B (A= 0.1% formic acid (95%)/DMSO; B=Acetonitrile (80%)/ 0.1% formic acid (15%)/DMSO (5%)) followed by 20min washing (95%B) and re-equilibration.  The MS was operated in Data Dependent Acquisition mode with an MS1 resolution of 120k from m/z 400-1400. MS/MS were acquired in the orbitrap analyser at 50k Resolution in “TopS” mode with HCD fragmentation (38%) and a dynamic exclusion of 30s. AGC was set to 1e5 / 100ms max injection time.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.2.1 (Tyanova et al., 2016a). Quantification was done at MS2 level using TMT-six/tenplex labels. All other MaxQuant settings were kept the same as default. The MaxQuant search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) was used with sequence databases Homo sapiens (Uniprot 13/01/2013) and Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 (PlasmoDB 15/12/2016). A decoy database of reversed sequences was used to filter false positives at a peptide false detection rate of 1%. The data files generated by MaxQuant were further analysed using Perseus version 1.5.6.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016b). The list of identified proteins was first filtered to remove potential contaminants, proteins only identified by one site, and proteins identified from the reverse (decoy) peptides. The protein intensity values were then transformed by function log2(x). The log2 intensities were normalised by subtracting the median intensities of each replicate followed by the median intensities of each protein. Proteins identified from fewer than 4 peptides were filtered out at this stage. Student t-tests were performed to identify proteins with statistically significant changes between conditions using stringency parameters s0 = 0.5 and FDR = 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Malaria remains a global health issue requiring the identification of novel therapeutic&#xa0;targets to combat drug resistance. Metabolic serine hydrolases are druggable enzymes playing essential roles in lipid metabolism. However, very few have been investigated in malaria-causing parasites. Here, we used&#xa0;fluorophosphonate broad-spectrum activity-based probes and quantitative chemical proteomics to annotate and profile the activity of more than half of predicted serine hydrolases in <i>P</i>. <i>falciparum</i> across the erythrocytic cycle.&#xa0;Using conditional genetics, we demonstrate that the activities of four&#xa0;serine hydrolases, previously annotated as essential (or important) in&#xa0;genetic&#xa0;screens, are actually dispensable for parasite replication. Of importance,&#xa0;we also identified eight human serine hydrolases that are specifically&#xa0;activated at different developmental stages. Chemical inhibition of two of them blocks parasite replication. This strongly suggests that parasites&#xa0;co-opt the activity of host enzymes and that this opens a new drug development strategy against which the parasites are less likely to develop resistance.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria, Fluorophosphonate, Serine hydrolase, Abp, Abpp, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute, London, NW1 1AT, United Kingdom
UCL

### Submitter
Dara Davison

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Dara Davison
The Francis Crick Institute, London, NW1 1AT, United Kingdom


