### Accession
PXD018087

### Title
A rendezvous of two second messengers: The c-di-AMP receptor protein DarB controls (p)ppGpp synthesis in Bacillus subtilis

### Description
DarB is a cyclic di-AMP binding protein consisting of two CBS (Cystathionine-beta synthase) domains. To reveal the global role of the second-messenger, understanding the function of the receptor proteins is fundamental. In order to do so, we aimed to identify potential binding partners of DarB in vitro with an unbiased protein pulldown experiment. In this study, we identified the (p)ppGpp synthetase/ hydrolase RelA as the binding partner of DarB and could confirm these findings with an in vivo interaction experiment.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of potential binding partners of DarB, E. coli Rosetta DE3 was transformed with a vector carrying 6xHis-SUMO-DarB or the empty vector as control. Expression of the recombinant protein was induced by the addition of isopropyl 1-thio-β-D-galactopyranoside (final concentration, 1 mM) to exponentially growing cultures (OD600 of 0.8). Proteins were purified in 50 mM Tris-HCl, 200 mM NaCl (pH 7.5). Cells were lysed by three passes at 18,000 p.s.i. through an HTU DIGI-F press (G. Heinemann, Germany). After lysis, the crude extract was centrifuged at 100,000 g for 60 min and then passed over a Ni2+nitrilotriacetic acid column (IBA, Göttingen, Germany) for binding of the 6xHis-tagged DarB. After extensive washing, B. subtilis 168 crude extract (from cells cultivated in LB, lysis as described above) was added to the column to allow binding of B. subtilis proteins to the column-bound DarB protein. After extensive washing, DarB, together with its potential binding partners, was eluted from the column with an imidazole gradient. The proteins from the eluate fractions were subjected to SDS-PAGE and in-gel digestion of proteins with trypsin followed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis. To detect interaction partners of the DarB in vivo, cultures of a B. subtilis strain with a chromosomal RelA-6xHis version plus either plasmid-borne DarB-Strep, or the empty vector control, were cultivated in MSSM minimal medium containing low (0.1 mM) or high (5 mM) potassium concentrations until exponential growth phase was reached (OD600 ~ 0.4-0.6). The cells were harvested, and DarB-Strep and its potential interaction partners were enriched from crude extracts using a StrepTactin column (IBA, Göttingen, Germany) and D-desthiobiotin (2.5 mM) as the eluent. The eluted proteins were further processed for LC-MS analysis as described before. Protein identification by mass spectrometry: Excised polyacrylamide gel pieces of protein bands were digested with trypsin as described previously (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Peptides were purified using C18 stop and go extraction (stage) tips according to Rappsilber et al. (2003 and 2007). Dried peptide samples were reconstituted in 20 µl LC-MS sample buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). 2 µl of each sample were subjected to reverse phase liquid chromatography for peptide separation using an RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on an Acclaim® PepMap 100 pre-column (100 µm x 2 cm, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid. Analytical separation of peptides was done on an Acclaim® PepMap RSLC column (75 µm x 50 cm, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) running a water-acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. All solvents and acids had Optima grade for LC-MS (Fisher Scientific). Chromatographically eluting peptides were on-line ionized by nano-electrospray (nESI) using the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific) and continuously transferred into the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos Pro or Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific). Full scans within the mass range of 300-1850 m/z were taken from the Orbitrap-FT analyzer at a resolution of 30.000 with parallel data-dependent top 15 MS2-fragmentation with the LTQ Veleo Pro linear ion trap (CID). Full scans in a mass range of 300 to 1650 m/z were recorded with the Q Exactive HF at a resolution of 30,000 followed by data-dependent top 10 fragmentation (HCD) at a resolution of 15,000 (dynamic exclusion enabled). LC-MS method programming and data acquisition was performed with the XCalibur software (2.0 and 4.0, respectively, Thermo Fisher Scientific). References: Shevchenko, A., Wilm, M., Vorm, O., and Mann, M. (1996). Mass spectrometric sequencing of proteins silver-stained polyacrylamide gels. Anal Chem 68, 850-858. Rappsilber, J., Ishihama, Y., and Mann, M. (2003). Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem 75, 663-670. Rappsilber, J., Mann, M., and Ishihama, Y. (2007). Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2, 1896-1906.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS2 data were searched against a B. subtilis specific protein database (UniProt Proteome ID UP000001570) using the Proteome Discoverer Software 2.2. The digestion mode was trypsin/P, and the maximum of missed cleavage sites was set two. Carbamidomethyl at cysteines was set as fixed modification, and oxidation at methionine and N-terminal acetylation of proteins as variable modifications. Mass tolerances of precursors and fragment ions were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da/0.6 Da (Q Exactive HF/Orbitrap Velos Pro), respectively. False discovery rates were calculated using the reverse-decoy mode, and the filter for peptide spectrum matches was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Many bacteria use cyclic di-AMP as a second messenger to control potassium and osmotic homeostasis. In Bacillus subtilis, several c-di-AMP binding proteins and RNA molecules have been identified. Most of these targets play a role in controlling potassium uptake and export. In addition, c-di-AMP binds to two conserved target proteins of unknown function, DarA and DarB, that exclusively consist of the c-di-AMP binding domain. Here, we investigate the function of the c-di-AMP-binding protein DarB in B. subtilis, which consists of two cystathionine-beta synthase&#xa0;(CBS) domains. We use an unbiased search for DarB interaction partners and identify the (p)ppGpp synthetase/hydrolase Rel as a major interaction partner of DarB. (p)ppGpp is another second messenger that is formed upon amino acid starvation and under other stress conditions to stop translation and active metabolism. The interaction between DarB and Rel only takes place if the bacteria grow at very low potassium concentrations and intracellular levels of c-di-AMP are low. We show that c-di-AMP inhibits the binding of DarB to Rel and the DarB-Rel interaction results in the Rel-dependent accumulation of pppGpp. These results link potassium and c-di-AMP signaling to the stringent response and thus to the global control of cellular physiology.

### Keywords
Second messengers, Bacillus subtilis, C-di-amp receptor, Pull-down, Darb, Rela

### Affiliations
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Department of General Microbiology, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg Stülke
Georg-August-University Göttingen, Department of General Microbiology, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics


