### Accession
PXD042145

### Title
Saccharomyces cerevisiae translational fidelity

### Description
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) are essential enzymes that ligate amino acids to tRNAs, and often require editing to ensure accurate protein synthesis. Recessive mutations in aaRSs cause various neurological disorders in humans, yet the underlying mechanism remains poorly understood. Pathogenic aaRS mutations frequently cause protein destabilization and aminoacylation deficiency. In this study, we report that combined aminoacylation and editing defects cause severe proteotoxicity. We show that a C268A mutation in yeast threonyl-tRNA synthetase (ThrRS) abolishes editing and causes heat sensitivity. Surprisingly, directed-evolution of the C268A mutant result in intragenic mutations that restore heat resistance but not editing. C268A destabilizes ThrRS and decreases overall Thr-tRNAThr synthesis, and the suppressor mutations in the evolved strains improve aminoacylation. We further show that deficiency in ThrRS aminoacylation or editing alone is not sufficient to cause heat sensitivity, and that C268A impairs ribosome-associated quality control. Our results suggest that aminoacylation deficiency predisposes cells to proteotoxic stress.

### Sample Protocol
1. 50 ug of protein from each sample was reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and then further reduced with DTT.  2. Proteins were precipitated onto SP3 beads to facilitate a buffer exchange into digestion buffer.  3. Samples were digested with Lys-C (1:100) overnight at room temperature and trypsin (1:100) for 6 hours at 37°C.  4. Peptides were labelled with TMTPro 18plex reagents.  5. 2 uL of each sample was pooled and used to shoot a ratio check in order to confirm complete TMT labelling and to allow for normalization of each sample.  6. All 18 TMTPro-labelled samples were pooled according to the ratios determined from the ratio check.  7. Peptides were desalted using a Sep-pak.  8. Peptides were fractionated into 24 fractions using basic reverse phase HPLC. 12 fractions were solubilized, desalted by stage tip, and analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS2 spectra were searched using the COMET algorithm against a Yeast Uniprot composite database containing its reversed complement and known contaminants.  • For proteome, Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the target-decoy strategy combined with linear discriminant analysis. The proteins were filtered to a <1% FDR and quantified only from peptides with a summed SN threshold of >180.

### Publication Abstract
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) are essential enzymes that ligate amino acids to tRNAs, and often require editing to ensure accurate protein synthesis. Recessive mutations in aaRSs cause various neurological disorders in humans, yet the underlying mechanism remains poorly understood. Pathogenic aaRS mutations frequently cause protein destabilization and aminoacylation deficiency. In this study, we report that combined aminoacylation and editing defects cause severe proteotoxicity. We show that the ths1-C268A mutation in yeast threonyl-tRNA synthetase (ThrRS) abolishes editing and causes heat sensitivity. Surprisingly, experimental evolution of the mutant results in intragenic mutations that restore heat resistance but not editing. ths1-C268A destabilizes ThrRS and decreases overall Thr-tRNAThr synthesis, while the suppressor mutations in the evolved strains improve aminoacylation. We further show that deficiency in either ThrRS aminoacylation or editing is insufficient to cause heat sensitivity, and that ths1-C268A impairs ribosome-associated quality control. Our results suggest that aminoacylation deficiency predisposes cells to proteotoxic stress.

### Keywords
Mistranslation, Protein synthesis, Aminoacyl-trna synthetase

### Affiliations
University of Maryland, College Park
University of Maryland

### Submitter
Jiqiang Ling

### Lab Head
Dr Jiqiang Ling
University of Maryland, College Park


