### Accession
PXD039537

### Title
Anti-Pol II pS5 co-immunoprecipitation in PHF3 WT, KO and ΔSPOC HEK293T cells

### Description
The analysis of differential interactome of Pol II pS5 in PHF3 WT, KO and ΔSPOC HEK293T cells using Pol II pS5 (4H8) antibody coupled to Protein G beads.

### Sample Protocol
5 µg of Pol II pS5 (4H8) was bound to 40 µl Protein G beads. Cells from a 10 cm dish were lysed in the buffer containing 50mM Tris pH8, 150mM NaCal, 0.1% Triton, 1mM DTT, 50U/ml benzonase, EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche). After immunoprecipitation on a rotating wheel at 4°C ON, the beads were washed 6x in TBS (with EDTA-free protease inhibitors, 1mM PMSF). Beads were three times eluted with 20 µL 100 mM glycine and the combined eluates adjusted to pH 8 using 1 M Tris-HCl pH 8. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature before adding 25 mM iodoacetamide and incubating for another 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Remaining iodoacetamide was quenched by adding 5 mM DTT and the proteins were digested with 300 ng trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) at 37°C overnight. The digest was stopped by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and the peptides were desalted using C18 Stagetips.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.16) and the Uniprot human reference proteome (July 2018, www.uniprot.org) as well as a database of most common contaminants.  The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of three missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For label-free quantification the “match between runs” feature and the LFQ function were activated - all other parameters were left at default. Downstream data analysis was performed using the LFQ values in Perseus (version 1.6.2.2). Mean LFQ intensities of biological replicate samples were calculated and proteins were filtered for at least two quantified values being present in the three biological replicates. Missing values were replaced with values randomly selected from a normal distribution (with a width of 0.3 and a median downshift of 1.8 standard deviations of the sample population). To determine differentially enriched proteins we used the LIMMA package in R (version 3.5.1.) and applied the Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing to generate adjusted p-values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phf3, Co-immunoprecipitation, Rna pol ii ps5

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna, Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Laboratories Support GmbH

### Submitter
WeiQiang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Dea Slade
Medical University of Vienna, Austria


