### Accession
PXD028121

### Title
Anti-carbamylated fibrinogen antibodies, that might be related to a particular rheumatoid phenotype, include a subset recognizing in vivo epitopes of its γ chain whose one of them is not cross reactive with ACPA

### Description
To identify the targets recognized by anti-carbamylated protein (anti-CarP) antibodies in patients with early Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA), to study the cross-reactivity between anti-CarP and anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA) and to evaluate their prognostic value. 331 patients (184 RA and 147 other rheumatisms) from the Very Early Arthritis (VErA) French cohort were analyzed. We performed mass spectrometry analysis of RA sera displaying anti-CarP activity and epitope mapping of the carbamylated fibrinogen γ chain to identify immunodominant peptides. The specificity of these targets was studied using competition assays with the major antigens recognized by ACPA. The prognostic value of anti-carbamylated fibrinogen IgG antibodies (ACa-Fib IgG) was compared to anti-CCP and anti-CarP using an in-house ELISA. Besides the α chain, the γ chain of fibrinogen, particularly one immunodominant epitope that has a specific reactivity, was identified as a circulating carbamylated target in sera. Prevalence of ACa-Fib was 37% at baseline and 10.9% for anti-CCP-negative RA. In anti-CCP-negative patients, ACa-Fib positivity was associated with a more inflammatory and erosive disease at baseline but not with rapid radiological progression, which remains strongly related to anti-CCP antibodies. Fibrinogen seems to be one of the antigens recognized in vivo by the anti-CarP response, particularly 2 epitopes of the γ chain, one of which is not cross reactive with ACPA. This specificity might be associated with a distinct clinical phenotype since ACa-Fib IgG were shown to be linked to systemic inflammation in very early RA but not to rapid radiological progression.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, peptides fraction were solubilized in formic acid 0.1% (v/v) and analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoESI source. Peptides were injected onto an enrichment column (C18 Pepmap100 precolumn (300 μm i.d. × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å), Thermo Scientific). The separation was carried out using an EASY-spray column (15 cm, 3 μm, 0.075 mm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). The flow rate was 300 μL/min and the mobile phase composed of H2O/0.1% FA (buffer A) and ACN/H2O/0.1% FA (80/20) (buffer B). The elution gradient duration was 120 minutes: 0-3min, 2% B; 3-84min, 2-35% B; 84-94min, 35-90% B; 94-105min, 90% B; 105-106min, 90-2% B; 106-120min, 2% B. The temperature of the column was set at 40 °C. For mass spectrometry settings, the capillary voltage was 1.6 kV and the temperature of the capillary was 275°C. The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms and the m/z detection range was 400-1800 in MS scan at a resolution of 70 000. 17 500 in MS/MS. The 10 most intense peptide ions were selected and then fragmented with nitrogen as collision gas and a resolution set at 17 500 for MSMS analysis. Fragmentation occurred with a normalized collision energy of 28.

### Data Protocol
All spectra obtained were exported in “raw” format to identify peptides and proteins with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific). Peak lists were searched using MASCOT search software (Matrix Science) against the database Swissprot with human taxonomy. Database search were performed with the following parameters: one miss cleavage site allowed; carbamidomethyation on cysteine, oxidation on methionine and carbamylation on lysine as variable modifications. The parent-ion and daughter-ion tolerance were 5ppm and 0.02Da respectively. False discovery rate threshold for identification was specified at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anti-carbamylated protein/peptide antibodies (anti-carp), Prognosis, Fibrinogen, Very early rheumatoid arthritis, Acpa

### Affiliations
Rouen University Hospital, Department of Rheumatology & CIC-CRB1404, Rouen, France.  Normandie University, UNIROUEN, INSERM, U1234, Rouen, France
Normandie Université, PISSARO Proteomic Facility, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB), F-76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan, France.

### Submitter
Clement GUILLOU

### Lab Head
Dr FRERET Manuel
Rouen University Hospital, Department of Rheumatology & CIC-CRB1404, Rouen, France.  Normandie University, UNIROUEN, INSERM, U1234, Rouen, France


