### Accession
PXD005138

### Title
Phosphodiesterase 10A inhibition improves cortico-basal ganglia function in Huntington’s disease models

### Description
Using Huntington’s disease (HD) mouse models that quantitatively replicate the reduction of striatal Phoshodiesterase 10 (PDE10) levels in manifest Huntington’s disease patients, we demonstrate the potential therapeutic benefit of PDE10 inhibition on correcting basal ganglia circuitry deficits thought to drive disease symptomology in patients. PDE10 inhibition acutely restored corticostriatal input and boosted cortically driven indirect pathway activity in HD models with compromised PDE10 levels.  We show that cyclic nucleotide signaling processes are impaired in the models, and that elevation of both the cAMP and cGMP nucleotides afforded by PDE10 inhibition are required for this rescue. Global phosphoproteomic profiling of striatal proteins in response to PDE10 inhibition provide novel information on the plausible neural substrates responsible for the improvement.  Finally, we show that long-term chronic treatment of the Q175 knock-in mouse model with PDE10A inhibitors, starting at a presymptomatic age, showed improvements, above and beyond those seen during acute administration, including a partial reversal of striatal deregulated transcripts predominantly driven through activation of the AP-1 and CREB transcription factor complexes, and a prevention of the emergence of some cardinal HD neurophysiological deficits.

### Sample Protocol
6 month old Q175 Hom, Het and WT mice (12 per group; 6 male, 6 female) were dosed with 3.2 mg/kg free base equiv. of PF-02454920 (succinic acid salt) or vehicle (0.5% methylcellulose) by oral gavage.  Mice were sacrificed 1 hour post-dose  by exposure of the head to the microwave beam with power set at 5kW for 0.85secb using a MMW-05 Muromachi Microwave Applicator resulting in rapid heat inactivation of brain enzymes. After microwave fixation, mice were decapitated and the head was cooled down on wet ice for ~10 minutes prior to dissection of the striatum on ice. Striata were weighed and frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Striatal samples were processed with our standard proteome and phosphoproteome workflows, i.e. proteins were extracted, digested with trypsin, and labelled with mTRAQ. Peptide samples were fractionated via reverse phase chromatography into twelve fractions per samples. One aliquot of each peptide fraction was enriched for phosphorylated peptides using the immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) method (for details see Supplemental Methods). Subsequently, LC-MS/MS analyses were performed for all 174 not enriched and 174 phospho-peptide enriched fractions using an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw data files were analyzed with the MaxQuant software suite for peptide and protein identification and mTRAQ and MaxLFQ quantification. All MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot Mouse database (version 12.2013).   Proteins or phosphosites with significant regulation resulting from compound treatment were identified by the one-sample MeanRank test using ratios of compound-treated versus vehicle control-treated intensities. Similarly, significant differences in basal proteome and phosphoproteome were identified by one-way ANOVA on MaxLFQ intensities, using genotype as factor. Details on the significance analysis and subsequent enrichment and sub-network analysis are described in the Supplemental Methods.

### Publication Abstract
Huntington's disease (HD) symptoms are driven to a&#xa0;large extent by dysfunction of the basal ganglia circuitry. HD patients exhibit reduced striatal phoshodiesterase 10 (PDE10) levels. Using HD mouse models that exhibit reduced PDE10, we demonstrate&#xa0;the benefit of pharmacologic PDE10 inhibition to&#xa0;acutely correct basal ganglia circuitry deficits. PDE10 inhibition restored corticostriatal input and boosted cortically driven indirect pathway activity. Cyclic nucleotide signaling is impaired in HD models, and PDE10 loss may represent a homeostatic adaptation to maintain signaling. Elevation of both cAMP and cGMP by PDE10 inhibition was required for rescue. Phosphoproteomic profiling of striatum in response to PDE10 inhibition highlighted plausible neural substrates responsible for the improvement. Early chronic PDE10 inhibition in Q175 mice showed improvements beyond those seen with acute administration after symptom onset, including partial reversal of striatal deregulated transcripts and the prevention of the emergence of HD neurophysiological deficits. VIDEO ABSTRACT.

### Keywords
Huntington's disease; proteomics; phosphoproteomics;pde10a;striatum;

### Affiliations
Evotec

### Submitter
Manuela Machatti

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Schaab
Evotec


