### Accession
PXD001076

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics of cytotoxic T cells to reveal Protein Kinase D 2 regulated networks

### Description
The focus of the present study was to characterize the phosphoproteome of cytotoxic T cells and to explore the role of the serine threonine kinase PKD2 (Protein Kinase D2) in the phosphorylation networks of this key lymphocyte population. We used Stable Isotope Labelling of Amino acids in Culture (SILAC) combined with phosphopeptide enrichment and quantitative mass-spectrometry to determine the impact of PKD2 loss on the cytotoxic T cells phosphoproteome. We identified 15,871 phosphorylations on 3,505 proteins in cytotoxic T cells.  450 phosphosites on 281 proteins were down-regulated and 300 phosphosites on 196 proteins were up-regulated in PKD2 null cytotoxic T cells. These data give valuable new insights about the protein phosphorylation networks operational in effector T cells and reveal that PKD2 regulates directly and indirectly about 5% of the cytotoxic T cell phosphoproteome. PKD2 candidate substrates identified in this study include proteins involved in two distinct biological functions: regulation of protein sorting and intracellular vesicle trafficking, and control of chromatin structure, transcription and translation. In other cell types PKD substrates include class II histone deacetylases such as HDAC7 and actin regulatory proteins such as Slingshot. The current data show these are not PKD substrates in primary T cells revealing that the functional role of PKD isoforms is different in different cell lineages.

### Sample Protocol
P14 cytotoxic T cells were generated and labeled in SILAC media. Splenocytes were activated for 2 days with the P14-TCR cognate ligand (peptide gp33-41 from Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis Virus, LCMV). Then, cells were cultured for 4 days in SILAC medium (Dundee Cell Products), L-proline 200 mg/l, L-arginine 84 mg/l, pre-supplemented with 300 mg/l L-glutamate, 10% dialysed FCS with a 10kDa cutoff (Life Technologies), 50 units/ml penicillin-G, 50 μg/ml streptomycin and 50 µM β-mercaptoethanol and 20 ng/ml IL-2 (Proleukin). The following arginine and lysine isotopes were used: R0K0 (light):L-[12C6, 14N4]arginine (R0) and L-[12C6, 14N2]lysine (K0) R10K8 (heavy): L-[13C6, 15N4]arginine (R10) and L-[13C6, 15N2]lysine (K8). The SILAC labelling was performed in 3 biological replicates, where the P14 wild type CTLs cells comprised the “light” condition and PKD2 null CTLs were labelled with “heavy” amino acids in two experiments (experiments 1 and 2), and a label switch was performed in the third experiment  (experiment 3). P14 wild-type and PKD2 null CTLs differentially labelled in SILAC media for four days were mixed at 1:1 ratio (total 3x108 cells) and stimulated for 5 min with P14-TCR cognate peptide (LCMV gp33-41). After TCR stimulation, cells were washed once in cold PBS and were subjected to cytosol and nuclear fractionation.  Briefly, cells were resuspended in hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 15 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM EDTA, 10 mM NaF, 0.15% (vol/vol) Nonidet-P40, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 mM Na3VO4 and 1 mM dithiothreitol) and centrifuged for 1 min/10,000g. Cytosolic fractions were removed and nuclear-membrane fractions were resuspended in nuclear lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.05, 50 mM NaCl, 3 0 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 50 mM NaF, 5 mM ZnCl2, 10% (vol/vol) glycerol and 0.5% (vol/vol) Triton-X100). Cytosolic and nuclear fractions were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid (10%, v/v) for 15 min/ice. Protein pellets were resuspended in Urea 8M Tris-HCl 100mM. Cytosolic and nuclear lysates were subjected to alkylation with iodoacetamide prior to trypsin digestion (Roche). Proteolytic digestion products were desalted on a 1-g Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters), and subjected to hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) using a 4.6 × 250-mm TSKgel Amide-80 5-μm particle column (Tosoh Biosciences). 18 fractions of each subcellular compartment were collected throughout the gradient and further enriched in phosphopeptides by immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC, Phos-Select, Sigma). The supernatants from the IMAC (combining the 18 fractions for each subcellular compartment in 9 samples) were used for additional TiO2 pull down (Titanspheres, GL Sciences). The peptide mixture was separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000 nLC (Dionex)) coupled online to a Linear Trap Quadrupole (LTQ)-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The eluting peptide solutions was automatically (online) electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). The mass spectrometers were operated in positive ion mode and used in data-dependent acquisition modes. A full scan (FT-MS) was acquired at a target value of 1,000,000 ions with resolution R = 60,000 over a mass range of 335-1800 amu (atomic mass unit). The ten most intense ions were selected for fragmentation in the LTQ Orbitrap Velos. Fragmentation in the LTQ was induced by collision-induced dissociation (CID) with a target value of 10,000 ions. For accurate mass measurement, the ""lock mass"" function (lock mass = 445.120036 Da) was enabled for MS scan modes. To improve the fragmentation of phosphopeptides, the multistage activation algorithm in the Xcalibur software was enabled for each MS/MS spectrum using the neutral loss values of 48.99, 32.66 and 24.50 m/z units. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 300 s. General mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 1.0-2.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; ion transfer tube temperature, 150–180 °C; normalised collision energy (35%) using wide band activation mode for MS2. The isolation width was set to 2 amu for IT-MS/MS. Ion selection thresholds were 600 counts for MS2. An activation of q = 0.25 and activation time of 30 ms were applied in MS2 acquisitions. The fill time for FTMS was set to 1000 ms and for ITMS to 150 ms. In this study three independent biological replicates of P14 wild-type versus PKD2 knockout CTLs were analyzed, with two technical replicates for each biological sample (total 310 HPLC-MS/MS runs).

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, we combined the raw data obtained from the two technical replicates, the two subcellular fractions (nucleus and cytosol) and the IMAC and TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment methods in each independent replicate. Data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 which incorporates the Andromeda search engine. Proteins were mapped to the Uniprot mouse protein database ("Mouse Complete Proteome" retrieved on 2013-08-13). Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 20 ppm, an MS/MS tolerance at 0.5 Da and full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, N-terminal protein acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Peptides were required to be at least 6 amino acids in length with false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 calculated at the level of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database.        The annotated_spectra.zip file contains .pdf files with annotated MS/MS spectra for all PTM containing peptides described in the publication related to this dataset. Separate MS/MS spectra for the highest identification and localization scores have been deposited. The Phospho (STY)Sites_annotated_spectra.xlsx file within the annotated_spectra.zip file contains a list of all reported sites and the file names of their corresponding .pdf files including the annotated spectra.

### Publication Abstract
The focus of the present study was to characterize the phosphoproteome of cytotoxic T cells and to explore the role of the serine threonine kinase PKD2 (Protein Kinase D2) in the phosphorylation networks of this key lymphocyte population. We used Stable Isotope Labeling of Amino acids in Culture (SILAC) combined with phosphopeptide enrichment and quantitative mass-spectrometry to determine the impact of PKD2 loss on the cytotoxic T cells phosphoproteome. We identified 15,871 phosphorylations on 3505 proteins in cytotoxic T cells. 450 phosphosites on 281 proteins were down-regulated and 300 phosphosites on 196 proteins were up-regulated in PKD2 null cytotoxic T cells. These data give valuable new insights about the protein phosphorylation networks operational in effector T cells and reveal that PKD2 regulates directly and indirectly about 5% of the cytotoxic T-cell phosphoproteome. PKD2 candidate substrates identified in this study include proteins involved in two distinct biological functions: regulation of protein sorting and intracellular vesicle trafficking, and control of chromatin structure, transcription, and translation. In other cell types, PKD substrates include class II histone deacetylases such as HDAC7 and actin regulatory proteins such as Slingshot. The current data show these are not PKD substrates in primary T cells revealing that the functional role of PKD isoforms is different in different cell lineages.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Lymphocytes, Silac, Pkd2

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Jens Hukelmann

### Lab Head
Dr Doreen Ann Cantrell
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK


