### Accession
PXD015377

### Title
Global PhosphoTyrosinylated Protein Profile of Cell-Matrix Adhesion Complexes of Trabecular Meshwork Cells

### Description
Identification of Tyrosine phosphorylated proteins in the ECM enriched fraction isolated from Human TM cells. Bottom up LC-MS/MS analysis of pY antibody enriched peptides from mouse ECM.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was subjected to chromatographic separation on a Waters NanoAquity UPLC equipped with a 1.7 µm BEH130 C18 75 µm I.D. X 250 mm reversed-phase column. The mobile phase consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid in water and (B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Following a 5 µL injection, peptides were trapped for 5 min on a 5 µm Symmetry C18 180 µm I.D. X 20 mm column at 20 µl/min in 99.9% A. The analytical column was held at 5% B for 5 min then switched in-line and a linear elution gradient of 5% B to 30% B was performed over 90 min at 300 nL/min. The analytical column was connected to a fused silica PicoTip emitter (New Objective, Cambridge, MA) with a 10 µm tip orifice and coupled to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer through an electrospray interface. The instrument was set to acquire a precursor MS scan from m/z 350-1800 with r = 120,000 at m/z 400 and a target AGC setting of 4e5 ions. In a data-dependent mode of acquisition, MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap with AGC target of 5e3 and fill times of 100ms. For all experiments, a dynamic exclusion of 60 s was employed for previously fragmented precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed in Mascot distiller (Matrix Science) and then submitted to independent Mascot database searches (Matrix Science) against SwissProt (mouse taxonomy) containing both forward and reverse entries of each protein. Search tolerances were 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for product ions using trypsin specificity with up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da on C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (+15.9949 Da on M) and Phosphorylation (+79.98 Da on STY) were considered variable modifications. All searched spectra were imported into Scaffold (Proteome Software) and protein confidence thresholds were set using a Bayesian statistical algorithm based on the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms which yielded a peptide and protein false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulation of the mechanical properties and cell adhesive interactions of trabecular meshwork (TM) are known to impair aqueous humor drainage and elevate intraocular pressure in glaucoma patients. The identity of regulatory mechanisms underlying TM mechanotransduction, however, remains elusive. Here we analyzed the phosphotyrosine proteome of human TM cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion complexes, which play a key role in sensing and transducing extracellular chemical and mechanical cues into intracellular activities, using a two-level affinity pull-down (phosphotyrosine antibody and titanium dioxide beads) method and mass spectrometry. This analysis identified ~1,000 tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins of TM cell-ECM adhesion complexes. Many consensus adhesome proteins were found to be tyrosine phosphorylated. Interestingly, several of the phosphotyrosinylated proteins found in TM cell-ECM adhesion complexes are known to be required for podocyte glomerular filtration, indicating the existence of molecular parallels that are likely relevant to the shared fluid barrier and filtration functions of the two mechanosensitive cell types.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomcis, Ecm membrane

### Affiliations
Duke University
Duke Proteomics and Metabolomics Shared Resource

### Submitter
Erik Soderblom

### Lab Head
Dr Erik Soderblom
Duke Proteomics and Metabolomics Shared Resource


