### Accession
PXD020332

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of Corallium rubrum biominerals

### Description
The process of calcium carbonate biomineralization has arisen multiple times during metazoan evolution. In the phylum Cnidaria, biomineralization has mostly been studied in the subclass Hexacorallia (i.e. stony corals) in comparison to the subclass Octocorallia (i.e. red corals); the two diverged approximately 600 million years ago. The precious Mediterranean red coral, Corallium rubrum, is an octocorallian species, which produces two distinct high-magnesium calcite biominerals, the axial skeleton and the sclerites. In order to gain insight into the red coral biomineralization process and cnidarian biomineralization evolution, we studied the protein repertoire forming the organic matrix (OM) of its two biominerals. We combined High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry and transcriptome analysis to study the OM composition of the axial skeleton and the sclerites. We identified a total of 102 OM proteins, 52 are shared between the two red coral biominerals with scleritin being the most abundant protein in each fraction. Contrary to reef building corals, the red coral is collagen-rich (10 collagen-like proteins). Agrin-like glycoproteins and proteins with sugar-binding domains are also predominant. Twenty-seven and 23 proteins were uniquely assigned to the axial skeleton and the sclerites, respectively. Their inferred regulatory function suggests that the difference between the two biominerals rather relies on the modeling of the matrix network than on specific structural components. At least one OM component appears to have been horizontally transferred from prokaryotes early during Octocorallia evolution. Our results support the view that calcification of the red coral axial skeleton likely represents a secondary calcification of an ancestral gorgonian horny axis. In addition, the comparison with stony coral skeletomes highlighted the low proportion of similar proteins between the biomineral OMs of hexacorallian and octocorallian corals, suggesting an independent acquisition of calcification in anthozoans.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 100 µg of SOM, and non-quantified IOM samples were denatured in Laemmli buffer for 5 min at 95°C. Proteins were loaded on a 12% polyacrylamide SDS-PAGE electrophoretic gel for rapid run (15 min) in order to obtain one single band. Gels were colored using Coomassie blue staining. The single bands were excised from the gels and cut into pieces and were digested using trypsin procedure. Then, nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an on-line system consisting of a nano-pump UltiMate™ 3000 UHPLC binary HPLC system (Dionex, ThermoFisher) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, Germany). Peptides were resuspended in 20 μl of sample buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and 2 μl was injected into a pre-column 300 µm × 5 mm (Acclaim PepMap, 5 µm particle size). After loading, peptides were eluted to an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 capillary column (75 µm × 15 cm, 100 Å, 3 μm particle sizes). Peptides were eluted into the MS, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a 40 min gradient from 5% to 40% mobile phase B. Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in H2O and mobile phase B was 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive and data-dependent mode, with a single MS scan (m/z 350-1400 at 60,000 resolution (at m/z 200) in a profile mode) followed by MS/MS scans on the 10 most intense ions at 15,000 resolution. Ions selected for MS/MS scan were fragmented using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 28% and using an isolation window of m/z 1.8.

### Data Protocol
The RAW files from Q-Exactive HF were converted into Mascot generic format (mgf) files using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Scientific). These files were submitted to Mascot v2.3 (Matrix Sciences Ltd, United Kingdom) for database search against the red coral transcriptome database of the Centre Scientifique de Monaco (trinity_v141, Ganot et al., unpublished data). The mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursors, and 0.5 Da for the MS/MS fragment ion. The fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethyl and variable modifications were set to oxidation at methionine. The Mascot result files were processed using Scaffold v4.8.3 (Proteome Software Inc. USA; Additional file 14) software using the Prophet algorithm for validation of peptide and protein identifications with a threshold of 95% and 99%, respectively, and a minimum of two peptides in one of the 4 fractions for the identification of one protein. The relative abundance of identified proteins in each organic matrix fraction was estimated by calculating the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) using Scaffold v4.8.3. In order to compare the abundance of proteins in each condition, the weighted spectra (WS) value was also calculated as the number of MS/MS spectra for each protein (Additional file 4 sheet#1).  Identified proteins using Mascot were cross-checked against the published C. rubrum transcriptome (Pratlong et al., 2015), which used a different assembly strategy. This allowed us to merge several sequences from the trinity_v141 into longer cDNA sequences (Additional files 2 and 3). Cellular localization was determined from the prediction of signal peptide (SignalP; http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/), transmembrane domain (TMHMM; http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/) and GPI-anchor (assigned GPI if both in predGPI and in GPISOM; http://gpcr.biocomp.unibo.it/predgpi/pred.htm: http://gpi.unibe.ch/). Sequence annotation was carried out using Blast2GO pipeline (B2G: https://www.blast2go.com/) using blastp against refseq (Eval > 1E-15) for homology search. ProtParam (http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) was used to determine in silico molecular weight and pI of proteins, net charge pH=8 was calculated with PROTEIN CALCULATOR v3.4 (http://protcalc.sourceforge.net/), Low Complexity Region were determined using segmasker (SEG: http://mendel.imp.ac.at/METHODS/seg.server.html), and InterProScan (B2G) and SMART (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de) were used for domain predictions (Additional file 4 sheet #2). Multiple sequence alignments for collagen-like proteins, galaxin and CR_22 were performed using Mafft or Clustal (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/mafft). Phylogenetic analysis was carried out for CR_22 using PhyML…Percentage of identity and similarity between C; rubrum proteins and putative homologs in three scleractinian species were calculated using Ident and Sim tool (https://www.bioinformatics.org/sms2/ident_sim.html) after pairwise alignment with Mafft. Reference: Pratlong M, Haguenauer A, Chabrol O, Klopp C, Pontarotti P, Aurelle D. The red coral (Corallium rubrum) transcriptome: a new resource for population genetics and local adaptation studies. Mol Ecol Resour. 2015;15:1205–15.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Organic matrix, Sclerites, Axial skeleton, Lc-ms/ms, Corallium rubrum

### Affiliations
Bordeaux INP-ENSEGID
Centre scientifique de Monaco, Monaco

### Submitter
Nathalie Le Roy

### Lab Head
Dr Denis Allemand
Centre scientifique de Monaco, Monaco


