### Accession
PXD033101

### Title
Putative tear fluid biomarkers of diabetic retinopathy

### Description
Identification of tear fluid biomarkers may offer a non-invasive strategy for detecting diabetic patients with increased risk of developing diabetic retinopathy (DR) or increased disease progression, thus helping both improving diagnostic accuracy and understanding the pathophysiology of the disease. The goal of this study was to characterize the proteomic profile of human tear fluid and examine changes in proteins expression in different stages of diabetic retinopathy.

### Sample Protocol
Tear fluid samples were collected using Schirmer test strips. Schirmer strips were soaked in 0.9% NaCl to elute proteins. The total protein concentration of each sample was determined using the Bicinchoninic acid method. Proteins were denatured using 8M urea followed by reduction by adding 15 mM dithiothreitol. Samples were then incubated with 30 mM iodoacetamide to alkylate cysteine residues. After dilution of samples with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 4M, they were digested with lysyl endopeptidase (Wako; 1/100, w/w) at 37˚C for 4 hours. Samples were again diluted to 2 M urea and digested with trypsin (Promega; 1/100, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by the addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted on a reversed phase (RP) C18 OMIX tip (Agilent). The tip was first washed pre-wash buffer (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (ACN, 20:80, v/v)) and pre-equilibrated with wash buffer (0.1% TFA in water) before the sample was loaded on the tip. After peptide binding, the tip was washed with wash buffer and peptides were eluted with elution buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water/ACN (40:60, v/v)). The combined elutions were dried in a vacuum concentrator. For liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, peptides were injected on an Ultimate 3000 RSL Cnano system in-line connencted to a Thermo Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Trapping was performed at 10 l/min for 4 min in loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)), on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany).  The peptides were separated on a 250 mm Waters nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm inner diameter (Waters Corporation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient starting at 1% MS solvent B ((0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) reaching 33% MS solvent B in 63 min, 55% MS solvent B in 87 min, 99% MS solvent B in 90 minutes followed by a 10-minute wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 15,000 were isolated with a width of 1.5 m/z for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 50 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the mass spectrometry data was performed in MaxQuant (version 1.6.11.0) with mainly default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on PSM, peptide, and protein level. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis with quantified proteins was carried out.  Spectra were searched against the human proteins in the Reference proteins database (release version of January 2020 containing 20,365 human protein sequences). Data analysis of the results was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1).  Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. A PANTHER Overrepresentation Test (Released on 2021-02-24) with Homo sapiens as reference list was performed and molecular, biological processes, and cellular components annotations data set were available considering Fisher’s Exact test with FDR correction (FDR p < 0.05). Protein-protein interactome analysis was performed using the STRING database (version 11.5). The analysis considered both functional and physical protein associations with 0.700 (high confidence) as minimum required interaction score. GraphPad Prism (version 8.00) was used to perform data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Type 2 diabetes, Tear fluid, Lc-msms, Proliferative diabetic retinopathy, Nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Univ Coimbra, Coimbra Institute for Clinical and Biomedical Research (iCBR), Faculty of Medicine, Coimbra, Portugal.

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Rosa Fernandes
Univ Coimbra, Coimbra Institute for Clinical and Biomedical Research (iCBR), Faculty of Medicine, Coimbra, Portugal.


