### Accession
PXD002091

### Title
Positional proteomics reveals differences in N-terminal proteoform stability.

### Description
To understand the impact of alternative translation initiation on a proteome, we performed the first large-scale study of protein turnover rates in which we distinguish between N-terminal proteoforms pointing to translation initiation events. Using pulsed SILAC combined with N-terminal COFRADIC we monitored the stability of 1,941human N-terminal proteoforms, including 147 proteoform pairs with heterogeneous N-termini originating from the same gene that result from alternative translation initiation and incomplete processing of the initiator methionine. N-terminally truncated proteoforms were on average less abundant than canonical proteoforms, many had different stabilities and exhibited both faster and slower turnover rates compared to their canonical counterparts. These differences in stability did not depend on the length of truncation but on individual protein characteristics. In silico simulation of N-terminal proteoforms in macromolecular complexes revealed possible consequences for complex integrity such as replacement of unstable canonical subunits. The extent of intrinsic disorder in N-terminal protein structures correlated with turnover times, indicating that a change in the structural flexibility of protein N-termini in truncated proteoforms might impact proteoform stability. Interestingly, removal of the initiator methionine by methionine aminopeptidases reduced the stability of processed proteoforms while susceptibility for N-terminal acetylation, another common co-translational modification, did not seem to impact on turnover rates. Taken together, our findings reveal differences in protein stability between N-terminal proteoforms and point to a role for alternative translation initiation and co-translational initiator methionine removal in the overall regulation of proteome homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
For N-terminal COFRADIC analyses, human T-lymphocyte Jurkat cells were subjected to SILAC labelling. Cells were cultured in a 5% CO2 gas-equilibrated, humidified incubator in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) - 1640 medium without arginine and lysine (Silantes, GmbH, Munich, Germany) containing 10% fetal bovine serum dialyzed using a 10 kDa cut-off membrane (Gibco, Life Technologies, Paisley, Scotland, UK), 2 mM alanyl-L-glutamine dipeptide (GlutaMAX, Gibco), 50 units/ml of penicillin (Gibco), 50 µg/ml of streptomycin (Gibco) and 146 µg/ml light (12C6) L-lysine (Cambridge Isotope Labs, Andover, MA, USA). Media were supplemented with either light (Arg0, 12C6 14N4) or medium (Arg6, 13C6 14N4) L-arginine (Cambridge Isotope Labs) at a final concentration of 48 µg/ml at which Arg to Pro conversion was not detected. To achieve a complete incorporation of the labelled amino acids, cells were maintained in culture for 7 population doublings. The pulsed SILAC strategy for protein turnover measurements was previously described by Boisvert et al. (Boisvert, F. M., Ahmad, Y., Gierlinski, M., Charriere, F., et al., A quantitative spatial proteomics analysis of proteome turnover in human cells. Mol Cell Proteomics 2012, 11, M111 011429). Briefly, suspension cultures containing equal numbers of unlabelled (Arg0) and labelled (Arg6) cells were taken and the medium was removed by centrifugation for 5 min at 350 g. Cell pellets were washed with PBS and centrifuged for 5 min at 350 g. The unlabelled cells were then suspended in light RPMI medium, whereas the medium labelled (Arg6) cells were suspended in medium containing heavy Arg (Arg10, 13C6 15N4) L-arginine. Following medium change, separate starting cultures of 10^7 cells were cultured at a concentration of 2*10^5 cells/ml for periods of 0.5, 1.5, 4, 8, 12, 24, or 48 h, after which cultures of 10^7 cells were collected by centrifugation. Following two rounds of re-suspending in PBS and centrifugation at room temperature, cell pellets were immediately frozen on dry ice and stored at -80oC.  Proteins were isolated from cell pellets by 3 rounds of freezing and thawing in 1 ml of 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.5 and cell debris removed by a 10 min centrifugation at 13,200 g at 4oC. The protein concentration in the supernatants was measured by the Bradford method and for every time point sample, an equal amount of medium/heavy labelled proteome sample was combined with the corresponding equivalent of light control sample.  N-terminal COFRADIC analyses were performed as described previously by Steas et al. (Staes, A., Impens, F., Van Damme, P., Ruttens, B., et al., Selecting protein N-terminal peptides by combined fractional diagonal chromatography. Nat Protoc 2011, 6, 1130-1141.). All primary amines were blocked by acetylation at the protein level to ensure uniformity of protein N-termini (i.e. no distinction can be made between in vivo Nt-free (and thus in vitro Nt-acetylated) and in vivo Nt-acetylated N-termini).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC (Dionex, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The sample mixture was loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 µm I.D. × 20 mm, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). After back flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 m I.D. × 150 mm, 5 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded in solvent A’ (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN)) and separated with a linear gradient from 2% solvent A’’ (0.1% formic acid) to 50% solvent B’ (0.1% formic acid and 80% ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min followed by a wash reaching 100% solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the ten most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. Mascot Generic Files were created from the MS/MS data in each LC run using the Distiller software (version 2.4.2.0). The generated MS/MS peak lists were searched with Mascot using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.3.01, Matrix Science). Searches were performed in the Swiss-Prot database with taxonomy set to human (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database versions of 2012/01/25, 2012/02/22 and 2012/03/21). Acetylation at lysine side-chains, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide were set as fixed modifications. Variable modifications were acetylation of N-termini and pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine (both at peptide level). Endoproteinase Arg-C/P (Arg-C specificity with Arg-Pro cleavage allowed) was set as enzyme allowing for no missed cleavages. Mass tolerance on the precursor ion was set to 10 ppm and on fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put to ESI-TRAP. Only peptides that scored above the threshold score, set at 99% confidence, were withheld. Identified peptides were re-mapped onto UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database release 2011_08, containing 20,244 human protein entries. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated by searching a decoy database (a shuffled version of the human Swiss-Prot database version 2011_08 made by the DBToolkit algorithm) and ranged from 0.32% to 2.27% for individual samples, with a global FDR of 1.18% on the spectrum level.

### Publication Abstract
To understand the impact of alternative translation initiation on a proteome, we performed a proteome-wide study on protein turnover using positional proteomics and ribosome profiling to distinguish between N-terminal proteoforms of individual genes. By combining pulsed SILAC with N-terminal COFRADIC, we monitored the stability of 1,941 human N-terminal proteoforms, including 147&#xa0;N-terminal proteoform pairs that originate from alternative translation initiation, alternative splicing or incomplete processing of the initiator methionine. N-terminally truncated proteoforms were less abundant than canonical proteoforms and often displayed altered stabilities, likely attributed to individual protein characteristics, including intrinsic disorder, but independent of N-terminal amino acid identity or truncation length. We discovered that the removal of initiator methionine by methionine aminopeptidases reduced the stability of processed proteoforms, while susceptibility for N-terminal acetylation did not seem to influence protein turnover rates. Taken together, our findings reveal differences in protein stability between N-terminal proteoforms and point to a role for alternative translation initiation and co-translational initiator methionine removal, next to alternative splicing, in the overall regulation of proteome homeostasis.

### Keywords
Human, Alternative translation initiation, N-terminal proteoform, Nt-acetylation, Protein stability, Initiator methionine processing, N-terminal cofradic, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
VIB Department of Medical Protein Research, University of Ghent
VIB Department of Medical Protein Research, Ghent University, Belgium

### Submitter
Daria Gawron

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Kris Gevaert
VIB Department of Medical Protein Research, Ghent University, Belgium


