### Accession
PXD014240

### Title
Combination of proteogenomics with peptide de novo sequencing identifies new genes and hidden posttranscriptional modifications

### Description
Proteogenomics, the combination of proteomics, genomics and transcriptomics, has considerably improved genome annotation in under-studied phylogenetic groups, where homology information is missing. Yet, it can also be advantageous when re-investigating well-annotated genomes. Here, we apply an advanced proteogenomics approach, combining standard proteogenomics with peptide de novo sequencing, to refine annotation of the well-studied model fungus Sordaria macrospora. We investigated samples from different developmental and physiological conditions, resulting in detection of 104 hidden proteins and annotation changes in 575 genes, including  389  splice site refinements. Significantly, our approach provides peptide-level evidence for 113 single amino acid variations and 15 C-terminal protein elongations originating from A-to-I RNA editing, a phenomenon recently detected in fungi. Co-expression and phylostratigraphic analysis of the refined proteome suggests new functions in evolutionary young genes correlated with distinct developmental stages. In conclusion, our advanced proteogenomics approach is highly supportive to promote functional studies of model systems.  Proteogenomics, the combination of proteomics, genomics and transcriptomics, has considerably improved genome annotation in under-studied phylogenetic groups, where homology information is missing. Yet, it can also be advantageous when re-investigating well-annotated genomes. Here, we apply an advanced proteogenomics approach, combining standard proteogenomics with peptide de novo sequencing, to refine annotation of the well-studied model fungus Sordaria macrospora. We investigated samples from different developmental and physiological conditions, resulting in detection of 104 hidden proteins and annotation changes in 575 genes, including  389  splice site refinements. Significantly, our approach provides peptide-level evidence for 113 single amino acid variations and 15 C-terminal protein elongations originating from A-to-I RNA editing, a phenomenon recently detected in fungi. Co-expression and phylostratigraphic analysis of the refined proteome suggests new functions in evolutionary young genes correlated with distinct developmental stages. In conclusion, our advanced proteogenomics approach is highly supportive to promote functional studies of model systems.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to digestion, samples were purified by ethanol precipitation. A 10-fold excess of ice-cold ethanol was added to an aliquot of each sample corresponding to 100 µg of total protein content and incubated for 1h at -40°C. Protein precipitates were centrifuged for 30min at 12.000 rcf, 4°C, and after removal of the supernatant, pellets were washed with 200 µl ice-cold aceton. After centrifugation for 20min at the same settings as above, supernatant was discarded and samples were dried under a laminar flow hood. For digestion with trypsin, proteins were first resuspended in 20 µl 6M GuHCl, followed by dilution with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC, pH 7.8) to reach a final concentration of 0.2M of the former. CaCl2 was added at a concentration of 2 mM and finally trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:20 (protease: substrate). Digests were carried out at 37°C for 14h and stopped by the addition of 10% TFA (v/v) to a final concentration of 1%. Desalting of the peptides and assessement of the quality of the digests was done as described before 52 Samples dedicated for GluC digestion were resolubilized in 8M Urea, 50 mM ABC (pH 7.8) and diluted with additional 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC)  buffer to reach a final concentration of 0.4M Urea. Endoproteinase GluC was added at a 1:30 protease:substrate ratio and samples were incubated for 14h at 25°C. Acidification, desalting and quality control were carried out as described above.   Samples for global analysis were fractionated after digestion and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using a Ultimate 300 nano RSLC HPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer, while samples dedicated for label-free quantification and PRM-analysis were measured unfractionated on a Ultimate 300 nano RSLC HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (all Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database searches after genome annotation refinement were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific). Search algorithms Mascot (Version 2.6.1, Matrix Science) Sequest and MS Amanda (Version 2.0) were used and searches were conducted in target/decoy manner against the refined S. macrospora database (10,004 target sequences) in concatenation with a database comprising common lab contaminants (257 target sequences). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (full specificity), allowing for a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was defined as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and pyroglutamic acid formation from N-terminal glutamine residues were allowed as variable modification. Precursor mass tolerance was limited to 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Results were evaluated with Percolator and filtered for 1% FDR (PSM, Peptide and Protein level), PSMs with a precursor mass deviation greater than 5 ppm were discarded and only Master proteins were kept.

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomics combines proteomics, genomics, and transcriptomics and has considerably improved genome annotation in poorly investigated phylogenetic groups for which homology information is lacking. Furthermore, it can be advantageous when reinvestigating well-annotated genomes. Here, we applied an advanced proteogenomics approach, combining standard proteogenomics with peptide <i>de novo</i> sequencing, to refine annotation of the well-studied model fungus <i>Sordaria macrospora</i> We investigated samples from different developmental and physiological conditions, resulting in the detection of 104 so-far hidden proteins and annotation changes in 575 genes, including 389 splice site refinements. Significantly, our approach provides peptide-level evidence for 113 single-amino-acid variations and 15 C-terminal protein elongations originating from A-to-I RNA editing, a phenomenon recently detected in fungi. Coexpression and phylostratigraphic analysis of the refined proteome suggest that new functions in evolutionarily young genes correlate with distinct developmental stages. In conclusion, our advanced proteogenomics approach supports and promotes functional studies of fungal model systems.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Next-generation sequencing techniques have considerably increased the number of completely sequenced eukaryotic genomes. These genomes are mostly automatically annotated, and <i>ab initio</i> gene prediction is commonly combined with homology-based search approaches and often supported by transcriptomic data. The latter in particular improve the prediction of intron splice sites and untranslated regions. However, correct prediction of translation initiation sites (TIS), alternative splice junctions, and protein-coding potential remains challenging. Here, we present an advanced proteogenomics approach, namely, the combination of proteogenomics and <i>de novo</i> peptide sequencing analysis, in conjunction with Blast2GO and phylostratigraphy. Using the model fungus <i>Sordaria macrospora</i> as an example, we provide a comprehensive view of the proteome that not only increases the functional understanding of this multicellular organism at different developmental stages but also immensely enhances the genome annotation quality.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Sordaria macrospora, Proteogenomics, Rna editing, De novo peptide sequencing

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b, 44227 Dortmund, Germany
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Dortmund

### Submitter
Bernhard Blank-Landeshammer

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V., Otto-Hahn-Str. 6b, 44227 Dortmund, Germany


