### Accession
PXD022198

### Title
The Proteome Landscape of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)

### Description
Many functional consequences of mutations on tumor phenotypes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) are only partially known. This is in part due to a scarcity of information on the proteome of CLL. We profiled the proteome of 117 CLL samples with data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) and integrated the results with genomic, transcriptomic, functional data and clinical outcome. We found trisomy 12 and IGHV to be major determinants of proteome variation in CLL (1055 and 542 differential proteins FDR of 5%). Trisomy 12 was associated with limited protein abundance buffering. Protein complex analyses detected functional units involved in BCR/PI3K/AKT signaling in CLL with trisomy 12. We associated protein expression with response to anticancer drugs, and STAT2 protein expression emerged as a biomarker for the prediction of response to kinase inhibitors including BTK and MEK inhibitors. STAT2 protein levels were determined by gene dosage (trisomy 12), stabilization in a protein complex and linked to interferon signaling in CLL. This study highlights the emerging importance of protein abundance profiling in CLL biology.

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilized cell pellets were resuspended in 20 μL of 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate and lysed, aided by sonication with a VialTweeter (Hielscher). For 100,000 FACS sorted cells, lysis buffer volume was reduced to 10 μL. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA or Qbit Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer's instructions. Samples were then diluted and treated with 50 U Benzonase Nuclease (Sigma-Aldrich) per 1 mio cells for 30 min at 37 °C. Reduction of disulfide bonds was carried out by the addition of tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubation at 37 °C for 30 min with shaking. Alkylation of free thiol groups was performed by the addition of iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted to 1 M urea and sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 for overnight digestion at 37 °C. After adjusting to 2% formic acid, samples were desalted with C18 column 50mg (Waters) or for the FACS sorted cells with in-house C18 stage tips (2 discs of 47mm, Empore 3M). Cleaned peptide samples were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 13.5 μL of 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid with the addition of iRT peptides [Escher et al., 2012] (Biognosys) for the following mass spectrometry analysis. Peptide concentration was determined using the quantitative fluorometric peptide assay (Pierce/Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer's instructions. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters) chromatography system. Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 4 μL or 200 ng (LUMOS) of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100A, 5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100A, 1.8 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (Lumos) by a gradient from 8 to 22% B in 112 min, 32% B in 8 min and 95% B in 5 min. The instrument was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) or data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. Fragmentation was accomplished by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy setting of 30% (DDA) or 28% (DIA). The resolution of the Orbitrap analyzer was set to 120,000 and 30,000 for MS1 and MS2, with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and 54 ms (DDA) or 100 ms and 50 ms (DIA), respectively. The mass range monitored in MS1 was 350-1500 m/z and in MS2 200-1800 m/z for DIA and the auto m/z normal scan range mode for DDA. Advanced Peak Determination (APD) was activated. Data was acquired with Tune Plus version 2.1.

### Data Protocol
DDA and DIA files were imported into Spectronaut v.13.4 [Bruderer at al., 2015] (Biognosys) or v.14.5 (FACS sorted cells) to create a hybrid library which was used to search the DIA data against the SwissProt reviewed subset of the human UniProt database (version 2019-07-09, 20913 entries). Pulsar library searches were run with trypsin as specific digestion enzyme, allowing max. two missed cleavages per peptide. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification whereas Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) were variable modifications. For the DIA analysis, b- and y-ions were used, and the data were extracted at maximum intensity. For peptide and protein level, the q-value cutoff was 0.01 (equivalent to 1% FDR). For quantification, only proteins with a minimum of two proteotypic peptides were considered. The Spectronaut reports were exported and further processed in R (version 3.6.0). Processing of raw protein abundance data and quality control was done with the R/Bioconductor package DEP [Zhang et al., 2018]. Proteins were selected for analysis if they showed fewer than 50% missing values across remaining samples in each of the two batches (batch 1 and batch 2) of the exploratory cohort. The protein abundance data were background corrected, scaled and transformed using the variance stabilizing transformation approach of [Huber et al., 2002] [Karp et al., 2010].

### Publication Abstract
Many functional consequences of mutations on tumor phenotypes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) are unknown. This may be in part due to a scarcity of information on the proteome of CLL. We profiled the proteome of 117 CLL patient samples with data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry and integrated the results with genomic, transcriptomic, ex vivo drug response, and clinical outcome data. We found trisomy 12, IGHV mutational status, mutated SF3B1, trisomy 19, del(17)(p13), del(11)(q22.3), mutated DDX3X and MED12 to influence protein expression (false discovery rate [FDR] = 5%). Trisomy 12 and IGHV status were the major determinants of protein expression variation in CLL as shown by principal-component analysis (1055 and 542 differentially expressed proteins, FDR = 5%). Gene set enrichment analyses of CLL with trisomy 12 implicated B-cell receptor (BCR)/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling as a tumor driver. These findings were supported by analyses of protein abundance buffering and protein complex formation, which identified limited protein abundance buffering and an upregulated protein complex involved in BCR, AKT, MAPK, and PI3K signaling in trisomy 12 CLL. A survey of proteins associated with trisomy 12/IGHV-independent drug response linked STAT2 protein expression with response to kinase inhibitors, including Bruton tyrosine kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitors. STAT2 was upregulated in unmutated IGHV CLL and trisomy 12 CLL and required for chemokine/cytokine signaling (interferon response). This study highlights the importance of protein abundance data as a nonredundant layer of information in tumor biology and provides a protein expression reference map for CLL.

### Keywords
Human, Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, Dia-ms, Lumos

### Affiliations
Medical Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital and University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Institute of Molecular Systems Biology (IMSB), ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Medical Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital and University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Fabienne Meier-Abt

### Lab Head
Dr Thorsten Zenz
Medical Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital and University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


