### Accession
PXD029616

### Title
N-Acetylation of secreted proteins is widespread in Apicomplexa and independent of acetyl-CoA transporter AT1

### Description
Acetyl-CoA critically participates in post-translational modification of proteins, central carbon and lipid metabolism in several compartments of eukaryotic cells. In mammals, the acetyl-CoA transporter 1 (AT1) facilitates the flux of cytosolic acetyl-CoA into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) enabling the acetylation of proteins of the secretory pathway in concert with dedicated acetyltransferases including Nat8. Homologues of AT1 and Nat8 were identified in the apicomplexan parasites Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium berghei. However, the implication of acetyl-CoA pool influx into the ER in acetylation of ER-transiting proteins and their relevance throughout the parasites’ life cycle is unknown. Here, we report proteome-wide analyses, which revealed unprecedented widespread N-terminal acetylation marks of secreted proteins in both parasites. Deletion of the gene coding for AT1 in both parasites, resulted in global loss of fitness and in addition to retardation in erythrocytic development, malaria parasites are blocked in transmission to mosquitoes. However, in absence of AT1 proteome wide lysine and N-terminal acetylation modifications remain unaltered. This highlights a role of AT1 in parasite development uncoupled to acetylation capacity, indicative of an unusually active acetylation machinery occurring in the ER of Apicomplexa.

### Sample Protocol
The parasite pellets were resuspended in 0.2 mL of dedicated lysis buffer, then briefly sonicated to ensure proper protein extraction. The proteins extracted from the biological material were labelled on their N-termini and lysine ε-amino groups using N-acetoxy-[2H3] succinimide, before being subjected to trypsin digestion. The peptides obtained were then fractionated on a Strong Cation eXchange chromatography, and the fractions number 2-11 were individually analysed on an LTQ-Orbitrap velos mass spectrometer coupled to a liquid chromatography.

### Data Protocol
The data obtained were processed using Mascot Distiller, respectively searching against a custom “ME49”-based T. gondii protein database (v.30) or a P. berghei reference proteome set (UP000074855), with the parent and fragment mass tolerance respectively defined to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da. The quantitation results were then parsed using the EnCOUNTer script to obtain the final N-ter acetylome datasets.

### Publication Abstract
Acetyl-CoA participates in post-translational modification of proteins and in central carbon and lipid metabolism in several cell compartments. In mammals, acetyl-CoA transporter 1 (AT1, also known as SLC33A1) facilitates the flux of cytosolic acetyl-CoA into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), enabling the acetylation of proteins of the secretory pathway, in concert with the activity of dedicated acetyltransferases such as NAT8. However, the involvement of the ER acetyl-CoA pool in acetylation of ER-transiting proteins in Apicomplexa is unknown. Here, we identified homologs of AT1 and NAT8 in Toxoplasma gondii and Plasmodium berghei parasites. Proteome-wide analyses revealed widespread N-terminal acetylation of secreted proteins in both species. Such extensive acetylation of N-terminally processed proteins has not been observed previously in any other organism. Deletion of AT1 homologs in both T. gondii and P. berghei resulted in considerable reductions in parasite fitness. In P. berghei, AT1 was found to be important for growth of asexual blood stages, production of female gametocytes and male gametocytogenesis, implying its requirement for parasite transmission. In the absence of AT1, lysine acetylation and N-terminal acetylation in T. gondii remained globally unaltered, suggesting an uncoupling between the role of AT1 in development and active acetylation occurring along the secretory pathway.

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei, Toxoplasma gondii, Acetylome, Acetyl-coa transporter, Endoplasmic reticulum, Secretory pathway

### Affiliations
Protein Maturation, Cell fate and Therapeutics Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC) CNRS UMR9198, Bt. 21, 1 Avenue de la Terrasse F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France
Institut de Biologie Intégrative de la Cellule - CNRS

### Submitter
Jean Baptiste BOYER

### Lab Head
Dr Carmela GIGLIONE
Protein Maturation, Cell fate and Therapeutics Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC) CNRS UMR9198, Bt. 21, 1 Avenue de la Terrasse F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France


