### Accession
PXD011685

### Title
Jellyfish Cyanea capillata nematocyst venoms  LC-MSMS

### Description
The scyphozoan jellyfish  Cyanea capillata are common blooming species in China.The venomous characteristics of jellyfish  Cyanea capillata is largely  attributed to their complex and elaborate venom delivery system: the stinging cells, or nematocytes. These specialized cells synthesize and secrete  unique intracellular organelles called nematocysts. Nematocysts with heterogeneous sizes and morphologies may contain different toxic components that  exert diverse pharmacological and physiological activities such as hemolysis, cytolysis and proteolysis for defense and prey capture. We modified the  previous method of nematocyst preparation using density centrifugation to purify undischarged nematocysts from jellyfish Cyanea capillata tentacles.  Ultimately, mastigophore-type nematocysts were successfully purified.Then we used purified nematocysts for proteomic study to identify sting-related  toxins in Cyanea capillata nematocysts.

### Sample Protocol
The frozen jellyfish tentacles were thawed at 4 °C and mixed with ice-cold filtered seawater at a mass:volume ratio of 1:1 to allow autolysis of the  tissues for 4 days. The mixture was stirred evenly for 20 min twice a day. The autolyzed mixture was sequentially filtered through 80- and 200- mesh  sieves to remove the debris. Then, the mixture was centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 5 min, and the supernatant was decanted. The collected sediments were  resuspended in fresh seawater and vortexed for 5 min. Nematocysts were purified from the prepared suspension by centrifugation (20 min, 800 × g) in a  discontinuous gradient of Percoll diluted with seawater (bottom layer: 90 % Percoll; middle layer: 50 % Percoll; top layer: 30 % Percoll). The  undischarged nematocysts sedimented in the bottom of the test tubes. Finally, Percoll was removed, and the collected nematocysts were washed with  seawater and stored at ?80 °C until use.  The venoms of jellyfish  Cyanea capillata were extracted from the purified nematocysts using the bead grinding method. 200 mg of isolated nematocysts  were transferred into grinding tubes with glass beads (approximately 8,000 beads; 0.5 mm in diameter) and 2 ml of ice-cold phosphate buffered saline  (PBS, pH 7.4). The samples were shaken in a Mini Bead Beater-16 (Biospec, USA) at 3,450 rpm for 30 s; this process was repeated 10 times with  intermittent cooling at 4 °C for 1 min. The breakup of nematocyst capsules was confirmed microscopically, and debris was removed by centrifugation  (12,000 × g, 4 °C, 10 min). The supernatant was collected and used as C.capillata nematocyst venom (CnV) for further experiments. The protein  concentration of the venom was determined by Bradford assay. Then, different quantities of CnV (2, 4, 6, and 8 μg of protein) were loaded onto 12 %  reducing SDS-polyacrylamide gels. Proteins were stained using Coomassie Blue R-250, and each gel lane was cut into 40 slices. Gel fragments were  completely destained with 30 % acetonitrile in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB). After dehydration with 50 mM TEAB followed by 100 %  acetonitrile, the fragments were then dried at 37 °C using a vacuum centrifuge. The in-gel proteins were incubated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for  30 min at 56 °C to reduce cysteine (Cys) residues. DTT was removed by pipetting, and samples were then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in the dark  at room temperature for 30 min. The gel pieces were then rinsed with acetonitrile and TEAB and dried at 37 °C. The proteins in the gel pieces were  digested overnight by incubation with 0.4 μg of trypsin in 9 % acetonitrile and 50 mM TEAB buffer at 37 °C. The peptides were extracted from the gel  slices by washing successively with 50 mM TEAB, 100 % acetonitrile and 5 % formic acid. All the supernatants containing tryptic peptides were pooled and  dried completely with a vacuum centrifuge. The dried peptides were resuspended in 20 μl of 0.1 % formic acid, centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 1 min and analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer  that was coupled to an EASY-nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each sample (6 μl) was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded  onto a reversed-phase trap column (200 mm × 100 μm, Acclaim PepMap 100 nanoViper C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a reversed-phase  analytical column (100 mm × 75 μm, 3 μm resin, EASY-Column C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) and separated with a linear  gradient of buffer B (84 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. Mass data were  acquired over 300-1,800 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 (200 m/z), and data-dependent acquisition selected the top 10 method dynamically choosing the most  abundant precursor ions for tandem mass spectrometry using HCD fragmentation with an isolation width of 2 m/z, a collision energy of 30 eV and a  resolution of 17,500 (200 m/z). The dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.3) against the translated protein sequences from our constructed transcriptome database. Spectral data were also searched against the UniProt animal toxin and venom database and the database restricted to the taxonomy “cnidaria”. The peptide mass tolerance was ± 0.15 Da. The set number of missed cleavages for trypsin was 2. The set fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C), and the variable modifications were Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidated (NQ), Dioxidation (W) and Oxidation (M). Protein identification was based on a protein probability score > 95 % and at least one unique peptide with a probability score > 80 %. All identified proteins were annotated in non-redundant GO protein databases (Nr, Swiss-Prot) and the KEGG database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Jellyfish, Nematocysts, Lc-msms, Venom

### Affiliations
Navy Medical University
Department of Marine Biotechnology, Navy Medical University,

### Submitter
Liming Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Liming Zhang
Department of Marine Biotechnology, Navy Medical University,


