### Accession
PXD006741

### Title
SPARTAN Protease and Checkpoint Kinase 1 Cross-Activation Loop Safeguards Genome Stability

### Description
DNA-protein crosslinks (DPCs) are abundant DNA lesions, which constantly challenge genome stability by interfering with DNA replication. SPARTAN (SPRTN) protease plays a central role in DPCs repair in proliferative vertebrate cells. SPRTN is a constitutive part of the DNA replication machinery and its protease activity is essential for DNA replication fork progression. How this essential protease is activated and regulated during DNA replication is not known. By using biochemical, cell biological and genetic approaches in human cell lines and Zebrafish model system, we identified that SPRTN cleaves covalently crosslinked Checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1) from chromatin and releases CHK1 during physiological DNA replication. Proteolysed CHK1 is activated and in turn phosphorylates SPRTN. Phosphorylated SPRTN is further recruited to chromatin to proteolyse DPCs that ensures unperturbed DNA replication. Our data suggest SPRTN-CHK1 cross-activation loop is essential for genome stability.

### Sample Protocol
Purified SPRTN was isolated by denaturing IP using Strep-Tactin beads (IBA), from 2.5x108 HEK293 cells ectopically coexpressing SPRTN-E112A-SSH and either CHK1-WT or CHK1-S345A. SPRTN isolates were reduced with 5 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich; room temperature, 60 min), alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich; room temperature, 60 min), and extracted using a double methanol/chloroform precipitation. Protein precipitates were solubilized in 6M urea (with sonication), and diluted in a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and 1 mM EDTA until the urea concentration was < 1M. Protein was subsequently digested overnight with LysC (rLysC, Promega Cat # V1671) at 37˚C. Peptides were then desalted using a SOLA HRP SPE cartridge (Thermo Scientific Cat# 60109-001) following manufacturer instructions and dried. Dried tryptic peptides were reconstituted with LC-MS grade water containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and separated by nano-LC_MS/MS over 2h gradient (1-35% Acentonitrile) coupled to a QExative mass spectrometer (Thermo)

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was analysed in PEAKS (V7.5; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Waterloo, ON, Canada) using the PEAKS database and PTM function. Data was searched against Human UniProtSwissprot database (downloaded Aug 2016) enabling the decoy function whilst selecting LysC as enzyme (two missed cleavages; none non-specific cleavage), HCD as fragmentation source, mass tolerance of 10ppm for precursor ions (MS data) and 0.05Da for peptide fragment ions (MS/MS data); carboamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification, and Oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) and phosphorylation (STY) as a variable modifications. PEAKS-PTM results were filtered using a 1% FDR at peptide level. Extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) of peptides of interest was performed using Xcalibur Qual Browser (Thermo Scientific) enabling Gaussian peak smoothing at 3 points and a mass tolerance of precursor ion (MS1) of 4ppm. XIC peak area was automatically calculated by the software

### Publication Abstract
The SPRTN metalloprotease is essential for DNA-protein crosslink (DPC) repair and DNA replication in vertebrate cells. Cells deficient in SPRTN protease exhibit DPC-induced replication stress and genome instability, manifesting as premature ageing and liver cancer. Here, we provide a body of evidence suggesting that SPRTN activates the ATR-CHK1 phosphorylation signalling cascade during physiological DNA replication by proteolysis-dependent eviction of CHK1 from replicative chromatin. During this process, SPRTN proteolyses the C-terminal/inhibitory part of CHK1, liberating N-terminal CHK1 kinase active fragments. Simultaneously, CHK1 full length and its N-terminal fragments phosphorylate SPRTN at the C-terminal regulatory domain, which stimulates SPRTN recruitment to chromatin to promote unperturbed DNA replication fork progression and DPC repair. Our data suggest that a SPRTN-CHK1 cross-activation loop plays a&#xa0;part in DNA replication and protection from DNA replication stress. Finally, our results with purified components of this pathway further support the proposed model of a&#xa0;SPRTN-CHK1 cross-activation loop.

### Keywords
Genome stability, Chk1 kinase, Spartan protease, Ageing, Dna replication, Dna-protein crosslinks, Cancer

### Affiliations
CRUK-MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Oxford University
CRUK and MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, UK

### Submitter
iolanda Vendrell

### Lab Head
Dr Kristijan Ramadan
CRUK and MRC Oxford Institute for Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, OX3 7DQ, UK


