### Accession
PXD020141

### Title
The long non-coding RNA HOTAIRM1 promotes tumor aggressiveness and radiotherapy resistance in glioblastoma

### Description
Glioblastoma is the most common malignant primary brain tumor. Clinically relevant biomarkers are restricted to isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) gene 1 or 2 mutation and O6-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter methylation. Long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) alterations may contribute to glioblastoma pathogenesis and potentially serve as novel biomarkers. The clinical significance of HOXA Transcript Antisense RNA, Myeloid-Specific 1 (HOTAIRM1) was analyzed in multiple glioblastoma gene expression data sets for associations with prognosis and IDH mutation and MGMT promoter methylation status. The role of HOTAIRM1 in glioblastoma biology and radiotherapy resistance was characterized in vitro and in vivo. We identified HOTAIRM1 as a candidate lncRNA whose up-regulation is significantly associated with shorter survival of glioblastoma patients independent from IDH mutation and MGMT promoter methylation. Glioblastoma cell line models uniformly showed reduced cell viability, less invasive growth and diminished colony formation capacity upon HOTAIRM1 down-regulation. Integrated proteogenomic analyses and determination of reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels revealed impaired mitochondrial function and increased ROS levels upon HOTAIRM1 knock-down. HOTAIRM1 knock-down decreased expression of transglutaminase 2 (TGM2) as a candidate protein implicated in mitochondrial function, and knock-down of TGM2 mimicked the phenotype of HOTAIRM1 down-regulation in glioblastoma cells. Moreover, HOTAIRM1 modulates radiosensitivity of glioblastoma cells in vitro and in vivo. Our data support a role for HOTAIRM1 as a driver of biological aggressiveness, radioresistance and poor outcome in glioblastoma. Targeting HOTAIRM1 may be a promising new therapeutic approach.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteome analyses, proteins were extracted from frozen cell pellets from siRNA-mediated HOTAIRM1 knock-down and control cells of the T98G, LN-229 and  U251 cell lines. In addition, proteins were extracted from shRNA-mediated HOTAIRM1 knock-down and control cells of LN-229 cells as described. MS-based proteome analyses were performed as described before23. Cells were homogenized in urea buffer with a TissueLyser (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and subsequent sonication. After centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 x g and 4°C, supernatants were collected. Protein concentration was determined via Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and 10 µg protein per sample were desalted through electrophoretic migration at 50 V for 10 min on a 4 -12 % Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gel (#EC62352BOX, Novex NuPAGE, Thermo Fischer Scientific). After silver staining, protein bands were cut out, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin before peptide extraction via sonication. Peptides were dissolved and diluted with 0.1 % TFA (v/v). For MS-based proteome analyses, 15 µL peptide solution per sample was analyzed on a nano-high-performance liquid chromatography electrospray ionization mass spectrometer. The analytical system was composed of an RSLCnano U3000 HPLC coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Injected peptides were concentrated and desalted at a flow rate of 6 µL/min on a trapping column (Acclaim PepMao C18, 2 cm x 100 µm x 3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fischer Scientific) with 0.1 % TFA (v/v) for 10 min. Subsequently, peptides were separated at a constant flowrate of 300 nL/min over a 120 min gradient on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 25 cm x 75 µm x 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fischer Scientific) at 60°C. Separation was achieved through a gradient from 4 to 40% solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 84% (v/v) acetonitrile in water). Afterwards, peptides were ionized at a voltage of 1,400 V and introduced into the mass spectrometer operated in positive mode. Mass spectrometry scans were recorded in profile mode in a range from 350-2000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000, while tandem mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 17,500. Tandem mass spectra were recorded with a data-dependent Top10 method and 30% normalized collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was activated with a repeat count of 1 for 100 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was applied for peptide/protein identification with Mascot (version 2.4, Matrix Science, London, UK) as search engine employing the UniProt database (human; including isoforms; date 2016-03-01). A false discovery rate of 1% (p ≤ 0.01) on peptide level was set as identification threshold. Proteins were quantified with Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Version 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters Corporation, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK).

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma is the most common malignant primary brain tumor. To date, clinically relevant biomarkers are restricted to isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) gene 1 or 2 mutations and O6-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter methylation. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been shown to contribute to glioblastoma pathogenesis and could potentially serve as novel biomarkers. The clinical significance of HOXA Transcript Antisense RNA, Myeloid-Specific 1 (HOTAIRM1) was determined by analyzing HOTAIRM1 in multiple glioblastoma gene expression data sets for associations with prognosis, as well as, IDH mutation and MGMT promoter methylation status. Finally, the role of HOTAIRM1 in glioblastoma biology and radiotherapy resistance was characterized in vitro and in vivo. We identified HOTAIRM1 as a candidate lncRNA whose up-regulation is significantly associated with shorter survival of glioblastoma patients, independent from IDH mutation and MGMT promoter methylation. Glioblastoma cell line models uniformly showed reduced cell viability, decreased invasive growth and diminished colony formation capacity upon HOTAIRM1 down-regulation. Integrated proteogenomic analyses revealed impaired mitochondrial function and determination of reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels confirmed increased ROS levels upon HOTAIRM1 knock-down. HOTAIRM1 knock-down decreased expression of transglutaminase 2 (TGM2), a candidate protein implicated in mitochondrial function, and knock-down of TGM2 mimicked the phenotype of HOTAIRM1 down-regulation in glioblastoma cells. Moreover, HOTAIRM1 modulates radiosensitivity of glioblastoma cells both in vitro and in vivo. Our data support a role for HOTAIRM1 as a driver of biological aggressiveness, radioresistance and poor outcome in glioblastoma. Targeting HOTAIRM1 may be a promising new therapeutic approach.

### Keywords
Glioblastoma; hotairm1; long non-coding rna; radiosensitivity

### Affiliations
Institute for Molecular Medicine I  Medical Faculty  Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf  Universitaetsstrasse 1  40225 Duesseldorf  Germany
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory

### Submitter
Anja Stefanski

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
Institute for Molecular Medicine I  Medical Faculty  Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf  Universitaetsstrasse 1  40225 Duesseldorf  Germany


