### Accession
PXD004646

### Title
E. coli S30 lysate proteome -  The E

### Description
Protein production using processed cell lysates, defined precursor cocktails and target specific additives has become a core technology in the field of synthetic biology. Due to their open nature, these artificial systems are excellent to produce difficult proteins such as toxins or membrane proteins. However, the composition of cell lysates as the core component of cell-free systems is still widely a black box. Lysates of Escherichia coli are most productive for cell-free expression, yielding several milligrams of protein per milliliter of reaction. Although proteomics studies of several E. coli strains are available, the preparation of cell-free lysates implies specific fractionation resulting into yet unknown final lysate compositions. Therefore, the identification of prevalent and reliable lysate compounds will be an indispensable prerequisite for directed lysate engineering as an emerging strategy for new applications in synthetic biology. In this study, the S30 lysate proteome from E. coli strain A19 has been analyzed for the first time by using a GeLC-MS/MS approach. A total of 821 proteins were identified in processed S30 lysates. We provide detailed lists of detected proteins relevant for transcription/translation, folding, stability and enzymes involved in metabolic processes. In addition, we also performed a quantitative proteome analysis of modified S30 lysates, generated by induction of the SOS response during cultivation. These altered lysates contain 3-10-fold more folding factors and exhibit improved solubility and folding of difficult proteins. Therefore, the manipulation of the S30 lysate proteome by modified cultivation conditions is an effective approach for the generation of customized cell-free systems.

### Sample Protocol
GeLC-MS/MS Analysis using MALDI-TOF/TOF - Sample preparation: The protein concentration of S30 lysates was determined by Bradford assay to be within the range of 30-35 mg/mL. Lysate samples were diluted to a concentration of 5 mg/mL. A 5-fold excess of ice-cold acetone was added to 400 µg of protein (in a volume of 80 µL) and proteins were precipitated overnight at -20°C. Precipitated protein was pelleted by centrifugation (20,000 x g at 4°C for 15 min) and washed once with 80% ice-cold acetone. After centrifugation (20,000 x g at 4°C for 5 min), the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was air-dried for 5 min at RT to remove residual acetone.  For qualitative GeLC-MS/MS analysis the protein pellet (400 µg) was directly dissolved in 25 mM sodium-bicarbonate containing 4 M urea and the protein concentration re-determined by Bradford assay using BSA in 25 mM sodium-bicarbonate and 4 M urea as reference. For quantitative GeLC-MS/MS analysis, the protein pellet (400 µg) was dissolved in 30 µL of lysis buffer (guanidine-HCl containing buffer as provided by Serva ICPL Kit) and the protein concentration was once again determined by Bradford assay using BSA in lysis buffer as a reference. Accordingly, 100 µg were transferred into a new reaction tube and lysis buffer was added to a final volume of 20 µL. Then, cysteine residues were reduced and alkylated followed by the labelling reaction with ICPL according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Serva ICPL Kit). The labelled and combined protein samples were precipitated as described previously using 5-fold excess of acetone. The resulting protein pellet was dissolved in 25 mM sodium-bicarbonate containing 4 M urea and the protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. Separation by SDS-PAGE: To reduce the complexity of the sample for qualitative and quantitative analysis, 50 µg of protein (dissolved in 25 mM sodium-bicarbonate in 4 M urea) were mixed with Laemmli buffer, heated to 40°C for 5 min and separated by 10% SDS-PAGE (migration distance ~5 cm). Each lane (Coomassie stained) was cut into twelve equal fractions and every fraction was further cut into ~1 mm3 pieces in preparation for in-gel digestion by trypsin (Pierce trypsin protease, 90057). Destaining and washing of gel pieces and digestion was performed following instructions of standard protocols for in-gel digestion (adapted from 71). The gel pieces were covered in trypsin solution (25 ng/µl) in 25 mM sodium-bicarbonate. After digestion for 24 h at 37°C the reaction was terminated by the addition of 5 µL of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and peptides were extracted according to standard protocols. Desalting of peptides was performed using C18 Ziptips (Millipore Ziptips, Z720046) and peptides were subsequently eluted in 3 µL 0.1% TFA/50% acetonitrile (ACN). The solvent was removed using a vacuum concentrator and the pellet was stored at –20°C. LC separation and spotting: For LC separation, the peptide-pellets were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% TFA/5% ACN and separated using reversed-phase Nano Liquid Chromatography (UltiMate 3000 nanoflow LC system, Dionex) equipped with pre-column (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, 300 μm i.d. x 5 mm) in line with analytical column (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm i.d. x 25 cm) and Proteineer fc fraction collector (Bruker Daltonics, Germany). Peptides were initially desalted at a flow rate of 20 µL/min on the pre-column at 40°C, followed by separation at 300 nL/min and 40°C on the analytical column. The elution was conducted using linear gradient from 3-40% ACN in 0.1% TFA for 1.5 h. Column elution was mixed with α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (HCCA) matrix solution (93.5% (v/v) 0.1% TFA/95% ACN; 4.5% saturated HCCA solution (HCCA in 0.1% TFA/90% ACN); 1% (v/v) 10% TFA; 1% (v/v) 100 mM NH4H2PO4) prior to depositing at a 10-sec interval directly on MTP AnchorChipTM 1536 BC between 18 and 93 min. Carryover between LC runs was minimized by running an idle circuit between runs. The calibrant in HCCA matrix solution (Peptide Calibration Standard II, Bruker Daltonics) was manually spotted afterwards.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis: The monoisotopic mass of peptides was determined using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) (Bruker Ultraflex II TOF/TOF 200, Bruker Daltonics) using reflector mode in the mass range from 700-5,000 Da. Spectra were initially processed by FlexControl, FlexAnalysis 3.3 and WARP-LC software (Bruker Daltonics). Maximal 30 MS2 spectra per spot were acquired using LIFT mode based on a mass list generated from a selection of most intense peaks (signal/noise ratio  15) by WARP-LC after MS1 survey scans were completed.  Raw MS1 and MS2 spectra were re-processed as profile using Mascot Distiller version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science, UK) using default processing parameters (default.Bruker.Baf.opt). MS2 spectra were submitted to an in-house Mascot Server version 2.6 (Matrix Science, UK) and searched against reference proteome of E. coli MG1655 (Uniprot Proteome ID: UP000000625, 4315 sequences, as downloaded on 19th of January, 2017) and collections of common contaminants (MPI Martinsried, 247 sequences, as downloaded on 2nd of February, 2016). The following search parameters were used for qualitative analysis: Allowing up to one missed cleavage, tolerance of 50 ppm for peptides and 0.5 Da for MS/MS, MALDI-TOF/TOF, enzyme: Trypsin, variable modifications: Oxidation (M), fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C). For quantitative analysis after ICPL labelling, the same search parameters were used with additional variable modifications for light and heavy label, respectively: ICPL (K) and ICPL 13C (6) (K). For quantitative analysis, the median peptide ratio was determined using Mascot Distiller’s Quantitation Toolbox and the individual datasets were normalized to median = 0. The single peptide ratios were exported considering quality parameters (cutoff: Fraction 0.7; Correlation 0.9; Peptide Standard Error 0.1; only peptide sequences that were unique to one protein were used for quantitation). The individual datasets were further evaluated by InfernoRDN (Pan-omics software) using box- and correlations plots to identify problematic or outlier datasets. Positively evaluated datasets were combined and significantly regulated peptides were identified using permutation test implemented in “Quantitative proteomics p-value calculator (QPPC)” as described in detail elsewhere 72, 73. The following parameters were used: Stage 1 (1,000 permutations; Outlier removal activated, threshold 30; p-value correction: FDR (Benjamini-Yekutieli)); Stage 2 (p-value cut-off 0.05; Fold-change cut-off 1.5). Only proteins regulated under both criteria (p-value cut-off 0.05 and fold-change cut-off 1.5) were considered significantly regulated.

### Publication Abstract
Protein production using processed cell lysates is a core technology in synthetic biology and these systems are excellent to produce difficult toxins or membrane proteins. However, the composition of the central lysate of cell-free systems is still a "black box". Escherichia coli lysates are most productive for cell-free expression, yielding several mgs of protein per ml of reaction. Their preparation implies proteome fractionation, resulting in strongly biased and yet unknown lysate compositions. Many metabolic pathways are expected to be truncated or completely removed. The lack of knowledge of basic cell-free lysate proteomes is a major bottleneck for directed lysate engineering approaches as well as for assay design using non-purified reaction mixtures. This study is starting to close this gap by providing a blueprint of the S30 lysate proteome derived from the commonly used E. coli strain A19. S30 lysates are frequently used for cell-free protein production and represent the basis of most commercial E. coli cell-free expression systems. A fraction of 821 proteins was identified as the core proteome in S30 lysates, representing approximately a quarter of the known E. coli proteome. Its classification into functional groups relevant for transcription/translation, folding, stability and metabolic processes will build the framework for tailored cell-free reactions. As an example, we show that SOS response induction during cultivation results in tuned S30 lysate with better folding capacity, and improved solubility and activity of synthesized proteins. The presented data and protocols can serve as a platform for the generation of customized cell-free systems and product analysis.

### Keywords
Qualitative and quantititative proteomics, E. coli a19, S30 lysate, Heatshock lysate

### Affiliations
Fraunhofer Institute for Interfacial Engineering and Biotechnology, Stuttgart, Germany
IGVP, University of Stuttgart

### Submitter
Daniel Foshag

### Lab Head
Dr Steffen Rupp
Fraunhofer Institute for Interfacial Engineering and Biotechnology, Stuttgart, Germany


