### Accession
PXD023347

### Title
USP36-mediated deubiquitination of DOCK4 contributes to the diabetic renal tubular epithelial cell injury via Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway

### Description
Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) has become the leading cause of end-stage renal diseases, but the efficacy of current treatment remains unsatisfactory. The pathogenesis of DKD needs a more in-depth research. Ubiquitin specific proteases 36 (USP36), a member of deubiquitinating enzymes family, has aroused wide concerns for its role in deubiquitinating and stabilizing target proteins. Nevertheless, the role of USP36 in diabetes has never been reported yet. Herein, we identified an increased expression of USP36 both in vitro and in vivo in diabetic renal tubular epithelial cells (TECs), and its overexpression is related to the enhanced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Further investigation into the mechanisms proved that USP36 could directly bind to and mediate the deubiquitination of dedicator of cytokinesis 4 (DOCK4), a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) that could activate Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway and induce EMT. Our study revealed a new mechanism that USP36 participates in the pathogenesis of DKD, and provided potential intervening targets accordingly.

### Sample Protocol
Renal tubular epithelial cells (TECs) were divided into normal glucose (NG) and high glucose (HG) groups, which were treated with 5.5mM or 25.5mM glucose DMEM complete medium respectively (Gibco, USA). 100 μg peptides were fractionated to120 fractions with high pH RPRP-HPLC, and then combined to 8 fractions. For each fraction, 2 μg peptide were separated and analyzed with a Nano-HPLC (EASY-nLC1000) coupled to Q-Exactive mass spectrometry (Thermo Finnigan). Separation was performed using a reversed-phase column (75 μm, ID × 15 cm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific Inc.). Mobile phases were H2O with 0.1 % FA, 2 % ACN (phase A) and 98 % ACN, 0.1 % FA (phase B). Separation of sample was executed with a 90 min gradient at 300 nL/min flow rate. Gradient B: 5 % for 3 min, 5 – 30 % for 60 min, 30 – 40 % for 15 min, 40 - 90 % for 5 min, 90 % for 3 min, 90 – 2 % for 1 min and 2 % for 3 min.

### Data Protocol
1. Data dependent acquisition was performed in profile and positive mode with Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 70,000 (200 m/z) and m/z range of 350 – 1800 for MS1; For MS2, the resolution was set to 17,500 (200 m/z) with a fixed first mass of 100 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS1 was set to 1.0e+06, and 1.0e+05 for MS2. The top 12 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30 %, and isolation window of 2 m/z. The dynamic exclusion time window was 30 s. 2. Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant (Version 1.5.5.1). The HUMAN protein sequence database (Uniprot-HUMAN-9606) was downloaded from UNIPROT. This database and its reverse decoy were then searched against by MaxQuant software. The quantification type was reporter ion MS2 with 10-plex TMT specific to Lys (K) and unmodified N-term; Trypsin was set as specific enzyme with up to 2 miss  cleavage; Oxidation [M] and Acetyl [protein N-term] were considered as variable modification, Carbamidomethyl [C] was set as fixed modification; Min peptide length was 7 and max peptide mass was 4600; Both peptide and protein FDR should be less than 0.01. Only unmodified unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The iBAQ label free quantification was also measured with log fit checked. All the other parameters were reserved as default.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) has become the leading cause of end-stage renal disease but the efficacy of current treatment remains unsatisfactory. The pathogenesis of DKD needs a more in-depth research. Ubiquitin specific proteases 36 (USP36), a member of deubiquitinating enzymes family, has aroused wide concerns for its role in deubiquitinating and stabilizing target proteins. Nevertheless, the role of USP36 in diabetes has never been reported yet. Herein, we identified an increased expression of USP36 both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> in diabetic renal tubular epithelial cells (TECs), and its overexpression is related to the enhanced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Further investigation into the mechanisms proved that USP36 could directly bind to and mediate the deubiquitination of dedicator of cytokinesis 4 (DOCK4), a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) that could activate Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin signaling pathway and induce EMT. Our study revealed a new mechanism that USP36 participates in the pathogenesis of DKD, and provided potential intervening targets accordingly.

### Keywords
Deubiquitination, Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, Wnt/β-catenin, Dedicator of cytokinesis 4, Ubiquitin specific proteases 36, Diabetic kidney disease

### Affiliations
Shandong University
Shandong Uniersity

### Submitter
Suwei Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Suwei Zhu
Shandong University


