### Accession
PXD022585

### Title
An Isocaloric High-Fat Diet Improves Lifespan in Rats and Drosophila

### Description
The health effect of dietary fat has been one of the most vexing issues in the nutrition field. Few animal studies have examined the impact of high-fat diets on lifespan by controlling energy intake. In this study, we found that compared to a normal diet, an isocaloric high-fat diet (IHF) significantly prolonged lifespan by decreasing the profiles of free fatty acids (FFAs) in serum and multiple tissues by downregulating FFAs anabolism and upregulating catabolism pathways in rats and flies. Proteomics analysis in rats identified PPRC1 as a key protein that was significantly upregulated by nearly 2-fold by IHF, and among the FFAs, only palmitic acid (PA) was robustly and negatively associated with the expression of PPRC1. Using PPRC1 transgenic RNAi/overexpression flies and in vitro experiments, we further demonstrated that IHF significantly reduced PA, which could upregulate PPRC1 through PPARG, resulting in improvements in oxidative stress and inflammation and prolonging lifespan.

### Sample Protocol
1.1 Protein extraction (1)Mix 0.5 ml of lysis buffer 3 (8 M Urea, 40 mM Tris-HCl or TEAB with 1mM PMSF, 2mM EDTA and 10mM DTT, pH 8.5) with 100 mg of liver sample, and place in a 1.5 ml centrifuge tube. (2)The mixtures were placed into a TissueLyser with two magnetic beads (diameter 5mm) for 2min at 50Hz to release proteins.  (3)Centrifugation with 25,000g at 4℃ for 20min, and the supernatant was transferred into a new tube. (4)Add 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) to the supernatant, and 56℃ water bath for 1 hour.  (5)Return to room temperature and then alkylate by 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in the dark at room temperature for 45min. (6)Following centrifugation (25,000g, 4℃, 20min), the supernatant containing proteins was quantified by Bradford. 1.2 Quality control of protein extraction (1) Protein quantitation with bradford assay. Protein was quantitated according to the manufacturers' protocol.  (2) SDS-PAGE. After Mixing 30μg proteins with loading buffer in centrifuge tube, heat them at 95℃ for 5 minutes to make protein sample. load the protein sample to holes in 12% polyacrylamide gel and then run SDS-PAGE at 120V constant voltage for 120 minutes. After electrophoresis, stain gel with Coomassie Blue for 2 hours, then add destaining solution (40% ethanol and 10% acetic acid) and shake it for 3-5 times, each time for 30 minutes. 1.3 Protein digestion The protein solution (100ug) with 8M urea was diluted 4 times with 100mM TEAB. Protein was digested by Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with the ratio of protein: trypsin =40: 1 at 37°C overnight. After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried according to the manufacturer's protocol.  1.4 Peptide labeling The peptides were dissolved in 30ul 0.5M TEAB and vortex. Peptide labeling was conducted by ITRAQ Reagent 8-plex Kit (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) according to the manufacturer's protocol. One unit of ITRAQ Reagent - 8-plex labels 60ug of protein digest. A total of eight samples were labeled with ITRAQ Reagent 8-plex Kit. The labeled peptides with different reagents were combined and desalted with a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried according to the manufacturer's protocol. The pH value was higher than 7.5 after labeling and the total labeling efficiency was 0.96%. 1.5 Peptide fractionation The peptides were separated on a Shimadzu LC-20AB HPLC Pump system coupled with a high pH RP column. The peptides were reconstituted to 2 ml with mobile phase A (5% ACN, 95% H2O, pH adjusted to 9.8 with ammonia) and loaded onto a column containing 5μm particles (phenomenex). Elute at a flow rate gradient of 1 ml/ min: 5% mobile phase B (5% H2O, 95% ACN, adjust pH to 9.8 with ammonia) for 10 min, 5-35% mobile phase B for 40min, 35-95% mobile phase B for 1 min, 95% mobile phase B for 3 min and 5% mobile phase B for 10 min. Elution was monitored by measuring absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides were pooled as 20 fractions and vacuum-dried. 1.6 HPLC Each fraction was resuspended in mobile phase A (2% ACN and 0.1% FA in water) and then centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was loaded onto a C18 trap column 5 μl/min for 8min using a LC-20AD nano-HPLC instrument (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler. Then, the peptides were eluted from trap column and separated by an analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house. The gradient was as following at 300 nl/min: 5% mobile phase B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) for 0-8 min; 8%-35% mobile phase B for 8-43 min; 35%-60% mobile phase B for 43-48 min; 60%-80% mobile phase B for 48-50 min; 80% mobile phase B for 50-55 min; 5% mobile phase B for 55-65 min. 1.7 Mass spectrometer detection The peptides separated by nanoHPLC were ionized by nanoESI source and then subjected into the tandem mass spectrometry Q EXACTIVE (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) detection. The main parameters were listed as following: electrospray voltage: 1.6 kV; precursor scan range: 350-1600 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 in Orbitrap; MS/MS fragment scan range: >100 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 in HCD mode; normalized collision energy setting: 27%; dynamic exclusion time: 15 s; automatic gain control (AGC) for full MS target and MS2 target: 3e6 and1e5, respectively; the number of MS/MS scans following one MS scan: 20 most abundant precursorions above a threshold ion count of 20000. The instrument was operated in positive mode.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics pipeline  MS/MS raw data Raw data must be converted to MGF files for bioinformatics analysis by thermo scientific tool Proteome Discoverer. For an MS/MS Ions Search, each query represents a complete MS/MS spectrum, and is delimited by a pair of statements: BEGIN IONS and END IONS.  MS/MS ion search and canonical proteomics database The exported MGF files were searched using Mascot version 2.3.02 in this project against the selected database. At least one unique peptide was necessary for the identified protein. Parameters were as follows: Table S1 Mascot search parameters Item value Type of search MS/MS ion search Enzyme Trypsin Fragment mass tolerance 0.05Da Mass values Monoisotopic Variable modifications Oxidation (M), iTRAQ8plex (Y) Peptide mass Tolerance 20ppm Fixed modifications Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) Database I-cxPBT002 (35814 sequences) Database_info Rtus_norvegicus(uniprot,20171117)   Protein quantification An automated software called IQuant (Wen et al., 2014) was applied for quantitatively analyzing the labeled peptides with isobaric tags. To assess the confidence of peptides, the PSMs were pre-filtered at a PSM-level FDR of 1%. Then based on the "simple principle" (the parsimony principle), identified peptide sequences were assembled into a set of confident proteins. In order to control the false-positive rate of protein, the process filtered again at the protein level with 1% FDR (protein-level FDR < = 0.01) based on Picked protein FDR strategy (Savitski et al., 2015). The protein quantification process included the following steps: protein identification, tag impurity correction, data normalization, missing value imputation, protein ratio calculation, statistical analysis and results presentation. Main iQuant quantitation parameters were as follows: Table S2 IQuant quantitation parameters Item Value Quant_peptide Use All Unique peptide Quant_number At least one unique spetra Normalization VSN Protein_Ratio Weighted average Statistical Analysis Permutation Tests  GO enrichment and pathway enrichment A total of 4830 proteins were identified and further enriched using DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) for GO and KEGG analysis. PPI was performed in STRING (https://string-db.org/) and cytoscape (version 3.6.1). The fold changes of > 1.2 with p-values < 0.05 were considered as a cut off for differential proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The health effect of dietary fat has been one of the most vexing issues in the field of nutrition. Few animal studies have examined the impact of high-fat diets on lifespan by controlling energy intake. In this study, we found that compared to a normal diet, an isocaloric moderately high-fat diet (IHF) significantly prolonged lifespan by decreasing the profiles of free fatty acids (FFAs) in serum and multiple tissues via downregulating FFA anabolism and upregulating catabolism pathways in rats and flies. Proteomics analysis in rats identified PPRC1 as a key protein that was significantly upregulated by nearly 2-fold by IHF, and among the FFAs, only palmitic acid (PA) was robustly and negatively associated with the expression of PPRC1. Using PPRC1 transgenic RNAi/overexpression flies and in&#xa0;vitro experiments, we demonstrated that IHF significantly reduced PA, which could upregulate PPRC1 through PPARG, resulting in improvements in oxidative stress and inflammation and prolonging the lifespan.

### Keywords
Isocaloric, High-fat diet, Proteomics, Lifespan

### Affiliations
chongqing medical university
National Key Discipline Laboratory, Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, P. R. China

### Submitter
dan shi

### Lab Head
Dr Chang Hao Sun
National Key Discipline Laboratory, Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, P. R. China


