### Accession
PXD005471

### Title
Na2CO3-responsive phosphoproteins in Puccinellia tenuiflora leaves

### Description
Reversible protein phosphorylation also play crucial roles in plant salt resistance. In our syudy, 62 Na2CO3-responsive phosphoproteins were found in leaves by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labeling. These Na2CO3-responsive phosphoproteins were sorted into seven functional categories. Among them, most of photosynthetic proteins including 11 light harvesting proteins, five PS II protein, and ten Calvin cycle-related protein (i.e. RuBisCO activase, RuBisCO large subunit, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and Phosphoglycerate kinase), three ATP synthase subunits, and other carbohydrate and energy metabolism related proteins were identified increased in phosphorylation level. While two starch and sucrose metabolism related protein (e.g. UDP-glucose 6-dehydrogenase), one stress response protein, one membrane and transporting protein, and most of gene expression, protein synthesis and turnover related proteins were identified inhibited phosphorylation under Na2CO3 treatment. In addition, calmodulin, inactive receptor kinase, VWA copine domain containing protein, and tetraspanin family protein participate in signaling pathways were identified enhanced phosphorylation under Na2CO3.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of Puccinellia tenuiflora (Turcz.) scribn. et Merr. were sowed on vermiculite and grown in Hoagland solution in pots under fluorescent light (220 μmol m-2 s-1, 12 h : 12 h, light : dark) at 25 °C and 75% humidity for 50 d. Seedlings of 50-day old were treated with 0, 150, and 200 mM Na2CO3 (pH 11) for 24 h, respectively. After treatment, leaves were harvested, either used right away or immediately stored at -80 °C for experiments. Leaf samples from various treatments (0mM, 150mM-24h, and 200mM-24h Na2CO3) were ground to powder in liquid nitrogen with chilled mortar and pestle. After 10 mL of Tris pH 8.8 buffered phenol and 10 mL of extraction buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 0.9 M sucrose, 10 mM EDTA, 0.4% β-mercaptoethanol) were added, the samples were homogenized for 15 min. The supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 18,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C, and then precipitated by adding ammonium acetate in methanol and incubated overnight at -20 °C. The precipitant was collected by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C and rinsed with ammonium acetate in methanol and cold acetone. The resulting pellets were dissolved in a lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% Nonidet P-40, 13 mM DTT, 2% pharmalyte of pH 4-7). Protein samples were prepared from three independent biological replicates, and protein concentration was determined using a Quant-kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (GE Healthcare, Salt Lake City, UT, USA). Leaf proteins from each sample were reduced and alkylated with 1M DTT and 1M iodoacetamide, respectively. After digestion with trypsin, the peptides from each sample (0mM, 150mM-24h, and 200mM-24h) were divided into two groups and labeled with iTRAQ reagents 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, and 119 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, respectively. And then, the samples were lyophilized, resuspended, and the phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 column. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoAcquity ultraperformance LC (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Watham, MA, USA). The peptides were eluted with a 90 min gradient (solvent A: 0.1% FA in H2O, solvent B: 0.1% FA in 100% ACN) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The peptide separation was accomplished by three-step elution: 5–28% solvent B in 70 min, 28–90% solvent B in 7 min, 90% solvent B for 2 min, 90–2% solvent B in 2 min, and 2% for 9 min. The peptide ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120000, full-scan MS spectra from m/z 350 to 1600. Up to 15 of the most intense peptides were selected from each MS scan for collision-induced fragmentation by MS/MS in the linear ion trap and the normalized collision energy was set at 35.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data and peak lists were extracted using ProteinPilot (version 4.0, AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA), searched against the NCBI green database (7 262 093 sequences) at a 95% confidence interval (unused ProtScore > 1.3). Using the following parameters: restricted to tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites; 20 ppm mass error tolerance for MS and 0.2 Da for MS/MS fragment ions error tolerance; carbamidomethylcysteine was chosen for fixed modification; protein N-acetylation, oxidized methionine, and phospho_STY (serine, threonine, and tyrosine) were chosen for the variable modifications. Reliable quantification of individual phosphopeptide was achieved by the mean ± SD of triplicate experiments, the peptides with more than 1.5-fold changes in at least two replicates were considered to be changed at phosphorylation level.

### Publication Abstract
Alkali-salinity exerts severe osmotic, ionic, and high-pH stresses to plants. To understand the alkali-salinity responsive mechanisms underlying photosynthetic modulation and reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis, physiological and diverse quantitative proteomics analyses of alkaligrass (Puccinellia tenuiflora) under Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> stress were conducted. In addition, Western blot, real-time PCR, and transgenic techniques were applied to validate the proteomic results and test the functions of the Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive proteins. A total of 104 and 102 Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive proteins were identified in leaves and chloroplasts, respectively. In addition, 84 Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive phosphoproteins were identified, including 56 new phosphorylation sites in 56 phosphoproteins from chloroplasts, which are crucial for the regulation of photosynthesis, ion transport, signal transduction, and energy homeostasis. A full-length PtFBA encoding an alkaligrass chloroplastic fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (FBA) was overexpressed in wild-type cells of cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. Strain PCC 6803, leading to enhanced Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> tolerance. All these results indicate that thermal dissipation, state transition, cyclic electron transport, photorespiration, repair of photosystem (PS) II, PSI activity, and ROS homeostasis were altered in response to Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> stress, which help to improve our understanding of the Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive mechanisms in halophytes.

### Keywords
Na2co3, Leaves, Phosphoproteomics, Puccinellia tenuiflora

### Affiliations
Alkali Soil Natural Environmental Science Center, Northeast Forestry University, Key Laboratory of Saline-alkali Vegetation Ecology Restoration in Oil Field, Ministry of Education, Harbin 150040, China
NEFU

### Submitter
Shaojun Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Shaojun Dai
Alkali Soil Natural Environmental Science Center, Northeast Forestry University, Key Laboratory of Saline-alkali Vegetation Ecology Restoration in Oil Field, Ministry of Education, Harbin 150040, China


