### Accession
PXD032214

### Title
Adaption of oxidative phosphorylation machinery compensates hepatic lipotoxicity in early stages of MAFLD; PMID:35743314

### Description
Mitochondrial function is an important control variable in the progression of metabolic dysfunction associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD). We hypothesize that organization and function of mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) in this pathologic condition is a consequence of shifted substrate availability. Paradoxically, in MAFLD increased de novo lipogenesis (DNL) occurs despite hepatic insulin resistance. Therefore, we addressed this question using our animal model alb-SREBP-1c, which exhibits increased DNL by constitutively active SREBP-1c. Using an omics approach, we show that the abundance of ETC complex subunits and metabolic pathways are altered in liver of these animals. Analyses of cellular metabolic status by functional assays revealed that SREBP-1c-forced DNL induces a limitation of substrates for oxidative phosphorylation that is rescued by enhanced complex II activity. Furthermore, energy metabolism associated gene regulation indicates the counteracting to increase expression of mitochondrial genes and features cell communication by miRNA and exosomal RNA transfer. In conclusion, substrate availability fuels mainly complex II electron flows as a consequence of activated DNL with impact on whole body by liver-specific exosomal RNAs in early stages of MAFLD.
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35743314/

### Sample Protocol
Transgenic mice, with a liver-specific overexpression of the transcriptionally active domain of human Sterol regulatory element-binding protein (SREBP)-1c with C57Bl6 genetic background (PMID: 22363740 ), were analyzed in comparison to C57Bl6 control mice. Animals were sacrificed by CO2-asphyxiation, prior to removal of liver tissue or isolation of primary hepatocytes for analyses. Isolation of primary hepatocytes was performed by two-step perfusion protocol adapted from Akie and Cooper 2015(PMID: 26382148 ) as previously described (PMID: 28490610).

### Data Protocol
Protein profiling isolated mitochondria was performed using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an Ultimate 3000 separation liquid chromatography system (Thermofisher Scientific, Germering, Germany) combined with an EASY-spray ion source and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific) as previously described53. Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap C18-LC-column (ID: 75 μm, 2 cm length; Thermofisher Scientific) and separated via EASY-Spray C18 column (ES802; ID: 75 μm, 25 cm length; Thermofisher Scientific). Each LC-MS run lasted 150 min and MS data were acquired with both data-dependent (DDA) and data-independent (DIA, 34 windows) MS/MS scan approaches.

### Publication Abstract
Alterations in mitochondrial function are an important control variable in the progression of metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD), while also noted by increased de novo lipogenesis (DNL) and hepatic insulin resistance. We hypothesized that the organization and function of a mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) in this pathologic condition is a consequence of shifted substrate availability. We addressed this question using a transgenic mouse model with increased hepatic insulin resistance and DNL due to constitutively active human SREBP-1c. The abundance of ETC complex subunits and components of key metabolic pathways are regulated in the liver of these animals. Further omics approaches combined with functional assays in isolated liver mitochondria and primary hepatocytes revealed that the SREBP-1c-forced fatty liver induced a substrate limitation for oxidative phosphorylation, inducing enhanced complex II activity. The observed increased expression of mitochondrial genes may have indicated a counteraction. In conclusion, a shift of available substrates directed toward activated DNL results in increased electron flows, mainly through complex II, to compensate for the increased energy demand of the cell. The reorganization of key compounds in energy metabolism observed in the SREBP-1c animal model might explain the initial increase in mitochondrial function observed in the early stages of human MAFLD.

### Keywords
Mafld; isolated hepatocytes, Mouse, Mitochondrial function

### Affiliations
Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry German Diabetes Center (DDZ) Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research  at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Auf´m Hennekamp 65 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany
 Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry
German Diabetes Center (DDZ)
Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research 
at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf


### Submitter
Birgit Knebel

### Lab Head
Dr Birgit Knebel
Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry German Diabetes Center (DDZ) Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research  at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Auf´m Hennekamp 65 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany


