### Accession
PXD004278

### Title
MZH29 is a novel potent FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitor with activity of overcoming drug resistant mutations in AML

### Description
In this study, we screened a group of newly synthesized tyrosine kinase inhibitors, and discovered MZH29 was a potent FLT3 inhibitor. Remarkably, MZH29 is well tolerated and effective in the clinically known FLT3 mutants in the constructed BaF3 model cells. MZH29 could also lead to complete tumor regression in the mouse xenograft model and increases survival in the bone marrow engraftment model. Further proteomics study indicates that the inhibition effects of MZH29 and AC220 are in a similar manner. All the results present here support that MZH29 could be a promising candidate for both the FLT3 WT and drug resistance mutant AML.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomics process was performed as our previously published method with slightly modification (13). In brief, MV4-11 cells were treated with MZH29 or AC220 in 10 nM for 24 h, equivalent DMSO treated cells were set as control group. Cells in each group were lysed with 8 M urea in 0.1 M PBS containing protease inhibitor cocktail. Protein(100 ug) in each group was treated with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 55°C followed by 25 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark at room temperature and was digested with trypsin/lys-C mix (Promega, USA) at 37 °C for 12 h. TMT 3-plex reagents were used for peptide labeling as manufacture’s instruction. TMT-126 was used for the control group, TMT-127 was used for the MZH29 treated group and TMT-128 was used for the AC220 treated group.  HPLC (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Scientific) was performed for the TMT labeled peptides separation. An Xbridge BEH300 C18 column was used (1 ml/min, 4.6 × 250 mm, 2.5 m, Waters). Column temperature was maintained at 45°C with a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min, and detection was performed by UV absorbance at 214 nm. Fractions were collected every 1.5 min in 50 tubes, then combined to 20 groups and were dissolved in 20 μl 0.1% FA for further liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were separated by a 120 min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.300 μL/min with the EASY-nLC 1000 system which was directly interfaced with the Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a homemade fused silica capillary column (75 μm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C-18 resin (300 A, 5 μm; Varian, Lexington, MA). Mobile phase A consisted of ddH2O with 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur3.0 software and there is a single full-scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (350 -1550 m/z, 120,000 resolution) followed by 3 s data-dependent MS/MS scans in an Ion Routing Multipole at 38% normalized collision energy (HCD).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run were searched against the selected database using Proteome Discovery searching algorithm (version 1.4).

### Publication Abstract
More than one-third of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) harbor aberrant mutations in Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3). Among them, the internal tandem duplication (ITD) mutation predicts poor prognosis. MZH29 is a novel FLT3 inhibitor synthesized in our laboratory that showed that cellular and kinase assays sustained inhibitory effects on wild-type and mutant FLT3, including the FLT3-ITD, FLT3-D835H/Y/V and FLT3-K663Q mutants. More importantly, MZH29 retained its potent inhibitory effect against the FLT3-ITD/F691L mutation, a drug resistance mutation against the well-known FLT3 inhibitor, AC220. MZH29 is a type II FLT3 inhibitor that tolerated the F691L mutation in molecular docking studies. Oral administration of 10&#x2009;mg/kg MZH29 caused complete tumor regression and extended survival in a mouse model of AML with less toxicity. Subsequent proteomics study revealed less proteome perturbation in the MZH29-treated group than in the AC220-treated group. MZH29 demonstrates potential and potent novel FLT3 inhibitory effects for the treatment of AML.

### Keywords
Tyrosine kinases inhibitor; aml; drug resistance; mv4-11

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences


