### Accession
PXD028521

### Title
Multi-omics  reveals molecular responses to aneuploidy in Leishmania

### Description
Integrated genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics experiment of aneuploid Leishmania donovani strains. This submission concerns the proteomic data.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were efficiently lysed using 200 μl RIPA buffer and 1x HALT protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific), combined with a 30 sec sonication (Branson Sonifier SLPe ultrasonic homogenizer, Labequip, Ontario, Canada) with an amplitude of 50% on ice. After centrifugation of the samples for 15 min at 10,000 g at 4 °C, the cell pellet was discarded. Next, the protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA protein Assay kit in combination with a NanoDrop 2000 photospectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For each sample, 25 μg of proteins were reduced using 2 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, in a volume of 20 μl 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and incubated for 1 h at 55°C. After alkylation of the proteins with 2µL of 375 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min protected from light, 6 volumes of ice-cold acetone were added, and the samples were incubated overnight at -20°C. The next day, samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 10.000 g at 4°C, the acetone was removed, and pellets were resolved in 20 μl of 200 mM TEAB. Proteins were then digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C with an enzyme trypsin ratio of 1:50. Before LC-MS/MS analysis, the samples were desalted with Pierce C18 spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific).  Each of the digested samples was separated by nano reverse phase C18 (RP-C18) chromatography on an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using an Acclaim C18 PepMap®100 column (75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm particle size) connected to an Acclaim PepMap™ RSLC C18 analytical column (50 µm x 15 cm, 2 µm particle size) (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Of each sample, a total of 1µg of peptides were loaded on the column. Before loading, digests were dissolved in mobile phase A, containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid, at a concentration of 1µg/10µL and spiked with 20 fmol Glu-1-fibrinopeptide B (Glu-fib, Protea biosciences, Morgantown, WV). A linear gradient of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile) from 0 to 45% in 90 min, followed by a steep increase to 100% mobile phase B in 10 min, was used at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Liquid Chromatography was followed by MS (LC-MS/MS) and was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). The high-resolution mass spectrometer was set up in an MS/MS mode where a full scan spectrum (350 – 1850 m/z, resolution 70,000) was followed by a high energy collision activated dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (100 – 2000 m/z, resolution 17,500). Peptide ions were selected for further interrogation by tandem MS as the twenty most intense peaks of a full scan mass spectrum. The normalized collision energy used was set at 28%. A dynamic exclusion list of 20 sec for the data-dependent acquisition was applied.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were converted to mzML files using MSConvert v3.0. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was carried out with MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16 using the following settings (other settings were kept default): Oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were indicated as variable modifications, carbamidomethyl (C) was indicated as a fixed modification, digestion with trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages, match between runs = yes, dependent peptides = yes. The search database was the LdBPKV2 proteome, and reversed proteins were used as decoys

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Leishmania aneuploidy multiomics proteomics

### Affiliations
University Of Antwerp
Adrem Data Lab, Departement of Computer Science, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium

### Submitter
Bart Cuypers

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Laukens
Adrem Data Lab, Departement of Computer Science, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium


