### Accession
PXD009149

### Title
Application of SPOT to Zn-treated HL-60 cells for multi-omics mechanism discovery

### Description
Application of SPOT to Zn-treated HL-60 cells for multi-omics mechanism discovery. A time-resolved, multi-omics experiment using an aumtomated, unified sample preparation platform

### Sample Protocol
An aliquot of approximately one million cells was removed from samples for RNA analysis (1 h and 6 h time points only), and the remaining cells were kept for proteomic and metabolomic analysis. The remaining HL60 cells (approximately one million) were lysed in 100 µL of 1:1:2 MeCN:MeOH:NH4HCO3 (50 mM, pH 8.0) followed by one freeze-thaw cycle (three minutes each) and a ten-minute sonication in an ice bath.  Protein concentration was obtained using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An aliquot of 100 or 150 µg of each sample in a total of 100 µL of lysis buffer was precipitated with 300 µL of ice cold 75:25 acetone:methanol for 2 h at -80°C. Samples were spun for 15 minutes at 6,800 x g and the supernatant was removed and utilized for metabolomics analysis. The pellets were rinsed with 300 µL of ice cold acetone and spun as above. Acetone was removed and the pellet was allowed to dry briefly. Metabolite supernatants were dried and reconstituted in 50 uL of appropriate reverse phase liquid chromatography (0.1%    formic    acid    in    98:2 H2O:MeCN) or hydrophilic interaction chromatography (80:20 MeCN: H2O) compatible buffers prior to analyses. Tryptic digestion and desalting were automated using the Agilent AssayMAP Bravo (with the exception of the 1 h time point which was digested manually). A pellet of 100 µg was resuspended in 10 µL of neat trifluoroethanol (TFE) and 10 µL of 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and then shaken at 2,000 rpm using the AssayMAP Bravo T-shake for two minutes. The AssayMAP Bravo In-solution Digestion Single Plate v 1.0 Protocol was followed for digestion. Samples were reduced with 5 µL of 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at room temperature for 30 minutes and alkylated with 5 µL of 200 mM of idoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. For digestion, 65 µL of Rapid Trypsin Digestion Buffer (Promega) was added to each sample followed by 5 µL of Rapid-Digestion Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) at 0.4 µg/µL for an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. The samples were incubated at 70°C for 30 minutes, and then digestion was stopped by adding 5 µL of 60% formic acid to each sample. Samples were desalted using the AssayMAP Bravo Peptide Cleanup v 2.0 protocol. C18 cartridges were primed with 100% MeCN, 0.1% TFA and then equilibrated with 100% H2O, 0.1%TFA. A 5 ug aliquot of sample was loaded onto a cartridge, washed with 100% H2O, 0.1%TFA, and eluted in 70% MeCN:50% H2O:0.1% TFA to equal a concentration of 1ug/1ul. Desalted samples were dried in a speed vac and stored at -80C. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, samples were reconstituted in 15 µL of 0.1 % formic acid. Label-free proteomic samples were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer in line with a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC 1000 UHPLC system. Samples, 2 µL, were injected via the autosampler and loaded onto a pulled-tip C18 UHPLC column (75 µm x 450 mm,) packed with Phenomenex Jupiter resin (3 µm particle size, 300 Å pore size), with 0.1% FA in water (mobile phase A). Peptides were separated over a 130 minute two-step gradient with initial conditions set to 100% mobile phase A for 2 minutes before ramping to 20% mobile phase B,  0.1% FA in MeCN, over 100 minutes and then 32% mobile phase B over 20 minutes. The remainder of the gradient was spent washing at 95% mobile phase B and returning to initial conditions. Eluted peptides were ionized via positive mode nanoelectrospray ionization (nESI) using a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated using a top 17 data-dependent acquisition mode. Fourier transform mass spectra (FTMS) were collected using 120,000 resolving power, an automated gain control (AGC) target of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms over the mass range of 400-1600 m/z. Precursor ions were filtered using monoisotopic precursor selection of peptide ions with charge states ranging from 2 to 6.. Previously interrogated precursor ions were excluded using a 30 s dynamic window (± 10 ppm). Precursor ions for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis were isolated using a 2 m/z quadrupole mass filter window and then fragmented in the ion-routing multipole via higher energy dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 35%.  Ion trap fragmentation spectra were acquired using an AGC target of 10,000 and maximum injection time of 35 ms, and 120 m/z was set for the first scan mass to enable detection of the lysine residue fragmented ion.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed via Protalizer (Vulcan Analytical, Inc.) to identify proteins and determine a fold change in proteins common to the treated and control samples. Search parameters were set to include carbamidomethyl, phosphorylation, and oxidation modifications, as well as methionine-containing and miscleaved peptides (maximum of two miscleavages). Both peptide and protein target FDR rates were set to 1%. For the Orbitrap-LTQ, data precursor tolerance was set to 6 ppm. Changes in protein abundance were considered statistically significant at a value of greater than 1.5 or less than -1.5 and a p-value of ≤0.1.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics, metabolomics, and transcriptomics generate comprehensive data sets, and current biocomputational capabilities allow their efficient integration for systems biology analysis. Published multiomics studies cover methodological advances as well as applications to biological questions. However, few studies have focused on the development of a high-throughput, unified sample preparation approach to complement high-throughput omic analytics. This report details the automation, benchmarking, and application of a strategy for transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic analyses from a common sample. The approach, sample preparation for multi-omics technologies (SPOT), provides equivalent performance to typical individual omic preparation methods but greatly enhances throughput and minimizes the resources required for multiomic experiments. SPOT was applied to a multiomics time course experiment for zinc-treated HL-60 cells. The data reveal Zn effects on NRF2 antioxidant and NFkappaB signaling. High-throughput approaches such as these are critical for the acquisition of temporally resolved, multicondition, large multiomic data sets such as those necessary to assess complex clinical and biological concerns. Ultimately, this type of approach will provide an expanded understanding of challenging scientific questions across many fields.

### Keywords
Spot, Hl-60 cells, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Research Center, Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Danielle Gutierrez

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Caprioli
Mass Spectrometry Research Center, Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University


