### Accession
PXD011692

### Title
Phosphatidic acid governs natural egress in Toxoplasma gondii via a guanylate cyclase receptor platform

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is able to establish a life-long chronic infection in human and animals. Host cell entry and egress from infected cells are two key steps in the lytic cycle of this obligate intracellular parasite that ensures its survival and dissemination. Egress is a temporally orchestrated process underpinned by the regulated exocytosis of the apical secretory organelles, termed micronemes. At any point during intracellular replication, deleterious environmental changes resulting from a loss of host cell integrity can trigger egress via the activation of the cGMP-dependent protein kinase G (PKG). Remarkably, even in the absence of extrinsic alarming signals, the parasites naturally egress from infected cells in a coordinated manner after ca. 5 to 6 cycles of binary fission. Here we show that  diacylglycerol kinase 2 (DGK2) is secreted into the parasitophorous vacuole where it produces phosphatidic (PA), which acts as intrinsic signal to elicit natural egress. PA activates a large guanylate cyclase (GC) receptor uniquely conserved in apicomplexans and composed of one P4-ATPase and two guanylate cyclase domains. Assembly of a functional GC at the parasite plasma membrane critically depends on the association with two proteins acting as cofactors. This study reveals the existence of a unique and versatile signaling platform able to respond to an intrinsic lipid mediator and other extrinsic alarming signals to control programmed and induced egress, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Intracellular tachyzoites were harvested, washed in PBS, and lysed in coIP buffer (0.2% [v/v] Triton X-100, 50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8], 150 mM NaCl) in presence of a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Cells were sonicated on ice and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were then subjected to IP as already described34. Briefly, Co-IP experiments were performed on 1% paraformaldehyde cross-linked intracellular parasites. Parasites were suspended in 100 mL of 6 M Urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB). To this solution, 2 µl of DTT (50 mM in LC-MS grade water) were added and the reduction was carried out at 37°C for 1 hour. Alkylation was performed by adding 2 µL of iodoacetamide (400 mM in distilled water) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Urea concentration was lowered to 1M with 50 mM AB, and protein digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C with 15 µL of freshly prepared trypsin Promega (0.2 µg/µL in AB). After beads removal, the sample was desalted with a C18 microspin column (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA), dried under speed-vacuum, and re-dissolved in H2O/CH3CN/FA 94.9/5/0.1 before LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis. LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3μm, 75 μm x 20mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 500 mm, C18, 2μm Easy-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 90 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: 0-5 min 95 % A and 5 % B, then to 65 % A and 35 % B in 60 min, then to 10 % A and 90 % B in 10 min, and finally stay at 10 % A and 90 % B for 15 min. The entire run was at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. ESI was performed in positive mode. For MS survey scans, the resolution was set to 70 000, the ion population was set to 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a scan range window from 400 to 2000 m/z. For MS2 data-dependent acquisition, up to fifteen precursor ions were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The resolution was set to 17 500, the ion population was set to 1 × 105 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z units. The normalized collision energies were set to 27%.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated from raw data using the MS Convert conversion tool from ProteoWizard. The peaklist files were searched against the Toxoplasma gondii TGGT1 database from ToxoDB using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.020 Da and parent ion tolerance to 10.0 ppm. Variable amino acid modification was oxidized methionine and fixed amino acid modification was carbamidomethyl cysteine. The mascot search was validated using Scaffold 4.7.3 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0 % probability and contained at least 3 identified peptides. Fifty-five proteins were recovered. We manually filtered putative interactors by selecting proteins with more than five identified peptides and excluding secreted proteins or proteins frequently recovered in our previous immunoprecipitation experiments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma dondii; guanylyl cyclase

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva
University of Geneva

### Submitter
Mathieu Brochet

### Lab Head
Dr Mathieu Brochet
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva


