### Accession
PXD018326

### Title
Mouse kidney glomeruli. Control vs. podocin(R231Q/A268V)

### Description
Similar to human patients, mice with the compound heterozygous mutation podocin R231Q/A268V, develop a late onset FSGS. Here, we did a proteomics anaylsis of kidney glomeruli before the onset of disease (mice at 3 weeks of age). Analysis of the data reveals that there are no developmental changes in the proteome of compund heterozygous mice.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of glomeruli Compound-heterozygous PodR231Q/A286V and wildtype mice at 3 weeks of age were euthanized by cervical dislocation. Kidneys were perfused with magnetic beads to isolate glomeruli as was described elsewhere (Rinschen, M. M. et al. Phosphoproteomic Analysis Reveals Regulatory Mechanisms at the Kidney Filtration Barrier. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 25, 1509–1522 (2014).). In brief, kidneys were removed and placed in HBSS containing magnetic beads (Dynabeads m-450 Epoxy, ThermoFisher Scientific). Subsequently, kidneys were minced and placed in a digestion solution (1 mg/mL Worthington Collagenase Type II, 0.75 mg/mL Pronase E (Sigma Aldrich P6911), DNAse I 100 U/mL in HBSS) for 15 min at 37°C and then purified by sieving and a magnet. Isolated glomeruli were washed twice in HBSS and pelleted using spin of 1500 rpm for 5 min at 4°C. Pellets were solubilized in 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate in PBS and incubated at 95°C for 10 min. After cooling, samples were treated with 25 U/µl Benzonase (Merck) for 30 min at 37°C and 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 55°C. After incubation with 40 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature samples were centrifuged at 14.000 rpm for 5 min. Samples were frozen and stored at -80°C. Sample preparation for LC-MS Protein clean up, digestion and peptide clean up were performed according to the SP3 sample preparation protocol (described in Hughes, C. S. et al. Ultrasensitive proteome analysis using paramagnetic bead technology. Mol. Syst. Biol. 10, 757 (2014).). In brief, 2 µl of beads (1:1 mixture of hydrophobic and hydrophilic SeraMag Carboxylate-Modified beads, GE Life Sciences, Marlborough, MA) and formic acid (1%) in acetonitrile until a concentration of 50% organic solvent was reached were added to each sample.  After incubating the samples for 8 min, an in-house built magnetic rack was used for the protein clean up. Samples were washed twice with 70% ethanol and once with 100% acetonitrile after discarding the supernatant. 0.1 µg sequencing grade trypsin and 0.1 µg LysC were added and digestion was performed for 16 h at 37°C. Subsequently, acetonitrile was added until 95% organic solvent content was achieved before samples were incubated for 8 min. After applying magnetic force on the beads, the supernatant was again discarded and the samples were washed twice with acetonitrile. 5% dimethylsulfoxide in water was used to elute the peptides from the beads. Samples were stored at -20°C before measurements by liquid-chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry after addition of 1 µl of 10% formic acid.  Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass spectrometry Samples were measured on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). After loading on solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water), peptides were separated over an in-house packed 50-cm column (filled with Poroshell, 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm [Agilent, Santa Clara, CA]) using the following 1-h gradient: within 43 min 5% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), within 4 min 25% to 37% solvent B, within 1 min 37% to 85% solvent B, 85% solvent B for 5 min and an equilibration at 5% solvent B for another 5 min. Subsequently, a standard data-dependent acquisition method was used. MS/MS of the top 10 peptides followed the acquisition of a scan from 300 to 1750 mass-to-charge at a resolution of 70,000 (AGC target 3e6; maximum injection time 20 ms). An isolation window of 2.1 Th was used to isolate peptides. The automatic gain control target for MS2 was set at 500,000 at a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The resolution was set at 17,500. Singly charged and unassigned peptides were automatically excluded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched against the uniprot mouse reference database dated 10/2017 that has the podocin mutations R231Q and A286V added as podocin isoforms (uploaded with this submission). Data was analyzed using MaxQUant version 1.5.5.1 with the parameters in this submission. Data was further analyzed using Perseus 1.6.2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian kidneys constantly filter large amounts of liquid, with almost complete retention of albumin and other macromolecules in the plasma. Breakdown of the three-layered renal filtration barrier results in loss of albumin into urine (albuminuria) across the wall of small renal capillaries, and is a leading cause of chronic kidney disease. However, exactly how the renal filter works and why its permeability is altered in kidney diseases is poorly understood. Here we show that the permeability of the renal filter is modulated through compression of the capillary wall. We collect morphometric data prior to and after onset of albuminuria in a mouse model equivalent to a human genetic disease affecting the renal filtration barrier. Combining quantitative analyses with mathematical modelling, we demonstrate that morphological alterations of the glomerular filtration barrier lead to reduced compressive forces that counteract filtration pressure, thereby resulting in capillary dilatation, and ultimately albuminuria. Our results reveal distinct functions of the different layers of the filtration barrier and expand the molecular understanding of defective renal filtration in chronic kidney disease.

### Keywords
Glomerulus, Nphs2, Kidney, Podocin

### Affiliations
1) Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany
2) CECAD, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany

1) Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany 2) CECAD, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Martin Hoehne

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Benzing
1) Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany 2) CECAD, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany


