### Accession
PXD028873

### Title
Phosphoproteomics reveals regulation of secondary metabolites in Mahonia bealei under ultraviolet-B radiation

### Description
Mahonia Bealei was used as a traditional Chinese medicine for its high alkaloid content. Previous research found that alkaloid and flavonoid contents in the M. bealei leaves increased under combinatory treatments of ultraviolet B and dark. In order to explore the underlying response mechanism, TiO2 material enrichment and mass-based label-free quantitative proteomics techniques were used for phosphoproteomics analysis of M. bealei leaves under ultraviolet B. ATP content, photosynthetic pigment content, and some enzymatic/non-enzymatic indicators increased in the leaves of M. bealei under UV-B radiation. Phosphoproteomics study found that under the UV-B radiation, phosphoproteins related to MAPK signal transduction and plant hormone brassinosteroid signaling pathway were varied greatly. Phosphoproteins related to photosynthesis, glycolysis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, and amino acid synthesis/metabolism pathway were also significantly changed. These results suggested that the ultraviolet B radiation activated oxidative stress system, MAPK signal transduction pathway, and photosynthetic energy metabolism pathway. These changes are important for the redox reactions in secondary metabolism and the accumulation of secondary metabolites in M. bealei leaves under UV-B radiation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction A portion (0.5 g) of sample was ground to powder in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle and was then transferred to an acetone solution containing 10% trichloroacetic acid and 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol. The resulting mixture was vortexed and then sonicated for 5 min. The suspension was incubated for 1 h at −20°C with vortexing every 15 min and was then centrifuged at 9000 ×g for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was washed twice with 0.07% 2-mercaptoethanol in acetone. The pellet was dried using a Speed-Vac concentrator (Savant Instruments, Hickville, NY, USA) and resuspended in lysis buffer, consisting of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5% CHAPS, and 2 mM tributylphosphine, by vortexing for 1 h at 25°C. The resulting suspension was centrifuged at 20,000 ×g for 20 min at 25°C, and the supernatant was collected as total protein. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay with bovine serum albumin as the standard.  Protein enrichment, reduction, alkylation, and digestion Extracted proteins (100 μg) were adjusted to a final volume of 100 μL. Methanol (400 μL) was added to each sample and mixed before addition of 100 μL of chloroform and 300 μL of water. After mixing and centrifugation at 20000g for 10 min to achieve phase separation, the upper phase was discarded, and 300 μL of methanol was added to the lower phase and then centrifuged at 20,000 ×g for 10 min. The pellet was collected as the soluble fraction. 18 Proteins were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C in the dark, and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C in the dark. Alkylated proteins were digested with trypsin at a 1:100 enzyme/protein ratio for 16 h at 37 °C. Peptides were desalted with a Strata-X Column (Phenomenex, USA) and acidified with 20% formic acid.  Phosphopeptide enrichment The phosphorylated peptide enrichment kit (Jingjie BIO, Hangzhou, China) was used to enrich phosphopeptides according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Desalted peptides (1mg) were resuspended in 1mL of binging buffer provided by the kit. After mixing, 50 μL of TiO2 materials (8 mg) was added to the sample and shaken lightly for 30 min. Then Centrifuged at 2000 ×g for 3 min to discard the supernatant and TiO2 materials was washed in washing buffer provided by the kit. Finally, phosphopeptides were eluted, dried, and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid. After centrifuging at 20,000 ×g for 15 min, the supernatant was collected for nanoflow liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Analysis using nanoliquid chromatography mass spectrometry The phosphopeptides were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and was directly loaded onto home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile) and separated with a linear gradient of 3–17% buffer B (90% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) from 0 min to 86 min, 17% to 28% buffer B from 86 min to 110 min, 28% to 80% buffer B from 110 min to115 min and 80% buffer B from 115 min to 120 min at a flow rate of 500 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using HCD setting as 28% and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20,000 ions/s scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 1E5. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.  Protein identification  Maxquant (V1.5.2.8) was used to retrieve the secondary mass spectrometry data and set the retrieval parameters: Identified proteins were searched against the UniProtKB database ( 40254 entries, downloaded 2020.04.22). and a reverse database was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and a common pollution database was added to the database to eliminate the influence of contaminated proteins in the identification results. The enzyme digestion method is set as Trypsin. The number of missing bits is set to 2; First search and the Main search level mother ion quality error tolerance is set to 20 PPM and 5 PPM respectively, the quality of secondary ions, error tolerance of 0.02 Da sets the cysteine alkylation to fixed, variable modifiers for oxidation of methionine, protein N the acetylation, Deamidation (NQ), protein tyrosine phosphorylation of serine threonine identification PSM of FDR was set to 1%. Functional categorization of phosphoproteins The submitted proteins were annotated for subcellular localization using Wolfpsort (http://www.genscript.com/psort/wolf_psort.html), a software that predicts subcellular localization. Heatmap Illustrator (heml.1.0.3.7) was used to provide an overall representation of intensities phosphorylation site of only phosphorylated proteins in Control or UV-B group. Phosphoprotein functions were categorized using MapMan bin codes and used DAVID functional annotation analysis, GO terms were classified into categories of molecular function, cellular component, and biological process. Then, the enrichment results was presented by using the micro-bioinformation platform (http://www.bioinformatics.com.cn) based on enrichment count > 5, a P-value < 0.05. In addition, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.kegg.jp/) was used to annotate protein pathways, then the pathways were enriched by Metascape (http://metascape.org/gp/) and performed by the micro-bioinformation platform. Protein−protein interactions were analyzed by STRING (http://string-db.org/) using the sequences of phosphorylated proteins as input. The required confidence score was set as >0.700 for highly confident interactions. The network is clustered by a K-means algorithm in STRING. Motif analysis of phosphorylation modification sites The Motif-X algorithm was used to extract significantly enriched amino acid motifs surrounding the identified phosphosites. The sequence window was limited to 13 amino acids, and foreground peptides were prealigned with the phosphosite centered. Proteome data set from Uniprot database was used as the background database. The occurrence threshold was set at the minimum of 20 peptides, and the P-value threshold was set at <10−6.

### Publication Abstract
Mahonia bealei (M. bealei) is a traditional Chinese medicine containing a high alkaloid content used to treat various diseases. Generally, only dried root and stem are used as medicines, considering that the alkaloid content in <i>M. bealei</i> leaves is lower than in the stems and roots. Some previous research found that alkaloid and flavonoid contents in the <i>M. bealei</i> leaves may increase when exposed to ultraviolet B (UV-B) radiation. However, the underlying mechanism of action is still unclear. In this study, we used titanium dioxide material enrichment and mass-based label-free quantitative proteomics techniques to explore the effect and mechanism of <i>M. bealei</i> leaves when exposed to UV-B treatment. Our data suggest that UV-B radiation increases the ATP content, photosynthetic pigment content, and some enzymatic/nonenzymatic indicators in the leaves of <i>M. bealei</i>. Moreover, phosphoproteomics suggests phosphoproteins related to mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signal transduction and the plant hormone brassinosteroid signaling pathway as well as phosphoproteins related to photosynthesis, glycolysis, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and the amino acid synthesis/metabolism pathway are all affected by UV-B radiation. These results suggest that the UV-B radiation activates the oxidative stress response, MAPK signal transduction pathway, and photosynthetic energy metabolism pathway, which may lead to the accumulation of secondary metabolites in <i>M. bealei</i> leaves.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics; mahonia bealei; ultraviolet-b radiation; abiotic stress; secondary metabolism

### Affiliations
College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science, Zhejiang University
Zhejiang university

### Submitter
Amin Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Amin Liu
College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science, Zhejiang University


