### Accession
PXD006583

### Title
Human Angiogenin Cytoplasmic Interactomics

### Description
Human Angiogenin (hAng) is a member of the ribonuclease A superfamily and a potent inducer of neovascularization. Herein, protein interactions of hAng in the nucleus and cytoplasm of the human umbilical vein cell line EA.hy926, have been investigated by mass spectroscopy. The first gel-free analysis of hAng immunoprecipitates from the cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts from EA.hy926 cancer human cell line, revealed many statistically significant potential hAng-interacting proteins. The majority of the proteins identified by the mass spectrometry analysis are parts of multiprotein complexes, and some of them are common in nucleus and cytoplasm, including spliceosome, proteasome, and molecular chaperone TRiC/CCT. These complexes are involved in crucial biological pathways, implicating thus the key role of hAng in many vital cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture The human umbilical vein cell line, EA.hy926, was established by the fusion of primary human umbilical vein cells with a thioguanine-resistant clone of A549, and obtained from ATCC. The cells were cultured in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum (Gibco) and antibiotic-antimycotic (pen/strep, Biosera). Cells were maintained at 37 oC with 5 % humidified CO2.  Cytoplasmic extract preparation To obtain the cytoplasmic lysate, EA.hy926 cells were resuspended in NP-40 lysis buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5 % (v/v) NP-40, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)] and maintained on ice for 15 minutes. Centrifugation at 600 g for 5 min at 4 °C, separated the cytoplasmic material from the nuclei. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford protocol. In order to ensure complete degradation of RNA molecules, the cytoplasmic extract was incubated with 0,1 mg/ mL RNase A for 1h at 4 °C on a rotator. The complete degradation of RNA molecules was verified by agarose electrophoresis.  Immunoprecipitation and Protein Identification i) hAng immunoprecipitation The cytoplasmic extract was precleared by adding normal mouse IgG antibody on ice for 1 h, followed by incubation with protein A/G-conjugated agarose beads (Santa Cruz) for 30 min on rotator. The sample was then centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was used for the immunoprecipitation procedure, while the pellet served as control sample. Recombinant human angiogenin was added in the cytoplasmic extract, in complex with the hAng antibody/protein beads. For the formation of the complex, the hAng antibody was pre-incubated with the A/G protein beads in NP-40 lysis buffer, for 6 h at 4 oC on a rotator. After centrifugation (3,500 g, 5 min, 4 oC) and washing, the antibody/beads complexes were resuspended in NP-40 buffer, and recombinant hAng was then added in excess (molar ratio hAng/anti-hAng antibody 10/1). The sample was incubated for 12 h at 4 oC on a rotator, centrifuged at 3,500 g for 5 min at 4 oC, and washed two times with the same buffer.  Finally, the cytoplasmic extract, was incubated with the hAng/antibody/beads complex for 12 h at 4 oC on a rotator, and then the immunocomplex was pelleted by centrifugation at 3,500 g for 5 min at 4 oC. The immunocomplexes (control-IgG sample and specific antibody sample) were then washed 2 times with NP-40 buffer. A last wash with PBS 1x containing 1 mM PMSF was performed and the samples were resuspended in SDS-PAGE loading buffer. ii) Proteomic analysis The immunocomplexes were resuspended in 8 M Urea/100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, the beads were pelleted by centrifugation, and the extracted proteins were processed according to the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol35 using spin filter devices with a 10 kDa cut-off (Sartorius, VN01H02). Filters were extensively washed with the urea solution, treated with 10 mg/mL iodoacetamide in the urea solution and incubated for 30 min in the dark for cysteine alkylation. Proteins on the top of the filters were washed three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and finally digested by adding 1 μg trypsin/LysC mix in 80 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution (Mass spec grade, Promega) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation and upon speed-vac-assisted solvent removal eluted peptides were reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid, 2 % acetonitrile in water. Peptide concentration was determined by nanodrop absorbance measurement at 280 nm. 2.5 μg peptides were pre-concentrated with a flow of 3 μL/ min for 10 min using a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm×2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, particle size 2 μm, 100 Å, Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) consisted of solution A (2 % (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid) and solution B (80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid). The peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 4 % solution B up to 40 % in 450 min for an 8 h gradient run with a flow rate of 300 nL/ min. The column was placed in an oven operating at 35 °C. For LC-MS/MS, purified peptides were analysed by HPLC MS/MS coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a nanospray source. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 300–1,600) in profile mode and data-dependent acquisition, with the resolution set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 106ions. The six most intense ions were sequentially isolated for collision-induced (CID) MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 min and activated for 90 s. Ions with single charge states were excluded. Lock mass of m/z 445, 120025 was used for internal calibration. Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1)36, using the complete human proteome database. Search parameters included a molecular weight ranging from 350 to 5,000 Da, an S/N threshold of 1.5, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, an MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.6 Da, a maximum of two missed cleavages by trypsin, and methionine oxidation and acetylation of the N-terminus as variable modifications. The protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %. Label-free quantification was carried out in MaxQuant and protein abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (Label Free Quantitation LFQ intensity). Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.2.7.4)37. Proteins identified as contaminants, “reverse” and “only identified by site” were filtered out. The LFQ intensities were transformed to logarithmic. Zero intensities were imputed — replaced by normal distribution, assuming that the corresponding protein is present in low amounts in the sample. The replicas were grouped for each set of conditions, ie “hAng Ab” and “IgG Ab” (three biological replicas for the cytoplasmic fraction), and a two-sided Student's t-test of the grouped proteins was performed using p values for truncation.

### Publication Abstract
Human Angiogenin (hAng) is a member of the ribonuclease A superfamily and a potent inducer of neovascularization. Protein interactions of hAng in the nucleus and cytoplasm of the human umbilical vein cell line EA.hy926 have been investigated by mass spectroscopy. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD006583 and PXD006584. The first gel-free analysis of hAng immunoprecipitates revealed many statistically significant potential hAng-interacting proteins involved in crucial biological pathways. Surprisingly, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), was found to be immunoprecipitated with hAng only in the cytoplasm. The hAng-PCNA interaction and colocalization in the specific cellular compartment was validated with immunoprecipitation, immunoblotting, and immunocytochemistry. The results revealed that PCNA is predominantly localized in the cytoplasm, while hAng is distributed both in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm. hAng and PCNA colocalize in the cytoplasm, suggesting that they may interact in this compartment.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipation, Lc-ms/ms, Angiogenin

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology,  University of Thessaly, Biopolis, 41500 Larissa, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Kontou
Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology,  University of Thessaly, Biopolis, 41500 Larissa, Greece


