### Accession
PXD007638

### Title
Confirmation of ZAK as covalent target of Ibrutinib

### Description
The goal of this experiment was the confirmation of ZAK as a covalent target of Ibrutinib by an affinity enrichment experiment with a linkable analogue of Ibrutinib.

### Sample Protocol
Immobilization of a linkable analogue of Ibrutinib to sepharose beads. Incubation of Ramos lysate with the matrix in presence or absence of 10 uM free competitor (Ibrutinib). SDS elution of reversibly bound targets and subsequent tryptic digestion of covalently bound proteins. Labeling of samples with TMT label and subsequent mass spectromtry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using an in-house pipeline and searched with Mascot 2.4

### Publication Abstract
Chemoproteomics profiling of kinase inhibitors with kinobeads enables the assessment of inhibitor potency and selectivity for endogenously expressed protein kinases in cell lines and tissues. Using a small panel of targeted covalent inhibitors, we demonstrate the importance of measuring covalent target binding in live cells. We present a differential kinobeads profiling strategy for covalent kinase inhibitors where a compound is added either to live cells or to a cell extract that enables the comprehensive assessment of inhibitor selectivity for covalent and noncovalent targets. We found that Acalabrutinib, CC-292, and Ibrutinib potently and covalently bind TEC family kinases, but only Ibrutinib also potently binds to BLK. ZAK was identified as a submicromolar affinity Ibrutinib off-target due to covalent modification of Cys22. In contrast to Ibrutinib, 5Z-7-Oxozeaenol reacted with Cys150 next to the DFG loop, demonstrating an alternative route to covalent inactivation of this kinase, e.g., to inhibit canonical TGF-&#x3b2; dependent processes.

### Keywords
Sds elution vs bead trypsinationlc-ms/ms, Lysate-based assay, Linkable ibrutinib affinity enrichment, Ramos b-lymphocyte lysate, Ibrutinib

### Affiliations
Cellzome

### Submitter
Maria Faelth Savitski

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome


