### Accession
PXD003882

### Title
Drosophila mRNA Interactome -  Global changes of the RNA-bound proteome during the maternal-to-zygotic transition in Drosophila

### Description
The maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT) is a process that occurs in animal embryos at the earliest developmental stages, during which maternally deposited mRNAs and other molecules are degraded and replaced by products of the zygotic genome. The zygotic genome is not activated immediately upon fertilization, therefore post-transcriptional mechanisms control the first steps of development in the early, pre-MZT embryo. To perform unbiased organism-wide identification of Drosophila RNA binding proteins (RPBs), crucial players of post-transcriptional control, we applied the recently developed RNA interactome capture method, which involves cross-linking of RNAs and their direct protein partners by UV light, purification of RNA under stringent conditions and identification of proteins by mass spectrometry. Our analysis yielded 523 high confidence RBP hits, half of which were not previously reported to bind RNA. Our comparison of the RNA interactomes of pre- and post-MZT embryos reveals a highly dynamic behavior of the RNA-bound proteome during early development, and suggests active regulation of RNA binding of some RBPs. This resource provides the first evidence of RNA binding for hundreds of Drosophila proteins, and opens new avenues for study of molecular mechanisms of early development.

### Sample Protocol
Embryos laid by Oregon R flies were irradiated with 1 J/cm2 UV light at 254 nm and lysed under denaturing conditions as described in (Castello et al., 2013). We modified the composition of the lysis buffer to 500 mM LiCl, 0.5% LiDS, 500 mM EDTA, 20 mM 7.5 Tris-HCl and 12.5 mM DTT. We incubated the lysates at 60ºC for 15 min to ensure the complete disruption of non-covalent protein-protein interactions. Poly(A)+ RNA and cross-linked proteins were purified and analyzed as previously described (Castello et al., 2013). Detailed protocol and methods used for sample quality control are described in Supplemental Information. Captured proteins were partially digested with Lys-C and trypsin and labeled with 6plex tandem mass tags (TMT) as previously described (Altelaar et al., 2013), separated by chromatography and analysed on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS analysis and identification and quantification of proteins is described in detail in Supplemental information.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). MS/MS spectra were filtered to retain the 10 most abundant ions for each 100 Da window and searched against the Drosophila UniProt database (version 2014_06) concatenated to a database containing protein sequences of common contaminants using Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science). Enzyme cleavage specificity was set to LysC, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and TMT6x (N-term, K) were used as variable modifications. The peptide mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for MS, and 0.5 Da for MS/MS. Percolator was used for false discovery rate determination. Only peptides passing the following filters were retained: 1% false discovery rate, minimum peptide length = 6, minimum peptide ion score = 20, search engine rank = 1. Reporter ion quantification was performed by the reporter ion quantifier node within Proteome Discoverer using a peak integration tolerance of 20 ppm. Raw reporter ion intensities for each peptide were used for further bioinformatics analyses. Peptides were mapped back on the Uniprot protein sequences. For each Flybase gene identifier a generic protein was selected. Among all proteins that cover most peptides, the longest was selected. Only peptides uniquely mapping to one protein model were considered for the analysis. A quantitative differential proteome analysis was performed for the mRNA interactome analysis (comparing CL and noCL) for the differential total proteome analysis (comparing 4-5h and 0-1h) and the differential binding analysis (comparing 4-5h and 0-1h). In the case of multiple quantification events per peptide, the event with largest total intensity over all samples was considered. The ratios of peptide intensities between CL and noCL samples were computed. For each protein, intensity log-ratios were averaged over all peptides. Protein intensity log-ratios were tested against the null hypothesis that log-ratios are equal to zero using a moderated t-test (Lönnstedt and Speed, 2002) implemented in the R/Bioconductor package limma (Smyth, 2005). p-values were corrected for multiple testing by controlling the false discovery rate (FDR) using the method of Benjamini-Hochberg (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
The maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT) is a process that occurs in animal embryos at the earliest developmental stages, during which maternally deposited mRNAs and other molecules are degraded and replaced by products of the zygotic genome. The zygotic genome is not activated immediately upon fertilization, and in the pre-MZT embryo post-transcriptional control by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) orchestrates the first steps of development. To identify relevant Drosophila RBPs organism-wide, we refined the RNA interactome capture method for comparative analysis of the pre- and post-MZT embryos. We determine 523 proteins as high-confidence RBPs, half of which were not previously reported to bind RNA. Comparison of the RNA interactomes of pre- and post-MZT embryos reveals high dynamicity of the RNA-bound proteome during early development, and suggests active regulation of RNA binding of some RBPs. This resource provides unprecedented insight into the system of RBPs that govern the earliest steps of Drosophila development.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Drosophila development, Tmt-ms3

### Affiliations
DKFZ German Cancer Research Center Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer (B230) Im Neuenheimer Feld 581 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
DKFZ German Cancer Research Center Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer (B230) Im Neuenheimer Feld 581 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


