### Accession
PXD027065

### Title
Transgelin contributes to a poor response of metastatic renal cell carcinoma to sunitinib treatment

### Description
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) represents about 2-3% of all cancers with over 400,000 new cases per year. Sunitinib, a vascular endothelial growth factor tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitor, has been used mainly for first-line treatment of metastatic clear-cell RCC with good or intermediate prognosis. However, about one third of metastatic RCC patients do not respond to sunitinib, leading to disease progression. Here we aim to find and characterize proteins associated with poor sunitinib response in a pilot proteomics study. 16 RCC tumors from patients responding (8) vs. non-responding (8) to sunitinib in 3 months after treatment initiation, together with their adjacent non-cancerous tissues, were analyzed using data independent acquisition mass spectrometry. Proteomics analysis quantified 1996 protein groups (q<0.01) and revealed 27 proteins deregulated between tumors non-responding vs. responding to sunitinib, representing a pattern of deregulated proteins potentially contributing to sunitinib resistance. Gene set enrichment analysis showed up-regulation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition with transgelin as one of the most significantly abundant protein. Transgelin expression was silenced by CRISPR/Cas9 and RNA interference, and the cells with reduced transgelin level exhibited significantly slower proliferation. Our data indicate that transgelin is an essential protein supporting RCC cell proliferation which could contribute to intrinsic sunitinib resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues from 16 patients with mccRCC treated at Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute (MMCI) in Brno, Czech Republic in 2006-2018 with at least 5-years follow-up were involved in the study. All specimens were received within 20 min of surgical removal according to standardized MMCI protocol and immediately evaluated by a pathologist and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. There were 10 men and 6 women in the study with mean age 63.7 ± 9.5 years. All patients underwent sunitinib treatment in the first line and their therapy outcome was evaluated three months after the therapy initiation. Eight patients responded to sunitinib therapy (R; reached partial or complete remission) while another eight patients did not respond (NR; disease progressed). Both tumor and adjacent normal (N) tissues were available from each patient. Approximately 2x2x2 mm pieces of kidney tissue were lysed in 200 µl of lysis buffer (6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 1% Triton X-100 in 0.1 M phosphate buffer pH 6.6) and mechanically homogenized 2x2 min at 25 s-1 in the homogenizer (Retsch, Haan, Germany). The homogenates were subsequently sonicated 30x0.1 s under 50 W power using needle sonication (Bandelin HD 2200; Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). The samples were left for 15 min at room temperature and then were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm/20 min/4 °C. The supernatants were transferred into a new tube and RC-DC protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, USA) was used to measure protein concentrations in lysates. Trypsin digestion was performed using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) with several modifications: 100 µg of protein was added onto Vivacon 500 ultrafiltration spin columns (30 kDa membrane cutoff, Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Göttingen, Germany) with 200 µl of UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5). The columns were centrifuged at 14,000 g/30 min/20 °C. 100 μl of UA buffer was then added onto the columns followed by addition of 20 µl 0.1 M tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, mixed and left in thermomixer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) for 30 min/600 rpm/37 °C to reach a complete reduction of proteins. The samples were then centrifuged at 14,000 g/15 min/20 °C. Subsequently, 100 μl of UA buffer and 20 μl of 0.3 M iodoacetamide were added onto the columns and mixed. The samples were alkylated for 1 min/600 rpm/25 °C in thermomixer and then for 20 min in dark without shaking, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 g/15 min/20 °C. The columns were washed two times with 100 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and centrifuged for 14,000 g/20 min/20 °C. The digestion was performed by the addition of 3.33 μl of 1 μg/μl trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 100 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by incubation for 12 h at 37 °C in a wet chamber. The digests were collected by centrifugation at 14,000 g/15 min/20 °C and C18 desalted as previously described (PMID 19053527). Four pooled samples were prepared for spectral library generation, each pooled from aliquots of tumor, or normal samples within the R and NR groups. LC-MS/MS analysis of peptide samples was performed using the RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) online connected to Impact II Ultra-High Resolution Qq-Time-Of-Flight (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer. Peptides were preconcentrated online on a 100 μm × 30 mm trapping column packed with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) prior to LC separation. Equilibration of the trapping and analytical column was performed before the sample injection. Peptides were separated using an Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (3 μm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the following LC gradient (mobile phase A: 0.1% FA (formic acid) in water, mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile: 300 nl/min; 40°C): Elution gradient started at 1% of mobile phase B, which increased to 56% over 120 min nonlinearly (40 min: 14%, 80 min: 30%, 120 min: 56%) followed by the system wash phase. Analytical column outlet was connected to the CaptiveSpray nanoBooster ion source (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). NanoBooster was filled with acetonitrile. MS and MS/MS spectra were measured either in data-dependent mode (DDA) in 4 samples for spectral library generation in 3 injections each, or in data-independent mode (DIA) in all 32 tissue samples in single injections for protein and peptide quantification. DDA data were acquired with 3 s long cycle. The mass range was set to 150-2200 m/z with precursors selection from 300 to 2000 m/z. Measurement frequency of MS and MS/MS scans were 2 Hz and 4-16 Hz (depending on the precursor intensity). DIA data were measured in m/z range of 300-1250 with scan time set to 250 ms or 50 ms for the survey or 64 MS/MS scans (please see the publication).

### Data Protocol
First, the spectral library was constructed from DDA data searched in MaxQuant version 1.5.8.3. (www.maxquant.org) against human UniProt/SwissProt proteome database (UniProt version 2018_03 with 20316 sequences downloaded on 25th April 2018) complemented by iRT protein database (Biognosis, Zurich, Switzerland) and internal database of common protein contaminants in Andromeda search algorithm; default setting for Bruker qTOF was applied. The enzyme name: Trypsin (cleaving polypeptides at the carboxyl side of lysine or arginine), max. missed cleavage sites 2, taxonomy: Homo sapiens. Decoy database search: PSM false discovery rate (FDR) 0.01, protein FDR 0.01. Tolerances: 0.07 Da/0.006 Da (first search/main search) peptide tolerance and 40 ppm IT MS/MS fragment match tolerance. Modifications: Dynamic (variable): oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term). Static (fixed): Carbamidomethyl (C). The spectral library was created in Spectronaut 13.9 software (Biognosis, Zurich, Switzerland) based on MaxQuant search of all DDA analyses. Quantitative data from DIA runs were obtained in Spectronaut 13.9 for all proteins/peptides/transitions using default settings. The peptides identified with q ˂ 0.01 in at least 8 of 32 analyses were included into the final dataset (q-value percentile 0.25 setting). Proteins with absolute log2 fold change (|log2FC|) ˃ 0.58 and with q ˂ 0.05 were considered differentially abundant between sample groups.

### Publication Abstract
Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) represents about 2-3% of all cancers with over 400,000 new cases per year. Sunitinib, a vascular endothelial growth factor tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitor, has been used mainly for first-line treatment of metastatic clear-cell RCC with good or intermediate prognosis. However, about one-third of metastatic RCC patients do not respond to sunitinib, leading to disease progression. Here, we aim to find and characterize proteins associated with poor sunitinib response in a pilot proteomics study. Sixteen RCC tumors from patients responding (8) vs. non-responding (8) to sunitinib 3 months after treatment initiation were analyzed using data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry, together with their adjacent non-cancerous tissues. Proteomics analysis quantified 1996 protein groups (FDR = 0.01) and revealed 27 proteins deregulated between tumors non-responding vs. responding to sunitinib, representing a pattern of deregulated proteins potentially contributing to sunitinib resistance. Gene set enrichment analysis showed an up-regulation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition with transgelin as one of the most significantly abundant proteins. Transgelin expression was silenced by CRISPR/Cas9 and RNA interference, and the cells with reduced transgelin level exhibited significantly slower proliferation. Our data indicate that transgelin is an essential protein supporting RCC cell proliferation, which could contribute to intrinsic sunitinib resistance.

### Keywords
Mccrcc; sunitinib; resistance; dia-ms; transgelin

### Affiliations
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science

### Submitter
Pavel Bouchal

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Bouchal
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science


