### Accession
PXD020400

### Title
Cellular and extracellular proteome of the animal pathogen Corynebacterium silvaticum, a close relative of zoonotic Corynebacterium ulcerans and Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis

### Description
A single paragraph of about 200 words maximum. For research articles, abstracts should give a pertinent overview of the work. We strongly encourage authors to use the following style of structured abstracts, but without headings: (1) Background: Place the question addressed in a broad context and highlight the purpose of the study; (2) Methods: Describe briefly the main methods or treatments applied; (3) Results: Summarize the article's main findings; and (4) Conclusions: Indicate the main conclusions or interpretations. The abstract should be an objective representation of the article, it must not contain results which are not presented and substantiated in the main text and should not exaggerate the main conclusions

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular proteins were prepared as described [Bittel et al. 2018]. Cells were removed by centrifugation (10 min, 4 °C, 4,000 x g) and the supernatant was subsequently filtered using a 0.2 µm pore size filter (Minisart, Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany). After TCA precipitation the proteins were resuspended in protein buffer (10 mM DTT, 2% sodium deoxycholate, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0). Protein concentration was determined using PierceTM 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Tryptic digest of 25 µg of the proteins were carried out on 10 kDa vivacon 500 membrane filters as previously described following a modified Filter Aided Sample preparation (FASP) protocol [Wiesniewsky et al., 2009; Kraner et al., 2017; Möller et al., 2019].  The isolation of cell surface proteins was performed by tryptic shaving [Tjalsma et al., 2008; Bittel et al., 2018] using 1.5 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA) for 1.5 h at 37 °C.  For analysis of the whole proteome the cells were resuspended in PBS buffer with protease inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and lysed with a homogenizer (MP Biomedical, Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) using glass beads (5.5 m sec-1, 30 sec., 5 cycles, 4°C). To remove the cell debris the samples were centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatant were retained. Protein buffer were added to a final concentration of 10 mM DTT, 2% sodium deoxycholate and 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and 40 µg of these proteins were transferred into a new low-binding tube. An incubation at 55 °C for 30 min were applied for protein denaturation followed by an alkylation of sulfhydryl groups (40 mM CAA final concentration). Proteins were precipitated overnight with 80% acetone at 4 °C, washed three times with 80% ice cold acetone, dried under N2 atmosphere to avoid oxidation [44] [Kraner et al., 2017]. The resulting protein pellet were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB buffer with 2 µg trypsin and digested overnight at 37 °C under constant shaking. A clean-up with C18 stage tips were performed to desalt 25 µg of all samples (three biological replicates of secreted proteins, whole proteome and surface proteins). Peptides were vacuum-dried and prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, resuspended in 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) [Bittel et al., 2018].  Mass spectrometric analyses were carried out following a previously published protocol [Bittel et al.,2018; Kraner et al., 2017]. 10 µg peptides were loaded onto a nanoflow Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). For separation of peptides an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific; C18 with 2 µm particle size, 50 cm × 75 µm) were used (flow rate: 200 nl min−1; increasing acetonitrile concentrations over 120 min). Total method duration (including equilibration and column wash) was 160 min. Analysis of all samples were carried out using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) Settings were adjusted according to a recently published protocol [40] [Möller et al 2019]: spray voltage 2000 V, transfer tube temperature 275 °C, scan range for the MS 1 detection in the Orbitrap 300–2000 (m/z), 50 ms maximum injection time, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400,000 and Orbitrap resolution of 120.000. The most intense ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation with collision energy of 35%. For ion trap detection a maximum injection time of 250 ms and an AGC target of 100 were set [Kraner et al., 2017; Bittel et al., 2018]. Resulting raw data files were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 program package (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and the C. ulcerans W25 database (Proteome Id: UP000311124) in UniProt (www.uniprot/proteomes). The theoretical masses of peptides were generated with a maximum of two missed cleavages as described [Schäfer et al. 2016]. Carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification, mass tolerance for survey scans was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da for fragment mass measurements, to compare the measured spectra of product ions. False discovery rate (FDR) were set on 1 % for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw data files were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 program package (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and the C. ulcerans W25 database (Proteome Id: UP000311124) in UniProt (www.uniprot/proteomes). The theoretical masses of peptides were generated with a maximum of two missed cleavages as described [Schäfer et al. 2016]. Carbamidomethyl modification on cysteine was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification, mass tolerance for survey scans was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da for fragment mass measurements, to compare the measured spectra of product ions. False discovery rate (FDR) were set on 1 % for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exoproteome; mass spectrometry; necrotizing lymphadenitis; secretome; zoonosis; lc-ms/ms analysis

### Affiliations
Prof. for Microbiology
FAU Erlangen

### Submitter
Jens Möller

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Burkovski
Prof. for Microbiology


