### Accession
PXD025644

### Title
Multiomic analysis of the Arabian camel (Camelus dromedarius) kidney reveals a role for cholesterol in water conservation

### Description
The one-humped Arabian camel (Camelus dromedarius) is the most important livestock animal in arid and semi-arid regions and continues to provide basic necessities to millions of people. In the current context of global warming, there is renewed interest in the adaptive mechanisms that enable camelids to survive in arid conditions. Recent investigations described genomic signatures that revealed evolutionary adaptations to desert environments. We now present a comprehensive catalogue of the transcriptomes and proteomes of the dromedary kidney and describe how the gene expression profiles of Differentially Expressed Genes (DEGs) are modulated as a consequence of chronic dehydration and subsequent acute rehydration. We performed RNAseq and quantification of peptides in samples from 15 dromedaries (5 controls, 5 dehydrated and 5 rehydrated). Gene Ontology analyses suggested an enrichment of the cholesterol biosynthetic process and an overrepresentation of categories related to “ion transmembrane transport” in the camel kidney, and RTN analyses confirmed alterations in the transcriptional machinery involved in cholesterol synthesis. These data were validated by RT-qPCR. Based on our hypothesis of a role for cholesterol during dehydration, we identified DEGs with roles in the countercurrent multiplication process which are affected by changes in the level of cholesterol. Thus, we further validated 3 genes coding for ion transporting proteins (KCNJ8, SLC9A7 and ATP1B3) and AQP2, which were upregulated during dehydration. Our datasets suggest that suppression of cholesterol biosynthesis may facilitate water retention in the kidney of the dromedary by indirectly enhancing the osmotic gradient along the medullary interstitium and the AQP2-mediated water reabsorption.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was carried out by adding 10ml of extraction buffer with protease inhibitors per mg of frozen grounded sample to lyse cells. Extraction buffer with protease inhibitors consisted of 0.1ml protease inhibitor (P8340, Sigma, 100x in DMSO), 0.1ml Phenylmethanefonyl Flouride (P7626, Sigma, 100x in EtOH), 1ml phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP 04906837001, Roche, 10x in RIPA), and 8.8ml RIPA buffer. The mixture was vortexed at a high speed for 1 minute then incubated on ice for 30 minutes. Lysed samples were spun at 12000xg for 20 minutes at 4°C to retain only proteins in the supernatant. Then supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Colorimetric-based Bradford assay was used to measure protein concentration.

### Data Protocol
Relative Peptide abundance was measured using Tandem Mass Tagging Mass Spectrometry (TMT-MS) performed at the Bristol Proteomics Facility, University of Bristol. TMT-MS is a quantitative proteomic approach which allows comparison of protein abundance between multiple samples in a single experiment. Briefly, samples were digested and labelled with a set of amine-specific isobaric tags to obtain differentially labelled peptides of identical mass. Samples were then pooled and fractionated by chromatography and later analysed by nano-LC MS/MS using a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. Quantification of peptides by mass spectrometry in each sample was compared to a pooled sample total to give a peptide abundance ratio. Proteome Discoverer v2.1 software was used to filter the data with a 5% FDR cut off and remove any contaminants identified. Normalisation to total protein content of each sample was performed for the final protein abundance ration. Differential protein expression was calculated using the DEqMS R package using log transformed and median normalised protein abundance ratio values.

### Publication Abstract
The Arabian camel (Camelus dromedarius) is the most important livestock animal in arid and semi-arid regions and provides basic necessities to millions of people. In the current context of climate change, there is renewed interest in the mechanisms that enable camelids to survive in arid conditions. Recent investigations described genomic signatures revealing evolutionary adaptations to desert environments. We now present a comprehensive catalogue of the transcriptomes and proteomes of the dromedary kidney and describe how gene expression is modulated as a consequence of chronic dehydration and acute rehydration. Our analyses suggested an enrichment of the cholesterol biosynthetic process and an overrepresentation of categories related to ion transport. Thus, we further validated differentially expressed genes with known roles in water conservation which are affected by changes in cholesterol levels. Our datasets suggest that suppression of cholesterol biosynthesis may facilitate water retention in the kidney by indirectly facilitating the AQP2-mediated water reabsorption.

### Keywords
Kidney proteomics, Camelus dromedarius, Countercurrent multiplication, Desert physiology, Dromedary camel, Kidney transcriptomics, Water deprivation

### Affiliations
Bristol Medical School, University of Bristol
Molecular Neuroendocrinology group, Bristol Medical school, University of Bristol

### Submitter
Fernando Alvira Iraizoz

### Lab Head
Dr David Murphy
Molecular Neuroendocrinology group, Bristol Medical school, University of Bristol


