### Accession
PXD011760

### Title
Fumarate effect on the Escherichia coli proteome at aerobic and anaerobic growth conditions

### Description
The changes in protein composition of E. coli were studied in a global proteomic approach for aerobic growth without or with fumarate as carbon source (glycerol + O2, fumarate + O2, respectively) and anaerobic growth without or with fumarate as carbon source (glycerol + DMSO, glycerol + DMSO + fumarate, respectively). The experiments should unravel the changes in response to fumarate under aerobic (i) and anaerobic (ii) conditions, and more generally (iii) the fumarate proteome under aerobic versus anaerobic conditions. Fumarate was used as the C4DC due to its capability to support aerobic and anaerobic growth, and glycerol was used as the alternative carbon source that exerts no or only weak carbon catabolite repression.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli W3110 wild type was grown in M9 medium supplemented with casamino acid hydrolysate and L-tryptophane. Glycerol (50 mmol/l) or fumarate (50 mmol/l) were used as carbon and energy sources at aerobic conditions and cultures were shaken at 180 rpm at 37 °C to an optical density at 578 nm (OD578) of 1.7 (fumarate) and 2.7 (glycerol) corresponding to stationary growth phase. Anaerobic cultivation was accomplished at 37 °C in the medium mentioned above with glycerol (50 mmol/l) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 20 mmol/l) or fumarate (20 mmol/l) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, 20 mmol/l) to an OD578 of 0.5 – 0.85 corresponding to late exponential growth phase.  15 OD units were harvested by centrifugation (8,000 × g, 4 °C, 15 min) and pellets were stored at -80 °C. Membranes of 80 OD units of E. coli culture were prepared as described (Wörner et al, J Bacteriol 2017, 200 (4) 612-617). Protein extracts in 8M urea/ 2M thiourea were prepared from cells by three sonication cycles in four, from membrane fractions in three independent biological replicates. Protein was reduced and alkylated before subsequent digestion with trypsin (1:25) at 37°C for 16-18 hours. The resulting peptides were cleaned using reversed-phase material (µ-C18 ZipTips), and analysed by nano-LC Q-TOF UDMSE on a travelling wave ion-mobility-enabled hybrid quadrupole orthogonal acceleration time-of-flight mass spectrometer (SYNAPT G2-Si HDMS, Waters Corporation, Manchester, UK) after separation using a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) with a ACQUITY UPLC® M-Class HSS T3 column (Waters). Data acquisition was set up using the program MassLynx™ Software Version 1.53.1398 (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using the program PLGS v3.2 (Waters Corporation). The raw data were searched against the E. coli K12 database obtained from Uniprot (06/2014) complemented with the sequence of DctA with trypsin as proteolytic enzyme, maximum two missed cleavages, methionine oxidation as variable modification, and carbamidomethylation at cysteine as fixed modification. Proteins identified with at least two peptides were considered for further analysis. Intensities were median normalized using Genedata Analyst 10.0.3 (Genedata AG, Basel, Switzerland). Intensity values of proteins that were missing in some of the replicates were replaced by a minimum value of 1000 to allow for mathematical calculations. Average values were calculated using the geometrical mean of the protein intensities per condition prior to ratio calculation between two conditions each. Corresponding p- and q-values (Benjamini-Hochberg correction) were determined by two sided t test.

### Publication Abstract
In the absence of sugars, C4-dicarboxylates (C4DC) like fumarate represent important substrates for growth of Escherichia coli. Aerobically, C4DCs are oxidized to CO<sub>2</sub> whereas anaerobically, C4DCs are used for fumarate respiration. In order to determine the impact of fumarate under aerobic and anaerobic conditions, proteomes of E. coli W3110 grown aerobically or anaerobically with fumarate and/or the non-C4DC substrate glycerol were comparatively profiled by nanoLC-MS/MS. Membrane enrichment allowed sensitive detection of membrane proteins. A total of 1657 proteins of which 646 and 374 were assigned to the cytosol or membrane, respectively, were covered. Presence of fumarate triggered changes (&#x2265;&#x202f;2fold) to the levels of 211 and 76 proteins under aerobic and anaerobic growth, respectively. The fumarate induced changes included proteins encoded by genes regulated by the C4DC two-component system DcuS-DcuR (DctA, DcuB, FumB, FrdABC proteins) catalyzing uptake and initial catabolic steps. Many of the proteins displaying altered levels are not part of the DcuS-DcuR regulon, including proteins of citric acid cycle and associated pathways (aerobic), proteins involved in motility and chemotaxis (anaerobic), and oxidative stress. Their genes are mostly preceded by cAMP receptor protein (CRP) sites, some by DcuR-like sites. Testing of selected genes confirmed regulation by CRP and DcuS-DcuR. SIGNIFICANCE: Global protein profiling of the soluble and the membrane fraction provides a comprehensive view on the protein pattern of E. coli grown aerobically and anaerobically with or without fumarate. The results disclose during aerobic growth besides the known impact of the C4-dicarboxylates (C4DC) on carbon utilization and citric acid cycle major adaptations in amino acid metabolism. In contrast, protein alterations in the presence of fumarate under anaerobic conditions point to enhanced motility and chemotaxis. Only proteins (transporters, initial metabolic steps) feeding external C4DCs to the central pathways were regulated by the C4DC two-component system DcuS-DcuR, whereas other protein levels were controlled in an indirect manner by CRP triggered catabolite control and other mechanisms. Consequently, metabolic and transcriptional regulation by C4DCs is apparently effected by a network of the DcuS-DcuR system with important contribution by catabolite control.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli; fumarate metabolism, Lc-udmse, Aerobic/anaerobic growth; c4-dicarboxylates

### Affiliations
University Medicine Greifswald, Department of Functional Genomics
Dept. of Functional Genomics

### Submitter
Elke Hammer

### Lab Head
Dr Elke Hammer
University Medicine Greifswald, Department of Functional Genomics


