### Accession
PXD012500

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Diaphragm after Chronic Heart Failure_Males

### Description
Proteomic analysis of diaphragm tissue from rats subjected to chronic heart failure. Redox sensitive Cysteine residues from both adult and old diaphragm tissues examined

### Sample Protocol
Tissue was homogenised in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10 mM N-ethylmalemide. Samples were desalted using Zeba desalting coloumns. 100ug of protein in 160ul of 25 mM Ammonium Bicaronate, 10ul of 1% (w/v) rapigest added for 10min at 80'C, 10 ul of 100mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride added and samples heated at 60 'C for 10min, 10ul of 100mM d(5) N-ethylmaleimide added and incbated in dark for 30 min. 10ul of 200 ug/ul solution of trypsin added and samples incubated overnight at 37'C. Sample was diluted 1:10 in 97% H2O, 3% MeCN and 0.1% Formic acid. 5ul of sample corresponding to 250ng was loaded onto Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanosystme coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer. Sample was resolved on the analytical coloumn over 120min at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Data dependent acquisition consisted of a 70,000 resolution full scan MS scan and the 10 most abundant peaks were selected for MS/MS using a 17,000 resolution scan with an ion selection window of 3m/z and normailised collision energy of 30.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were converted to mgf files using Proteome Discovery and resulting files were searched against UniProt mouse sequence database using in house Mascot server. Search parameters used were peptide mass tolerance 10ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.01Da, +1,+2,+3 ions, missed cleavages 1, instrument type ESI-TRAP. Variable modifications included were d(0) NEM, d(5) NEM of Cysteine, Arginine and Lysine, mono-, di-, tri- oxidation of Cys residues. Label free quantification was performed using PEAKS& studio software, significantly changed proteins had -10LogP>20, at least 3 unique peptides and fold change > 1.5. Peptides identified by Proteome Discoverer with d(0) NEM and separately d(5) NEM were considered as redox sensitive peptides, a list of these target peptides was searched againist the results library using Skyline to relatively quantify peptides d(0)NEM vs d(5)NEM.

### Publication Abstract
Inspiratory dysfunction occurs in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) in a manner that depends on disease severity and by mechanisms that are not fully understood. In the current study, we tested whether HFrEF effects on diaphragm (inspiratory muscle) depend on disease severity and examined putative mechanisms for diaphragm abnormalities via global and redox proteomics. We allocated male rats into Sham, moderate (mHFrEF), or severe HFrEF (sHFrEF) induced by myocardial infarction and examined the diaphragm muscle. Both mHFrEF and sHFrEF caused atrophy in type IIa and IIb/x fibers. Maximal and twitch specific forces (N/cm<sup>2</sup>) were decreased by 19&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;10% and 28&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;13%, respectively, in sHFrEF (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;.05), but not in mHFrEF. Global proteomics revealed upregulation of sarcomeric proteins and downregulation of ribosomal and glucose metabolism proteins in sHFrEF. Redox proteomics showed that sHFrEF increased reversibly oxidized cysteine in cytoskeletal and thin filament proteins and methionine in skeletal muscle &#x3b1;-actin (range 0.5 to 3.3-fold; p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;.05). In conclusion, fiber atrophy plus contractile dysfunction caused diaphragm weakness in HFrEF. Decreased ribosomal proteins and heighted reversible oxidation of protein thiols are candidate mechanisms for atrophy or anabolic resistance as well as loss of specific force in sHFrEF.

### Keywords
Heart failure, Rat, Diaphragm

### Affiliations
NUI Galway
Physiology, NUI Galway

### Submitter
Brian McDonagh

### Lab Head
Dr Brian McDonagh
Physiology, NUI Galway


