### Accession
PXD023852

### Title
HDAC6 inhibition restores TDP-43 pathology and axonal transport defects in human motor neurons with TARDBP mutations

### Description
TDP-43 is the major component of pathological inclusions in most ALS patients and in up to 50% of patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Heterozygous missense mutations in TARDBP, the gene encoding TDP-43, are one of the common causes of familial ALS. In this study, we investigate TDP-43 protein behavior in induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived motor neurons from three ALS patients with different TARDBP mutations and three healthy controls. TARDPB mutations induce several TDP-43 changes in spinal motor neurons, including cytoplasmic mislocalization and accumulation of insoluble TDP-43, C-terminal fragments and phospho-TDP-43. By generating iPSC lines with allele-specific tagging of TDP-43, we find that mutant TDP-43 initiates the observed disease phenotypes and has an altered interactome as indicated by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Our findings also indicate that TDP-43 proteinopathy results in a defect in mitochondrial transport. Lastly, proteomics analyses also show that pharmacological inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) restores the observed TDP-43 pathologies and the axonal mitochondrial motility, suggesting that HDAC6 inhibition may be an interesting therapeutic target for neurodegenerative disorders linked to TDP-43 pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Pull down mCherry tagged TDP-43 For pull down of mCherry tagged TDP-43, the RFP-Trap Magnetic Agarose kit (rtma-100, ChromoTek GmbH, Germany) was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 25 µl of beads were first equilibrated by gently pipetting up and down in 500 µl ice-cold dilution buffer (10 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA). Afterwards, the beads were precipitated with a magnetic separation rack (A20006, NVIGEN Inc, San Jose, California, USA) until the supernatant was clear and the supernatant discarded. iPSC-derived motor neurons were lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors (cOmplete, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail, Sigma-Aldrich) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP, Sigma-Aldrich). Equal amounts of diluted iPSC-derived motor neuron lysates were added to the equilibrated beads and subsequently rotated over-night at +4°C. The next day, the beads were precipitated on the magnetic separation rack and washed three times in 1 ml trypsin digestion buffer (20 mM Tris HCl pH 8 and 0.2 mM CaCl2) before shipping to the VIB proteomics core on dry ice. Sample preparation After the affinity purification, the washed beads were treated with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) for 4 hours at 37°C to cleave all proteins from the beads. After removal of the magnetic beads, the proteins were further digested with 1 µg trypsin overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Next, peptides were purified on OMIX C18 tips (Agilent). The tips were first washed 3 times with 150 µl pre-wash buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ acetonitrile (ACN) (20:80, v/v)) and pre-equilibrated 5 times with 150 µl of solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the tip. After peptide binding, the tip was washed 3 times with 150 µl of solvent A and peptides were eluted twice with 150 µl elution buffer (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (40:60, v/v)). LC-MS/MS analysis Purified peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µL loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (96:2, v/v)) and 5 µL of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (Waters, nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 180 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads). The peptides were separated on an in-house produced column (75 µm x 500 mm), packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur basic 1.9 µm silica particles (Dr. Maisch, Germany). The Ultimate 3000’s column oven was set to 50°C. For proper ionization, a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 µm inner diameter) (New Objective) was connected to the analytical column. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5 to 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/ACN (2:8, v/v)) over 87 min, at a constant flow rate 300 nl/min, followed by a 13-minutes washing phase plateauing at 99% MS solvent B. Re-equilibration with 95% MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water) was performed at 300 nl/min for 20 min adding up to a total run length of 120 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 2.5 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 375−1,500, AGC target 3 × 106  ions, maximum ion injection time 60 ms), acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z), was followed by up to 16 tandem MS scans (resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 1 × 105 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 1.5 Da, fixed first mass 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, intensity threshold 1.3 x 104, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 7, 8, >8 positively charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 20 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 28% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12003 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein filtering Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.11.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level (Cox et al, 2014; Cox & Mann, 2008). Spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (from January 2020 with 20,365 entries). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set to C-terminal of arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage next to prolines with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues as wells as acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1) after uploading the proteingroups file from MaxQuant (Tyanova et al, 2016). Reverse database hits were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. These quantified proteins, were subsequently used for further data analysis. Gene Ontology enrichment analysis Log2 fold changes were calculated between mCherry-tagged wildtype and mutant TDP-43 interacting proteins, and also between mCherry-tagged mutant TDP-43 with and without tubastatin A treatment for HDAC6 inhibition. Log2 fold changes were converted to Z scores and ranked. A |Z-score| > 1 was used as a cut-off to select for enriched or depleted TDP-43 interactors, and both lists were analyzed for gene ontology enriched terms using DAVID (Huang et al, 2009). Common contaminants as defined by the MaxQuant contaminant list were removed from the gene enrichment analysis.

### Publication Abstract
TDP-43 is the major component of pathological inclusions in most ALS patients and in up to 50% of patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Heterozygous missense mutations in TARDBP, the gene encoding TDP-43, are one of the common causes of familial ALS. In this study, we investigate TDP-43 protein behavior in induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived motor neurons from three ALS patients with different TARDBP mutations, three healthy controls and an isogenic control. TARDPB mutations induce several TDP-43 changes in spinal motor neurons, including cytoplasmic mislocalization and accumulation of insoluble TDP-43, C-terminal fragments, and phospho-TDP-43. By generating iPSC lines with allele-specific tagging of TDP-43, we find that mutant TDP-43 initiates the observed disease phenotypes and has an altered interactome as indicated by mass spectrometry. Our findings also indicate that TDP-43 proteinopathy results in a defect in mitochondrial transport. Lastly, we show that pharmacological inhibition of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) restores the observed TDP-43 pathologies and the axonal mitochondrial motility, suggesting that HDAC6 inhibition may be an interesting therapeutic target for neurodegenerative disorders linked to TDP-43 pathology.

### Keywords
Induced pluripotent stem cells, Interactome, Tdp-43, Als, Axonal transport, Hdac6, Tardpb mutation

### Affiliations
KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Neurosciences, Experimental Neurology and Leuven Research Institute for Neuroscience and Disease (LIND), B-3000 Leuven, Belgium; VIB, Center for Brain and Disease Research, Laboratory of Neurobiology, Leuven, Belgium; University Hospitals Leuven, Department of Neurology, Leuven, Belgium.
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.

### Submitter
Rupert Mayer

### Lab Head
Dr Philip Van Damme
KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Department of Neurosciences, Experimental Neurology and Leuven Research Institute for Neuroscience and Disease (LIND), B-3000 Leuven, Belgium; VIB, Center for Brain and Disease Research, Laboratory of Neurobiology, Leuven, Belgium; University Hospitals Leuven, Department of Neurology, Leuven, Belgium.


