### Accession
PXD016240

### Title
Investigation of isoAsp accumulation to antioxidative enzymes during thermal stress and their repair by PROTEIN L-ISOASPARTYL METHYLTRANSFERASE (PIMT).

### Description
The formation of isoAsp residues from Asp and Asn residues in proteins and peptides is accelerated under stressful environments and has detrimental effects on protein structure and function. PROTEIN L-ISOASPARTYL METHYLTRANSFERASE (PIMT) is a protein repairing enzyme which revert such deleterious isoAsp residues to normal aspartyl residues as a protein repair process. In present work, we aim to study the isoaspartyl formation of antioxidative enzymes, superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) under stressful environments and their repair by PIMT in Arabidopsis.  The role of PIMT in repairing these enzymes for the plant survival under heat and oxidative stress were investigated through molecular, biochemical approaches in Arabidopsis. We demonstrated that isoAsp accumulation in proteins increase upon heat and oxidative stress, and PIMT activity is essential to restrict such isoAsp accumulation. We demonstrated that PIMT play an important role under heat and oxidative stress by restricting stress-induced deleterious isoAsp accumulation in proteins.  Analyses of PIMT overexpression and RNAi lines suggest that PIMT maintains ROS homeostasis by protecting the functionality of antioxidative enzymes from isoAsp mediated damage under stressful environments. To confirm further whether Asn residues of antioxidative enzymes indeed susceptible to isoAsp formation, we used bacterially expressed and purified recombinant proteins for MS analyses. Purified proteins were subjected to thermal insult and then MS/MS analyses were carried out to identify isoAsp modification. Our MS analyses suggest that these antioxidative enzymes are indeed susceptible to isoAsp formation under thermal stress.

### Sample Protocol
Sample- Bacterially expressed and purified recombinant SOD and catalase. Control (without thermal insulted) and thermally insulted proteins.  Twenty microgram of treated and untreated purified protein samples were run on 12% SDS-PAGE. Protein bands were then excised and in-gel digestion was performed using trypsin (promega). Bands were initially destained and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (1h, 65°C) followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at  room temperature. Next, in gel trypsin digestion was carried out for 16 h at 30°C. Eluted proteins were collected in fresh tube and trypsin digestion was terminated using 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Samples were then vacuum-dried and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid before using for LC MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS was performed on AB Sciex QTRAP 650 Exion AD LC system (AB Sciex) with an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column (2.1x100mm, 1.7μm, Waters) using Turbo Spray Ion Drive electrospray ionization (ESI) source. The peptide mixture was fractionated by applying a linear gradient 5% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) to 30% of acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 µl/min in 32 min run.  Spectra were acquired at 3 Hz with a mass range of m/z 400-1200 for MS1. Further top 3 intense peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis with a scan rate of 10000 Da/Sec in positive mode.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were processed with Analyst 1.7 (AB Sciex) using paragon method of protein pilot v5.0.1 (AB Sciex) and peak lists were searched against 78742 proteins of the Uniprot Arabidopsis proteome database (UP000006548, 39371 proteins, version May 22, 2019). Protein pilot was searched with standard tryptic peptides with upto 3 allowed miss cleavage which further corrected by 1% FDR. Cys-carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and biological modifications and amino acid substitution as variable modification. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 0.7 Da where as mass tolerance for fragment ions were set at 0.6 Da. Threshold score value for accepting individual spectra was set at 95% confidence level and unused score of 1.3 was used to accept individual spectra.

### Publication Abstract
Stressful environments accelerate the formation of isoaspartyl (isoAsp) residues in proteins, which detrimentally affect protein structure and function. The enzyme PROTEIN l-ISOASPARTYL METHYLTRANSFERASE (PIMT) repairs other proteins by reverting deleterious isoAsp residues to functional aspartyl residues. PIMT function previously has been elucidated in seeds, but its role in plant survival under stress conditions remains undefined. Herein, we used molecular, biochemical, and genetic approaches, including protein overexpression and knockdown experiments, in <i>Arabidopsis</i> to investigate the role of PIMTs in plant growth and survival during heat and oxidative stresses. We demonstrate that these stresses increase isoAsp accumulation in plant proteins, that PIMT activity is essential for restricting isoAsp accumulation, and that both PIMT1 and PIMT2 play an important role in this restriction and <i>Arabidopsis</i> growth and survival. Moreover, we show that PIMT improves stress tolerance by facilitating efficient reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging by protecting the functionality of antioxidant enzymes from isoAsp-mediated damage during stress. Specifically, biochemical and MS/MS analyses revealed that antioxidant enzymes acquire deleterious isoAsp residues during stress, which adversely affect their catalytic activities, and that PIMT repairs the isoAsp residues and thereby restores antioxidant enzyme function. Collectively, our results suggest that the PIMT-mediated protein repair system is an integral part of the stress-tolerance mechanism in plants, in which PIMTs protect antioxidant enzymes that maintain proper ROS homeostasis against isoAsp-mediated damage in stressful environments.

### Keywords
Isoasp, Arabidopsis, Pimt, Protein repair., Antioxidative enzyme

### Affiliations
National Institute of Plant Genome Research, New Delhi
National Institute of Plant Genome Research, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi-110067

### Submitter
Manoj Majee

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Manoj Majee
National Institute of Plant Genome Research, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi-110067


