### Accession
PXD015454

### Title
Identification of ubiquitination site in BCL-XL after PROTAC DT2216 treatment

### Description
The availability of a suitable lysine for PROTAC-mediated ubiquitination can also determine the degradative ability of a protein target and the selectivity of a PROTAC. PROTAC DT2216 selectively triggers ubiquitination and degradation of BCL-XL. In this study, we identify K87 is the key ubiquitinated lysine under DT2216 treatment through LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of FLAG-tagged protein for mass spectrometry. HEK293T cells were co-transfected with Flag-BCL-XL(pDL2009) and HA-Ub vectors. Proteins were extracted by using IP lysis buffer and then subjected to immunoprecipitation using Pierce™ Anti-DYKDDDDK Affinity Resin (Cat. No. A36801, Thermal Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Anti-DYKDDDDK Affinity Resin was washed with 1X TBS three times and then added to protein samples, and the mixture was incubated at 4 °C with rotation for 4 h. The immunoprecipitated samples were centrifuged at 1000×g for 1 min at 4 °C, and then washed three times with 1X TBS. Immunoprecipitated samples were eluted with 0.1 M glycine HCl (pH 2.8). Sample preparation and LC-MS/MS. Purified proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested using filter-aided sample preparation58. Resulting peptides were then separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted using a 90 min gradient from 97:3 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio A (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid and 0.5% acetonitrile in water, buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.15 kV) followed by MS/MS analysis using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in top-speed data-dependent mode. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 240,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following HCD activation, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with precursor mass-dependent normalized collision energy between 28.0 and 31.0.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis. Proteins were identified by database search against human Uniprot database (73911 proteins, March 16, 2019) using Mascot with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da), protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.03670) and lysine ubiquitination (+114.04293 Da) were variable modifications; cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.021465 Da). Percolator was used to filter the peptide spectrum matches to a false discovery rate of 1%. Scaffold (Proteome Software) was used to verify MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm59

### Publication Abstract
B-cell lymphoma extra large (BCL-X<sub>L</sub>) is a well-validated cancer target. However, the on-target and dose-limiting thrombocytopenia limits the use of BCL-X<sub>L</sub> inhibitors, such as ABT263, as safe and effective anticancer agents. To reduce the toxicity of ABT263, we converted it into DT2216, a BCL-X<sub>L</sub> proteolysis-targeting chimera (PROTAC), that targets BCL-X<sub>L</sub> to the Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) E3 ligase for degradation. We found that DT2216 was more potent against various BCL-X<sub>L</sub>-dependent leukemia and cancer cells but considerably less toxic to platelets than ABT263 in vitro because VHL is poorly expressed in platelets. In vivo, DT2216 effectively inhibits the growth of several xenograft tumors as a single agent or in combination with other chemotherapeutic agents, without causing appreciable thrombocytopenia. These findings demonstrate the potential to use PROTAC technology to reduce on-target drug toxicities and rescue the therapeutic potential of previously undruggable targets. Furthermore, DT2216 may be developed as a safe first-in-class anticancer agent targeting BCL-X<sub>L</sub>.

### Keywords
Bcl-xl, Dt2216, Protac, K87, Ubiquitination site

### Affiliations
University of Florida
Department of Pharmacodynamics, College of Pharmacy, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA

### Submitter
Dongwen Lv

### Lab Head
Dr Dongwen Lv
Department of Pharmacodynamics, College of Pharmacy, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA


