### Accession
PXD034427

### Title
Fingolimod effects on the brain  are mediated through biochemical modulation of bioenergetics, autophagy and neuroinflammatory networks

### Description
Fingolimod (FTY720) is an oral drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for management of Multiple Sclerosis (MS) symptoms, which has also shownbeneficial effects against Alzheimer’s (AD) and Parkinson’s (PD) diseases  pathologies. Although an extensive effort has been made to identify mechanisms underpinning its therapeutic effects, much remains unknown. Here, we investigated Fingolimod induced proteome changes in the cerebellum (CB) and frontal cortex (FC) regions of the brain which are known to be severely affected in MS, using a tandem mass tag (TMT) isobaric labeling-based quantitative mass-spectrometric approach to investigate the mechanism of action of Fingolimod. This study identified 6749 and 6319 proteins in CB and FC respectively, and returned 2609 and 3086 differentially expressed proteins in mouse CB and FC respectively, between Fingolimod treated and control groups. Subsequent bioinformatics analyses indicated a metabolic reprogramming in both brain regions of the Fingolimod treated group, where oxidative phosphorylation was up-regulated while glycolysis and pentose phosphate pathway were down-regulated. In addition, modulation of neuroinflammation in the Fingolimod treated group was indicated by upregulation of retrograde endocannabinoid signaling and autophagy pathways, and downregulation of neuroinflammation related pathways including neutrophil degranulation and the IL-12 mediated signaling pathway. Our findings suggest that Fingolimod may exert its protective effects on the brain by inducing metabolic reprogramming and neuroinflammation pathway modulation.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissue samples were lysed in lysis buffer containing 0.15 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail followed by a sonication using  probe sonicator (3 pulses/15 s/50 Hz with 20 s between each pulse) and centrifugation at 15,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were collected and transferred into a new tube and insoluble materials were removed. Concentration of the extracted proteins was measured using BCA assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, USA) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard, and 150 μg protein persample was used for digestion. Protein reduction was performed by addition of 0.1 volume of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour at room temperature (RT), followed by alkylation with 0.05 volume of 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 hour in the dark at room temperature. To quench the alkylation reaction, 5 mM DTT was added to the sample for 15 minutes in the dark. Dual digestion was performed using Lys-C (Wako, Japan) at a ratio of 1:100 enzyme: protein overnight at RT, followed by Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) digestion at a ratio of 1:100 enzyme: protein for 5 hours at 37 °C. Protein samples were acidified with TFA to final concentration of 1% (pH 2-3) and desalted by SDB-RPS (3M- Empore) Stage Tips.

### Data Protocol
Peptide to spectrum matching was performed through a local Mascot server against the charge state and monoisotopic m/z values were corrected using a method previously detailed by Huttlin et al [21]. Spectra were searched against an indexed Mus Musculus UniProt database using the Sequest search algorithm and included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, and TMT labelling of peptide N-termini and lysine residues as static modifications, oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification, and a precursor ion tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.8 Da. A linear discriminant analysis was used to filter Sequest matches to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide level based on matches to reversed sequences [22]. Proteins were ranked by multiplying peptide probabilities and the dataset was finally filtered to 1% protein FDR. TMT reporter ion quantification was assessed using the strategy described previously [23, 24]. Peptides with a total signal-to-noise (S/N) for all channels of greater than 200 with a precursor isolation specificity of greater than 0.75 were used for quantification. TMT reporter ion intensity values were normalised by summing values across all peptides within each channel then correcting each channel to the same summed value [25]. Protein level quantification was performed using normalised S/N values for all peptides assigned to a given protein [26].

### Publication Abstract
Fingolimod (FTY720) is an oral drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for management of multiple sclerosis (MS) symptoms, which has also shown beneficial effects against Alzheimer's (AD) and Parkinson's (PD) diseases pathologies. Although an extensive effort has been made to identify mechanisms underpinning its therapeutic effects, much remains unknown. Here, we investigated Fingolimod induced proteome changes in the cerebellum (CB) and frontal cortex (FC) regions of the brain which are known to be severely affected in MS, using a tandem mass tag (TMT) isobaric labeling-based quantitative mass-spectrometric approach to investigate the mechanism of action of Fingolimod. This study identified 6749 and 6319 proteins in CB and FC, respectively, and returned 2609 and 3086 differentially expressed proteins in mouse CB and FC, respectively, between Fingolimod treated and control groups. Subsequent bioinformatics analyses indicated a metabolic reprogramming in both brain regions of the Fingolimod treated group, where oxidative phosphorylation was upregulated while glycolysis and pentose phosphate pathway were downregulated. In addition, modulation of neuroinflammation in the Fingolimod treated group was indicated by upregulation of retrograde endocannabinoid signaling and autophagy pathways, and downregulation of neuroinflammation related pathways including neutrophil degranulation and the IL-12 mediated signaling pathway. Our findings suggest that Fingolimod may exert its protective effects on the brain by inducing metabolic reprogramming and neuroinflammation pathway modulation.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Brain, Fingolimod, Proteomics, Frontal cortex

### Affiliations
Macquarie Medical School Macquarie University Australia Sydney 2109
macquarie university

### Submitter
Mehdi Mirzaei

### Lab Head
Dr Associate Professor Vivek Gupta
Macquarie Medical School Macquarie University Australia Sydney 2109


