### Accession
PXD027549

### Title
O-GlcNAcylation of fatty acid synthase under nutritional stress as a pro-survival mechanism in cancer cells

### Description
Quantitative proteomics study of differences in protein O-GlcNAcylation under amino acid starvation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates of metabolically-labelled HeLa cells were clicked with biotin tags, enriched, then labelled with iTRAQ tags for LC-MS/MS protein identification and quantitation.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantitation by iTRAQ was performed using ProteinPilot v5 software.

### Publication Abstract
Protein O-GlcNAcylation is a specific form of protein glycosylation that targets a wide range of proteins with important functions. O-GlcNAcylation is known to be deregulated in cancer and has been linked to multiple aspects of cancer pathology. Despite its ubiquity and importance, the current understanding of the role of O-GlcNAcylation in the stress response remains limited. In this study, we performed a quantitative chemical proteomics-based open study of the O-GlcNAcome in HeLa cells, and identified 163 differentially-glycosylated proteins under starvation, involving multiple metabolic pathways. Among them, fatty acid metabolism was found to be targeted and subsequent analysis confirmed that fatty acid synthase (FASN) is O-GlcNAcylated. O-GlcNAcylation led to enhanced de novo fatty acid synthesis (FAS) activity, and fatty acids contributed to the cytoprotective effects of O-GlcNAcylation under starvation. Moreover, dual inhibition of O-GlcNAcylation and FASN displayed a strong synergistic effect in vitro in inducing cell death in cancer cells. Together, the results from this study provide novel insights into the role of O-GlcNAcylation in the nutritional stress response and suggest the potential of combining inhibition of O-GlcNAcylation and FAS in cancer therapy.

### Keywords
O-glcnac, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
University of Macau, Faculty of Health Sciences

### Submitter
Yin-Kwan Wong

### Lab Head
Dr Shen Han-Ming
University of Macau, Faculty of Health Sciences


