### Accession
PXD033864

### Title
Oxygen-dependent regulation of E3(SCF)ubiquitin ligases and a Skp1-associated JmjD6 homolog in Dictyostelium

### Description
The SCF (Skp1/cullin-1/F-box protein) class of E3 polyubiquitin ligases generates a signal for proteasomal degradation of thousands of proteins in animals. The evolutionary diversification of the F-box protein (FBP) family of substrate receptor subunits has challenged elucidation of these complexes in protists. Using bioinformatics and orthogonal Skp1 interactome methods, we expand the list of putative FBPs in the social amoeba Dictyostelium and show that Skp1 interactions are highly remodeled between growth and development. In addition, a subset of FBPs was less represented when the posttranslational hydroxylation and glycosylation of the Skp1 subunit was abrogated by deletion of the O2-dependent Skp1 prolyl hydroxylase PhyA. The significance of Skp1 modification for SCF activity was indicated by partial rescue of phyA-KO cell development with proteasomal inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
co-immunoprecipitations co-IPs of Skp1 using pAb UOK77 and a non-immune rabbit IgG were performed as described (19). For co-IPs of Skp1-myc and corresponding untagged strains, cell pellets were solubilized in lysis buffer (250 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.2% v/v NP-40, 10 µg/ml leupeptin, 10 µg/ml aprotinin) at a final concentration of 1.2-1.5 × 105 cells/µl for vegetative cells and 2.4 × 105 cells/µl for scraped slugs for 15 min on ice. Cell lysates were spun at 21,000 × g for 15 min to produce an S21 supernatant. 83 µl of the supernatant was incubated with a 50 µl slurry of Pierce™ anti-c-myc magnetic polystyrene beads (cat#88842), a ratio that was optimized for maximal (>60%) depletion of Skp1-myc from lysates. After rotation at 4°C for 1 h, beads were magnetically aggregated at the bottom of the tube and IP supernatant was removed. They were then rinsed three times in lysis buffer, three times in detergent free lysis buffer, and finally in detergent and buffer free solution (250 mM NaCl, 10 µg/ml leupeptin, 10 µg/ml aprotinin). Proteins were eluted in 133 mM triethanolamine? for 15 min, neutralized with acetic acid, and dried in a vacuum centrifuge for mass spectrometry. For JcdI-FLAG and FLAG-JcdI co-IPs, aliquots of 3 × 107 Dictyostelium slugs or exponentially growing vegetative cells were lysed as above. Co-IP of Skp1 was performed using 5 μl of packed UOK77 conjugated to Sepharose beads (7). Co-IP of FLAG3-JcdI and JcdI-FLAG3 was performed using 2.5 μl of packed anti-FLAG M2 beads (Sigma). After rotation for 1h at 4°C, beads were collected by centrifugation at 2000 × g for 30 sec, resuspended and washed 3× with 1 ml of IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.2% NP-40), and transferred to a fresh tube after the first centrifugation. The entire reaction was boiled in 1× GESB sample buffer for 3 min, and 1 × 106 cells were analyzed by SDS−PAGE and Western blotting. M2 anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma) was used for probing of JcdI, while the pan-specific Skp1 monoclonal 4E1 antibody or polyclonal Skp1 UOK77 antibodies were used for Western blotting of Skp1. The secondary antibody used for M2 and 4E1 was the anti-mouse Alexa-680-conjugated secondary antibody, and Alexa-680-conjugated anti-rabbit for UOK77 probed blots. Membranes were analyzed as above. Proteomic analyses Eluted proteins were solubilized in 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8), reduced with 10 mM DTT at 22° C, and alkylated with 50 mM chloroacetamide to avoid carbamylation whose mass mimics Gly-Gly PTMs characteristic of ubiquitination after trypsin digestion (59). After 1:1 dilution with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) 1µg of endo-LysC/trypsin (Pierce cat#A40009) was added and rotated at 22°C for 2 h, and then subsequently diluted with the same buffer to a final concentration of 2 M urea for overnight digestion on a rotator. The peptide samples were amended with heptafluorobutyric acid (HFBA) to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) and aspirated 5 times through a pre-equilibrated C18 Zip-Tip (Agilent Bond Elut Omix), which was then rinsed twice with 0.1% HFBA. Peptides were eluted with a 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA), and 75% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. The eluants were pooled, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and dissolved in 5% ACN, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptide solution was loaded onto a C18 trap column (Thermo Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 series) in a Thermo Fisher UltiMate 3000 HPLC, and eluted from the trap column onto a C18 nano-column (Thermo Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 series) in a 5%-90% ACN gradient in 0.1% formic acid (FA) for 3 h. The eluent was directly introduced via a nano-electrospray source into a Thermo-Fischer Q-Exactive Plus and analyzed by MS and MS/MS. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 350 to 2000 at 70k resolution. Peptides were selected for fragmentation in the C-trap via higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) for MS/MS analysis using a Top 10 method and a 30 sec fragmentation exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (PD 2.5), using its two step Protein Search method with label free quantification and Consensus workflow with parameters specific to the MS1 and MS2 fragmentation and mass tolerances of the Thermo-Fischer Q Exactive Plus. A modified Dictyostelium discoideum protein database containing 12,428 unique Dictyostelium discoideum proteins (60), modified to include a 179 proteins exclusion list of common ectopic contaminants (61), was used for peptide identification. Sequest HT search parameters were 10 ppm parent ion mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance, 2 missed tryptic cleavages, oxidation of Met, formylation or acetylation of the protein N terminus, and chloroacetamide alkylation of Cys. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was determined via Target/Decoy in the Proteome Discoverer processing workflow. Protein identifications were ranked by protein FDR confidence intervals of High (X<1%), Medium (1%-5%), and Low (>5%).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dictyostelium, Immunoprecipitation, Lc-msms, Scf, Glycosylation, Skp1, E3

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, United States Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States
University of Georgia

### Submitter
Christopher West

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Mark West
Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, Center for Tropical and Emerging Global Diseases, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, United States Dept. of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States


