### Accession
PXD024107

### Title
Periostin as a blood biomarker of muscle cell fibrosis, cardiomyopathy and disease severity in myotonic dystrophy type 1 

### Description
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is the most common form of adult-onset muscular dystrophy and is caused by an repeat expansion [r(CUG)exp] located in the 3' untranslated region of the DMPK gene. Symptoms include skeletal and cardiac muscle dysfunction and fibrosis. In DM1, there is a lack of established biomarkers in routine clinical practice. Thus, we aimed to identify a blood biomarker with relevance for DM1-pathophysiology and clinical presentation. 

### Sample Protocol
Tissue lysis, carbamidomethylation and on-filter proteolysis Mouse quadriceps derived from healthy and SXL for proteomics analysis were mechanically homogenized (metal dounce) and further lysed with 1% SDS buffer containing 50 mM Tris-Cl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.8 with complete mini. To degrade nucleic acids, cell lysates were treated with Benzonase plus 2 mM MgCl2 and incubation at 37°C for 30 min. Next, cell lysates were centrifuged at 18,000 rcf at room temperature (RT) for 30 min. The supernatant was collected and used to determine protein concentration with BCA assay as per manufacturer’s instructions. Next, lysates corresponding to ~100 µg of protein of each sample were subjected to reduction of disulfide bonds with 10 mM DTT and incubation at 56°C for 30 min followed by alkylation of free thiol groups with 30 mM IAA and incubation at RT for 30 min in the dark. Next, sample cleaning and on-filter proteolytic digestion (trypsin) were performed using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) [1, 2] protocol with nanosep centrifugal devices (30 KDa, PALL), but with minor changes as previously described [3]. Digested peptides were quality controlled [4] and were desalted with C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (SPEC; 4 mg, Varian) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and the eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac. The dried peptides were resolubilized in 0.5 M TEAB, pH 8.5 and the peptide concentration was determined using a NanoDrop 2000 UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany).  iTRAQ labeling and high pH (8.0) C18 reversed-phase fractionation Approximately 50 µg of peptides of each sample were labeled with iTRAQ reagents [5] according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB SCIEX, Germany). After labeling, all samples were dried completely in a SpeedVac and resolubilized in 200 µL of 0.5% TFA. Before multiplexing, 1 µL of each sample was pooled and analyzed by LC-MS to evaluate labeling efficiency and to correct minor differences of sample amounts e.g. due to pipetting errors. Afterwards, samples were mixed in 1:1:1:1:1:1 based on the normalization factors obtained from the prior LC-MS analysis and an aliquot corresponding to ~20 µg of multiplexed sample was desalted with C18 SPEC tips (4 mg, Varian). Eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and resolubilized in 10 mM NH4OH, 17 mM FA, pH 8.0 and fractionated by reversed-phase chromatography at pH 8.0 as described earlier[3]. In total 16 fractions were collected at 1 min intervals from min 5 to 70 in a concatenation mode. The fractions were completely dried and stored at -80°C until further use.  LC-MS/MS analysis  Each individual fraction was resolubilzed in 0.1% TFA and was analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific, Germany). Peptides were preconcentrated on a 100 µm x 2 cm C18 trapping column for 10 min using 0.1% TFA with a flow rate of 20 µL/min followed by separation on a 75 µm x 50 cm C18 main column (both Acclaim Pepmap nanoviper, Thermo Scientific, Germany) with 125 min LC gradient ranging from 3-35% of B (84% ACN in 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Q Exactive HF was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode and MS survey scans were acquired from m/z 300 to 1500 at a resolution of 60000 using the polysiloxane ion at m/z 371.1012 as lock mass[6]. The twenty most intense ions were isolated with a 0.4 m/z window and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 33%, taking into account a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15000. Automatic gain control target values and fill times were set to 3 × 106 and 50 ms for MS and 2 × 105 and 200 ms for MS/MS, respectively. Furthermore, a 10% (v/v) NH4OH solution was placed in front of the ESI source for charge state reduction[7].

### Data Protocol
All iTRAQ data (16 raw files) were processed simultaneously using the MudPIT option with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Germany) and searched against the mouse Uniprot database with 16802 target entries, downloaded in July 2016 using three different search algorithms i.e. Mascot (Matrix Science), Sequest and MS Amanda using same set of parameters as following. Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively. Trypsin was selected as enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of Cys (57.0214 Da) and iTRAQ-8-plex on N terminus and Lys (304.2053 Da) were set as fixed modifications whereas, oxidation of Met (15.9949 Da) as variable modifications. Data export was done using following filter criteria: peptide-spectrum matches with false discovery rate 1% (high confidence setting), search engine rank 1 and only proteins that were quantified with ≥ 2 unique peptides were considered for further data analysis. Next, the normalization of the raw iTRAQ ratios was done using Excel (Microsoft) as described before [3] to get normalized abundance values (NAVs) for each protein. Using these NAVs, the respective replicates were averaged accordingly and the ratios were calculated between SXL / wild type. Lastly, the global standard deviation (gSD) and the global mean (gM) were determined over all protein log2-ratios and Student's t-Test p-values (two-sample assuming unequal variance) were calculated for each protein. Only proteins with p-values ≤ 0.05 and with log2-ratios ≥ 2 gSD away from the gM were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ctg-trinucleotide expansion, Dmpk, Dm1 biomarker, Steinert’s disease, Clinical proteomics, Dmsxl

### Affiliations
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.
Prof. Dr. Albert Sickmann President  Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200 albert.sickmann@isas.de www.isas.de twitter.com/isas_Leibniz

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Albert Sickmann
Prof. Dr. Albert Sickmann President  Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200 albert.sickmann@isas.de www.isas.de twitter.com/isas_Leibniz


