### Accession
PXD035872

### Title
Ostrich eggshell peptides survival into the Miocene (6-9 Ma)

### Description
The oldest authenticated peptide sequences to date were reported in 2016 from 3.8 Ma old ostrich eggshell (OES) from the site of Laetoli, Tanzania (Demarchi et al., 2016). Here we demonstrate survival of the same sequences in 6.5-9Ma OES recovered from a palaeosteppe setting in northwestern China. The eggshell is thicker than those observed in extant species and consistent with the Liushu Struthio sp. ootaxon. These findings push the preservation of ancient proteins back to the Miocene and highlight their potential for paleontology, paleoecology and evolutionary biology.

### Sample Protocol
A subsample of OES specimen IVPP V26107 was prepared in the ultra-clean facility at the University of Copenhagen, following the protocol of Demarchi et al. (2016) which omitted the digestion step. In brief, the fragment was powdered, bleached for 72 hours (NaOCl, 15% w/v), demineralised in just enough cold weak hydrochloridric acid (0.6 M HCl), and the peptides purified and concentrated using C18 Stage Tips (Cappellini et al., 2019; Rappsilber et al., 2007).  Prepared StageTips of the procedural blank and sample were eluted with 30 µL of 40% acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% formic acid into a 96-well plate prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. To remove the ACN, the plate was vacuum centrifuged until approximately 5 µL remained. Samples were then resuspended with 6 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 5% ACN. Based on protein concentration results at 205 nm (NanoDrop, Thermo Scientific), 5 µL of each was then separated over a 77 min gradient by an EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) attached to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany) using a 15 cm column. The column (75 μm inner diameter) was made in-house, laser pulled, and packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany). Parameters were the same as those already published for historical samples (Mackie et al., 2018). In short, MS1: 120k resolution, maximum injection time (IT) 25 ms, scan target 3E6. MS2: 60k resolution, top 10 mode, maximum IT 118 ms, minimum scan target 3E3, normalized collision energy of 28, dynamic exclusion 20 s, and isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Wash-blanks consisting of 0.1% TFA 5% ACN were also run in order to hinder cross-contamination. The LC-MS/MS run included, in this order: two wash blanks, one procedural blank, one wash blank, the OES sample, and two wash blanks.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic analysis was carried out using PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc (Zhang et al., 2012)). The Uniprot_swissprot database (downloaded 13/08/2021) was used for carrying out the searches and common contaminants were included (cRAP; common Repository of Adventitious Proteins: http://www.thegpm.org/crap/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deep time, Ostrich eggshell (oes), Palaeoproteomics, Miocene, Peptide

### Affiliations
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin, Italy
University of Turin

### Submitter
Beatrice Demarchi

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrice Demarchi
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin, Italy


