### Accession
PXD024802

### Title
BAG3 suppresses ciliogenesis by regulating levels of OFD1

### Description
By regulating several hallmarks of cancer, BAG3 exerts oncogenic functions in a wide variety of malignant diseases including glioblastoma (GBM) and triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Here we performed global proteomic/phosphoproteomic analyses of Crispr/Cas9-mediated isogenic BAG3 knockouts of the two GBM lines U343 and U251 in comparison to parental controls. Depletion of BAG3  evoked major effects on proteins involved in ciliogenesis/ciliary function and the activity of the related kinases aurora-kinase A (AURKA) and cyclin-dependent kinase-1 (CDK1). Cilia formation was significantly enhanced in BAG3 KO cells, a finding that could be confirmed in BAG3-proficient vs -deficient BT-549 TNBC cells, thus identifying a completely novel function of BAG3 as a negative regulator of ciliogenesis. Furthermore, we demonstrate that enhanced ciliogenesis and reduced expression of SNAI1 and ZEB1, two key transcription factors regulating epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is correlated to decreased cell migration and invasion, both in the GBM and TNBC BAG3 knockout cells. Our data obtained in two different tumor entities identify suppression of EMT and ciliogenesis as putative synergizing mechanisms of BAG3-driven tumor aggressiveness in therapy-resistant cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Crispr/Cas9-mediated isogenic knockout lines of BAG3 and parental controls of the GBM cell line U251-MG and U343 were grown until they reached confluence. Cells were washed two times with warm PBS and trypsinized as in standard procedure. The samples were lysed on the with lysis buffer (2% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH8, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloracetamide, protease inhibitor cocktail tablet [EDTA-free, Roche] and phosphatase inhibitor tablet [Roche]). Samples were incubated for 10 min at 95°C before sonication with Sonic Vibra Cell at 1 s ON/ 1 s OFF pulse for 30 s at a maximal amplitude of 40%. After sonication, samples were incubated for 5 min at 95°C. Lysates were precipitated using three volumes of ice-cold methanol, one volume chloroform and 2.5 volumes ddH2O. After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 45 min at 4°C, the upper aqueous phase was aspirated and three volumes of ice-cold methanol added. Samples were mixed and proteins pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 5 min at 4°C. Supernatant was discarded and pellets washed one additional time with ice-cold methanol. Protein pellets were dried at room temperature for further use. Proteins were resuspended in 8 M Urea and 50 mM Tris pH8 and protein concentration determined using a μBCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, 23235). Samples were then diluted to 4 M urea using 50 mM Tris pH8 and incubated with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 1:100 (w/w) ratio 3 hours at 37°C. Further the digestion reactions were diluted to 1 M Urea using digestion buffer and incubated at a 1:100 (w/w) ratio of Trypsin (Promega, V5113) for overnight at 37°C. Digests were acidified using trifluoroaceticacid (TFA) to a pH of 2-3 and peptides purified using SepPak C18 columns (Waters, WAT054955) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Eluates were dried and stored for further processing.  Phosphopeptides were enriched using High Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, A32992). Peptides and phosphopeptides were resuspended in TMT-labeling buffer (50 mM TEAB (SIGMA, 86600), 20% Acetonitrile) and peptide concentration determined by μBCA. Peptides were mixed with TMT reagents (ThermoFisher Scientific, 90061, TH266884) in 1:2 (w/w) ratio (2 μg TMT reagent per 1 μg peptide). Reactions were incubated for one hour at RT and subsequently quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% at RT for 15 min. Samples were pooled in equimolar ratio (unless stated otherwise), acidified, and dried for further processing. Peptides were fractionated using a High pH Reversed phase fractionation kit according to manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and separated on an Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 22 cm long, 75 μm ID fused-silica column, which had been packed in house with 1.9 μm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5%–60% acetonitrile over 135 min and directly sprayed into a QExactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 3 × 106. Up to 20 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 35). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 80 ms and an AGC target value of 1 × 105. Ions with charge states of 1 and > 6 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimize repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
RAW data was processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). HCD-fragmented spectra were searched against a HUMAN proteome FASTA file (UniProt 2016) by SequestHT and the false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using a target/decoy-based approach. TMTpro reporter abundances were extracted and used for plotting and statistical analysis. Further analysis was done on Perseus (v.1.6.5.0). The data was filtered for contaminants and the statistical analysis was performed using two sample t-test with the default values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ofd1, Bag3, Ciliogenesis, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Glioblastoma cells

### Affiliations
institute of biochemistry 2 (IBC2)
Molecular Signaling group, Institute of biochemistry 2, Goethe University - Medical Faculty, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Marina Hoffmann

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Molecular Signaling group, Institute of biochemistry 2, Goethe University - Medical Faculty, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


