### Accession
PXD004860

### Title
Identification of O-GlcNAcylated proteins and mapping of O-GlcNAc sites using Click Chemistry following extensive fractionation of extracted proteins

### Description
The O-N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminylation, termed O-GlcNAcylation, is an atypical glycosylation corresponding to the transfer of a unique saccharide, the N-acetyl-β-D-glucosamine, on the hydroxyl group of serine and threonine amino acids of nuclear, cytosolic and mitochondrial proteins. Because of its dynamism, its reversibility and the swiftness of GlcNAc moieties transfer, O-GlcNAcylation is akin to phosphorylation and it is able to respond rapidly to both extracellular and intracellular demands. This post-translational modification is highly represented on intracellular proteins (in particular cytosolic, nuclear and mitochondrial proteins), and is involved in almost if not all cellular processes. O-GlcNAcylation is nowadays clearly associated with the etiology of several acquired diseases, in particular diabetes, neuro-degenerative disorders, cardiovascular diseases or cancer. The O-GlcNAcylation rapidly emerged as a major cellular mechanism which compete with phosphorylation in terms of modified proteins and the importance in cellular physiology. The O-GlcNAcylated sites could also correspond to phosphorylated ones; many proteins are modified by both O-GlcNAc and phosphates groups, and these two post-translational modifications could compete to the same or at neighboring sites. However, despite the undeniable role of O-GlcNAcylation in the modulation of almost all cellular processes, its precise function remains still misunderstood, mainly because of the unknown position of O-GlcNAcylation on specific domains of proteins. Thus, the precise localization of O-GlcNAcylated sites remains an indispensable prerequisite for the fine understanding of its biological function. However, mapping the O-GlcNAcylated sites remains laborious, but challenging, because of (i) the low stoichiometry of O-GlcNAcylation; (ii) the ion suppression of the modified peptide by the unmodified peptide present in larger excess; and (iii) the labile β bound between serine or threonine and the O-GlcNAc moiety which is broken during the CID (Collision-Induced Dissociation) fragmentation process, leading to loss of site information. To respond to this biological demand and to overcome these difficulties, enrichment of O-GlcNAc modified proteins and the use of other fragmentation processes like ECD (Electron Capture Dissociation), ETD (Electron Transfer Dissociation), or HCD (High-energy Collisional Dissociation), able to limit the O-GlcNAc loss during the fragmentation, are crucial. Our strategy was an alternative, specific, efficient and selective purification of O-GlcNAc bearing proteins from skeletal muscle cells by the use of the Click chemistry methodology. To extensively map O-GlcNAc sites on proteins, we proposed herein an intensive fractionation of the muscle cell proteome according to solubility, hydrophobicity and isoelectric point of proteins. The method of Click chemistry was achieved on each enriched-fraction containing proteins of interest.

### Sample Protocol
The purpose of our project is the identification of O-GlcNAcylation sites on proteins isolated from skeletal muscles cells in culture (C2C12 cells differentiated in myotubes). Proteins were extracted according to a simplified differential extraction protocol, leading to cytosol-enriched proteins, to membrane-enriched proteins and myofilament-enriched proteins. We then performed an extensive fractionation on cytosol-enriched fraction. Briefly, the cytosol-enriched proteins were precipitated differentially with ammonium sulfate, with saturation concentration of 25, 50, 75 and 100% ammonium sulfate (fractions assigned to AS25, AS50, AS75 and AS100, respectively). The fractions AS25, AS50 and AS75 were then fractionated according to their isoelectric point on MicroRotofor apparatus, on the pH range 4-7. For each fraction resulting from ammonium persulfate fractionation, ten sub-fractions resulted from isoelectric fractionation. A total of 30 fractions were thus obtained from cytosol-enriched proteins. Each one was then submitted to Click chemistry, permitting the specific coupling of O-GlcNAcylated proteins on agarose beads. The O-GlcNAcylated proteins were firstly labelled with azido-N-galactosamine with galactosyl transferase; these azido-labelled proteins were then coupling to alkyne-agarose beads through the copper catalyzed azide-alkyne Click Chemistry. This coupling of O-GlcNAcylated proteins permits to enhance the purification step of o-GlcNAc proteins. The glycosylated proteins, attached to agarose beads, were proteolytically digested with trypsine after reduction/alkylation and enzymatic dephosphorylation. The non-retained peptides were analyzed on mass spectrometry, permitting the identification of O-GlcNAcylated proteins. The remaining peptides were released from beads through beta-elimination, corresponding to chemical cutoff of glycosidic bonds, and the analyzed on mass spectrometry. The sequencing of these peptides led to identification of dehydrated serine or threonine, corresponding so to hydroxylated which bear initially the O-GlcNAc moieties. Mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were reconstituted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 4% acetonitrile and analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos or a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm x 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase column from Dionex (C18 PepMap100, 15 cm x 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 90 min and 20-45% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid during 30 min for the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos and 4-25% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1% formic acid for 40 min and 25-50% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1% formic acid during 10 min for the Q-Exactive). For peptide ionisation in the nanospray source, spray voltage was set between 1.4 and 1.5 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos was set up in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. MS spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 400-1700 at a FWHM resolution of 60 000 measured at 400 m/z and an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e6. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The 20 abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy (NCE), and an AGC target value of 1e4 was performed in the ion trap on the 20 most intense precursor ions measured to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, exclusion list size 500 and exclusion duration of 30 s. For Q-Exactive runs, survey MS scan were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 300-1700 m/z range with a resolution of 70 000 (AGC target at 1e6), the 12 most intense ions per survey scan (Intensity threshold 1e5) were selected for HCD fragmentation (AGC target 5e5, NCE 25%) and resulting fragments were analysed at a resolution of 17500 in the Orbitrap. Fragmented precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 25 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification. The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). This software was used to search data via in-house Mascot server (version 2.3.0; Matrix Science, London, U.K.) and SEQUEST HT against the Uniprot mouse reference proteome database (version 09.08.2013, 50,850 entries). The following parameters were used for searches: (i) trypsin; (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed; (ii) monoisotopic precursor tolerance of 8 ppm, followed by 0.8 Da 0.5 Da for fragment ions from MS/MS ; and (iii) cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215) and methionine oxidation (+15.995) as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was processed the built-in Percolator (Brosch, m; Yu, L; HUBBARD, T; CHOUDHARY, J Accurate and sensitive peptide identification with Mascot percolator. J. Proteome Res. 2009, 8 (6), 3176-3181) node and was set to 5%. Protein identification from ß-elimination experiments was performed similarly as above for data processing with the exception of the following modifications. Dehydration of Ser and Thr (-18.011) as well as ß-elimination of Cys (-33.988 Da) was added as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc_msms, Post-translational modifications, Mouse, Sites mapping, C2c12 muscle cells, Muscle, O-glcnacylation

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille, France

### Submitter
Luc Camoin

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Camoin
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, INSERM, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille, France


