### Accession
PXD005516

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Analysis of Paper Mulberry under Chilling

### Description
Paper mulberry as a valuable woody species has a well chilling tolerance. In this study, phosphoproteomic analysis in combination with physiological measurement and mRNA quantification were employed to explore the molecular mechanism of chilling (4 °C) tolerance in paper mulberry. After chilling for 6 hours, there were 427 significant changed phosphoproteins detected in paper mulberry seedlings without obvious physiological injury. When obvious physiological injury occurred after chilling for 48 hours, a total of 611 phosphoproteins were found significantly change at phosphorylation level. According to 9 phosphorylation motifs extracted by Motif-X analysis, MAPKs, CDPKs, CDKs and CKs were considered as the primary upstream protein kinases. Results of GO analysis showed that phosphoproteins were mainly responsible for signal transduction, protein modification and translation during chilling. Additionally, transport and cellular component organization were respectively enriched after chilling for 6 and 48 hours. Based on the analysis of protein-protein interaction network, a protein kinases and phosphatases hub protein  was thought as the key of phosphorylation regulation, which probably modulates cross-talk between Ca2+, BR, ABA and ethylene mediated signaling pathways. Together with results, we concluded a schematic chilling tolerance mechanism at phosphorylation level.

### Sample Protocol
Protein were extracted using a modified method according to Shen et al.45 Briefly, 0.5-1 g leaves were homogenized in 2 mL of the homogenization buffer containing 20 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.5), 250 mM sucrose, 10 mM ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid, 5 % 2-mercaptoethanol, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor Mixture (Roche, Mannnheim, Germany). Then, the homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was mixed with a quarter of the volume of 50% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid to attain 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid in final mixture. The mixture was stood on ice bath for more than 30 minutes. Subsequently, the mixture was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C, and the supernatant was discarded. After washed three times with acetone, the pellet was collected by centrifugation, air-dried and then suspended in SDT buffer containing pH 7.6 100 mM Tris-HCl, 4 % (w/v) SDS, 1 mM DTT. A modified BCA protein assay kit (Sangon, shanghai, China) was employed to quantify protein concentrations. The samples were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested using trypsin at a 1:100 enzyme/protein concentration at 37 °C for 16 hours. The TiO2 beads were incubated in 400 μL loading buffer containing 65 % ACN and 2 % TFA saturated by glutamic acid. Tryptic peptides (3mg) were resuspended in 400 μL loading buffer. After shaking the mixture of tryptic peptide and TiO2 beads (1:1) for 40 minutes and collecting TiO2 beads by centrifugation, 800 μL wash buffer (65 % ACN and 0.1 % TFA) were added and shaked for 40 minutes twice. Subsequently, TiO2 beads were eluted twice with 800 μl elution buffer (500 mM NH4OH and 60 % ACN). The eluates were dried down and reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid for MS analysis. Peptides, which were separated on a self-packed C18 reverse-phase column (75 μm inner diameter,150 mm length) (Column Technology, Fremont, USA) that directly connected mass spectrometer, were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, San Jose, USA). The column was eluted at a flow rate of 1μL per minutes, using a gradient formed. Solution A was 0.1% formic acid and solution B consisted of 0.1 % formic acid and 90 % ACN. A four-step linear gradient of 2 % to 5 % B in 5 minutes, 5 % to 22 % B in 55 minutes, 90 % B in 5 minutes, keeping 90% B in 10 minutes was performed. The spray voltage was set at 2.0 kV, and the temperature of the heated capillary was 270 °C. Each MS scan was acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z) with the lock mass option enabled. A lock mass function was used to obtain high mass accuracy. The 12 most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at a normalized collision energy of 37 %. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 120 seconds to prevent the repetitive selection of peptides.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and searched against the paper mulberry protein database which protein sequences were predicted based on genome (unpublished data) and transcriptome sequencing. The following parameters were used for database searches: cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification; and methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine were selected as variable modifications. Up to two missing cleavage points were allowed. The precursor ion mass tolerance was 7 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da for MS/MS spectra. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at < 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications, and the minimum peptide length was set as 6. In parallel, PTM scores and PTM localization probabilities were calculated. Then, normalization and imputation as Karpievitch et al. described were performed to remove systematic biases and obtain a complete matrix of intensities.46 Only the phosphopeptides that met the following restrictions were regarded as significant changed phosphoproteins: (1) phosphorylation site localization probability greater than 0.75 and phosphorylation site score difference not less than 5. (2) the p value of one-way ANOVA analysis < 0.05. (3) the fold change between each treatments > 2.

### Publication Abstract
Paper mulberry is a valuable woody species with a good chilling tolerance. In this study, phosphoproteomic analysis, physiological measurement, and mRNA quantification were employed to explore the molecular mechanism of chilling (4 &#xb0;C) tolerance in paper mulberry. After chilling for 6 h, 427 significantly changed phosphoproteins were detected in paper mulberry seedlings without obvious physiological injury. When obvious physiological injury occurred after chilling for 48 h, a total of 611 phosphoproteins were found to be significantly changed at the phosphorylation level. Several protein kinases, especially CKII, were possibly responsible for these changes according to conserved sequence analysis. The results of Gene Ontology analysis showed that phosphoproteins were mainly responsible for signal transduction, protein modification, and translation during chilling. Additionally, transport and cellular component organization were enriched after chilling for 6 and 48 h, respectively. On the basis of the protein-protein interaction network analysis, a protein kinase and phosphatases hub protein (P1959) were found to be involved in cross-talk between Ca<sup>2+</sup>, BR, ABA, and ethylene-mediated signaling pathways. We also highlighted the phosphorylation of BpSIZ1 and BpICE1 possibly impacted on the CBF/DREB-responsive pathway. From these results, we developed a schematic for the chilling tolerance mechanism at phosphorylation level.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Paper mulberry, Chilling tolerance

### Affiliations
Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences
Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing

### Submitter
Zhi Pi

### Lab Head
Dr Shen lab
Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of Botany, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing


