### Accession
PXD038242

### Title
Quantifying mistranslation from alanine tRNA anticodon variants in S. cerevisiae

### Description
Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) maintain translational fidelity through strict charging by their cognate aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase and codon:anticodon base pairing with the mRNA at the ribosome. Mistranslation occurs when an amino acid not specified by the genetic code is incorporated into a protein. Since alanyl-tRNA synthetase uniquely recognizes a G3:U70 base pair in alanine tRNAs and the anticodon plays no role in charging, alanine tRNA variants with anticodon mutations have the potential to mistranslate alanine. Our goal was to quantify mis-incorporation of alanine into proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains expressing one of 57 different alanine tRNA anticodon variants. Using mass spectrometry, we observed mistranslation for 45 of the variants when expressed on single-copy plasmids.

### Sample Protocol
Strains containing a plasmid with a single alanine tRNA variant were grown overnight in media lacking leucine and uracil. Cultures were diluted to OD600 of 0.01 in the same media containing 1.0 µg/mL doxycycline to induce tRNA expression, except for the strain expressing the alanine tRNA with CGG(Pro) anticodon which was diluted to OD600 of 0.1. Cultures were harvested by washing once in 1x yeast nitrogen base and frozen in liquid nitrogen when they reached an OD600 between 0.8–1.0, except for the alanine tRNA with GCC(Gly) anticodon which due to its slow growth was harvested 36 hours after dilution at OD600 ~ 0.4.  Cells were lysed by bead-beating with 0.5 mm glass beads at 4°C. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce, ThermoFisher Scientific). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 55°C, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark and the alkylation was quenched with an additional 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at room temperature. For each sample, 50 µg of protein was diluted 4-fold with 50 mM Tris pH 8.9 and digested for 4 hours at 37°C with 1.0 µg LysC (Wako Chemicals). Digestions were acidified to pH 2 with trifluoroacetic acid and desalted over Empore C18 stage tips.  For strains containing alanine tRNA variants with Lys UUU and CUU anticodons and the corresponding control strain, samples were lysed as above in 4 M guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM TEAB pH 8.0. Samples were prepared as above, except after quenching the alkylation reaction, 100 µg of protein was acetylated with 200 µg of Sulfo-NHS-acetate (Pierce, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 1 hr at room temperature. Robotic purification and digestion of proteins into peptides was performed on the Kingfisher Flex using trypsin and the R2-P1 method described by Leutert et al. (2019; Mol Syst Biol 15:e9021). Digestions were acidified and desalted as above. Peptides were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS pH 9.5 with 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for 5 hrs at room temperature to reduce acetylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues before peptides were desalted again.   Peptide samples were resuspended in 4% acetonitrile, 3% formic acid and subjected to liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry on a tribrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Eclipse; ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a 100 µm ID x 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 3 µm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) and separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a 100 µm ID x 30 cm analytical column packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) housed into a column heater set at 50°C. Peptides were separated using a gradient of 8-50% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid delivered at 350 nl/min over 95 minutes, with a total 120-min acquisition time. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a defined cycle time of 3 seconds. For each cycle, one full mass spectrometry scan was acquired from 350 to 1200 m/z at 120,000 resolution with a fill target of 3E6 ions and automated calculation of injection time. The most abundant ions from the full MS scan were selected for fragmentation using 1.6 m/z precursor isolation window and beam‐type collisional‐activation dissociation (HCD) with 30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 15,000 resolution by setting the AGC target to standard and injection time to automated mode. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from selection for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the S. cerevisiae protein sequence database (downloaded from the Saccharomyces Genome Database resource in 2014) using Comet (release 2015.01). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Constant modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.0125 Da) and variable modification of methionine oxidization (15.9949 Da) was used for all searches. A variable modification of each amino acid to alanine was used for the respective searches. A maximum of 3 of each variable modification was allowed per peptide. Search results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide spectrum match level using Percolator. Mistranslation frequency was calculated from the unique mistranslated peptides for which the non-mistranslated sibling peptide was also observed. The frequency is defined as the counts of unique mistranslated peptides, where alanine had been mis-incorporated, divided by the counts of all peptides containing the wild-type amino acid and expressed as a percentage. At the codon level, mistranslation frequency calculations only considered peptides with one substitution event to allow for accurate localization of the mistranslation event and identification of the codon being mistranslated.

### Publication Abstract
Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) maintain translation fidelity through accurate charging by their cognate aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase and codon:anticodon base pairing with the mRNA at the ribosome. Mistranslation occurs when an amino acid not specified by the genetic message is incorporated into proteins and has applications in biotechnology, therapeutics and is relevant to disease. Since the alanyl-tRNA synthetase uniquely recognizes a G3:U70 base pair in tRNA<sup>Ala</sup> and the anticodon plays no role in charging, tRNA<sup>Ala</sup> variants with anticodon mutations have the potential to mis-incorporate alanine. Here, we characterize the impact of the 60 non-alanine tRNA<sup>Ala</sup> anticodon variants on the growth of <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>. Overall, 36 tRNA<sup>Ala</sup> anticodon variants decreased growth in single- or multi-copy. Mass spectrometry analysis of the cellular proteome revealed that 52 of 57 anticodon variants, not decoding alanine or stop codons, induced mistranslation when on single-copy plasmids. Variants with G/C-rich anticodons resulted in larger growth deficits than A/U-rich variants. In most instances, synonymous anticodon variants impact growth differently, with anticodons containing U at base 34 being the least impactful. For anticodons generating the same amino acid substitution, reduced growth generally correlated with the abundance of detected mistranslation events. Differences in decoding specificity, even between synonymous anticodons, resulted in each tRNA<sup>Ala</sup> variant mistranslating unique sets of peptides and proteins. We suggest that these differences in decoding specificity are also important in determining the impact of tRNA<sup>Ala</sup> anticodon variants.

### Keywords
Mistranslation, Yeast, Lc-msms, Trna variants

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington

### Submitter
Matthew Berg

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA


