### Accession
PXD017918

### Title
Extending the Comprehensiveness of Immunopeptidome Analyses Using Isobaric Peptide Labeling

### Description
Defining the repertoire of peptides presented by the major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) is a key step towards the identification of relevant antigens for cancer immunotherapy. However, the identification of the cancer-specific antigens is a significant analytical challenge in view of their low abundance and low mutational load found in primary cancer specimens. Here, we describe the application of isobaric peptide labeling with tandem mass tag (TMT) to improve the detection of the MHC I peptides. Isobaric peptide labeling was found to promote the formation of multiply-charged ions and to enhance the formation of b-type fragment ions, thus resulting in a 50% improvement of MHC I peptide identification. The gain in sensitivity obtained using TMT labeling enabled the detection of low abundance MHC I peptides including tumor-specific antigens (TSAs) and minor histocompatibility antigens (MiHAs). We further demonstrate the application of this approach to quantify MiHAs presented by B-cell lymphocytes and determined their expression levels by LC-MS/MS using both synchronous precursor selection (SPS) and high field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS).

### Sample Protocol
The W6/32 antibodies (BioXcell) were incubated in PBS for 60 min at room temperature with PureProteome protein A magnetic beads (Millipore) at a ratio of 1 mg of antibody per mL of slurry.  Antibodies were covalently cross-linked to magnetic beads using dimethylpimelidate as described previously [21].  The beads were stored at 4°C in PBS pH 7.2 and 0.02% NaN3. Biological replicates of cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL PBS pH 7.2 and solubilized by adding 1 mL of detergent buffer containing PBS pH 7.2, 1% (w/v) CHAPS (Sigma) supplemented with Protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). After 60 min incubation with tumbling at 4°C, samples were spun at 10,000g for 30 min at 4°C. Supernatants were transferred into new tubes containing magnetic beads coupled to W6/32 antibodies at a ratio of 10 g of W6/32 antibody per 1 × 106 cells. Samples were incubated with tumbling for 180 min at 4°C and placed on a magnet to recover bound MHC I complexes to magnetic beads.  Magnetic beads were first washed with 4 × 1 mL PBS, then with 1 × 1 mL of 0.1X PBS and finally with 1 × 1 mL of water. MHC I complexes were eluted from the magnetic beads by acidic treatment using 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  To remove any residual magnetic beads, eluates were transferred into 2 mL Costar mL Spin-X centrifuge tube filters (0.45 m, Corning) and spun 2 min at 3,000g. Filtrates containing peptides were separated from MHC I subunits (HLA molecules and -2 macroglobulin) using home-made stage tips packed with twenty 1 mm diameter octadecyl (C-18) solid-phase extraction disks (EMPORE). Stage tips were pre-washed first with methanol then with 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.2% TFA and finally with 0.1% formic acid (FA). Samples were loaded onto the stage tips and peptides were retained on the stage tips while the HLA molecules and -2 macroglobulin were found in the flow-through. Stage tips were washed with 0.1% FA and peptides were eluted with 30% ACN in 0.1%TFA. The peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation and then stored at -20°C until MS analysis. Samples were reconstituted in 100 μL 200mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.2. The TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were dissolved in 40 μL of anhydrous ACN (Sigma-Aldrich) and added to the peptides. The solution was gently mixed and incubated for 90 min without agitation at RT before the reaction was quenched by hydroxylamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were desalted on Silica C18 UltraMicroSpin Column (The Nest Group), dried down and reconstituted in 4% FA (EMD Millipore). Benchmark evaluation was typically performed from MHC I peptide extracts corresponding to 2 x 106 B-LCL cells/injection. For extracts of less than 100 x 106 B-LCL cells, peptides were dissolved in 20 μL 200mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.2 and mixed with 5 μL of 0.02 mg/ μL of TMT0126. For larger cell amounts up to 2,000 x 106 BLCL, 0.8mg of TMT0126 label was used, and the reaction volume was scaled accordingly. Note that TMT labeling efficiency can vary significantly, and label concentration should be adjusted to maximize yield28.  For absolute quantification of MiHAs, synthetic peptides of concentration  ranging from 0.75- 192 fmoles were labeled with TMT-127N, TMT-128N, TMT-128C, TMT-129N, TMT-129C, TMT-                  130N, TMT-130C and TMT-131 while MHC I peptide extracts from 20 × 106 B-LCL cells were labeled with TMT-126. Note that the channel TMT-127C was unused to determine the extent of interfering fragment ions.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using PEAKS X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Searches were performed without enzyme specificity and with variable modifications for deamidation (N, Q) and oxidation (M). MAPDP was used to generate subject-specific protein sequence databases (add reference: PMID: 32108478). Protein entries are derived from the Ensembl reference genome release 75 (GRCh37.p13) and 88 (GRCh38.p10) respectively for B-LCL and B-ALL (PMID: 30576484). Single amino-acid polymorphism derived from RNA-Seq data sets available in the NCBI Bioproject database: B-BCL: PRJNA286122, B-ALL: PRJNA454807 (PMID: 30518613, PMID: 27841757) were incorporated in the protein entries. Polymorphisms were called by Casava (Illumina) for B-LCL and FreeBayes 1.0.2 (Garrison, E.; Marth, G., Haplotype-based variant detection from short-read sequencing. In arXiv e-prints, 2012) for B-ALL. Only SNV with a quality score above 20 were included.  Additionally, only expressed transcripts quantified by Kallisto v0.43.0 were retained for B-ALL (PMID: 27043002).

### Publication Abstract
Defining the repertoire of peptides presented by the major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) is a key step toward the identification of relevant antigens for cancer immunotherapy. However, the identification of cancer-specific antigens is a significant analytical challenge in view of their low abundance and low mutational load found in most primary cancer specimens. Here, we describe the application of isobaric peptide labeling with tandem mass tag (TMT) to improve the detection of the MHC I peptides. Isobaric peptide labeling was found to promote the formation of multiply charged ions and to enhance the formation of b-type fragment ions, thus resulting in a 50% improvement of MHC I peptide identification. The gain in sensitivity obtained using TMT labeling enabled the detection of low-abundance MHC I peptides including tumor-specific antigens (TSAs) and minor histocompatibility antigens (MiHAs). We further demonstrate the application of this approach to quantify MiHAs presented by B-cell lymphocytes and determined their expression levels by LC-MS/MS using both synchronous precursor selection (SPS) and high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS).

### Keywords
Tumor specific antigens, Mhc, Tmt, Faims, Minor antigens

### Affiliations
IRIC-Université de Montréal
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
IRIC-Université de Montréal


