### Accession
PXD005743

### Title
Temperature modulation of the Eucalyptus globulus and Eucalyptus grandis stem proteomes

### Description
Eucalyptus grandis e Eucalyptus globulus are among the most widely cultivated trees, differing in lignin composition and plantation areas. As temperature is a key modulator in plant metabolism, a large-scale proteome analysis was carried out to investigate changes induced in plantlets grown at different temperatures.

### Sample Protocol
Plantlets were cultivated in plant growth chambers with temperatures adjusted at: 10oC, 22oC and 32oC. Stem proteins were isolated following the phenol/ammonium acetate-methanol precipitation protocol and separated by SDS-PAGE. Each polyacrylamide gel lane was separated into five segments and trapped proteins were in-gel digested using trypsin. Peptides were separated for by reverse phase liquid chromatography using a 15 cm in-house packed nanocolumn. MS/MS data was acquired in a Q-Exactive instrument operated in the DDA/top 10 mode. For each treatment and species, five biological replicates were used.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out using the spectral correlation approach against the Eucalyptus grandis protein sequences downloaded from the Phytozome website (v1.1). Stringent-database searches were carried out by the Comet search engine using the following amino-acid mass modifications: cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation as static and dynamic modifications, respectively. Precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm was used during stringent database searches. All suggested peptide-spectrum matches were filtered using the software SePro, adjusted for a 1% false-discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Eucalyptus grandis and Eucalyptus globulus are among the most widely cultivated trees, differing in lignin composition and plantation areas, as E.&#xa0;grandis is mostly cultivated in tropical regions while E.&#xa0;globulus is preferred in temperate areas. As temperature is a key modulator in plant metabolism, a large-scale proteome analysis was carried out to investigate changes in the antioxidant system and the lignification metabolism in plantlets grown at different temperatures. Our strategy allowed the identification of 3111 stem proteins. A total of 103 antioxidant proteins were detected in the stems of both species. Hierarchical clustering revealed that alterations in the antioxidant proteins are more prominent when Eucalyptus seedlings were exposed to high temperature and that the superoxide isoforms coded by the gene Eucgr.B03930 are the most abundant antioxidant enzymes induced by thermal stimulus. Regarding the lignin biosynthesis, our proteomics approach resulted in the identification of 13 of the 17 core proteins involved in this metabolism, corroborating with gene predictions and the proposed lignin toolbox. Quantitative analyses revealed significant differences in 8 protein isoforms, including the ferulate 5-hydroxylase isoform F5H1, a key enzyme in catalyzing the synthesis of sinapyl alcohol, and the cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase isoform CAD2, the last enzyme in monolignol biosynthesis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005743.

### Keywords
Plant-environment, Biomass, Viridiplantae

### Affiliations
Universidade Estadual Paulista Department of Technology Jaboticabal, SP, Brazil
Sao Paulo State University

### Submitter
Tiago Balbuena

### Lab Head
Dr Tiago Santana Balbuena
Universidade Estadual Paulista Department of Technology Jaboticabal, SP, Brazil


