### Accession
PXD025411

### Title
Highly flexible metabolism of the marine euglenozoan protist Diplonema papillatum

### Description
Diplonema papillatum represents a group of highly diverse and abundant marine protists with still unknown lifestyle and ecological functions. Based on alterations of the transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic profiles obtained from cells grown under different conditions we designed a metabolic map of its cellular bioenergetic pathways. Comparative analysis in the nutrient-rich and -poor media and in the absence and presence of oxygen revealed a capacity for major metabolic reprograming. D. papillatum is equipped with fundamental metabolic routes such as glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, TCA cycle, pentose phosphate pathway, respiratory complexes, β-oxidation and synthesis of fatty acid. While gluconeogenesis uniquely dominates over glycolysis, TCA cycle represents a combination of standard and unusual enzymes. The presence of typical anaerobic enzymes such as pyruvate:NADP+ oxidoreductase, fumarate reductase, opine dehydrogenase, enoyl-coenzyme A reductase, and lactate dehydrogenase reflects the ability to survive in low-oxygen environments. The metabolism quickly reacts to restricted carbon source, revealing unusual flexibility of diplonemids, also reflected in cell morphology and motility, which is in good correlation with their extreme ecological valence.

### Sample Protocol
D. papillatum was grown axenically at 15 °C in seawater-based medium, either nutrient-rich (1 g/l tryptone and 1% (v/v) FBS) (R) or nutrient-poor (0.01 g/l tryptone, 0.001% lysogeny broth and 1% (v/v) horse serum) (P). To generate hypoxia, vented flasks with diplonemids were placed into Oxoid AnaeroJar (Thermo Scientific) and incubated at 15 °C for 3 days.  Cellular pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea, reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol, and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide. The reaction was quenched by additional 5 mM dithiothreitol. After dilution in 3 volumes of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8, the proteins were digested by sequencing grade trypsin (1:60, w/w; Promega) overnight. Peptide solution, acidified by 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, was clarified by centrifugation and purified on custom-made C18 SPE. Upon vacuum evaporation, the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 2% acetonitrile, and their concentration was determined by Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay. Next, 500 ng of purified peptides per sample were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap100 C18, 300 μm x 5 mm, 5 μm particle size; Dionex) and separated with an EASY-Spray C18 analytical column having integrated nanospray emitter (75 µm x 500 mm, 5 μm particle size; Thermo Scientific) on Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) in a 120-minute gradient (3-43% B), concave curve type 7, and flow rate 250 nl/min. The two mobile phases were used—0.1% formic acid (v/v) (A) and 80% ACN (v/v) with 0.1% formic acid (B). Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), equipped with EASY-Spray ion source, and spectral datasets were collected in the data-dependent mode using Top15 strategy for the selection of precursor ions. Precursors were measured in the mass range 300-1700 m/z with resolution 120,000, fragments were obtained by HCD mechanism with normalized collision energy 25 and resolution 15,000. Each of the three biological replicates was analyzed in three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Obtained datasets were processed by MaxQuant, version 1.6.17.0 with a built-in Andromeda search engine and the following parameters: (i) carbamidomethylation (C) as permanent and oxidation (M) as variable modifications; (ii) 20 ppm peptide tolerance in the first search, 4.5 ppm in the main search upon recalibration, and 20 ppm fragment tolerance; (iii) 1% peptide and protein false-discovery rates based on reverse decoy database search; (iv) engaged ‘match between the runs’ feature and label-free quantification. The search was performed against de novo assembled Diplonema papillatum transcripts with protein sequences predicted by TransDecoder, version 5.2 (87,769 sequences). The statistical analysis was performed using Perseus, version 1.6.15.0. Output proteinGroup table from MaxQuant was filtered for the reverse proteins, the contaminants, and the low confidence proteins identified only by the site. After log2 transformation of the LFQ intensities, only proteins with two and more valid values in at least one experimental group were retained. Consequently, the missing values were imputed from the normal distribution. Principal component analysis was used to evaluate sources of variability among samples and replicates. Next, ANOVA was performed with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing with a q-value threshold at 0.01. For pairwise comparisons, post hoc Tukey´s test was used at P ≤ 0.01. Additionally, differentially abundant proteins were filtered on effect size—at least 1-fold of log2 transformed ratio. Hierarchical clustering was performed on Z-score normalized averages of LFQ intensities for revealing protein abundance trends within specific functional groups of proteins across experimental conditions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrion, Diplonema papillatum, Hypoxia, Euglenozoans, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Peter Barath

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Barath
Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences


