### Accession
PXD027205

### Title
lysine acetylation and succinylation in Streptomyces coelicolor

### Description
To determine the acetylome of S. coelicolor, the wild-type S. coelicolor sample was prepared with three biological replicates and two technical replicates and analyzed. To quantify the acetylome and succinylome, three samples (wild-type, ∆SccobB1, and ∆SccobB2) with three biological replicates were prepared and analyzed. The cells were harvested, digested, and then subjected to affinity enrichment before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The wild-type S. coelicolor M145 and its derivatives ∆SccobB1 and ∆SccobB2 were cultured on MS solid medium at 30 °C for 3 days. Fresh spores were collected with a cotton swab and transferred to TSB liquid medium supplemented with 50 mM glucose. After growing them for 60 h, the cells were transferred to the new TSB medium containing 50 mM glucose and harvested at the log phase after 2 days. The collected cells were first frozen using liquid nitrogen and then transferred to 50-ml centrifuge tubes for sonication in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III, 3 μM trichostatin A, and 50 mM nicotinamide). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated using cold 15% trichloroacetic acid for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone thrice. The protein was dissolved in a buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.0), and the protein concentration was determined using a 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added slowly to make a final concentration of 20% and then the mixture was eddy-mixed and precipitated at 4 °C for 2 h. The supernatant was discarded after centrifugation at 4,500 g for 5 min. The precipitate was then washed with pre-cooled acetone 2-3 times. After the precipitate was dried, TEAB, with a final concentration of 200 mM, was added. The precipitate was dispersed by ultrasound, and trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (trypsin-to-protein) overnight. Then, the peptide solution was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 15 min at room temperature in the dark.  To enrich Kac or Ksuc peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed acetylation or succinylation antibody beads (PTM Biolabs, China) respectively at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with IP buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were vacuum-dried, and the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptides were dissolved in liquid chromatography mobile phase A and separated using the EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC-system. Mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. Mobile phase B was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. Liquid phase gradient setting: 0-36 min, 9%-25% B; 36-54 min, 25%~35% B; 54-57 min, 35%~80% B; 57-60 min, 80% B, the flow rate was maintained at 500 nL/min. The resulting peptides were analyzed by a Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were subjected to a Nano-Spray-Ionization source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting 31, and ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap, and 5E4 ions were accumulated to generate MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting data were processed using MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt S. coelicolor database (organism ID, 100226; 8,038 sequences) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide, and 5 charges. The mass error was set to 20 ppm for the first search, 5 ppm for the main search, and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lys, and acetylation on protein N-termini were specified as variable modifications. The false discovery rate thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification sites were specified at 1%. The minimum peptide length was set at 7. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Streptomyces coelicolor ; acetylome ; succinylome

### Affiliations
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences

### Submitter
Yujiao Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Yujiao Yang
CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences


