### Accession
PXD020746

### Title
Global Proteomic Analysis of Lysine lactylation in The Plant Pathogen Botrytis cinerea

### Description
Lysinelactylation , a recently discovered post-translational modification, plays a key role in the regulation of diverse cellular processes. Botrytis cinerea is a destructive necrotrophic fungal pathogen distributed worldwide with broad ranging hosts. However, the functions of  Lysine lactylation are unknown in B. cinerea or any other plant fungal pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction From B. cinerea The B. cinerea strain B05.10 was cultured on PDA plates (2% dextrose, 20% potato, and 1.5% agar) at 25℃ for 10 days, and then the conidia was collected and transferred into YEPD medium (2% glucose, 1% yeast extract, and 2% peptone) with shaking at 180 rpm for 14 h. The protein extraction was performed as previously described (Zhou et al., 2016). Briefly, the harvested mycelia were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen. Then the powder sample was suspended by lysis buffer (50 mM nicotinamide, 8 M urea, 65 mM dithiothreitol, 1% Triton-100, 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 2 mM EDTA, and 3 μM Trichostatin A) and then sonicated. After centrifugation at 15,000 x g in 4℃ for 15 min, 15% cold TCA was used to precipitate the proteins at -20℃ for 2 h. The precipitates were washed three times with cold acetone after centrifugation at 4℃for 15 min. Finally, the target protein was redissolved in 8 M urea supplemented with 100 mM NH4CO3 (PH 8.0) and 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) was used to determine protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics Analysis Gene ontology (GO) of crotonylation proteome was performed from the UniProt-GOA database based on three categories: cellular component, molecular function, and biological process. The soft WoLF PSORT was used to predicate the subcellular localization of the crotonylated protein (Horton et al., 2007). Proteins secondary structures (β-strand, α-helix, coil) were analyzed by the online tool NetSurfP (Chou and Schwartz, 2011). Soft MoMo (motif-x algorithm) was used to analysis the sequences model of crotonylated proteins composed of amino acids in distinct positions of modify-21-mers (10 amino acids up- and downstream of the Kcr site) in all protein sequences. To define the conservation of crotonylation, the BLASTP was used to compare the crotonylated protein sequences of B. cinerea with Carica papaya (Liu et al., 2018b), Nicotiana tabacum (Sun et al., 2017), Oryza sativa (Liu et al., 2018c), Danio rerio (Kwon et al., 2018), and four human cell lines (Wei et al., 2017b;Wu et al., 2017;Xu et al., 2017;Huang et al., 2018). InterProScan was used to perform the protein domain functional annotation based on protein alignment method and the InterPro domain database. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was employed to annotate protein pathway description (Kanehisa et al., 2004). Cytoscape software was used to analyze the protein-protein interactions whcih was obtained from the STRING database (Shannon et al., 2003;Szklarczyk et al., 2015). A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to verify the enrichment of lysine lactylation proteins against all database proteins. All projects with a corrected p-valve <0.05 is considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Botrytis cinerea, Lc-ms/ms, Lysine lactylation

### Affiliations
Key Lab of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong, College of Plant Health and Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Wenxing Liang
Key Lab of Integrated Crop Pest Management of Shandong, College of Plant Health and Medicine, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, China


