### Accession
PXD013630

### Title
Extracellular vesicle fibrinogen induces encephalitogenic CD8+ T cells in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis

### Description
Extracellular vesicles isolated from murine and human patient blood plasma was subjected to proteomic analysis to determine the EV proteome in healthy, non-disease murine and human samples and during disease.

### Sample Protocol
In solution Protein Digestion. Protein pellets were dissolved and denatured in 8M urea, 0.4M ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8. The proteins were reduced by the addition of 1/10 volume of 45mM dithiothreitol (Pierce ThermoScientific, catalog ID: 20290) and incubation at 37ºC for 20 minutes, then alkylated with the addition of 1/10 volume of 100mM iodoacetamide (Millipore-Sigma, catalog ID: I1149) with incubation in the dark at room temperature for 20 minutes. The urea concentration was adjusted to 2M by the addition of water prior to enzymatic digestion at 37°C with LysC (Wako, catalog ID: 125-05061) for 4 hours, then trypsin (Promega; Seq. Grade Mod. Trypsin, catalog ID:  V5113) for an additional 16 hours. Protease:protein ratios were estimated at 1:50. Samples were acidified by the addition of 20% trifluoroacetic acid, then desalted using C18 MacroSpin columns (The Nest Group, catalog ID: SMM SS18V) following the manufacturer’s directions with peptides eluted with 0.1% TFA, 80% acetonitrile. Eluted sample was speedvaced dry and dissolved in MS loading buffer (2% aceotonitrile, 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid). A nanodrop measurement (Thermo Scientific Nanodrop 2000 UV-Vis Spectrophotometer) determined protein concentrations (A260/A280). Each sample was then further diluted with MS loading buffer to 0.08µg/µl, with 0.4ug (5µl) injected for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS on the Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus. Trapping was done at 5µl/min, 97% Buffer A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) for 3 min. Peptide separation was performed at 330 nl/min with Buffer A: 100% water, 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. A linear gradient (90 minutes) was run with 3% buffer B at initial conditions; 5% B at 1 minute; 35% B at 50 minutes; 50% B at 60 minutes; 90% B at 65-70; and back to initial conditions at 71 minutes. MS was acquired in profile mode over the 300-1,700 m/z range using 1 microscan; 70,000 resolution; AGC target of 3E6; and a full max ion time of 45 ms. MS/MS was acquired in centroid mode using 1 microscan; 17,500 resolution; AGC target of 1E5; full max IT of 100 ms; 1.7 m/z isolation window; normalized collision energy of 28; and 200-2,000 m/z scan range. Up to 20 MS/MS were collected per MS scan on species with an intensity threshold of 2E4, charge states 2-6, peptide match preferred, and dynamic exclusion set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peptide Identification. The search parameters included tryptic peptides with up to 3 missed cleavages, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, and variable (dynamic) modifications of methionine oxidation, carbamidomethylated cysteine, deamidated asparagine or glutamine, and citrullination of arginine. Normal and decoy database searches were run, with the confidence level set to 95% (P < 0.05). Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are emerging as potent mediators of intercellular communication with roles in inflammation and disease. In this study, we examined the role of EVs from blood plasma (pEVs) in an experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis mouse model of central nervous system demyelination. We determined that pEVs induced a spontaneous relapsing-remitting disease phenotype in MOG<sub>35-55</sub>-immunized C57BL/6 mice. This modified disease phenotype was found to be driven by CD8+ T cells and required fibrinogen in pEVs. Analysis of pEVs from relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis patients also identified fibrinogen as a significant portion of pEV cargo. Together, these data suggest that fibrinogen in pEVs contributes to the perpetuation of neuroinflammation and relapses in disease.

### Keywords
Human, Multiple sclerosis, Fibrinogen, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
University of Connecticut
University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Department of Neuroscience, Farmington, CT, 06032, USA

### Submitter
Cory Willis

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen J. Crocker
University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Department of Neuroscience, Farmington, CT, 06032, USA


