### Accession
PXD002429

### Title
Nuclear proteomics reavels the role of protein synthesis and chromatin in root tips of soybean under initial flooding stress

### Description
Flooding has a severe negative effect on cultivation in the early stage of soybean growth. To understand the mechanism in early-stage soybean responding to initial flooding stress, nuclear proteomic technique was used.

### Sample Protocol
Two-day-old soybeans were treated without or with flooding for 3, 6,  and 24 h. For nuclear proteomics, nuclei were purified and nuclear proteins were extracted using extraction kit. For total proteins, proteins were extracted from root tip by TCA/Acetone method. After measuring concentration,  protein samples were cleaned up with chloroform/methanol method and then subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Using an Ultimate 3,000 nano LC system (Dionex), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID × 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and their separation and spraying were done using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm ID × 120 mm, nanoLC capillary column, NTTC-360/75-3, NikkyoTechnos) with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over a mass range of 400-15,000 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. A lock mass function was used to obtain high mass accuracy. The top ten most intense precursor ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at normalized collision energy of 35%. Identification of proteins was performed by MASCOT search engine (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) using soybean peptide database (54175 sequences) obtained from the soybean genome database (Phytozome version 9.1, http://www.phytozome.net/soybean). DTA files were generated from acquired raw data files and then converted to Mascot generic files using Discover Daemon software (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Parameters used in Mascot searches were follows: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da, and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. Automatic decoy database search was performed in the search. Mascot results were filtered with Mascot percolator. The Mascot results were used for differential analysis using SIEVE software (version 2.1.377, Thermo Fisher Scientific).The minimal requirement for accepting a protein identified was as follow: (i) the score indicated the probability of a true positive identification and was at least 100; (ii) at least two peptide sequence matched above the identity threshold; and (iii) the coverage of the total protein sequence by the matching peptides was a minimum of 4%.

### Publication Abstract
To identify the upstream events controlling the regulation of flooding-responsive proteins in soybean, proteomic analysis of nuclear proteins in root tip was performed. By using nuclear fractions, which were highly enriched, a total of 365 nuclear proteins were changed in soybean root tip at initial stage of flooding stress. Four exon-junction complex-related proteins and NOP1/NOP56, which function in upstream of 60S preribosome biogenesis, were decreased in flooded soybean. Furthermore, proteomic analysis of crude protein extract revealed that the protein translation was suppressed by continuous flooding stress. Seventeen chromatin structure-related nuclear proteins were decreased in response to flooding stress. Out of them, histone H3 was clearly decreased with protein abundance and mRNA expression levels at the initial flooding stress. Additionally, a number of protein synthesis-, RNA-, and DNA-related nuclear proteins were decreased in a time-dependent manner. mRNA expressions of genes encoding the significantly changed flooding-responsive nuclear proteins were inhibited by the transcriptional inhibitor, actinomycin D. These results suggest that protein translation is suppressed through inhibition of preribosome biogenesis- and mRNA processing-related proteins in nuclei of soybean root tip at initial flooding stress. In addition, flooding stress may regulate histone variants with gene expression in root tip.

### Keywords
Pre-ribosome biogenesis, Chromatin structure, Flooding stress, Soybean, Root tips, Nuclei

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science
University of Tsukuba

### Submitter
xiaojian Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science


