### Accession
PXD015208

### Title
Middle-down proteomics reveals RNA binding proteins harbor dense sites of methylation and phosphorylation

### Description
Arginine (Arg)-rich RNA-binding proteins play an integral role in RNA metabolism. Post-translational modifications (PTMs) within Arg-rich domains, such as phosphorylation and methylation, regulate multiple steps in RNA metabolism. However, the identification of PTMs within Arg-rich domains with complete trypsin digestion is extremely challenging due to the high density of Arg residues within these proteins. Here, we leveraged a middle-down proteomic approach coupled with electron transfer dissociation (ETD) mass spectrometry to map previously unknown sites of phosphorylation and methylation within the Arg-rich domains of U1-70K and structurally similar RNA binding proteins. From nuclear extracts of HEK293 cells, we achieved coverage of 29,114 residues and identified 681 PTMs currently unannotated in database repositories. Remarkably, the Arg-rich domains in RNA binding proteins are densely modified by methylation and phosphorylation compared with the remainder of the proteome, with methylation and phosphorylation often jointly occurring in Arg-rich peptides within RSRS motifs. Although they share a common motif, phosphorylation and methylation may oppose one another. Collectively, these findings suggest that the level of PTMs within Arg-rich domains may be among the highest in the proteome, and a possible unexplored regulator of RNA metabolism. These data also serve as a resource to facilitate future mechanistic studies of these PTMs in RNA binding protein structure and function.

### Sample Protocol
Protein expression and purification HEK293T cells were grown and transfected with a plasmid encoding the GST-LC1/BAD (AA231-310) domain of U1-70K using PEI and harvested 72 hours post-transfection. The cells were resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 200 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1% (w/v) sarkosyl and 1X HALT protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail). Lysates were sonicated using a microtip probe to shear nucleic acids. To make the lysates compatible with GST affinity purification, Triton X-100 (TX-100) was added to a concentration of 1.5% (v/v). The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatants were incubated overnight at 4°C with 0.5-1 ml of swelled glutathione-agarose resin (Sigma G4510), after which slurries were loaded onto a column. Resin was washed with 10 column volumes of wash buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 200 mM NaCl and 1% TX-100), and eluted with 4 x 1 ml elution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 500 mM NaCl, 20 mM reduced L-glutathione (Sigma G4251) and 0.1% TX-100. The eluted fractions were concentrated to ~200 μl using Amicon Ultra-0.5 ml 10K MWCO Centrifugal Filter Units (EMD Millipore), and dialyzed overnight against 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 200 mM NaCl and 0.1 mM PMSF using 10K MWCO Slide-A-Lyzer MINI Dialysis Units (Thermo).  Nucleoplasm Enrichment Cells from eight 15-cm plates were combined and rinsed with cold PBS, and then scraped in 10 mL PBS + 1X Protein Inhibitor Cocktail buffer (catalog no. COUL-RO, Roche) and centrifuged for 5 min at 1,000 x g at 4C. Cells were washed once in 1 ml 1X (cold) PBS and recovered by centrifugation for 5 min at 1,000 x g at 4C, swelled in 75 ul of hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 20 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1mM DTT, 5% Glycerol, 0.5 mM PMSF, 10 ug/mL Aprotinin, 10 ug/mL Leupeptin) and incubated on ice for 10 min. Samples were lysed by 0.1% NP-40, vortexed, and incubated on ice for 5 min. Nuclei were recovered by centrifugation for 10 min at 15,600 x g at 4C. Nuclei were extracted for 30 min on ice in 40 ul high salt buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 0.4 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.5 mM PMSF, 10 ug/mL Aprotinin, 10 ug/mL Leupeptin). Samples were sonicated for 5 sec and extracts were collected by centrifugation for 10 min at 15,600 x g at 4C. The supernatant obtained following the centrifugation step consisted of isolated nucleoplasm and the resulting pellet was the chromatin fraction.   In-gel Limited Trypsin digestion The GST-LC1/BAD (AA231-310) purified protein (14µg) was run onto a 10% acrylamide gel. The gel was stained with Coomassie G-250 and the GST-LC1/BAD band was compared to BSA standards to estimate protein concentration. The GST-LC1/BAD band was cut out and diced into small pieces. The gel pieces were divided among five tubes each receiving ~3 µg of GST-LC1/BAD. Gel pieces were de-stained until clear using 70% 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and 30% ACN. While on ice, each tube received 30µL digest buffer [12.5 ng/µL trypsin (Pierce MS grade) in 50mM ABC buffer. After the addition of trypsin, samples were incubated on ice for 3 min then brought up to RT to start digestion. At 6 different time points (15, 30, 60, 120, 240 min, and overnight) excess trypsin solution was removed and the digestion reaction was stopped with 30µL extraction buffer (50% ACN 5% acetic acid). After the addition of extraction buffer, samples equilibrated for five min, then stored at -20 °C. Peptides were shaken for 40 min at RT then spun at 20,000 x g for one minute. After a minute period following the first spin, peptides were spun again, and repeated twice. The supernatant containing the extracted peptides was collected into a new tube, in which 30µL of extraction buffer was added. This extraction process was repeated 2x. Peptide lyophilization used a SpeedVac (catalog no. 731022, Labconco) before resuspension in MS sample loading buffer (1% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, and 0.03% TFA).  In-solution digest of nucleoplasm fractions For each time point, 150 µg of nucleoplasm was digested. Samples were brought to a concentration of 1M urea, then DTT was added to a final concentration of 1mM, incubated for 30 min. IAA was added to a final concentration of 1mM, and incubated for 20 min in the absence of light. Samples were diluted in digestion buffer, digested with 1:50 ratio of trypsin (Pierce MS grade):total protein. Digestion reactions were performed at RT and quenched at increasing time lengths (5, 10, 20, 40, 80, 160 min, o/n) with 0.1% formic acid+0.01% TFA solution. Resulting peptides were cleaned up using an HLB column (Waters). Samples were washed with methanol, then Buffer C (50% ACN and 50% water), then 0.1% TFA. Digested samples were loaded into the column, washed with 0.1% TFA twice, and then eluted with Buffer C. The resulting elutant was lyophilized using a SpeedVac (catalog no. 731022, Labconco).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% TFA, 1% acetonitrile) and separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 μm Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (20 cm × 75 μm internal diameter; New Objective, Woburn, MA) by a NanoAcquity UHPLC (Waters). Linear gradient elution was performed using Buffer A (0.1% formic acid and 0% acetonitrile) and Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) starting from 3% Buffer B to 40% over 100 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer. Data-dependent MS/MS analyses included a high resolution step (120,000 at m/z 400) with an m/z range of 100-1000.  MS1 scans were conducted in the Orbitrap, and the top 10 ions with highest charge, followed by the precursor ion with the greatest intensity, were given priority for fragmentation. A data-dependent decision tree was used [36] and MS/MS spectra from both HCD and ETD were collected in the ion-trap. Peptides with charge state of +2 were chosen for fragmentation by HCD only, while all charge states +3 and above were fragmented by both ETD and HCD. At +3 charge state, precursor ions under 650 m/z were fragmented by both ETD and HCD. Those equal to or greater than 650 m/z were fragmented by HCD only. At +4 charge state, precursor ions under 900 m/z were jointly fragmented by both HCD and ETD, and only by HCD at m/z values equal to greater than 900. At +5 charge state, precursor ions under 950 m/z were fragmented by both HCD and ETD, and only by HCD at m/z values equal to or greater than 950. At + 6 charge state, all precursor ions were fragmented by ETD. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 30 seconds.  Database Searching Data files for the time points were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 and v1.6.1.0 with Thermo Foundation 2.0 for RAW file reading capability. The search engine Andromeda was used to build and search a concatenated target-decoy UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) containing both Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL human reference protein sequences (90,411 target sequences downloaded April 21, 2015), plus 245 contaminant proteins included as a parameter for Andromeda search within MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2011). Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) were included as variable modifications (up to 5 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da) for the nucleoplasm. A two stage search was performed as described previously [37]. This two-step method allows for a larger search space while limiting false-discovery rate (FDR) [38]. For the first search only fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to 2 missed cleavages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ± 20 ppm was applied prior to mass accuracy calibration and ± 4.5 ppm after internal MaxQuant calibration. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 6,000 Da, a minimum peptide length of 6 residues and 0.6 Da tolerance for ion-trap ETD and HCD MS/MS scans. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1 percent. The proteins identified in the first database search were then used to make a targeted database with which to re-search the raw files with an expanded missed cleavage window and variable modifications. The targeted database corresponding to purified U1-70K LC1/BAD protein contained a FASTA file of 334 proteins and allowed for 6 mis-cleavages. The targeted database corresponding to the nucleoplasm contained a FASTA file of 4,307 proteins, allowing 6 mis-cleavages. These targeted databases were used to search the spectra for variable PTMs including phosphorylation (S/T/Y) (+79.9799 Da) and mono, di, and tri (trimethylation only searched for rLC1/BAD IP run) methylation (K/R) (+14.0266 Da, +28.0532 Da, +42.0798 Da) in addition to N-terminal acylation and methionine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) within arginine (Arg)-rich RNA-binding proteins, such as phosphorylation and methylation, regulate multiple steps in RNA metabolism. However, the identification of PTMs within Arg-rich domains with complete trypsin digestion is extremely challenging due to the high density of Arg residues within these proteins. Here, we report a middle-down proteomic approach coupled with electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) mass spectrometry to map previously unknown sites of phosphorylation and methylation within the Arg-rich domains of U1-70K and structurally similar RNA-binding proteins from nuclear extracts of human embryonic kidney (HEK)-293T cells. Notably, the Arg-rich domains in RNA-binding proteins are densely modified by methylation and phosphorylation compared with the remainder of the proteome, with methylation and phosphorylation favoring RSRS motifs. Although they favor a common motif, analysis of combinatorial PTMs within RSRS motifs indicates that phosphorylation and methylation do not often co-occur, suggesting that they may functionally oppose one another. Furthermore, we show that phosphorylation may modify interactions between Arg-rich proteins, as serine-arginine splicing factor 2 (SRSF2) has a stronger association with U1-70K and LUC7L3 upon dephosphorylation. Collectively, these findings suggest that the level of PTMs within Arg-rich domains may be among the highest in the proteome and a possible unexplored regulator of RNA-binding protein interactions.

### Keywords
Etd, Basic-acidic domains, Middle-down, Rs protein, Decision tree

### Affiliations
Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology
Emory University

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried
Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology


