### Accession
PXD001834

### Title
Adaptative changes in protein expression and lysine acetylation induced by decreased glutathione levels in astrocytes

### Description
Astrocytes and neurons form a highly specialized functional unit and the loss or gain of astrocytic functions can influence the initiation and progression of different neurodegenerative diseases. Neurons depend on the antioxidant protection provided by neighboring astrocytes. Glutathione (-l-glutamyl-l-cysteinyl-glycine) is a major component of the antioxidant system that defends cells against the toxic effects of reactive oxygen/nitrogen species. A decline in glutathione levels has been observed in aging and neurodegenerative diseases and it aggravates the pathology in an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-mouse model. Using a stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomic approach, we analyzed the changes in global protein expression and regulation of lysine acetylation, in primary astrocyte cultures obtained from wild type mice or those deficient in the glutamate-cysteine ligase modifier subunit (GCLM). GCLM knockout astrocytes display an approximately 80% reduction in total glutathione levels. We identified potential molecular targets that are affected by the chronic decrease in glutathione levels and observed an adaptative response mediated by Nrf2 activation. In addition, sequence analysis of peptides more extensively acetylated in the absence of GCLM revealed an enrichment of cysteine residues immediately surrounding the site of acetylation; which suggests a potential specific regulation by decreased glutathione content. Pathway analysis revealed that some pathways exhibited both differential protein expression and lysine acetylation, revealing a coordinated response involving transcriptional and post-translational regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Primary astrocyte cultures were prepared from the cortex of 1 to 2-day-old mice as previously described (Vargas, Pehar et al. 2006). Astrocyte cultures were metabolically labeled using heavy or light isotopes of lysine from the moment the culture was established. In two of them, GCLM(+/+) (wild-type) astrocytes were cultured in “light” SILAC media supplemented with L-Lysine 12C6-14N2, while GCLM(-/-) astrocytes were cultured in “heavy” SILAC media containing L-Lysine-13C6-15N2. As a control, in the third experiment a label swap was used. For differential protein expression analysis 40 µg of combined heavy and light labeled protein from each experiment was separated on a 4-12% Criterion-XT gel (BioRad). After coomassie staining, each lane on the gel was cut into 12 bands. Proteins in each gel piece were reduced, alkylated, digested with Lys-C and trypsin, and desalted by C18 ZipTip (EMD Millipore) as previously described (Klein, Berkaw et al. 2009), prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. To prepare peptides for differential lysine acetylation analysis samples were processed as described by Choudhary et al. (2009) (Choudhary, Kumar et al. 2009), with minor modifications (GE Healthcare). Peptides were separated into 12 fractions by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography using a 6.4 mm x 30 mm Resource S methylsulfonate column (15 µm, GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min using a gradient of 0%B for 10 min; 0-30%B in 30 min; 30-100%B in 5 min and 100%B for 10 min (Buffer A: 5 mM KH2PO4 (pH 2.7)/ 30% acetonitrile; Buffer B: 5 mM KH2PO4 (pH 2.7)/350 mM KCl/ 30% acetonitrile). Acetylated peptides were immunoprecipitated from each fraction. For enrichment of lysine-acetylated peptides, SCX fractions were dried under vacuum and redissolved in immunoprecipitation buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Nonidet P-40). Peptides were incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-acetylated lysine antibody conjugated to agarose beads according to the manufacturer’s instructions (ImmuneChem). Immune complexes were then washed 3X with immunoprecipitation buffer and 3X with water. Immnoprecipitated peptides were then eluted with 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid in water. Peptides were loaded on a trap column, eluted, and separated on a 75 m x 15 cm fused-silica column packed in house with C18 reversed-phase resin (YMC-ODS-AQ; 5-μm particles; 200-Å pore; Waters) using an acetonitrile gradient of 5-50% in 120 or 180 min containing 0.2% formic acid on a LC Packings U3000 nano LC system at flow rate of 200 nl/min. The sample was introduced via nano-electrospray ionization (nESI) using an uncoated silica emitter (360 μm OD, 50 μm ID, with a 5 μm tip, New Objective) to a hybrid dual-pressure linear ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Elite, Thermo Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired in data dependent mode using a TOP20 method which acquires one FTMS survey MS scan with a mass range of m/z 400-1700 followed by tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) of the twenty most intense ions in the ion trap. The automatic gain control target value in the Orbitrap was 106 ions for the survey MS scan the resolution was 60,000 at m/z 400. A lock-mass was used for recalibration during data processing (J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2011 Aug;22(8):1373-80.) . Fragmentation in the ion trap was performed by collision-induced dissociation with a target value of 10,000 ions and a threshold of 500 counts. Three biological replicate experiments were performed with 2 technical replicates (72 LC-MS/MS analyses for each, protein expression and lysine acetylation).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda algorithm in MaxQuant 1.5.0.30 (MQ) (J Proteome Res. 2011 Apr 1;10(4):1794-805). Two separate searches were performed to quantitate changes in protein expression and lysine acetylation. LC-MS/MS analyses of enriched acetylated peptides were searched simultaneously against a UniProt murine database downloaded on 05/16/14 containing 82538 entries and commonly observed potential contaminants. A reversed decoy database (reward) was utilized to determine the peptide false discovery rate and minimize false assignment of modifications at the peptide N-terminus. The false discovery rates for peptide spectral matches, protein identification, and modification site assignment were each set to 0.01. The search parameters allowed for 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass deviation of  20 ppm, fragment mass tolerances  0.5 Da, and a minimum of 7 amino acids per peptide. Spectra were filtered leaving the top 8 MS/MS peaks per 100 Da. Dynamic modifications of acetyl (protein N-term and Lys), oxidation of Met, cyclization of peptide N-terminal Glu to pyro-Glu and static cysteine modification with carbamidomethyl were used. A minimum score (40) and delta score (6) were required for modified peptides. To search for missing SILAC partners after the initial database search the “requantify” option was used. Similar parameters were utilized to search the gel-LC-MS/MS spectra for changes in protein expression with the exceptions that identifications within a one minute window were matched between runs and a reversed decoy database (revert) was utilized. For protein identification, a minimum of one razor peptide was required and quantitation was based on razor, unmodified, and carbamidomethylated peptides. The search results were further analyzed and filtered using Perseus v. 1.5.0.15 (Max Planck Institute) with embedding protein and site-specific information and site-specific modification databases downloaded in August 2014 from PhosphoSitePlus (www.phosphosite.org) (Hornbeck, Kornhauser et al. 2012). Protein expression data were extracted from the protein groups and evidence tables and the acetylation data were extracted from the Acetyl(K)sites and evidence tables. Potential contaminants and reversed false positives were removed. The site of lysine acetylation was assigned if the probability of site localization was above 99%. Ratios from label swap experiments were inverted to yield experimental/control. Log2 transformed ratios of GCLM(-/-)/GCLM(+/+) were normalized by subtracting the median of the Log2 ratios per experiment. In addition, to adjust the changes in acetylation by potential changes in protein expression, we corrected each Log2 acetyl peptide ratio by subtracting the mean Log2 ratio of the corresponding protein if it was measured. Therefore, in the table depicting the set of regulated lysine acetylated peptides (Supp. Table 4) the corrected ratios were used when available; otherwise the uncorrected ratio was used. Log2 transformed ratios were used to calculate a moderated t-statistic in order to determine a p-value for each protein or peptide with ratios measured in at least 2 experiments. For acetylated peptides this p-value was adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing by the Benjamini & Hochberg method (Smyth 2004) with an FDR of 0.1 as previously described Udeshi et al. (2012) (Udeshi, Mani et al. 2012). Bioinformatic Analysis. Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis software (Qiagen) was used to determine the significantly enriched canonical pathways associated with the data sets of regulated protein and lysine-acetylated peptides. The significance of the over-represented canonical pathways was determined using the Fisher Exact test p-value and the enrichment ratio, i.e. number of hits in a pathway divided by the total number of proteins in the pathway. Peptide consensus sequence analysis. Peptide sequence analysis was performed by iceLogo (Colaert, Helsens et al. 2009) using the static reference method, with the Mus musculus Swiss-Prot database or the complete list of identified acetylated peptides as reference for background correction. The analysis was visualized using heat maps (p ≤ 0.05) and iceLogo figures with percentage difference as scoring system and a p ≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Astrocytes and neurons form a highly specialized functional unit, and the loss or gain of astrocytic functions can influence the initiation and progression of different neurodegenerative diseases. Neurons depend on the antioxidant protection provided by neighboring astrocytes. Glutathione (&#x3b3;-l-glutamyl-l-cysteinyl-glycine) is a major component of the antioxidant system that defends cells against the toxic effects of reactive oxygen/nitrogen species. A decline in glutathione levels has been observed in aging and neurodegenerative diseases, and it aggravates the pathology in an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-mouse model. Using a SILAC-based quantitative proteomic approach, we analyzed changes in global protein expression and lysine acetylation in primary astrocyte cultures obtained from wild-type mice or those deficient in the glutamate-cysteine ligase modifier subunit (GCLM). GCLM knockout astrocytes display an &#x223c;80% reduction in total glutathione levels. We identified potential molecular targets and novel sites of acetylation that are affected by the chronic decrease in glutathione levels and observed a response mediated by Nrf2 activation. In addition, sequence analysis of peptides displaying increased acetylation in GCLM knockout astrocytes revealed an enrichment of cysteine residues in the vicinity of the acetylation site, which suggests potential crosstalk between lysine-acetylation and cysteine modification. Regulation of several metabolic and antioxidant pathways was observed at the level of protein expression and lysine acetylation, revealing a coordinated response involving transcriptional and posttranslational regulation.

### Keywords
Astrocytes, Acetyl, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology Director of Proteomics Mass Spectrometry Facility
Medical University of SC

### Submitter
Jennifer Bethard

### Lab Head
Dr Lauren Ball
Department of Pharmacology Director of Proteomics Mass Spectrometry Facility


