### Accession
PXD036720

### Title
Antigen presentation deficiency, mesenchymal differentiation, and resistance to immunotherapy in the murine syngeneic CT2A tumor model

### Description
A common cornerstone of preclinical cancer research is the use of syngeneic orthotopic murine tumors as immunocompetent models of human cancers. For glioblastoma research efforts, the GL261 and CT2A lines are frequently used. We systematically characterized  these two lines to decipher the cell-intrinsic mechanisms that drive immuno-resistance in CT2A and to define the aspects of human cancer biology that the lines best model. We show that, despite sharing a few canonical genetic or histologic features of human glioblastoma, the transcriptional profiles of GL261 and CT2A tumours most closely resembled those of glioblastomas. CT2A additionally resembled other cancer types transcriptionally, including melanoma. CT2A displayed mesenchymal differentiation, upregulated angiogenesis, and multiple defects in antigen presentation machinery and interferon response pathways. Loss of MHC class I expression was restored in CT2A by interferon-γ treatment, explaining in part the modest efficacy of some immunotherapy combinations for CT2A. Our findings indicate that CT2A may serve as a robust preclinical solid tumor model of adaptive immune resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Exact methodological details for phosphoproteome, global proteome, and immunopeptidome analyses can be found in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.5, ThermoFisher Scientific) and searched using Mascot (v2.4) against the mouse Swiss-Prot database (v2021_03). Peptides were searched with no enzyme and variable methionine oxidation. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered by an ion score ≥ 15, length 8-11, search engine rank of 1, and aggregated across unique peptides. For phosphoproteomic data, peptide spectrum matches were filtered by ion score ≥ 20 for pTyr and protein expression data and  ≥ 25 for pSer/pThr data and search engine rank of 1. Abundances were averaged across biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ct2a, Gl261, Immunotherapy, Glioblastoma

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Ryuhjin Ahn

### Lab Head
Dr Forest White
Massachusetts Institute of Technology


