### Accession
PXD013381

### Title
HUVEC endosome LCMS -  ZFYVE21 is a complement-induced Rab5 effector that activates non-canonical NF-κB via phosphoinosotide remodeling of endosomes

### Description
Complement promotes vascular inflammation in transplant organ rejection and connective tissue diseases. Here we identify ZFYVE21 as a complement-induced Rab5 effector that regulates pro-inflammatory non-canonical NF-B signaling in endothelial cells (EC). In response to membrane attack complexes (MAC), ZFYVE21 is post-translationally stabilized via recruitment to MAC+Rab5+ endosomes in a Rab5- and PI(3)P-dependent manner. ZFYVE21 promotes SMURF2-mediated polyubiquitinylation and proteasome-dependent degradation of endosome-associated PTEN to induce vesicular enrichment of PI(3,4,5)P3 and sequential recruitment of activated Akt and NF-B-inducing kinase (NIK). Pharmacologic alteration of the phosphoinositide content of MAC+Rab5+ endosomes with miltefosine reduces ZFYVE21 induction, EC activation, as well as allograft vasculopathy in a humanized mouse model. ZFYVE21 induction distinctly occurs in response to MAC- but not ligand-induced non-canonical NF-B and is a biomarker for complement-mediated endothelial signaling in human renal and synovial tissues. Our data identifies ZFYVE21 as a novel Rab5 effector, defines a Rab5-ZFYVE21-SMURF2-pAkt axis by which it mediates EC activation, and demonstrates a role for this pathway as a drug target and biomarker for complement-mediated pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
Seventy-five microliters of AlexaFluor 647-labeled C9 was added to 500L PRA and 1925L gelatin veronal buffer and this mixture was added to IFN- pre-treated HUVEC carrying a Rab5- GFP reporter or to HUVEC carrying fluorescent lipid reporters (PH-RFP or 2XFYVE-GFP) as below for 30 minutes. Twenty confluent T175 flasks treated as above were used for proteomic analyses. For lipid reporter experiments individual C6 wells were used. Cells were harvested, washed, and resuspended in 0.5mL endosome buffer [10mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.4, 1mM EDTA, 0.25M sucrose containing 1 protease inhibitor tablet (Roche) per 10mL buffer] and mechanically disrupted by three freeze-thaw cycles followed by three cycles of sonication for 20 seconds  Subcellular fractions were identified and gated by forward scatter using a linear axis scale,  and Rab5-GFP+C9-AlexaFluor 647+ subcellular fractions representing MAC+Rab5+ vesicles were sorted using the gating strategies indicated. Sorted vesicles were concentrated to a volume of 500L using Amicon filter centrifugation (EMD Millipore) using a 5000MW cut-off prior to proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
The proteomics datasets have been publicly deposited in the Yale Protein Expression Database (https://medicine.yale.edu/keck/proteomics/yped/).

### Publication Abstract
Complement promotes vascular inflammation in transplant organ rejection and connective tissue diseases. Here we identify ZFYVE21 as a complement-induced Rab5 effector that induces non-canonical NF-&#x3ba;B in endothelial cells (EC). In response to membrane attack complexes (MAC), ZFYVE21 is post-translationally stabilized on MAC+Rab5+ endosomes in a Rab5- and PI(3)P-dependent manner. ZFYVE21 promotes SMURF2-mediated polyubiquitinylation and proteasome-dependent degradation of endosome-associated PTEN to induce vesicular enrichment of PI(3,4,5)P3 and sequential recruitment of activated Akt and NF-&#x3ba;B-inducing kinase (NIK). Pharmacologic alteration of cellular phosphoinositide content with miltefosine reduces ZFYVE21 induction, EC activation, and allograft vasculopathy in a humanized mouse model. ZFYVE21 induction distinctly occurs in response to MAC and is detected in human renal and synovial tissues. Our data identifies ZFYVE21 as a Rab5 effector, defines a Rab5-ZFYVE21-SMURF2-pAkt axis by which it mediates EC activation, and demonstrates a role for this pathway in complement-mediated conditions.

### Keywords
Rab5 mac

### Affiliations
Yale University
Cardiovascular department, Yale University

### Submitter
Caodi Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Dan Jane-wit
Cardiovascular department, Yale University


