### Accession
PXD028582

### Title
Tyrosine Phosphorylation of NLRP3 by Src Family Protein Tyrosine Kinase Lyn Suppresses NLRP3 Inflammasome Activation

### Description
The NLRP3 inflammasome is a multi-protein complex that triggers the activation of the inflammatory protein caspase-1 and the maturation of the cytokine IL-1 in response to microbes and other danger signals in host cells. Here, we sought a deeper understanding of how the NLRP3 inflammasome is regulated. We found that inflammasome activation induced the Src family kinase Lyn to phosphorylate NLRP3 at Tyr918, and that this phosphorylation of NLRP3 correlated with a subsequent increase in its ubiquitination, which facilitated its proteasome-mediated degradation. NLRP3 tyrosine phosphorylation and ubiquitination was abrogated in Lyn-deficient macrophages, which produced increased amounts of IL-1. Furthermore, mice lacking Lyn were highly susceptible to LPS-induced septic shock in an NLRP3-dependent manner. Our data demonstrate that Lyn-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of NLRP3 is a prerequisite for its ubiquitination, thus dampening NLRP3 inflammasome activity.

### Sample Protocol
Home-made Suspension Trapping filters were fashioned from 8 x 3mm punches of Munktell quartz discs (MK 360), stacked above two layers of C18 resin (Empore C18, 3M) in a 200uL pipet tip further processing followed the description of A. Zougman, et al. Proteomics 14, 1006 (2014).    Full MS1 profile data were acquired on a Q-Exactive hf (Thermo Fisher) from 380 to 1700 m/z at a resolution of 60,000  (39).  The 10 most abundant precursors were selected with a mass window of 2 Th, and subjected to Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) at 37% activation efficiency.  A 30 second dynamic exclusion improved selection of lower abundant ions. Fragmentation data was acquired in centroid at 30,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Initial searches were performed with both Proteome Discoverer 2.4 and Byonic search engines (Protein Metrics ver. 2.8.2) against the 2/06/2016 UniprotKB and reverted entry database for mouse.  With 5 and 10 ppm tolerance for precursor and fragments respectively, searches assume fixed Cys modifications of 57 Da, as well as variable mods of 16 (M), 80 (S, T) and 114 (K) Th.  Final discriminant scores were determined by Scaffold Q + S ver. 4.7 (Proteome Software) at 1.2% False Discovery Rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
In response to microbes and other danger signals, the NLRP3 inflammasome in immune cells triggers the activation of the protease caspase-1, which mediates the maturation of the inflammatory cytokine IL-1&#x3b2;. Here, we investigated how the NLRP3 inflammasome is regulated. We found that its activation in primary mouse macrophages induced the Src family kinase Lyn to phosphorylate NLRP3 at Tyr<sup>918</sup>, which correlated with a subsequent increase in its ubiquitination that facilitated its proteasome-mediated degradation. NLRP3 tyrosine phosphorylation and ubiquitination was abrogated in Lyn-deficient macrophages, which produced increased amounts of IL-1&#x3b2;. Furthermore, mice lacking Lyn were more susceptible to LPS-induced septic shock in an NLRP3-dependent manner. Our data demonstrate that Lyn-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation is a prerequisite for the ubiquitination that dampens NLRP3 inflammasome activity.

### Keywords
Murine nlrp3 inflammasome, Lyn tryosine kinase

### Affiliations
Professor of Pathology Endowed Chair in Immunology Research University of Iowa Health Care Distinguished Scholar Department of Pathology The University of Iowa  Tel: 319-335-1121 (O)/319-335-0990 (Lab)
University of Iowa, COM, Iowa City, IA 52241

### Submitter
robert Pope

### Lab Head
Dr Jian Zhang, M.D.
Professor of Pathology Endowed Chair in Immunology Research University of Iowa Health Care Distinguished Scholar Department of Pathology The University of Iowa  Tel: 319-335-1121 (O)/319-335-0990 (Lab)


