### Accession
PXD014039

### Title
TMT-based Study of Gene Expression Changes in Escherichia coli in Presence of Plasmids

### Description
The plasmids introduced into the E. coli cells affect the expression of chromosomal genes. Therefore we aimed at comparing the protein expression profiles of a strain not containing any plasmid with strains that do carry plasmids.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were homogenized using a FastPrep®-24 instrument (Matrix B (Blue), MP Biomedicals, OH, USA) using 4 repeated 40 seconds cycles at 6.5 m/s in 120 µl of the buffer containing 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Samples were centrifuged at 13 000 rpm for 10 min and the supernatants were transferred to clean tubes. The lysis tubes were washed with 80 µl of the lysis buffer, centrifuged at 13 000 rpm for 10 min, the supernatants were combined with the corresponding lysates from the previous step. Protein concentration in the combined lysates was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) and the Benchmark™ Plus microplate reader (BIO-RAD) with bovine serum albumin (BSA) solutions as standards. Aliquots containing 30 µg of total protein were taken from each sample and reduced at 56°C for 30 min in the lysis buffer with DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) at 100 mM final concentration and incubated. The reduced samples were processed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski JR et. al. Nat Methods. 2009 May;6(5):359-62). In short, reduced samples were diluted to 500 µl by addition of 8M urea, transferred onto Nanosep 10k Omega filters (Pall Life Sciences) and washed 2 times with 200 µl of 8M urea. Alkylation of the cysteine residues was performed using 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) diluted in digestion buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) for 30 min at room temperature and the filters were then repeatedly washed with digestion buffer. Trypsin (Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in digestion buffer was added in a ratio of 1:100 relative to total protein mass and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 3h; another portion of trypsin (1:100) was added and incubated overnight. The peptides were collected by centrifugation and labelled using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The labeled samples were combined, pooled samples were concentrated using vacuum centrifugation and SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and centrifugation.  The combined TMT-labeled sample was fractionated into 40 primary fractions by basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a linear gradient from 3% to 40% solvent B over 17 min followed by an increase to 100% B over 5 min. Solvent A was 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 and solvent B was 90% acetonitrile, 10% 10 mM ammonium formate at pH 10.00. The primary fractions were concatenated into final 20 fractions (1+21, 2+22, … 20+40), evaporated and reconstituted in 15μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Identification and relative quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The reference E. coli K12 database was downloaded from Uniprot (October 2017) and supplemented with the plasmid sequences and common proteomic contaminants (4599 sequences in total). The database search was performed using the Mascot search engine v. 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) with MS peptide tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with 1 missed cleavage; methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification, cysteine methylthiolation, TMT-6 on lysine and peptide N-termini were set as fixed modifications. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%. Quantification was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with 3 mmu mass tolerance, and the TMT reporter intensity values for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 on the total peptide amount. Only the unique identified peptides were taken into account for the relative quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmid, Escherichia coli, Tandem mass tag, Tmt

### Affiliations
Senior lecturer at Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University; BMC, Box 582, Husargatan 3, 751 23 Uppsala, Sweden
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Linus Sandegren
Senior lecturer at Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University; BMC, Box 582, Husargatan 3, 751 23 Uppsala, Sweden


