### Accession
PXD020639

### Title
The Ig-like domain of Punctin/MADD-4 is the primary determinant for interaction with the ectodomain of neuroligin NLG-1

### Description
Punctin/MADD-4, a member of the ADAMTSL extracellular matrix protein family, was identified as an anterograde synaptic organizer in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. At GABAergic neuromuscular junctions, the short isoform MADD-4B binds the ectodomain of neuroligin NLG-1, itself a postsynaptic organizer of inhibitory synapses. To identify the molecular bases of their partnership, we generated recombinant forms of the two proteins and carried out a comprehensive biochemical and biophysical study of their interaction, complemented by an in vivo localisation study. We show that spontaneous proteolysis of MADD-4B first generates a shorter N-MADD-4B form, which comprises four thrombospondin (TSP) and one Ig-like domains and binds NLG-1. A second processing event eliminates the C-terminal Ig-like domain along with the ability of N-MADD-4B to bind NLG-1. These data identify the Ig-like domain as the primary determinant for N-MADD-4B interaction with NLG-1 in vitro. We further demonstrate in vivo that this Ig-like domain is essential for efficient recruitment of GABAA receptors at GABAergic synapses in C. elegans. The interaction of N-MADD-4B with NLG-1 is also disrupted by heparin, used as a surrogate for the extracellular matrix component, heparan sulphate, and whose high-affinity binding to the Ig-like domain may proceed from surface charge complementarity, as suggested by homology 3D modelling. These data point to N-MADD-4B processing and cell-surface proteoglycan binding as two possible mechanisms that can regulate the interaction between MADD-4B and NLG-1 at GABAergic synapses.

### Sample Protocol
Protein identity in the SDS-PAGE bands was confirmed by peptide mass fingerprinting using Orbitrap LC-MS/MS. Briefly, gel bands were digested by trypsin using a slightly modified Shevchenko protocol. Extracted and dried peptides were analysed with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 15 cm x 75 µm I.D, 100 Å, 2µm, Dionex) operated at 300 nL/min., equilibrated in 4% of solvent B ((CH3CN  / 0.1% FA (80:20 v/v) and eluted using a linear gradient of 4-55% B in A in 30 min.For peptide ionisation in the EASY-Spray source, the spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 275°C. The spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. MS spectra were acquired in the 300-1700 m/z range at a resolution of 30 000 measured at 400 m/z. For internal mass calibration, the 445.12 m/z ion was used as lock mass. The 10 most abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap to insure both maximum sensitivity and a maximum amount of MS/MS data. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, exclusion list size of 500 MS runs and exclusion duration of 30 s. The monoisotopic masses of intact N-MADD-4 and its processing fragments were determined by MALDI-TOF MS on a Ultraflex III spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Wissembourg, France)operated in the linear mode, using a maximum accelerating potential of 25 kV and a 20 000-80 000 m/z range (LP_66kDa Method). The laser frequency was fixed to 100 Hz and ca. 1000 shots per sample were cumulated. Four external standards (Protein Calibration Standard II, Bruker Daltonics) were used to calibrate each spectrum to a mass accuracy within 100 ppm. Peak picking was performed using the FlexAnalysis 3.0 software with an analysis method adapted to the protein size adapted   analysis method. Parameters used were : centroid peak detection algorithm, S/N threshold fixed to 5 and a quality factor threshold of 30. Mean masses were calculated from the measured [M+H]+ and [M+2H]2+ values.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were searched using SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a homemade database comprising 20 150 human, and  4306 E. coli protein sequences and the N-MADD-4B sequence.   To detect contaminants, an additional search against the Swiss-Prot database (https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot); (version 2014.02; 20 284 entries), supplemented with a set of 245 frequently observed contaminants (e.g., human keratin)  , was performed using MASCOT (http://www.matrixscience.com). Searches used the following parameters: (i) trypsin; cleavage before Pro and one miscleavage allowed; (ii) mass tolerance of 6 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.8 ppm for fragment ions from MS/MS; (iii) Cys carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) as a fixed modification; Met oxidation (+15.99491 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) as variable modifications; (iv) minimum peptide length of five residues. Only high-score peptides were selected. Proteins were identified with a FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Punctin/MADD-4, a member of the ADAMTSL extracellular matrix protein family, was identified as an anterograde synaptic organizer in the nematode <i>Caenorhabditis elegans.</i> At GABAergic neuromuscular junctions, the short isoform MADD-4B binds the ectodomain of neuroligin NLG-1, itself a postsynaptic organizer of inhibitory synapses. To identify the molecular bases of their partnership, we generated recombinant forms of the two proteins and carried out a comprehensive biochemical and biophysical study of their interaction, complemented by an <i>in vivo</i> localization study. We show that spontaneous proteolysis of MADD-4B first generates a shorter N-MADD-4B form, which comprises four thrombospondin (TSP) domains and one Ig-like domain and binds NLG-1. A second processing event eliminates the C-terminal Ig-like domain along with the ability of N-MADD-4B to bind NLG-1. These data identify the Ig-like domain as the primary determinant for N-MADD-4B interaction with NLG-1 <i>in vitro</i> We further demonstrate <i>in vivo</i> that this Ig-like domain is essential, albeit not sufficient <i>per se</i>, for efficient recruitment of GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors at GABAergic synapses in <i>C. elegans</i> The interaction of N-MADD-4B with NLG-1 is also disrupted by heparin, used as a surrogate for the extracellular matrix component, heparan sulfate. High-affinity binding of heparin/heparan sulfate to the Ig-like domain may proceed from surface charge complementarity, as suggested by homology three-dimensional modeling. These data point to N-MADD-4B processing and cell-surface proteoglycan binding as two possible mechanisms to regulate the interaction between MADD-4B and NLG-1 at GABAergic synapses.

### Keywords
Gaba receptor, Synapse, Protein-protein interaction, Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, Punctin/madd-4, Neuroligin, Adamts-like, Muscle, Neuromuscular junction, Postsynaptic membrane

### Affiliations
INSERM UMR1068
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix-Marseille Université UM105,Institut Paoli-Calmettes 13273 MARSEILLE FRANCE

### Submitter
Patrick FOURQUET

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Paul Borg
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix-Marseille Université UM105,Institut Paoli-Calmettes 13273 MARSEILLE FRANCE


