### Accession
PXD033047

### Title
Dissecting the chloroplast proteome of potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) and its comparison with the tuber amyloplast proteome

### Description
Chloroplast, the energy organelle unique to plants and green algae, performs a wide range of functions including photosynthesis and biosynthesis of metabolites. However, as the most important tuber crop worldwide, the potato (Solanum tuberosum) chloroplast proteome has not been explored. Here, we use Percoll density gradient centrifugation to isolate intact chloroplasts from leaves of potato cultivar E3 and establish a reference proteome map of potato chloroplast by bottom-up proteomics. A total of 1834 non-redundant proteins, including 51 proteins encoded by the chloroplast genome, were identified in the chloroplast proteome. Extensive sequence-based localization prediction revealed over 62% of proteins to be chloroplast resident by at least one algorithm. A total of 16 proteins were selected for evaluating the prediction result by transient fluorescence assay and confirmed that 14 of them were distributed on distinct internal compartments of the chloroplast. In addition, 136 phosphorylation sites were identified in 61 proteins encoded by chloroplast proteome. Furthermore, by a comparative analysis between chloroplast and previously reported amyloplast proteomes, we reconstruct the starch metabolic pathways in the two different types of plastids. Altogether, our results establish a comprehensive proteome map with post-translationally modified sites of potato chloroplast, which would provide the theoretical principle for the research of photosynthesis pathway and starch metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
The isolation method of Percoll gradient centrifugation was based on the method of (Kubis et al., 2008) with some modifications. During the isolation procedure, the plant materials were kept on the ice and all the reagents were pre-cooled. Chloroplast proteins were extracted and digested by the method of TCA/Acetone extraction (Li et al., 2021) with some modifications. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Easy nLC1200 nano-flow UPLC. Peptides (500ng of each sample) were injected into the Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (nanoViper C18, 100 µm×2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and separated by the Acclaim Pep Map RSLC analytical column (nanoViper C18, 50 µm×15 cm, Thermo Scientific) set at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. The solvent gradients were set as a linear gradient of 8~38% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile contains 0.1% formic acid) over 102min through 120min run time. The sample was atomized using the nanoESI source. The data-dependent acquisition (Top 20) was carried out using MS survey scans in 350~1700 m/z range with 70,000 mass resolution. For subsequent MS/MS analysis, the resolution was set to 17,500 and the isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z. The normalized collision energy was 27 eV. Peptides with charge 2~7 were selected.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer software version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The potato nuclear-encoded protein database and the potato chloroplast-encoded protein database were downloaded from PGSC and NCBI, respectively. The MS/MS data were searched against the database using SEQUEST algorithm. The search parameters included phosphorylation at threonine, serine, and lysine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications; 2 missed cleavages allowed. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for MS data and 0.05 Da for MS/MS. The proteins were identified at a 95% confidence level and the false discovery rate was set to 5%.

### Publication Abstract
The chloroplast, the energy organelle unique to plants and green algae, performs many functions, including photosynthesis and biosynthesis of metabolites. However, as the most critical tuber crop worldwide, the chloroplast proteome of potato (<i>Solanum tuberosum</i>) has not been explored. Here, we use Percoll density gradient centrifugation to isolate intact chloroplasts from leaves of potato cultivar E3 and establish a reference proteome map of potato chloroplast by bottom-up proteomics. A total of 1834 non-redundant proteins were identified in the chloroplast proteome, including 51 proteins encoded by the chloroplast genome. Extensive sequence-based localization prediction revealed over 62% of proteins to be chloroplast resident by at least one algorithm. Sixteen proteins were selected to evaluate the prediction result by transient fluorescence assay, which confirmed that 14 were distributed in distinct internal compartments of the chloroplast. In addition, we identified 136 phosphorylation sites in 61 proteins encoded by chloroplast proteome. Furthermore, we reconstruct the snapshots along starch metabolic pathways in the two different types of plastids by a comparative analysis between chloroplast and previously reported amyloplast proteomes. Altogether, our results establish a comprehensive proteome map with post-translationally modified sites of potato chloroplast, which would provide the theoretical principle for the research of the photosynthesis pathway and starch metabolism.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Leaf, Poatao, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Shihezi University
Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology, MOE, and Key Laboratory of Potato Biology and Biotechnology, MARA, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China

### Submitter
Liu Shengxuan

### Lab Head
Dr Song Botao
Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology, MOE, and Key Laboratory of Potato Biology and Biotechnology, MARA, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China


