### Accession
PXD036106

### Title
Extended DNA threading through a dual-engine motor module in the activating signal co-integrator complex

### Description
Activating signal co-integrator complex (ASCC) supports diverse genome maintenance and gene expression processes. Its ASCC3 subunit is an unconventional nucleic acid helicase, harboring tandem Ski2-like NTPase/helicase cassettes crucial for ASCC functions. Presently, the molecular mechanisms underlying ASCC3 helicase activity and regulation remain unresolved. Here, we present cryogenic electron microscopy, DNA-protein cross-linking/mass spectrometry as well as in vitro and cellular functional analyses of the ASCC3-ASC1/TRIP4 sub-module of ASCC. Unlike the related spliceosomal SNRNP200 RNA helicase, ASCC3 can thread substrates through both helicase cassettes. ASC1 docks on ASCC3 via a zinc finger domain and stimulates the helicase by positioning a C-terminal ASC1-homology domain next to the C-terminal helicase cassette of ASCC3, likely assisting the DNA exit. ASC1 binds ASCC3 mutually exclusively with the dealkylase, ALKBH3, directing ASCC for specific ASCC-dependent processes. Our findings define ASCC3-ASC1/TRIP4 as a tunable motor module of ASCC that encompasses two cooperating ATPase/helicase units functionally expanded by ASC1/TRIP4.

### Sample Protocol
For identifying cross-linked peptides and residues, 6.7 nM unlabeled T48 ssDNA were cross-linked to 200 nM ASCC3HR or ASCC3HR-ASC1 in 48 x 10 µl reactions.  The samples were incubated in a 72-well microbatch plate (Greiner) in 50 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.5, 80 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM DTT on ice for 5 min, then the samples were exposed to 254 nm UV irradiation for 10 min (Ultra-violet cross-linker, Amersham Life Science).  Cross-linked samples were pooled and ethanol precipitated. Two sets of experiments were performed. The protein pellets were dissolved in 50 µl 4M urea and diluted to 1M Urea with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5. In order to digest the DNA, 1 µl Universal nuclease (Pierce) and 1 µl Nuclease P1 (New England Biolabs) were added to the samples, followed by 3-hour incubation at 37 °C. Protein digestion was performed with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C. The samples were acidified with formic acid (FA) to an end concentration of 0.1 % (v/v) and acetonitrile (ACN) was added to 5 % (v/v) end concentration. Non cross-linked nucleotides were depleted by C18 reversed-phase chromatography with Harvard Apparatus MicroSpin columns. Elution was achieved by successive application of 50 % and 80 % (v/v) ACN. Cross-linked peptides were enriched over linear peptides by TiO2 self-packed tip columns with 5% Glycerol (v/v) as a competitor as previously described. The samples were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 10/15 ul (first/second set of experiments) 2 % (v/v) ACN, 0.05 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and 7/8 ul were used for LC-MS analysis.  Chromatographic separation was achieved with Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled with C18 column packed in-house (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9/3 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Flow rate was set to 300 nl/min and 44 min linear gradient was formed with mobile phase A (0.1% v/v FA) and B (80% ACN, 0.08% FA) from 10% / 8% to 45% mobile phase B. Data acquisition of eluting peptides was performed with Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Resolution for survey scans was set to 120 000, maximum injection time to 60 ms, automatic gain control target to 100% / 250% and dynamic exclusion to 9s. Analytes, selected for fragmentation, were isolated with 1.6 m/z window and fragmented with normalized collision energy of 28. MS/MS spectra were acquired with resolution of 30 000, maximum injection time of 120 ms and automatic gain control target of 100%.

### Data Protocol
Cross-link data analysis of resulting .raw files was performed with the OpenNuXL node of OpenMS (version 3.0.0). Default general settings were used and the preset DNA-UV Extended was selected. The sequences of the proteins in the sample were provided as a database.  The maximum length of nucleotide adducts was set to 3 and poly(dT) was used as sequence. Resulting .idxml files were used for annotation and spectra were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein-dna cross-linking

### Affiliations
MPIbpc
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group  University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics

### Submitter
Aleksandar Chernev

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group  University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics


