### Accession
PXD040501

### Title
LeishIF3d is a non-canonical cap-binding protein specific for Leishmania

### Description
Translation of most cellular mRNAs in eukaryotes proceeds through a cap-dependent pathway, whereby the cap-binding complex, eIF4F, anchors the pre-initiation complex at the 5’ end of mRNAs driving translation initiation. The genome of Leishmania encodes a large repertoire of cap-binding complexes that fulfill a variety of functions possibly involved in survival along the life cycle. However, most of these complexes function in the promastigote life form that resides in the sand fly vector and lose their activity in amastigotes, the mammalian life form. Here we examined the possibility that LeishIF3d drives translation in Leishmania using alternative pathways. We describe a non-canonical cap-binding activity of LeishIF3d and examine its potential role in driving translation. LeishIF3d is required for translation, as reducing its expression by a homozygous deletion reduces the translation activity of the LeishIF3d(+/-) mutant cells. Proteomic analysis of the mutant cells highlights the reduced expression of flagellar and cytoskeletal proteins, as reflected in the morphological changes observed in the mutant cells. Targeted mutations in two predicted alpha helices diminish the cap-binding activity of LeishIF3d. Overall, LeishIF3d could serve as a driving force for alternative translation pathways, although it does not seem to offer an alternative pathway for translation in amastigotes.

### Sample Protocol
A buffer of 8.5M Urea, 10mM DTT,and 400mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the samples.The samples were reduced (60ºC for 30 min), modified with 40mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (room temperature for 30 min in the dark) and digested in 1.5M Urea, 66mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin, overnight at 37oC. The tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 tips (Homemade stage tips) dried, and re-suspended in 0.1% Formic acid. The resulting peptides were analyzed by LCMS/MS using a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) fitted with a capillary HPLC (Dionex). The peptides were loaded onto a homemade capillary column (30cm, 75-micron ID) packed with Reprosil C18-Aqua (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). The peptides were eluted at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min with 3 steps of acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% formic acid in water: a linear 60 minutes gradient of 5 to 28%, followed by 15 minutes gradient of 28 to 95% and 25minutes at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water. Mass spectrometry was performed in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan (m/z 300–1800)followed by High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the full MS scan. A dynamic exclusion list was enabled with exclusion duration of 20 s

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using MaxQuant version 2.1.1.0 vs. the Leishmaia Mexicana proteome from the Tritryp database, and against common contaminants with mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the precursor masses and 0.05 amu for the fragment ions. Oxidation on methionine and Acetyl on protein N-term were accepted as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl on cysteine was accepted as static modification on the denatured samples. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed. Peptide- and protein level false discovery rates (FDRs) were filtered to 1% using the target-decoy strategy. Protein table was filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database and contaminants. The data was quantified by using the same software, based on extracted ion currents (XICs) of each peptide. The intensity of each protein is calculated as the sum of the abundances of all the identified unique and razor peptides

### Publication Abstract
Translation of most cellular mRNAs in eukaryotes proceeds through a cap-dependent pathway, whereby the cap-binding complex, eIF4F, anchors the pre-initiation complex at the 5' end of mRNAs driving translation initiation. The genome of <i>Leishmania</i> encodes a large repertoire of cap-binding complexes that fulfill a variety of functions possibly involved in survival along the life cycle. However, most of these complexes function in the promastigote life form that resides in the sand fly vector and decrease their activity in amastigotes, the mammalian life form. Here we examined the possibility that LeishIF3d drives translation in <i>Leishmania</i> using alternative pathways. We describe a non-canonical cap-binding activity of LeishIF3d and examine its potential role in driving translation. LeishIF3d is required for translation, as reducing its expression by a hemizygous deletion reduces the translation activity of the LeishIF3d(+/-) mutant cells. Proteomic analysis of the mutant cells highlights the reduced expression of flagellar and cytoskeletal proteins, as reflected in the morphological changes observed in the mutant cells. Targeted mutations in two predicted alpha helices diminish the cap-binding activity of LeishIF3d. Overall, LeishIF3d could serve as a driving force for alternative translation pathways, although it does not seem to offer an alternative pathway for translation in amastigotes.

### Keywords
Leishmania, If3d

### Affiliations
Technion
1Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev Beer Sheva, 84105  Israel

### Submitter
Keren Bendalak

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Shapira
1Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev Beer Sheva, 84105  Israel


