### Accession
PXD044533

### Title
Molecular characterisation of the Atlantic salmon gill epithelial cell line ASG-10

### Description
Fish gills are not only the respiratory organ, but also essential for ion-regulation, acid-base control, detoxification, waste excretion and host defense. Multifactorial gill diseases are common in farmed Atlantic salmon, and still poorly understood. Understanding gill pathophysiology is of paramount importance, but the sacrifice of large numbers of experimental animals for this purpose should be avoided. Therefore, in vitro models, such as cell lines, are urgently required to replace fish trials. An Atlantic salmon gill epithelial cell line, ASG-10, was established at the Norwegian Veterinary institute in 2018. This cell line forms a monolayer expressing cytokeratin, e-cadherin and desmosomes, hallmarks of a functional epithelial barrier. To determine the value of ASG-10 for comparative studies of gill functions, the characterization of ASG-10 was taken one step further by performing functional assays and comparing the cell proteome and transcriptome with those of gills from juvenile freshwater Atlantic salmon. The ASG-10 cell line appear to be a homogenous cell line consisting of epithelial cells, which express tight junction proteins. We demonstrated that ASG-10 forms a barrier,  both alone and in co-culture with the Atlantic salmon gill fibroblast cell line ASG- 13. ASG-10 cells can phagocytose and express several ATP-binding cassette  transport proteins. Additionally, ASG-10 expresses genes involved in biotransformation of xenobiotics and immune responses. Taken together, this study provides an overview of functions that can be studied using ASG-10, which will be an important contribution to in vitro gill epithelial research of Atlantic salmon.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 5 Atlantic salmon parr (Fanad strain) aged 10 months were taken from freshwater tanks where they had been kept under low-light conditions. The median fish weight was 40.5 g (range: 33.4 g). The median fish length was 14.5 cm (range: 3.5 cm). The fish were euthanized with an overdose of Tricaine-methanesulfonate (Merck, Taufkirchen, Germany). Prior to gill excision, the gills were perfused by injection of sterile saline solution through the heart. All 8 gills from each fish were excised and the gill arch was removed using a sterile scalpel. Gills from the left side of the fish were stored in 1 mL of RNA later (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA USA) followed by storage at −80°  C until required for further processing. Gills from the right side of the fish were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, followed by storage at −80°C until required for further processing. ASG-10 cells were seeded in 75 cm2 cell culture flasks (132 000/cm2  ). Upon confluence, the cells were washed twice in ice-cold PBS and scraped with a cell scraper in 1 ml ice-cold PBS. The samples were centrifuged (600 x g, 4°C, 5 min) and the PBS removed. The samples were then snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until required for further processing. Total protein was extracted and prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis from samples from perfused juvenile salmon gills (n = 5), and from confluent ASG-10 cultures (n = 5). Sample preparation was carried out using the PreOmics iST kit (PreOmics, Martinsried, Germany) according to the Tissue/FFPE sample preparation protocol. Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap (Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with a reversed-phase NanoLC UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the Orbitrap Q-Exactive was processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 for identification of proteins (Cox and Mann, 2008). To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were matched to the protein database of ENSEMBL release 99 (Salmo salar). Proteins were quantified using the LFQ algorithm in MaxQuant using default settings (Cox et al., 2014). It should be noted that a fold-change cut- off was not applied to the proteomic data.

### Publication Abstract
Fish gills are not only the respiratory organ, but also essential for ion-regulation, acid-base control, detoxification, waste excretion and host defense. Multifactorial gill diseases are common in farmed Atlantic salmon, and still poorly understood. Understanding gill pathophysiology is of paramount importance, but the sacrifice of large numbers of experimental animals for this purpose should be avoided. Therefore, <i>in vitro</i> models, such as cell lines, are urgently required to replace fish trials. An Atlantic salmon gill epithelial cell line, ASG-10, was established at the Norwegian Veterinary institute in 2018. This cell line forms a monolayer expressing cytokeratin, e-cadherin and desmosomes, hallmarks of a functional epithelial barrier. To determine the value of ASG-10 for comparative studies of gill functions, the characterization of ASG-10 was taken one step further by performing functional assays and comparing the cell proteome and transcriptome with those of gills from juvenile freshwater Atlantic salmon. The ASG-10 cell line appear to be a homogenous cell line consisting of epithelial cells, which express tight junction proteins. We demonstrated that ASG-10 forms a barrier, both alone and in co-culture with the Atlantic salmon gill fibroblast cell line ASG-13. ASG-10 cells can phagocytose and express several ATP-binding cassette transport proteins. Additionally, ASG-10 expresses genes involved in biotransformation of xenobiotics and immune responses. Taken together, this study provides an overview of functions that can be studied using ASG-10, which will be an important contribution to <i>in vitro</i> gill epithelial research of Atlantic salmon.

### Keywords
Salmon cell line, Transcriptome, Proteome, Gill cell line

### Affiliations
Atlantic Technological University
Marine and Freshwater Research Centre Atlantic Technological University, Galway City Campus Ireland

### Submitter
Orla Slattery

### Lab Head
Dr Orla Slattery
Marine and Freshwater Research Centre Atlantic Technological University, Galway City Campus Ireland


