### Accession
PXD021437

### Title
Control of synaptic vesicle release probability via VAMP4 targeting to endolysosomes

### Description
The probability of synaptic vesicle (SV) fusion in response to an action potential, termed vesicular release probability (Pr), is a stochastic but tightly regulated process. SNARE proteins are the molecular executors of SV fusion and therefore, key modulators of Pr. The non-canonical SNARE VAMP4 is a cargo for activity-dependent bulk endocytosis (ADBE), a major SV retrieval mode operating during intense neuronal activity. Using optical imaging in primary neuronal cultures and slice electrophysiology from wild-type and VAMP4 knockout mice, we reveal that modulation of VAMP4 copy number on SVs is an important mechanism to regulate Pr. The control of VAMP4 copy number is determined by its clearance from axons via the endolysosomal system after its retrieval by ADBE. This activity-dependent regulatory mechanism enables synapses to 1) adapt their Pr dynamically to changing input and 2) couple regulation of synaptic strength to neuronal proteostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosome mouse samples(WT and VAMP-KO),were subjected to lysis with Urea lysis buffer, followed by S-trap based protein digestion using sequencing grade trypsin after reduction and alkylation. LC-MS Methods: The peptides were reconstituted in 20µL of 0.1% formic acid, vortexed, sonicated and 1.5 µL of each sample was injected on the mass spectrometer. Peptides were analysed by nanoflow-LC-MS/MS using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate RSLC 3000 system. Samples were injected on a 100 μm ID × 5mm trap (Thermo Trap Cartridge 5mm) and separated on a 75 μm × 50 cm nano LC column (EASY-Spray LC Columns #ES803). All solvents used were HPLC or LC-MS Grade (Millipore). Peptides were loaded for 5 minutes at 10 μL/min using 0.1% FA (Formic acid), 2% acetonitrile in water. The column was conditioned using 100% Buffer A (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in water) and the separation was performed on a linear gradient from 0 to 35% Buffer B (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO, 16.9% water and 80% acetonitrile), over 120 minutes at 300 nL/min. The column was then washed with 90% Buffer B for 5 minutes and equilibrated 10 minutes with 100% Buffer A in preparation for the next analysis. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 400 to m/z 1600 at resolution 120000 at m/z 200, with a target AGC of 4E5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS/MS scans were acquired in IonTrap mode using a fixed HCD (High energy Collision Dissociation) energy of 30% and resolution 15000 using a Top 20 method, with a target AGC of 2E5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The MS/MS triggering threshold was set at 5E3 and the dynamic exclusion of previously acquired precursor was enabled for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptide Identification was carried out by submitting the raw data to MaxQuant software (version 1.6.6.0). MS/MS spectra were searched against Uniprot SwissProt database including Isoforms (updated January 2019) using a false discovery rate of 1%. The maximum of missed cleavage was set to 2 using Trypsin/P enzyme. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and acetylation (Protein N term), oxidation (M), deamination (NQ) was set as variable modifications. Label-free Quantification (LFQ) was performed where Match between runs (MBR) was used with match window time (0.7) and alignment time window (20min).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endocytosis, Synaptic plasticity, Lysosome, Neurotransmitter, Synaptic vesicle, Release probability, Endosome, Vamp4

### Affiliations
Professor of Proteomics at the Faculty for Medical Sciences at Newcastle University.
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Matthias Trost
Professor of Proteomics at the Faculty for Medical Sciences at Newcastle University.


