### Accession
PXD040886

### Title
Protein networks associated with native metabotropic glutamate 1 receptors (mGlu1) in the mouse cerebellum.

### Description
To identify novel mGlu1-associated protein complexes in the mouse cerebellum, we used an unbiased tissue-specific proteomic approach, namely co-immunoprecipitation followed by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse cerebella were dissected, pooled and homogenized. Lysates were centrifuged for 10 min at 1,000 x g, 4 °C to remove unbroken cells and tissue debris. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford protein assay. The supernatant was incubated with primary antibodies. Samples were loaded on a precast gel, stained with Coomassie, protein bands were excised from gel and digested with trypsin for LC-MS analysis. The peptides were separated on a homemade fritless fused-silica microcapillary column (75 µm i.d. x 280 µm o.d. x 10 cm length) packed with 3 µm reversed-phase C18 material (Reprosil). The LTQ Orbitrp XL mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent mode. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired form 300 to 1800 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 with a maximum injection time (IT) of 20 ms

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific) with search engine Sequest. The raw files were searched against the Mus musculus database (167,940 entries) extracted from the NCBInr. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide identifications were filtered at a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
The metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 (mGlu<sub>1</sub>) plays a pivotal role in synaptic transmission and neuronal plasticity. Despite the fact that several interacting proteins involved in the mGlu<sub>1</sub> subcellular trafficking and intracellular transduction mechanisms have been identified, the protein network associated with this receptor in specific brain areas remains largely unknown. To identify novel mGlu<sub>1</sub>-associated protein complexes in the mouse cerebellum, we used an unbiased tissue-specific proteomic approach, namely co-immunoprecipitation followed by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Many well-known protein complexes as well as novel interactors were identified, including G-proteins, Homer, &#x3b4;2 glutamate receptor, 14-3-3 proteins, and Na/K-ATPases. A novel putative interactor, KCTD12, was further investigated. Reverse co-immunoprecipitation with anti-KCTD12 antibodies revealed mGlu<sub>1</sub> in wild-type but not in KCTD12-knock-out homogenates. Freeze-fracture replica immunogold labeling co-localization experiments showed that KCTD12 and mGlu<sub>1</sub> are present in the same nanodomain in Purkinje cell spines, although at a distance that suggests that this interaction is mediated through interposed proteins. Consistently, mGlu<sub>1</sub> could not be co-immunoprecipitated with KCTD12 from a recombinant mammalian cell line co-expressing the two proteins. The possibility that this interaction was mediated via GABA<sub>B</sub> receptors was excluded by showing that mGlu<sub>1</sub> and KCTD12 still co-immunoprecipitated from GABA<sub>B</sub> receptor knock-out tissue. In conclusion, this study identifies tissue-specific mGlu<sub>1</sub>-associated protein clusters including KCTD12 at Purkinje cell synapses.

### Keywords
Glutamate receptors; cerebellum; kctd12; immunoprecipitation; proteomics

### Affiliations
Medical University Innsbruck
Institute of Medical Biocemistry, Protein Core Facility, Medical Univeristy of Innsbruck

### Submitter
Leopold Kremser

### Lab Head
Dr Leopold Kremser
Institute of Medical Biocemistry, Protein Core Facility, Medical Univeristy of Innsbruck


