### Accession
PXD021042

### Title
Comparative analysis of maca (Lepidium meyenii) proteome profiles reveals insights into response mechanisms of herbal plants to high-temperature stress

### Description
High-temperature stress (HTS) is one of the main environmental stresses that limit plant growth and crop production in agricultural systems. Maca (Lepidium meyenii) is an important high-altitude herbaceous plant adapted to a wide range of environmental stimuli such as cold, strong wind and UV-B exposure. However, it is an extremely HTS-sensitive plant species. Thus far, there is limited information about gene/protein regulation and signaling pathways related to the heat stress responses in maca. In this study, proteome profiles of maca seedlings exposed to HTS for 12 h were investigated using a tandem mass tag (TMT)-based proteomic approach. In total, 6,966 proteins were identified, of which 300 showed significant alterations in expression following HTS. Bioinformatics analyses indicated that protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum was the most significantly up-regulated metabolic pathway following HTS. Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis showed that the expression levels of 19 genes encoding proteins mapped to this pathway were significantly up-regulated under HTS. These results show that protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum may play a crucial role in the responses of maca to HTS. Our proteomic data can be a good resource for functional proteomics of maca and our results may provide useful insights into the molecular response mechanisms underlying herbal plants to HTS.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material, culture and HTS treatment Maca (Lepidium meyenii Walp) cultivar 'Wumeng' (breeding and preservation by Yunnan Agricultural University, YunR-SV-LM-045-2017) was used in this study. For cultivation, the seeds were surface-sterilized with 1% (v/v) NaClO for 10 min, followed by five rinses in sterile water, and immersed in distilled water at 25 °C overnight. After germination, the seeds were immediately transferred to 60-well plates in 8-L plastic containers holding one-fifth-strength Hoagland solution (pH 5.5) (Caballero et al., 2012), which was replenished every other day. The seedlings were grown in a green house at 25 °C under a 16/8 h (light/dark) photoperiod with a light intensity of 150–180 μE m-2 s-1. After pre-cultivation for 14 d, the maca plants were then transferred to 9-well plates in 1.2-L plastic pots containing fresh one-fifth-strength Hoagland solution (pH 5.5) for treatments. For the HTS treatment, the seedlings were grown in a growth chamber at 42 °C for 0, 3, 6, 12 or 24 h under continuous illumination at a light intensity of 150–180 μE m-2 s-1 as described previously (Bhardwaj et al., 2015; Cao et al., 2016; Ding et al., 2018). Seedlings grown at 25 °C under same illumination for designated time points were used as controls. For the determination of chlorophyll and soluble sucrose contents, malondialdehyde concentration, and total antioxidant capacity, three biological replicates and three technical replicates were used. Each biological replicate was comprised of leaves from six two-week-old maca seedlings. For proteomic analysis, to reduce plant-to-plant variation, leaves from approximately 30–40 two-week-old maca seedlings were combined into a mixed sample. Three independent sets of plants were sampled to generate three biological replicates. Protein extraction, trypsin digestion and TMT labeling In this study, three independent biological replicates were conducted for each treatment. To reduce plant-to-plant variation, leaves from approximately 30–40 two-week-old maca seedlings were combined into a mixed sample. Three independent sets of plants were sampled to generate three biological replicates. Proteins from the maca leaf samples (approximately 1.0 g) were extracted with a lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 8.0) as described previously (Wang et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020). The protein concentration was measured using a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) as described by Wang et al. (2018). For trypsin digestion and TMT labeling, the protein samples were digested with trypsin buffer (3 μg trypsin in 50 μL 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer at pH 8.5; Promega, USA) at 37 °C for 16 h and the digested peptides were collected by centrifugation and reconstituted in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5; Sigma, USA). And then, the digested peptides were labeled using the TMT Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). In detail, the peptides from the control samples were labeled with TMT reagents 126, 127, and 128, and those from the HTS-treated samples were labeled with TMT reagents 129, 130, and 131 and incubated at 25 °C for 2 h before quenching with 8% hydroxylamine buffer (pH 8.0). High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) HPLC fractionation was conducted an Agilent 300Extend-C18 column (4.6 × 250 mm, 5 μm; Agilent Technologies, USA) as described by Zhan et al. (2018). Briefly, the peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL min−1 over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the collected fractions (60 fractions) were combined into 18 pools and dried by vacuum centrifugation. LC−MS/MS was carried out with an automated Easy-nLC 1000 UPLC system coupled to a Q-ExactiveTM Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) as described previously (Zhong et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018). In brief, the resulting peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and eluted using solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) in a linear gradient comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min on an Easy-nLC 1000 UPLC system. And then, the peptide samples were analyzed on a Q-ExactiveTM Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) equipped with the NanoSpray Ionization (NSI) source coupled with a UPLC system. The working parameters of the mass spectrometer were selected according to previous studies (Wang et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019).

### Data Protocol
Database search, quantification and reproducibility analysis For protein identification, the resulting MS/MS spectra were searched against several protein databases containing reversed sequences from original databases, including the maca protein database (http://maca.eplant.org), NCBI protein database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ protein/) and UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/) using MaxQuant software (v. 1.5.2.8) (Tyanova et al., 2016). All reported data were reported based on 99% confidence for peptide and protein identification as determined by a FDR of less than 1% as described previously (Roitinger et al., 2015; Zhong et al., 2017). The quantification ratio was calculated to assess the fold changes in the abundance of the proteins identified in HTS-treated (HTS) vs control (Cont) plants. Student’s t-test adjusted by the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) was used to identify significant (Padj < 0.05) differences in the means of HTS and Cont seedlings among the three biological replicates as described previously (Zhong et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018). To be identified as significantly differentially expressed, a protein must have a fold-change ratio > 1.500 or < 0.667, be detected in all three biological replicates, and pass the t-test with BH-adjusted Padj < 0.05. Reproducibility analysis of the biological replicates was performed using analysis of variance of the differentially expressed protein (DEP) data as described previously (Wang et al., 2018).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
High-temperature stress, Tandem mass tag, Molecular mechanism, Maca, Stress response

### Affiliations
Huzhou University
Key Laboratory of Medicinal Plant Biology of Yunnan Province, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China

### Submitter
Zhan Qi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Fan
Key Laboratory of Medicinal Plant Biology of Yunnan Province, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China


