### Accession
PXD037583

### Title
Peroxynitrite-mediated post-translational modification of human glutamine synthetase

### Description
The aim of the project was to understand the mechanisms that underlie the oxidative inactivation of human glutamine synthetase (HsGS). For that purpose, we expressed and purified recombinant HsGS, exposed it in phosphate buffer to peroxynitrite (ONOO-) and assessed the functional and structural consequences. To characterize the oxidative post-translational modifications induced by ONOO-, several approaches were carried out (e.g. SDS-PAGE, western-blot, amino acid quantification by LC, etc). The most detailed characterization was performed through LC-MS/MS analysis after trypsin digestion of the ONOO--treated protein, which allowed us to identify the amino acid residues that are modified and to estimate the extent of such modifications.

### Sample Protocol
Samples consisted in pure recombinant HsGS protein (0.2 mg/mL in 200 µL phosphate buffer pH 7.3), which was exposed to different concentrations of authentic ONOO- (100 and 500 µM). Then, samples were processed for nLC-MS/MS according to previously reported protocols (see ref. Mariotti et al, J. Proteome. Res. 2018, 17, 2017-2027). Briefly, after exposing the samples to ONOO-, they were vacuum-dried, redissolved in 20 µL of 8 M urea abd 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and then reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The alkylated protein samples were then divided into two fractions containing each 10 µg protein, vacuum-dried, redissolved either in 50 mM NH4HCO3 prepared in nanopure 16O-water or in 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.0 prepared in 18O-water and finally subjected to trypsin digestion at 37ºC (overnight for digestion in H216O, 24 h for digestion in H218O). The peptides obtained from both digests were then solid-phase extracted using StageTip C18 reverse-phase discs packed intro pipet tips. After elution of the peptides in 60%a acetonitrile/0.1% TFA, they were dried in a Speedvac concentrator, resuspended in 10 µL of either H216O or H218O and subsequently mixde in a 1:1 ratio immediately before mass spectrometric analysis. The nLC-MS/MS analysis was carried out as described in Mariotti et al, J. Proteome. Res. 2018, 17, 2017-2027 for both peptide mapping of HsGS native and modified peptides and cross-linked peptides in a Obritrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The main analysis consisted in a universal method characterized by a full MS Orbitrap scan and data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) Orbitrap scans with a top-speed mode and a priority for the most intense precursors. For cross-link identification, a data-dependent method was applied, in which a targeted group of signals displaying mass shifts of 4, 6 and 8 Da are selected for MS/MS. Further technical information can be found and the mentioned reference.

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained from the full MS Orbitrap scan was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.6.1.0 for identifying the native and modified tryptic peptides of treated HsGS protein. The main search parameters were setted as follows: First search peptide tolerance: 20 ppm; Main search peptide tolerance: 4.5 ppm; Digestion: Trypsin/P with 2 Max. missed cleavages; Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term). Nitration (Y, W), Oxidation (Y, H); PSM FDR: 0.01, Protein FDR: 0.01; Database: recombinant HsGS fasta sequence, contaminants included. After obtaining the list of identified peptides, data was further analyzed for relative quantification of the oxidative modifications found by obtaining the peak areas of the MS1 features using the Skyline 4.1.0 software.

### Publication Abstract
Glutamine synthetase (GS), which catalyzes the ATP-dependent synthesis of L-glutamine from L-glutamate and ammonia, is a ubiquitous and conserved enzyme that plays a pivotal role in nitrogen metabolism across all life domains. In vertebrates, GS is highly expressed in astrocytes, where its activity sustains the glutamate-glutamine cycle at glutamatergic synapses and is thus essential for maintaining brain homeostasis. In fact, decreased GS levels or activity have been associated with neurodegenerative diseases, with these alterations attributed to oxidative post-translational modifications of the protein, in particular tyrosine nitration. In this study, we expressed and purified human GS (HsGS) and performed an in-depth analysis of its oxidative inactivation by peroxynitrite (ONOO<sup>-</sup>) in&#xa0;vitro. We found that ONOO<sup>-</sup> exposure led to a dose-dependent loss of HsGS activity, the oxidation of cysteine, methionine, and tyrosine residues and also the nitration of tryptophan and tyrosine residues. Peptide mapping by LC-MS/MS through combined H<sub>2</sub><sup>16</sup>O/H<sub>2</sub><sup>18</sup>O trypsin digestion identified up to 10 tyrosine nitration sites and five types of dityrosine cross-links; these modifications were further scrutinized by structural analysis. Tyrosine residues 171, 185, 269, 283, and 336 were the main nitration targets; however, tyrosine-to-phenylalanine HsGS mutants revealed that their sole nitration was not responsible for enzyme inactivation. In addition, we observed that ONOO<sup>-</sup> induced HsGS aggregation and activity loss. Thiol oxidation was a key modification to elicit aggregation, as it was also induced by hydrogen peroxide treatment. Taken together, our results indicate that multiple oxidative events at various sites are responsible for the inactivation and aggregation of human GS.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Peroxynitrite, Protein oxidation, Glutamine synthetase, Nitrotyrosine

### Affiliations
Departamento de Bioquímica y Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas (CEINBIO), Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay
Departamento de Bioquímica & Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas (CEINBIO), Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, Uruguay

### Submitter
Nicolás Campolo

### Lab Head
Dr Rafael Radi
Departamento de Bioquímica y Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas (CEINBIO), Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, Montevideo, Uruguay


