### Accession
PXD022302

### Title
Effects of prenylcysteine oxidase 1 (PCYOX1) silencing on HepG2 cell secretome

### Description
We performed a label free mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis to investigate the effects of PCYOX1 silencing on the secretome of human HepG2 cells

### Sample Protocol
The human hepatoma cell line, HepG2, were cultured as previously described (Circulation research 85, 208-217). Stable gene silencing of PCYOX1 was obtained in HepG2 cells using shRNA Plasmids (Santa Cruz Biotecnologies), a pool of 3 target-specific lentiviral vector plasmids each encoding 19-25 nt (plus hairpin) shRNAs designed to knock-down PCYOX1 gene expression. A shRNA plasmid encoding for a scrambled shRNA sequence that does not lead to the specific degradation of any cellular message was used as negative control (control cells). Cells were transfected at 50-70% confluency for 24 hours with 0.5 µg of plasmid and 2 µl of trasfection reagent (Santa Cruz Biotecnologies) for each well of a 6 wells/plate and then grown in complete medium containing 1 µg/ml puromycin to enable selection.  All the experiments were performed on conditioned media collected after an overnight incubation in the absence of serum. Secretome samples for proteomic analysis were desalted, concentrated and digested as previously described by Brioschi et al (Journal of Proteomics. 2013;78:346–61). After lyophilization, the secreted protein pellets were dissolved in 25 mmol/L NH4HCO3 containing 0.1% RapiGest (Waters Corporation), sonicated, and centrifuged at 13,000g for 10 min. Samples were then incubated 15 min at 80°C and reduced with 5 mmol/L DTT at 60°C for 15 min, followed by carbamidomethylation with 10 mmol/L iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the darkness. Then, sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added to each sample (1 g every 50 g of proteins) and incubated overnight at 37°C. After digestion, 2% TFA was added to hydrolyze RapiGest and inactivate trypsin. Tryptic peptides were used for label-free mass spectrometry analysis, LC-MSE, performed on a hybrid quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoUPLC system and equipped with a Trizaic source (Waters Corporation).

### Data Protocol
Peak peaking, peptide identification and statistical analysis have been performed by means of Progenesis QIP v 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics) using a Uniprot human protein sequence database (v2015-1).

### Publication Abstract
The research into the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis has considerably increased our understanding of the disease complexity, but still many questions remain unanswered, both mechanistically and pharmacologically. Here, we provided evidence that the pro-oxidant enzyme Prenylcysteine Oxidase 1 (PCYOX1), in the human atherosclerotic lesions, is both synthesized locally and transported within the subintimal space by proatherogenic lipoproteins accumulating in the arterial wall during atherogenesis. Further, Pcyox1 deficiency in Apoe<sup>-/-</sup> mice retards atheroprogression, is associated with decreased features of lesion vulnerability and lower levels of lipid peroxidation, reduces plasma lipid levels and inflammation. PCYOX1 silencing in vitro affects the cellular proteome by influencing multiple functions related to inflammation, oxidative stress, and platelet adhesion. Collectively, these findings identify the pro-oxidant enzyme PCYOX1 as an emerging player in atherogenesis and, therefore, understanding the biology and mechanisms of all functions of this unique enzyme is likely to provide additional therapeutic opportunities in addressing atherosclerosis.

### Keywords
Hepg2, Secretome, Pcyox1

### Affiliations
Unit of Proteomics- Centro Cardiologico Monzino IRCCS

### Submitter
Maura Brioschi

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina banfi
Unit of Proteomics- Centro Cardiologico Monzino IRCCS


