### Accession
PXD019992

### Title
A miR-494 dependent feedback loop regulates ER stress (ANAN-376 Project)

### Description
Defects in stress responses are important contributors in many chronic conditions including cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and obesity-driven pathologies like non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Specifically, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is linked with these pathologies and control of ER stress can ameliorate tissue damage. MicroRNAs have a critical role in regulating diverse stress responses including ER stress. Here we show that miR-494-3p plays a functional role during ER stress. ER stress inducers (tunicamycin and thapsigargin) robustly increase the expression of miR-494 in vitro in an ATF6 dependent manner. Surprisingly, miR-494 pretreatment dampens the induction and magnitude of ER stress in response to tunicamycin in endothelial cells. Conversely, inhibition of miR-494 increases ER stress de novo and amplifies the effects of ER stress inducers. Using Mass Spectrometry (TMT-MS) we identified many proteins that are downregulated by both tunicamycin and miR-494 in cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Among these, we found 6 transcripts which harbor a putative miR-494 binding site. Our data indicates that ER stress driven miR-494 may act in a feedback inhibitory loop to dampen downstream ER stress signaling. We propose that RNA-based approaches targeting miR-494 or its targets may be attractive candidates for inhibiting ER stress dependent pathologies in human disease.

### Sample Protocol
CELL CULTURE AND TRANSFECTION:  Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) (Cat: NC9946677, Lonza) were cultured in EGM-2 media (Cat: CC-3162, Lonza) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Cat: FB-21, Lot# 649116, Hyclone) and were maintained at 37 C with 5% CO2. Cells used for experiments were low passage number (3-8). Tunicamycin (TCN) (Cat: T7765, Sigma) was dissolved in DMSO (Sigma).  HUVECs (50% confluence) were transfected with 50nM mimic/inhibitor RNA using the lipofectamine RNAiMax reagent (Cat: 13778-150, Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Specifically, mirVana miRNA Mimic Negative Control (Cat: 4464061, Ambion), hsa-miR-494-3p mirVana miRNA Mimic (MIMAT002816, Cat: 4404066, Assay ID MC12409, Ambion), mirVana miRNA Inhibitor Negative Control #1 (Cat: 4464076, Ambion), hsa-miR-494-3p mirVana miRNA Inhibitor (Cat: 4464084, Assay ID MH12409, Ambion), miRCURY LNA Mimic Negative Control (Cat: YM00479903, Qiagen), and hsa-miR-494-3p miRCURY LNA miRNA Mimic (MIMAT002816, Cat: YM00472106, Qiagen) were used for in vitro experiments.     PROTEIN PROCESSING, DIGESTION, AND LABELING:  HUVECs were treated with microRNAs (n=3 biological replicates) or TCN  (n=2, biological replicates) as described above. After 24h-48h, samples were lysed in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (50 µg of protein/ sample) followed by a Protease Max digestion, a microspin solid phase extraction and TMT 10-plex labeling according to manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific). Sample key was as follows – 126C: C-miR-a, 127N: miR-494-b, 127C: C-miR-c, 128N: miR-494-d, 128C: C-miR-e, 129N: miR-494-f, 129C: DMSO-g, 130N: TCN-h, 130C: DMSO-i, 131N: TCN-j.   LC AND MASS SPECTROSCOPY:  Multiplexed TMT-labeled samples were reconstituted in 5% formic acid and separated by 2D reverse-phase LC. A 20-microliter sample (40 microgram) was injected onto a NanoEase 5-micron XBridge BEH130 C18 300-micron x 50 mm column (Waters) at 3 microliter/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9). Peptides were eluted by injection of 20 microliter volumes of 14, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 35, 40, 50, and 90% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9) at 3 microliter/min flow rate. Eluted peptides were diluted with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 24 microliter/min flow rate and delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100-micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5-micron trap on a switching valve. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2-micron, 75-micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated at low pH in the 2nd dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 120 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 300 nanoliter/min flow rate.

### Data Protocol
Instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific). Raw files from the 17 fractions were merged and searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine with a human Swiss-Prot protein database downloaded October 2016 (20,120 entries). Searches were configured with static modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysines and peptide N-termini, carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteines, dynamic modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), parent ion tolerance of 1.25 Da, fragment mass tolerance of 1.0005 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator software. Only peptides with q scores less than 0.05 were accepted, and two or more unique peptides were required for matching a protein entry for its identification.    Search results and TMT reporter ion intensities were exported as text files and processed with in-house scripts. A trimmed mean reporter ion intensity peak height cutoff of 500 was used to filter out low quality scans. All reporter ion intensities for unique peptides matched to each respective protein were summed to create total protein intensities. Differential protein abundance was then determined by comparing the total reporter ion intensities between groups using the Bioconductor package edgeR. Biological groups were control miRNA versus miR-494-3p, and DMSO versus TCN treatments. Additional data normalizations, multiple testing corrections, and calculation of false discovery rates were performed within edgeR.

### Publication Abstract
Defects in stress responses are important contributors in many chronic conditions including cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and obesity-driven pathologies like non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Specifically, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is linked with these pathologies and control of ER stress can ameliorate tissue damage. MicroRNAs have a critical role in regulating diverse stress responses including ER stress. Here, we show that miR-494 plays a functional role during ER stress. Pharmacological ER stress inducers (tunicamycin (TCN) and thapsigargin) and hyperglycemia robustly increase the expression of miR-494 <i>in vitro.</i> ATF6 impacts the primary miR-494 levels whereas all three ER stress pathways are necessary for the increase in mature miR-494. Surprisingly, miR-494 pretreatment dampens the induction and magnitude of ER stress in response to TCN in endothelial cells and increases cell viability. Conversely, inhibition of miR-494 increases ER stress <i>de novo</i> and amplifies the effects of ER stress inducers. Using Mass Spectrometry (TMT-MS) we identified 23 proteins that are downregulated by both TCN and miR-494 in cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Among these, we found 6 transcripts which harbor a putative miR-494 binding site. We validated the anti-apoptotic gene <i>BIRC5</i> (survivin) and <i>GINS4</i> as targets of miR-494 during ER stress. In summary, our data indicates that ER stress driven miR-494 may act in a feedback inhibitory loop to dampen downstream ER stress signaling.

### Keywords
Micrornas, Quantitative proteomics, Isobaric labeling, Stress response, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
Department of Radiation Medicine  Knight Cancer Institute and OHSU 2720 S Moody Avenue Portland, Oregon 97201, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sudarshan Anand
Department of Radiation Medicine  Knight Cancer Institute and OHSU 2720 S Moody Avenue Portland, Oregon 97201, USA


