### Accession
PXD006920

### Title
Activity-Based Probes for Isoenzyme- and Site-Specific Functional Characterization of Glutathione S-transferases

### Description
Characterization of Glutathione S-transferase activity associated with phase II drug metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were labeled with GST-, GSH-ABP probes, enriched, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) comprise a diverse family of phase II drug metabolizing enzymes whose shared function is the conjugation of reduced glutathione (GSH) to endo- and xenobiotics. Although the conglomerate activity of these enzymes can be measured, the isoform-specific contribution to the metabolism of xenobiotics in complex biological samples has not been possible. We have developed two activity-based probes (ABPs) that characterize active GSTs in mammalian tissues. The GST active site is composed of a GSH binding "G site" and a substrate binding "H site". Therefore, we developed (1) a GSH-based photoaffinity probe (GSTABP-G) to target the "G site", and (2) an ABP designed to mimic a substrate molecule and have "H site" activity (GSTABP-H). The GSTABP-G features a photoreactive moiety for UV-induced covalent binding to GSTs and GSH-binding enzymes. The GSTABP-H is a derivative of a known mechanism-based GST inhibitor that binds within the active site and inhibits GST activity. Validation of probe targets and "G" and "H" site specificity was carried out using a series of competition experiments in the liver. Herein, we present robust tools for the characterization of enzyme- and active site-specific GST activity in mammalian model systems.

### Keywords
Mouse, Gst, Gsh, Glutathione

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron Wright
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


