### Accession
PXD007914

### Title
Mouse stool samples in response to antibiotic treatment

### Description
Background and Objectives: Antibiotic (ABx) therapy is associated with an increased risk for Crohn´s Disease but the underlying mechanisms are unknown. We observed high fecal serine protease activity (PA) to be a frequent side effect of ABx therapy in patients. The aim of the present study was to unravel whether this rise in PA may promote colitis development via detrimental effects on the large intestinal barrier. Design: Transwell experiments were used to assess the impact of high PA in ABx-treated patients or vancomycin/metronidazole (V/M)-treated mice on the epithelial barrier. Serine protease profiling was performed using LC-MS/MS analysis. The impact of high PA on the intestinal barrier in WT/IL10-/- mice and on colitis development in IL10-/- mice was investigated using V/M+/-oral serine protease inhibitor (AEBSF) treatment.  Results: The ABx-induced high PA was found to be due to significantly increased levels of pancreatic proteases and to impair the epithelial barrier. In WT mice, the rise in PA caused a transient increase in intestinal permeability but did not affect susceptibility towards DSS-induced acute colitis. In IL10-/- mice, the rise in PA caused a lasting impairment of the intestinal barrier, which was associated with inflammatory activation of the large intestinal tissue. In the long term, the lasting increase in PA upon repeated V/M treatment aggravated colitis development in IL10-/-mice. Conclusion: High PA is a frequent adverse effect of ABx therapy which is detrimental to the large intestinal barrier and may contribute to the development of chronic inflammation in genetically susceptible individuals.

### Sample Protocol
100 mg of murine gut contents from the ileum, cecum, colon or feces were homogenized and dissolved in sterile phosphate buffered saline (PBS, 10% w/v) using sterile glass beads and vigorous vortexing. A supernatant sample was generated in a two-step procedure:  First an initial supernatant was generated by centrifugation at 1000 rpm and 4°C for 5 minutes, which was subsequently centrifuged a second time at 6000 rpm and 4°C for 10 minutes. Whenever indicated, the supernatants were incubated with the serine protease inhibitor phenylmethane-sulfonylfluoride (PMSF, 5 mM, Sigma). The supernatants were stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Proteome analysis of cecal supernatants (Ce_sup) from ctr, V/M-treated and GF mice was performed using LC-MS/MS analysis. Ce_sup was diluted 1:1 with 2×NuPAGE® LDS Sample Buffer (Invitrogen) and proteins were reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were  run into a 4–12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) for about 1 cm prior to in-gel tryptic digestion according to standard procedures. The generated peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and  dissolved in 20 μL 0.1% formic acid (FA) prior to LC–MS/MS analysis. LC–nanoESI‐MS/MS was performed by coupling a nanoLC‐Ultra (Eksigent) to a LTQ‐Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). For each analysis, 10 μL of dissolved peptides was delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). After 10 min of loading and washing, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil-gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 400 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 210 min gradient from 2% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both LC solvents contained 5% (v/v) DMSO to boost the nanoESI response of peptides.12 The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS. Full scan MS spectra (360–1300 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution (at m/z 400) after accumulation precursor ions to a target value of 1,000,000 for a maximum time of 100 ms. Internal lock mass calibration was performed using an ion signal (m/z 401.922720) present in DMSO containing solvents. Tandem mass spectra were generated for up to ten peptide precursors by higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD, target value of 40,000, max 100 ms accumulation time, isolation width 2.0 Th) at a normalized collision energy of 30% and fragment ions were recorded at a resolution of 7500 in the Orbitrap. To maximize the number of precursors targeted for analysis, dynamic exclusion was enabled with one repeat count in 10 s and 20 s exclusion time (mass tolerance +/-10 ppm). Label free quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) by searching MS data against a mus musculus UniProt reference database (version 03.05.2016, 24864 entries) using the search engine Andromeda. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was used as fixed modification; variable modifications included oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation. Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme with up to two allowed miscleavage sites. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Label-free quantification, match-between-runs and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) options were enabled and results were filtered for a minimal length of seven amino acids and 1% peptide and protein FDR. MaxQuant results were imported into the MaxQuant associated software suite Perseus (v.1.5.6.0). iBAQ intensities were filtered for at least 2 valid values per experimental group and at least 2 peptides for identification per protein. Missing values were imputed from normal distribution (width 0.3, downshift 1.8). A two-sided student’s t-test was performed to assess statistical significance. Protein p-values were corrected for multiple testing using a permutation based 5% FDR cut-off (250 randomizations, s0 of 0.1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intestinal barrier, Stool, Mouse, Protease activity, Antibiotic treatment, Velos

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technische Universität München, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technische Universität München, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany


