### Accession
PXD019512

### Title
Human corneal epithelial cells internalize Aspergillus flavus spores by  actin mediated endocytosis

### Description
Mycotic leratitis is the corneal inflammation predominantly caused by Fusarium and Aspergillus species. Corneal epithelium is the earliest cell type encounter the invading pathogen. The innate immune responses of human corneal epithelial cells against Aspergillus flavus is not known. Here we studied the role of human corneal epithelial cells against Aspergillus flavus infection. The results showed that corneal epithelial cells internalized Aspergillus flavus conidia through actin mediated polymerization surrounding the conidia. Further the actin inhibitor cytochalasin D treatment reduced the formation actin ring around the conidia. The engulfed conidia acquired endosomal proteins as revealed by immunofluorescence analsyisis. Mass spectromtery of phagosomal proteins confirmed the recruitment of endosomal proteins and other proteins involved in phagocytosis. These results show the involvement of corneal epithelial cells in anti fungal defense.

### Sample Protocol
Phagosome proteome isolation: A. flavus conidia were labeled with 10 mg/mL EZ link sulfo-NHS-LC biotin and streptavidin magnetic beads respectively. Labeled conidia were purified from unlabeled spores under the magnetic field and cocultured with HCE cells for 2 h. Cells were gently lysed by passing the cell suspension 60 times through a needle (27G) in homogenization buffer (3 mM imidazole, 250 mM sucrose, pH 7.4, and proteinase inhibitors) after infection. The lysate was kept under Quadro MACS separator to separate the phagosomes containing conidia and proteins were eluted with 1X sample buffer (2 % (w/v) SDS, 60 mM Tris pH-6.8, 10 % (v/v) glycerol, 25 mM DTT) by heating at 98 ºC. Electrophoresis in a 10% polyacrylamide gel was carried out until the tracking dyes reached one cm in the separating gel.  Stained bands were cut into three pieces, reduced, alkylated and in gel digested with trypsin. Peptides were extracted and purified using Agilent C18 spin column. Mass spectrometry: Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA in 5% ACN and analyzed using a Thermo Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA). Peptides were separated in a capillary RSLC column (EASY-spray column pepMap®RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 1d0 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm or 15 cm Thermo SCIENTIFIC, CA).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer v1.4 was used to analyze the raw MS/MS data. Complete human proteome was downloaded from Uniprot and used in the two search engines: Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4.1.0) and an inbuilt SequestHT algorithm. The parameters for the database search were the following: peptide tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.60–0.80 Da. The peptide length was restricted to a minimum of six amino acids and a maximum of 144 amino acids for the database search and with two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was given as fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) has assigned as variable modifications. The peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) from SequestHT and Mascot were post-processed using the Percolator algorithm

### Publication Abstract
Human corneal epithelial (HCE) cells play a significant role in the innate immune response by secreting cytokines and antimicrobial peptides when they encounter fungal pathogens. But the detailed mechanism of attachment and engulfment of the fungal conidia by HCE cells is not well understood. Here, we show the phagocytosis of <i>Aspergillus flavus</i> conidia by RCB2280 cells and primary HCE cultures using confocal microscopy and proteomic analysis of conidium-containing phagosomes. Phalloidin staining showed actin polymerization, leading to an actin ring around engulfed conidia. Cytochalasin D inhibited the actin-mediated endocytosis of the conidia. Immunolabeling of the early endosomal markers CD71 and early endosomal antigen (EEA1) and the late endosomal markers lysosome-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1), Rab7, and cathepsin G showed that endosomal proteins were recruited to the site of conidia and showed maturation of the conidium-containing phagosomes. Lysotracker red DND 99 labeling showed the acidification of the phagosomes containing conidia. Phagosome-specific proteome analysis confirmed the recruitment of various phagosomal and endosomal proteins to the conidium-containing phagosomes. These results show that the ocular surface epithelium contributes actively to antifungal defense by the phagocytosis of invading fungal conidia.

### Keywords
Corneal epithelium, Actin ring, Asperillus flavus, Phagosome

### Affiliations
Director-research Aravind Medical Research Foundation Madurai-625 020
Senior Research Fellow, Department of Proteomics, Aravind Medical Research Foundation.

### Submitter
Divya Arunachalam

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. K. Dharmalingam
Director-research Aravind Medical Research Foundation Madurai-625 020


