### Accession
PXD018344

### Title
Identification of auto mono-ADP-ribosylation sites on SIRT6 and SIRT7

### Description
The aim of this project was to identify the auto mono-ADP-ribosylation sites on SIRT6 and SIRT7 to study the effect of the point mutations S56A and N189A respectively on their ADP-ribosylation activity. In addition, the mono-ADP-ribosylation pattern of SIRT7 was obtained in cells under different stress conditions (UV, H2O2, ionizing Irradiation and glucose starvation).

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were precipitated with cold acetone (o/n, -20ºC) and the protein pellets were resuspended in 20 µL of 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) + 6M urea solution. Samples were reduced with DTT (10 mM, 30 ºC, 60 min), and alkylated with chloroacetamide (CAA) (20 mM, 25 ºC, 30 min). The samples were diluted with NH4HCO3 to reduce urea concentration below 1M, and digested with trypsin (1:10 enzyme:protein, 30ºC, 16h, Promega). After digestion, the peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and then desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group) prior to LC‐MS/MS analysis.  The SIRT7 Wild type and mutant (N189A) samples were analyzed using a Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Afterwards, the peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) and a binary solvent system of 0.1% formic acid in H2O (Solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Solvent B). Chromatographic gradients started at 7% B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and gradually increased to 22% B in 52 min and then to 32% B in 8 min and 95% B in 10 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 95% B.  The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120.000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1400 with detection in the Orbitrap. Precursor automated gain control (AGC) was set to 4e5. Charge-state screening was enabled, and precursors with +2 to +5 charge states and intensities >5e4were selected for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). MS/MS acquisition method was as follow: a high-energy data-dependent HCD MS/MS spectrum was acquired in the orbitrap with collision energy of 30% and a resolution of 30k. AGC was set to 5e4, isolation window of 0.7 m/z and maximum injection time of 54 ms was used. This MS/MS was followed by an EThCD MS/MS when more than two ADP-ribose fragment peak (136.0623, 250.0940, 348.07091 and 428.0372) were observed in the HCD scan and for peptides with charge >+3. For the EThCD fragmentation, the “use-calibrated charge-dependent parameter” option was selected, it was acquired in the orbitrap with a SA of 20% and a resolution of 60k. AGC was set to 2e5, isolation window of 0.7 m/z and maximum injection time of 120 ms was used. Precursors masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded further selection for 60s and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The Sirt6 wild type and S56A mutant as well as the Sirt7 under stress condition peptide samples were analyzed using an Eclipse Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column (as described before) and a binary solvent system of 0.1% formic acid in H2O (Solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (Solvent B). Chromatographic gradients started at 5% B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and gradually increased to 25% B in 52 min and then to 40% B in 8 min and 100% B in 10 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 100% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 305°C. Ultramark 1621 was used for external calibration of the FT mass analyzer prior the analyses, and an internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120.000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1400 with detection in the Orbitrap. Precursor automated gain control (AGC) was set to 4e5. Charge-state screening was enabled, and precursors with +2 to +5 charge states and intensities >5e4 were selected for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). MS/MS acquisition method was described above.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the PEAKS X+ software, which as a default performs de novo peptide sequencing prior to database searches, in order to improve the accuracy of the results. The data were searched against a Swiss-Prot database (as in October 2019). Trypsin (specific, up to three missed cleavages allowed) was selected for database searches, and no enzyme was chosen in de novo searches (up to 5 candidates per spectrum reported). The maximal mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for products ions. Carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and ADP-ribose (+541.0611 Da at C, D, E, H, K, N, Q, R, S, T, and Y), were set as variable modifications. The maximal number of modifications per peptide was set as three. The false discovery rate was set to 0.05 for peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Sirtuins are key players of metabolic stress response. Originally described as deacetylases, some sirtuins also exhibit poorly understood mono-adenosine 5'-diphosphate (ADP)-ribosyltransferase (mADPRT) activity. We report that the deacetylase SirT7 is a dual sirtuin, as it also features auto-mADPRT activity. SirT7 mADPRT occurs at a previously undefined active site, and its abrogation alters SirT7 chromatin distribution. We identify an epigenetic pathway by which ADP-ribosyl-SirT7 is recognized by the ADP-ribose reader mH2A1.1 under glucose starvation, inducing SirT7 relocalization to intergenic regions. SirT7 promotes mH2A1 enrichment in a subset of nearby genes, many of them involved in second messenger signaling, resulting in their specific up- or down-regulation. The expression profile of these genes under calorie restriction is consistently abrogated in SirT7-deficient mice, resulting in impaired activation of autophagy. Our work provides a novel perspective on sirtuin duality and suggests a role for SirT7/mH2A1.1 axis in glucose homeostasis and aging.

### Keywords
Sirtuins; sirt7; adp-ribosylation; macroh2a; glucose starvation; chromatin; calorie restriction; aging; orbitrap lumos; orbitrap eclipse

### Affiliations
Chromatin Biology Laboratory Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute (IJC) Ctra de Can Ruti, Camí de les Escoles s/n 08916, Badalona, Barcelona, Spain
Proteomics Unit - Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute

### Submitter
Joan Josep Bech-Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Vaquero
Chromatin Biology Laboratory Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute (IJC) Ctra de Can Ruti, Camí de les Escoles s/n 08916, Badalona, Barcelona, Spain


