### Accession
PXD032099

### Title
Allogenic adipose-derived stem cells in DF treatment – are we closer to understanding their activity in humans

### Description
OBJECTIVE: To assess the safety and  efficacy as well as  determination of the molecular mechanism of action of topical allogeneic ADSC therapy in the treatment of ulcers in patients with neuropathic diabetic foot. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We examined a total of 57 patients with neuropathic diabetic foot in grades IA and IIA according to the University of Texas classification. Finally 23 patients received treatment with standard therapy and fibrin glue (fibrin gel group) and 23 received treatment with standard therapy and ADSC suspended in tissue glue (fibrin gel + ADSC group). The primary outcome was determining the time needed to reduce the wound size by 50% from the initial size in both groups by assessing the wound surface, the evaluation of treatment safety, expressed as the occurrence of any adverse events; the evaluation of symptoms improvement (e.g. pain, itching, etc.) assessed by Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) and analysis of the expression of selected pro-angiogenic and immunomodulatory factors in the wounds treated in both study groups. RESULTS:The ADSC group benefited from the use of stem cells in terms of accelerated wound healing and greater likelihood of complete healing of the wound. In a second week after administration of therapy, the difference between the groups was already statistically significant (p = 0,04). The time to the 50% reduction of the size of the wound in the fibrin gel + ADSC group was significantly shorter (18.9 +/- 2.2 days ) than in the group receiving fibrin gel  (39.8 +/- 6.9 days ), p = 0.0035. CONCLUSIONS: The results of the preliminary analysis show that the use of allogeneic ADSCs in the treatment of neuropathic diabetic foot ulcers is a safe method of therapy, which allows to improve the effects of wound healing. Our study indicates also the association of higher expression of selected proteins  expression intensifying the healing process through a faster transition to the proliferation phase with a faster reduction in wound area, and long-term efficacy of allogeneic ADSC cells.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 50 µg of each wound scraping samples were dissolved in a lysis buffer denatured and sonicated, needle aspirated. Debris were removed by centrifugation. Proteins were then precipitated with modified methanol/chloroform protocol. (Wessel, D., and Flügge, U.I. (1984) Anal. Biochem. 138 141–143.). Pellet of extracted proteins was digested with LysC/trypsin as described previously (Kuzniewska et al. 2020), labeled with iTRAQ8-plex. Samples were organized in 3 sets for LC-MS-MS/MS analysis as follows: set 1 – scrapings samples of 3 patients from fibrin gel group at two-time points (V0, V1), sets 2 and 3 – scrapings samples of 6 patients from ADSC group at two-time points (V0, V1) analyzed as two separate groups each consisting of 3 patients Combined samples were prefractionated in high pH setup, analyzed by LC-MSMS using RP Nano-Acquity (Waters) UPLC system and QExative Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS

### Data Protocol
Data were searched, using MaxQuant 1.6.3.4. platform, against UniProt reference proteome database taxonomy: Human, 77027 entries. further statistical analysis with Scaffold Q+S 5.0.1. Identification results were analyzed using the Scaffold Q + S platform, compared with the Whitney-Mann test with Benjamin-Hochberg p-value 0.05 correction.

### Publication Abstract
Although encouraging results of adipose-derived stem cell (ADSC) use in wound healing are available, the mechanism of action has been studied mainly in vitro and in animals. This work aimed to examine the safety and efficacy of allogenic ADSCs in human diabetic foot ulcer treatment, in combination with the analyses of the wound. Equal groups of 23 participants each received fibrin gel with ADSCs or fibrin gel alone. The clinical effects were assessed at four time points: days 7, 14, 21 and 49. Material collected during debridement from a subset of each group was analyzed for the presence of ADSC donor DNA and proteomic changes. The reduction in wound size was greater at all subsequent visits, significantly on day 21 and 49, and the time to 50% reduction in the wound size was significantly shorter in patients who received ADSCs. Complete healing was achieved at the end of the study in seven patients treated with ADSCs vs. one treated without ADSCs. One week after ADSC application, 34 proteins significantly differentiated the material from both groups, seven of which, i.e., GAPDH, CAT, ACTN1, KRT1, KRT9, SCL4A1, and TPI, positively correlated with the healing rate. We detected ADSC donor DNA up to 21 days after administration. We confirmed ADSC-related improvement in wound healing that correlated with the molecular background, which provides insights into the role of ADSCs in wound healing-a step toward the development of cell-based therapies.

### Keywords
Human, Adsc, Wound, Diabieties

### Affiliations
Medical University of Bialystok
Medical University of Warsaw, Head of Laboratory for Cell Research and Application

### Submitter
Dominik Cysewski

### Lab Head
Dr Malgorzata Lewandowska-Szumiel
Medical University of Warsaw, Head of Laboratory for Cell Research and Application


