### Accession
PXD012033

### Title
A protein-linger strategy keeps the plant on-hold after rehydration of drought-stressed Beta vulgaris

### Description
A drought stress and recovery time course experiment was carried out under controlled environmental conditions. In order to find regulatory key mechanisms enabling plants to rapidly react to periodic stress events, beets were either subjected to 11 days of progressive drought, or were drought stressed for 9 days followed by gradual rewatering for 14 days. Based on physiological measurements of leaf water status and changes in morphology, plants experienced a switch from moderate to severe water stress between day 9 and 11 of drought.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from 20 mg lyophilized ground leaf material (). Plant material was mixed with 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in acetone and incubated for 10 min in a cold ultra-sonication water bath. With intermediate collecting steps by centrifugation at 4000 g for 5 min, the plant material was washed with 1.5 ml ice-cold 10% TCA in acetone, 1.5 ml ice-cold 10% TCA in water and 1.5 ml ice-cold 80% acetone. After last centrifugation step, the supernatant was carefully discarded and the pellet was air dried. Protein were extracted by vortexing washed plant material for 1 min at room temperature in 0.8 ml extraction buffer (50 mM TrisHCL pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 0.7 M Sucrose, 1% PVPP (w/v), 1 mM PMSF, 5 mM DTT, ddH2O) and 0.8 ml phenol. For phase separation the mixture was centrifuged at 10 000 g for 5 min. The protein containing phenol phase was transferred to a new tube. Phase separation was repeated and protein was precipitated over night with 8 ml ice-cold 0.5% β-mercaptoethanol in acetone. Precipitated protein was centrifuged for 10 min (4 000 g, 4°C). The supernatant was discarded and the protein pellet was washed two times with ice cold 100 mM ammonium acetate in methanol and two times with ice cold 80% acetone with intermediate centrifugation (20 000 g, 4°C, 5min). Protein was digested and analyzed as previously described in (Turetschek et al., 2017). The protein pellet was dissolved in urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.8) and quantified with Bradford assay. Per sample, 100 μg protein was digested with Lys-C (1:100 v/v, 5 h, 30 °C, Roche, Mannheim, Germany) and trypsin (1:10, v/v, over- night, 37 °C, Applied Biosystems, Darmstadt, Germany). The sample was acidified with 200 µl 8% formic acid (FA) and loaded on stage tips (Marke müsstest du nachsehen). Peptides were washed 4 times with 200 µl 0.1% FA, eluted with 0.1% FA in methanol, split in two aliquots and stored at -80° in a protein LoBind tube until measurement.  Peptides of 4 biological replicates were dissolved in 100 μL 2% ACN, 0.1% FA. In random order 1 μg was applied on a C18 column (15 cm × 50 μm column, PepMap®RSLC, Thermo Sci- entific, 2 μm particle size) for separation during a 110 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Measurement was done on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with following settings: Full scan range 350–1800 m/z, max. 20 MS2 scans (activation type CID), repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 s, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 60 s, charge state screening enabled with rejection of unassigned and +1 charge states, minimum signal threshold 500.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified as describe in (Turetschek et al., 2017) in the software MaxQuant v1.5 2 with following parameters: first search peptide tolerance 20 ppm, main search tolerance 4.5 ppm, ITMS MS/MS match tolerance 0.6 Da. Maximum 3 of the following variable modifications were allowed per peptide: oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-term. Maximum two missed cleavages were tolerated. Best retention time alignment function was determined in a 20 min window. Identifications were matched between runs in a 0.7 min window. A FDR cut-off at 0.01 (at PSM and protein level) was set with a reverst decoy database. A minimum of 7 amino acids was required for identification of peptides and at least two peptides were required for protein identification. For label free quantification (LFQ) at least one MS2 scan was present with a minimum ratio of 2.

### Publication Abstract
Most crop plants are exposed to intermittent drought periods. To cope with these continuous changes, plants need strategies to prevent themselves from exhaustive adjustment maneuvers. Drought stress recovery has been shown to be an active process, possibly involved in a drought memory effect allowing plants to better cope with recurrent aridity. An integrated understanding of the molecular processes of enhanced drought tolerance is required to tailor key networks for improved crop protection. During summer, prolonged periods of drought are the major reason for economic yield losses of sugar beet (<i>Beta vulgaris</i>) in Europe. A drought stress and recovery time course experiment was carried out under controlled environmental conditions. In order to find regulatory key mechanisms enabling plants to rapidly react to periodic stress events, beets were either subjected to 11 days of progressive drought, or were drought stressed for 9 days followed by gradual rewatering for 14 days. Based on physiological measurements of leaf water relations and changes in different stress indicators, plants experienced a switch from moderate to severe water stress between day 9 and 11 of drought. The leaf proteome was analyzed, revealing induced protein pre-adjustment (prior to severe stress) and putative stress endurance processes. Three key protein targets, regulatory relevant during drought stress and with lingering levels of abundance upon rewatering were further exploited through their transcript performance. These three targets consist of a jasmonate induced, a salt-stress enhanced and a phosphatidylethanolamine-binding protein. The data demonstrate delayed protein responses to stress compared to their transcripts and indicate that the lingering mechanism is post-transcriptionally regulated. A set of lingering proteins is discussed with respect to a possible involvement in drought stress acclimation and memory effects.

### Keywords
Rehydration, Beta vulgaris, Drought, Beet

### Affiliations
Devision of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
University of Vienna, Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology

### Submitter
Reinhard Turetschek

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Wienkoop
Devision of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria


