### Accession
PXD045522

### Title
Multi-Omic and Functional Analysis for Classification and Treatment of Sarcomas with FUS-TFCP2 or EWSR1-TFCP2 Fusions

### Description
Linking clinical multi-omics analyses with mechanistic studies may improve the understanding of rare cancers. We leveraged two precision oncology programs to investigate rhabdomyosarcoma with FUS/EWSR1-TFCP2 fusions, an orphan malignancy without effective therapies. All tumors exhibited outlier ALK expression, partly accompanied by intragenic deletions and aberrant splicing. This resulted in the expression of ALK variants, i.e. short transcripts (ST), which we named ALK-ST1 (consisting of exons 1-2:18–29), ALK-ST2 (1:18–29), ALK-ST3 (18–29), and ALK-ST4 (1–5:12–17). To systematically investigate the oncogenic capacity of these ALK variants, we stably expressed them in p53-deficient MCF10A human mammary epithelial cells and performed different transformation assays. These experiments demonstrated that ALK-ST1, ALK-ST2, and ALK-ST3 are oncogenic variants, while ALK-ST4 could not transform MCF10A cells. We confirmed protein expression of ALK-ST1, ALK-ST2, and ALK-ST3 by western blotting, which was not possible for ALK-ST4 due to lack of a specific antibody that binds to the N-terminus of ALK that is lost in ALK-ST4. We therefore performed mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative proteomics on lysates from MCF10A cells stably expressing empty vector (EV), wildtype ALK (ALK-WT), or ALK-ST4 to confirm its expression.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: MCF10A cells (8 x 10^6) were seeded in 15 cm dishes and cultivated for two days. The cells were harvested by scraping on ice followed by washing once with cold-PBS. They were lysed in 200 µl lysis buffer containing 1x RIPA buffer (Merk), 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% Na-deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 140 mM NaCl, and 1x Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific) by incubating for 1 hour. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay. Proteins (10 µg) were digested with trypsin (Promega, V5111) using an AssayMAP Bravo liquid handling system (Agilent technologies) running the autoSP3 protocol according to Müller et al. (Müller T, Kalxdorf M, Longuespée R, Kazdal DN, Stenzinger A, Krijgsveld J. Automated sample preparation with SP3 for low-input clinical proteomics. Mol Syst Biol. 2020 Jan;16(1):e9111. doi: 10.15252/msb.20199111. PMID: 32129943; PMCID: PMC6966100.).  A 120 minute LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. Peptides were online desalted on a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5 µm, 300 Å wide pore; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 minutes using 30 µl/minute flow of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water. The analytical multistep gradient (300 nl/minute) was carried out on a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300 Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 200 mm; Waters) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). For the analytical separation the concentration of B was linearly ramped from 4% to 30% over 102 min. The end of the analysis included a washing (2 min 78% B) and an equilibration step (2% B for 10 min). Eluting peptides were analyzed in the mass spectrometer using data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. A full scan at 120k resolution (380-1400 m/z, 300% AGC target, 45 ms maxIT. profile mode) was followed by 47 windows of variable isolation width (400-1000 m/z, 1000% AGC target, 30k resolution, 54 ms maxIT, centroid) for fragment spectra acquisition. Collision energy was set at 28%.

### Data Protocol
DIA raw files were converted to the mzML (32bit) format via MSConvert (3.0.21048) selecting ‘TPP compatibility’, ‘Write index’ and using the filter ‘peak picking’ and ‘title maker’. mzML files were analyzed via DIA-NN (version 1.8) (Demichev, V., Messner, C.B., Vernardis, S.I. et al. DIA-NN: neural networks and interference correction enable deep proteome coverage in high throughput. Nat Methods 17, 41–44 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0638-x). The analysis was performed under the default parameters with the following changes: The number of allowed missed cleavages was set to 2 for Trypsin/P, ‘N-Term M excision’ and ‘Carbamidomethylation’ were selected, peptide length was 7-30 amino acids, ‘Mass accuracy‘ and ‘MS1 accuracy’ was set to 0 (automatic), ‘use isotopologues’ and ‘match between runs (MBR)’ was enabled, neuronal network classifier was set to ‘Double-pass mode’, protein inference was ‘Protein names from FASTA’, and ‘Optimal results’ was chosen for speed and RAM usage. The data was searched using an in-silico predicted spectral library (created by DIA-NN with smart profiling) of the human reference proteome from Uniprot with the sequence of ALK-ST4 added (containing 42,433 unique entries from July 18, 2023).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alk, Fus-tfcp2, Sarcoma, Ewsr1-tfcp2

### Affiliations
Division of Applied Functional Genomics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), NCT Heidelberg, Germany
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)

### Submitter
Claudia Scholl

### Lab Head
Professor Claudia Scholl
Division of Applied Functional Genomics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), NCT Heidelberg, Germany


