### Accession
PXD022408

### Title
Cryo-EM structural analysis of FADD: Caspase-8 complexes defines the catalytic dimer architecture for co-ordinated control of cell fate

### Description
Uncovering the molecular architecture of the core FADD:Caspase-8 complex and how this is altered by regulatory partners, such as the cell death inhibitor c-FLIP, is essential to  understand co-ordination of cell fate.  Here, using electron microscopy, we visualize for the first time fulllength procaspase-8 in a complex with FADD.  Our structural analysis reveals how the FADDnucleated tandem death effector domain (tDED) helical filament is required to correctly orientate procaspase-8 catalytic domains, enabling activation via  anti-parallel dimerization.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS was used to quantify the proteins present in the purified protein complexes (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures). Briefly, the proteins from single gradient fractions were precipitated using the UPPA-Protein precipitation kit (G Bioscience). The precipitated protein was re-suspended and digested with trypsin. Extracted tryptic peptides were analyzed using data-independent acquisition on a nanoAcquity UPC system coupled to a Waters Synapt G2-S HDMS mass spectrometer. The PLGS “TOP 3” method was used for absolute quantification of proteins.

### Data Protocol
Data was acquired using a Waters Synapt G2S mass spectrometer in HSMSe mode. The data was  processed through Proteinlynx Global Server 3.02 (Waters) using GFP as an internal calibrantand ADH1_YEAST digest (Waters) as an internal standard. The data was searched against a  Uniprot human fasta database, then the project re-analysed using ISOQuant University of Mainz, Stefan Tenzer, et al.) for stringent quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caspase 8, C-flip complex, Cell death. disc, Em, Fadd, Structure

### Affiliations
MRC Toxicology Unit
MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Cambridge, Hodgkin  Building, Lancaster Road, Leicester, LE1 9HN, UK

### Submitter
Rebekah Jukes-Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Marion M. MacFarlane
MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Cambridge, Hodgkin  Building, Lancaster Road, Leicester, LE1 9HN, UK


