### Accession
PXD041489

### Title
Loss of CorA the primary magnesium transporter of Salmonella is alleviated by PhoP and MgtA-dependent mechanisms

### Description
In many Gram-negative bacteria, the stress sigma factor of RNA polymerase, σS/RpoS, remodels global gene expression to reshape the physiology of quiescent cells and ensure their survival under non-optimal growth conditions. In the foodborne pathogen Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, σS is also required for biofilm formation and virulence.  We have recently shown that a ΔrpoS mutation affects the magnesium content of Salmonella and expression of the primary Mg2+-transporter CorA. The other two Mg2+-transporters of Salmonella are encoded by the PhoP-activated mgtA and mgtB genes expressed under magnesium starvation, whereas the corA gene is expressed constitutively. The σS control of corA prompted us to evaluate the impact CorA in quiescent Salmonella cells, by using global and analytical proteomic analyses and physiological assays. The ΔcorA mutation conferred a competitive disadvantage to exit from stationary phase, and slightly impaired motility, but had no effect on total and free cellular magnesium contents. In contrast to the wild type strain, the ΔcorA mutant produced MgtA, but not MgtB, in the presence of high extracellular magnesium concentration. Under these conditions, MgtA production in the ΔcorA mutant did not require PhoP and, consistently, a ΔmgtA, but not a ΔphoP, mutation slightly reduced the magnesium content of the ΔcorA mutant. Nevertheless, the ΔphoP mutation strongly impaired growth and motility, in the absence of CorA only and independently of the extracellular magnesium concentration, unraveling the importance of PhoP-dependent functions in the absence of CorA. Under these conditions, several proteins involved in flagella formation, chemotaxis and secretion were affected by the ΔcorA and ΔphoP mutations in combination, but not alone. Altogether, our data pinpoint a regulatory network, where the absence of CorA is sensed and its physiological consequences alleviated by induction of MgtA- and PhoP- dependent compensatory mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultures were centrifuged, washed twice with Tris-HCl 100 mM, pH 7.4. Aliquots (1ml at OD600=10) were centrifuged and resuspended in 1ml lysis buffer containing Urea 8M, Tris-HCl 100 mM, pH7.4. Samples were added to a lysing matrix tube containing specialized lysing matrix particles (tubes with caps Sigma Z763837 and glass beads Sigma G4649) and were lysed at 4°C using the FastPrep-24 5G instrument (3x30sec, pause 180 sec). After centrifugation (15 min, 13200 rpm, 4°C), aliquots (500 µl ) were immediately freezed in dry ice and stored at -80°C. An amount of 50µg of total protein were adjusted to 80 µL with lysis buffer. Subsequently, samples were reduced in 50mM TCEP (Sigma - 646547) for 1H followed by alkylation in 50mM iodoacetamide (Sigma - I114) for 1H in the dark. Proteins were first digested with 1µg rLys-C (Promega - V1671) for 3H at 25°C and a second digestion was performed with 1µg Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega - V5111) for 16H at 37°C. Incubation time and temperature control for reduction, alkylation and digestions were performed with an Eppendorf ThermoMixer® C equipped with a ThermoTop®. The digestion was stop with formic acid (FA) at 1% final and peptides were desalted on reversed phase C18 Sep-Pak Cartridge (Waters - WAT054955). Peptides were eluted 2 times with Acetonitrile (ACN) 50%, FA 0.1% and 1 time with ACN 80%, FA 0.1%. Finally, samples were dried in vacuum centrifuge and resuspended with ACN 2% / FA 0.1%. A nanochromatographic system (Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 - Thermo Fisher Scientific) was coupled on-line to a Q ExactiveTM Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an integrated column oven (PRSO-V1 - Sonation). For each samples, peptides was loaded on an home-made 38 cm capillary column picotip silica emitter tip (75 μm inner diameter) with C18 resin (1.9 μm particles, 100 Å pore size, Reprosil-Pur Basic C18-HD resin, Dr. Maisch) after an equilibration step in 100 % solvent A (H2O, FA 0.1 %). Peptides were eluted with a multi-step gradient using 2 to 7 % solvent B (ACN 80 %, FA 0.1 %) during 5 min, 7 to 23 % during 120 min, 23 to 45 % during 20 min and 45 to 95 % during 7 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 167 min. Column temperature was set to 60°C. MS data were acquired using Xcalibur software using a data-dependent Top 10 method with a survey scans (300-1700 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 and a MS/MS scans (fixed first mass 100 m/z) at a resolution of 17,500. The AGC target and maximum injection time for the survey scans and the MS/MS scans were set to 3E6, 50 ms and 1E6, 60 ms respectively. The isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z and normalized collision energy fixed to 28 for HCD fragmentation. We used a minimum AGC target of 1E4 for an intensity threshold of 1.7E5. Unassigned precursor ion charge states as well as 1, 7, 8 and >8 charged states were rejected and peptide match was disable. Exclude isotopes was enabled and selected ions were dynamically excluded for 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant analysis : Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.6.0 [1] using the Andromeda search engine [2]. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Salmonella typhimurium Strain 14028s UniProt database (5,369 entries the 17/01/2021) and against a small protein database containing 5 proteins. Andromeda searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of two missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), oxidation (Met, variable) and Nter acetylation (variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 4.5 ppm for the main search. The mass tolerance in MS/MS was set to 20 ppm. Maximum peptide charge was set to seven and seven amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The “match between runs” feature was applied for samples having the same experimental condition with a maximal retention time window of 0.7 minute. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. Quantification was performed using the XIC-based LFQ algorithm with the Fast LFQ mode as described in Ref. [3]. Unique and razor peptides, included modified peptides, with at least 2 ratio count were accepted for quantification. To find the proteins more abundant in one condition than in another, the LFQ intensity from Maxquant were compared. Reverse hits, potential contaminants, and proteins not well identified with a 1% FDR (“Only identified by site”) were first removed from the analysis. Only proteins identified with at least one peptide that is not common to other proteins in the FASTA file used for the identification (at least one "unique" peptide) were kept. Additionally, only proteins with at least four LFQ intensity values in one of the two compared conditions were kept for further statistics. Proteins absent in a condition and present in another are put aside. These proteins can directly be assumed differentially abundant between the conditions. After this filtering, intensities of the remaining proteins were first log-transformed (log2). Next, intensity values were normalized by median centering within conditions (section 3.5 in [4]). Missing values were imputed using the impute.mle function of the R package imp4p [5]. Statistical testing was conducted using a limma t-test thanks to the R package limma [6]. An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of the cp4p R package [7] using the robust method described in [8] to estimate the proportion of true null hypotheses among the set of statistical tests. The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to a FDR (false discovery rate) level of 1% and an absolute log2(fold-change) superior to 1 have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins. Finally, the proteins of interest are therefore those which emerge from this statistical analysis supplemented by those which are considered to be present from one condition and absent in another.

### Publication Abstract
In many Gram-negative bacteria, the stress sigma factor of RNA polymerase, &#x3c3;S/RpoS, remodels global gene expression to reshape the physiology of stationary phase cells and ensure their survival under non-optimal growth conditions. In the foodborne pathogen Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, &#x3c3;S is also required for biofilm formation and virulence. We have recently shown that a &#x394;rpoS mutation decreases the magnesium content and expression level of the housekeeping Mg2+-transporter CorA in stationary phase Salmonella. The other two Mg2+-transporters of Salmonella are encoded by the PhoP-activated mgtA and mgtB genes and are expressed under magnesium starvation. The &#x3c3;S control of corA prompted us to evaluate the impact of CorA in stationary phase Salmonella cells, by using global and analytical proteomic analyses and physiological assays. The &#x394;corA mutation conferred a competitive disadvantage to exit from stationary phase, and slightly impaired motility, but had no effect on total and free cellular magnesium contents. In contrast to the wild-type strain, the &#x394;corA mutant produced MgtA, but not MgtB, in the presence of high extracellular magnesium concentration. Under these conditions, MgtA production in the &#x394;corA mutant did not require PhoP. Consistently, a &#x394;mgtA, but not a &#x394;phoP, mutation slightly reduced the magnesium content of the &#x394;corA mutant. Synthetic phenotypes were observed when the &#x394;phoP and &#x394;corA mutations were combined, including a strong reduction in growth and motility, independently of the extracellular magnesium concentration. The abundance of several proteins involved in flagella formation, chemotaxis and secretion was lowered by the &#x394;corA and &#x394;phoP mutations in combination, but not alone. These findings unravel the importance of PhoP-dependent functions in the absence of CorA when magnesium is sufficient. Altogether, our data pinpoint a regulatory network, where the absence of CorA is sensed by the cell and compensated by MgtA and PhoP- dependent mechanisms.

### Keywords
Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium, Shotgun proteomics, Q exactive plus

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, CNRS UMR3528, Biochimie des Interactions Macromoléculaires, F-75015 Paris, France
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Françoise Norel
Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, CNRS UMR3528, Biochimie des Interactions Macromoléculaires, F-75015 Paris, France


