### Accession
PXD021514

### Title
Identification of WT and mutant OSBPL2 interactors

### Description
Pathogenic OSBPL2 mutations led to almost identical truncated proteins, which formed cytoplasmic aggregates, we performed a proteomic analysis to understand the function of mutant OSBPL2 via the identification of its interactome.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins (75 mg) extracted from HEK 293 cells stably expressing p3XFLAG-OSBPL2-WT and p3XFLAG-OSBPL2-mutant or -bacterial alkaline phosphatase (BAP) were incubated with 80 µL of FLAG M2 agarose beads (Sigma-Aldrich) for 48 h at 4°C in an orbital shaker. The agarose beads were washed four times with lysis buffer to restrict non-specific binding. Subsequently, 200 µL of elution buffer containing 150 ng/µL 3xFLAG peptide was added, and the samples were incubated overnight. The eluates were analyzed using immunoblotting, Coomassie blue staining, and silver staining. The eluates were digested and subjected to NanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated on a C18 precolumn (75 μm × 2 cm, nanoViper, Acclaim PepMap100, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analytical C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were analyzed using an LC-MS/MS system consisting of an Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray source. MS/MS spectra were analyzed against the Uniprot human database using the following software analysis protocol. The reversed sequences of all proteins were appended into the database for the FDR calculation. ProLucid was used to identify the peptides, with a precursor mass error of 5 ppm and a fragment ion mass error of 200 ppm.

### Data Protocol
The interactors of WT and mutant OSBPL2 were analyzed using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) for functional annotation. The Functional Annotation Tool in the online version of DAVID (version 6.8) was run (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/) using the default parameters and GO categories representing molecular function, cellular component, and biological process were separately analyzed for enrichment. p-value < 0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Intracellular accumulation of mutant proteins causes proteinopathies, which lack targeted therapies. Autosomal dominant hearing loss (DFNA67) is caused by frameshift mutations in <i>OSBPL2</i>. Here, we show that DFNA67 is a toxic proteinopathy. Mutant OSBPL2 accumulated intracellularly and bound to macroautophagy/autophagy proteins. Consequently, its accumulation led to defective endolysosomal homeostasis and impaired autophagy. Transgenic mice expressing mutant OSBPL2 exhibited hearing loss, but <i>osbpl2</i> knockout mice or transgenic mice expressing wild-type OSBPL2 did not. Rapamycin decreased the accumulation of mutant OSBPL2 and partially rescued hearing loss in mice. Rapamycin also partially improved hearing loss and tinnitus in individuals with DFNA67. Our findings indicate that dysfunctional autophagy is caused by mutant proteins in DFNA67; hence, we recommend rapamycin for DFNA67 treatment.<b>Abbreviations:</b> ABR: auditory brainstem response; ACTB: actin beta; CTSD: cathepsin D; dB: decibel; DFNA67: deafness non-syndromic autosomal dominant 67; DPOAE: distortion product otoacoustic emission; fs: frameshift; GFP: green fluorescent protein; HsQ53R-TG: human p.Q53Rfs*100-transgenic: HEK 293: human embryonic kidney 293; HFD: high-fat diet; KO: knockout; LAMP1: lysosomal associated membrane protein 1; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; NSHL: non-syndromic hearing loss; OHC: outer hair cells; OSBPL2: oxysterol binding protein-like 2; SEM: scanning electron microscopy; SGN: spiral ganglion neuron; SQSTM1/p62: sequestosome 1; TEM: transmission electron microscopy; TG: transgenic; WES: whole-exome sequencing; YUHL: Yonsei University Hearing Loss; WT: wild-type.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Mutant protein, Interactors

### Affiliations
 Department of Pharmacology Yonsei University College of Medicine
Department of Pharmacology Yonsei University College of Medicine

### Submitter
young ik koh

### Lab Head
Dr young ik koh
Department of Pharmacology Yonsei University College of Medicine


