### Accession
PXD021080

### Title
Development of a parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mass spectrometry-assay for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein and nucleoprotein

### Description
There is an urgent need for robust and high-throughput methods for SARS-CoV-2 detection in suspected pa-tient samples to facilitate disease management, surveillance, and control. Although nucleic acid detection methods such as RT-PCR are the gold standard, during the current pandemic the deployment of RT-PCR tests has been extremely slow, and key reagents such as PCR primers, and RNA extraction kits are at critical shortages. Rapid point-of-care viral antigen detec-tion methods have been previously employed for the diagnosis of respiratory viruses such as influenza and respiratory syn-cytial viruses. Therefore, the direct detection of SARS-CoV-2 viral antigens in patient samples could also be used for diagno-sis of active infection and alternative methodologies for specific and sensitive viral protein detection should be explored. Targeted mass spectrometry techniques have enabled the identification and quantitation of a defined subset of pro-teins/peptides at single amino acid resolution with attomole level sensitivity and high reproducibility. Herein we report a tar-geted mass spectrometry assay for the detection of SARS- CoV-2  spike protein and nucleoprotein in a relevant biologi-cal matrix. Recombinant full-length spike protein and nucleoprotein were digested and prototypic peptides were selected for parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) quantitation using a high resolution Orbitrap instrument. A spectral library, which con-tained 7 proteotypic peptides (4 from spike protein and 3 from nucleoprotein) and the top 3 to 4 transitionsMS2 spectra, was generated and evaluated. From the original spectral library, we selected 2 best performing peptides for the final PRM assay. The assay was evaluated using mock test samples containing inactivated SARS-CoV-2 virions, added to in-vitro de-rived mucus. The PRM assay provided a limit of detection (LOD) of ~200 attomoles and a limit of quantitation (LOQ) of ~ 390 attomoles. Extrapolating from the test samples, the projected titer of virus particles necessary for detection of SARS-CoV-2 spike and nucleoprotein detection was approximately 2E5 viral particles/mL, making it an attractive alternative to RT-PCR assays. Potentially mass spectrometry-based methods for viral antigen detection may deliver higher throughput and could serve as a complementary diagnostic tool to RT-PCR. Furthermore, this assay could be used to evaluate the pres-ence of SARS-CoV-2 in archived or recently collected biological fluids, in-vitro derived research materials, and wastewater samples

### Sample Protocol
S-TRAP digestion using trypsin; PRM assay using heavy internal standard peptides, data analysis using Skyline, mock virus sample for quantitation of spike protein and N protein

### Data Protocol
Skyline software (ver. 20.1, MacCoss Lab Software) was used for PRM assay development of trypsin  digested samples and analysis including peptide selection and heavy/light peptide ratio quantification. The SARS-CoV-2 and iRT spectral library were constructed using Proteome Discoverer searched files. Transition reports contained peptide sequence, selected transitions, MS2 selected peak areas, and heavy/light ratio, which were generated from Skyline for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
There is an urgent need for robust and high-throughput methods for SARS-CoV-2 detection in suspected patient samples to facilitate disease management, surveillance, and control. Although nucleic acid detection methods such as reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) are the gold standard, during the current pandemic, the deployment of RT-PCR tests has been extremely slow, and key reagents such as PCR primers and RNA extraction kits are at critical shortages. Rapid point-of-care viral antigen detection methods have been previously employed for the diagnosis of respiratory viruses such as influenza and respiratory syncytial viruses. Therefore, the direct detection of SARS-CoV-2 viral antigens in patient samples could also be used for diagnosis of active infection, and alternative methodologies for specific and sensitive viral protein detection should be explored. Targeted mass spectrometry techniques have enabled the identification and quantitation of a defined subset of proteins/peptides at single amino acid resolution with attomole level sensitivity and high reproducibility. Herein, we report a targeted mass spectrometry assay for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and nucleoprotein in a relevant biological matrix. Recombinant full-length spike protein and nucleoprotein were digested and proteotypic peptides were selected for parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) quantitation using a high-resolution Orbitrap instrument. A spectral library, which contained seven proteotypic peptides (four from spike protein and three from nucleoprotein) and the top three to four transitions, was generated and evaluated. From the original spectral library, we selected two best performing peptides for the final PRM assay. The assay was evaluated using mock test samples containing inactivated SARS-CoV-2 virions, added to in vitro derived mucus. The PRM assay provided a limit of detection of &#x223c;200 attomoles and a limit of quantitation of &#x223c; 390 attomoles. Extrapolating from the test samples, the projected titer of virus particles necessary for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 spike and nucleoprotein detection was approximately 2 &#xd7; 10<sup>5</sup> viral particles/mL, making it an attractive alternative to RT-PCR assays. Potentially, mass spectrometry-based methods for viral antigen detection may deliver higher throughput and could serve as a complementary diagnostic tool to RT-PCR. Furthermore, this assay could be used to evaluate the presence of SARS-CoV-2 in archived or recently collected biological fluids, in vitro-derived research materials, and wastewater samples.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Skyline, Heavy standard peptides, Qexactive hf-x, Spike protein, Nucleoprotein, Parallel reaction monitoring

### Affiliations
Sonja Hess, Dr. rer. nat. Director, Dynamic Omics AstraZeneca R&D Antibody Discovery and Protein Engineering One Medimmune Way, Gaithersburg, MD 20878
MedImmune

### Submitter
Raghothama Chaerkady

### Lab Head
Dr Sonja Hess
Sonja Hess, Dr. rer. nat. Director, Dynamic Omics AstraZeneca R&D Antibody Discovery and Protein Engineering One Medimmune Way, Gaithersburg, MD 20878


