### Accession
PXD001683

### Title
Aeropyrum pernix K1 LC-MSMS -  Perchlorate and chlorate reduction by the Crenarchaeon Aeropyrum pernix and two thermophilic Firmicutes

### Description
The study investigated the ability of selected (hyper-)thermophilic prokaryotes to grow anaerobically by the reduction of perchlorate and chlorate. Physiological, genomic and proteome analyses suggest that the Crenarchaeon Aeropyrum pernix reduces (per)chlorate with a periplasmic enzyme related to nitrate reductases, while it lacks a functional chlorite-disproportionating enzyme (Cld). A. pernix seems to rely on the chemical reactivity of reduced sulfur compounds with the toxic intermediate chlorite to complete the pathway. The chemical oxidation of thiosulfate (in excessive amounts present in the medium) to sulfate and the concomitant release of chloride anions from the reduction of chlorite are the products of a biotic-abiotic (per)chlorate reduction pathway in A. pernix. The apparent absence of Cld in two other (per)chlorate-reducing microorganisms and their dependence on sulfide for (per)chlorate reduction is consistent with earlier-made observations on (per)chlorate-reducing Archaeoglobus fulgidus. All here discussed microorganisms use strategies for complete (per)chlorate reduction that differ from the physiology of classical (per)chlorate-reducing mesophiles.

### Sample Protocol
Aeropyrum pernix strain K1 was purchased from the Leibniz Institute DSMZ- German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures. A. pernix was grown in DMS medium nr. 820 using a 1 g/l yeast extract and 5 g/l peptone as substrate. For anaerobic cultivation the headspace was filled with pure nitrogen. Electron acceptors (sodium chlorate or sodium perchlorate) and electron donors (sodium formate, methanol) were separately autoclaved and added to the media afterwards. Vitamin solutions and sodium pyruvate were filter-sterilized and added to the medium after autoclaving. Independent duplicates of 500 ml cell cultures of A. pernix grown with oxygen, chlorate or perchlorate were grown until the late exponential phase and cells were harvested by centrifugation. Ultrasonication and chemical disintegration using 4% SDS in PBS followed by centrifugation were used to obtain cell free extracts. Prior to loading samples on a SDS-PAGE and incubation step of 95 ◦C for 10 minutes was included. Total protein amounts were determined and equal amounts were loaded onto a Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris SDS page gel (Invitrogen) and electrophoresed for 5 min at 200V constant voltage using MES-SDS as running buffer. For each lane a single band containing all proteins was cut out and treated for reduction and alkylation of cysteines with 20 mM dithiothreitol and 40 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Digestion was performed by incubating the gel pieces overnight with trypsin at a 1:20 enzyme-protein ratio. Peptides were extracted from the gel-pieces with 5% formic acid and 5% DMS and subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using an EasyLC 1000 and an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full MS1 spectra from m/z 300-1200 were acquired at a resolution of 70000 (target 3e6, maximum injection time 250ms). A top20 method was used to acquire MS2 spectra at a resolution of 17500 (target 1e5, maximal injection time 50ms). Parent ions were isolated with a 2.5 m/z window and fragmented with a HCD energy of 28. Only multiply charged ion were selected and the dynamic exclusion window was set to 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The thermo .raw data files were processed within Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with the MS2 spectrum processor (http://ms.imp.ac.at/?goto=ms2spectrumprocessor) to deconvolute and deisotope all MS2 spectra. Database search was carried out using Mascot 2.2.07 with the entries from UniprotKB of Aeropyrum pernix (strain ATCC 700893 / DSM 11879 / JCM 9820 / NBRC100138 / K1) (taxid: 272557;  with 1714 entries and 493596 residues, downloaded on 20.02.2014). The precursor mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02 amu. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification and methionine oxide was set as variable modification. Scaffold 4.0 was used to load the Mascot .dat files and to further analyse them by X!tandem using the same restrictions as above and additionally, N-terminal pyroglutamic acid was included as variable modification. A minimum protein threshold of 99.0% with a minimum number of 2 peptides at a threshold of 95% was used to filter the results. Label free quantitation of the data was performed by using the total spectrum count.

### Publication Abstract
This study reports the ability of one hyperthermophilic and two thermophilic microorganisms to grow anaerobically by the reduction of chlorate and perchlorate. Physiological, genomic and proteome analyses suggest that the Crenarchaeon Aeropyrum pernix reduces perchlorate with a periplasmic enzyme related to nitrate reductases, but that it lacks a functional chlorite-disproportionating enzyme (Cld) to complete the pathway. Aeropyrum pernix, previously described as a strictly aerobic microorganism, seems to rely on the chemical reactivity of reduced sulfur compounds with chlorite, a mechanism previously reported for perchlorate-reducing Archaeoglobus fulgidus. The chemical oxidation of thiosulfate (in excessive amounts present in the medium) and the reduction of chlorite result in the release of sulfate and chloride, which are the products of a biotic-abiotic perchlorate reduction pathway in Ae.&#x2009;pernix. The apparent absence of Cld in two other perchlorate-reducing microorganisms, Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans and Moorella glycerini strain NMP, and their dependence on sulfide for perchlorate reduction is consistent with the observations made on Ar.&#x2009;fulgidus. Our findings suggest that microbial perchlorate reduction at high temperature differs notably from the physiology of perchlorate- and chlorate-reducing mesophiles and that it is characterized by the lack of a chlorite dismutase and is enabled by a combination of biotic and abiotic reactions.

### Keywords
Hyperthermophile, Lc-msms, Crenarchaeon, Aeropyrum

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, Technical University Delft, Julianalaan 67. 2682 BC Delft, The Netherlands
Department of Biotechnology, Technical University Delft, Delft, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Martijn Pinkse

### Lab Head
Dr Martijn W. H. Pinkse
Department of Biotechnology, Technical University Delft, Julianalaan 67. 2682 BC Delft, The Netherlands


