### Accession
PXD006381

### Title
Proteome of the Developing Murine Lens Through Mass Spectrometry

### Description
The proteome is a term used for the entire catalog of proteins present in a cell at any time. In here, we investigated the proteome of developing mouse lens through mass spectrometry-based protein sequencing. We extracted mouse lenses at six developmental time points, which included two embryonic (E15 and E18) and four postnatal stages (P0, P3, P6, and P9). The lenses from each time point were preserved in three distinct pools to serve as biological replicates for each developmental stage. The total cellular protein was extracted from the lens, digested with trypsin and labeled with 6-plex isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT) for three independent 6-plex TMT experiments. A total of 6,117 proteins were identified in the mouse ocular lens in at least one of the above-mentioned six developmental time points. Of these, 6,117 proteins were present in one TMT set, 4,325 in two, and 2,972 were present in three TMT sets, respectively. Majority of the proteins exhibit steady expression; however, we identified 162 proteins that exhibited an 8-fold differential (higher or lower) expression during the developmental time course compared to their levels at E15. The lens proteome is comprised of diverse proteins that have distinct biological properties and functional characteristics including a total of 404 proteins that have been associated with autophagy. We have established a comprehensive profile of the developing murine lens proteome. This repository will be helpful in identifying critical components of lens development and processes essential for the maintenance of its transparency.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Collection: The use of mice in this study was approved by the Johns Hopkins Animal Care and Use Committee (ACUC), and all experiments were performed in accordance with a protocol approved by the Johns Hopkins ACUC. Lenses were obtained at six different developmental stages, including embryonic day 15 (E15) and 18 (E18), and postnatal day 0 (P0), day 3 (P3), day 6 (P6), and day 9 (P9). The lenses were extracted as described previously. Briefly, mice were first anesthetized with isoflurane, subsequently euthanized through cervical dislocation, and lenses were isolated using forceps under a microscope. Three biological replicates, each consisting of 23 embryos for E15, 10 embryos for E18, and 8 pups for P0, P3, P6, and P9, were used for each developmental stage for subsequent separate analysis on the three TMT runs. Lenses were frozen immediately in −80 °C until further processing for total protein isolation.  Protein extraction, digestion, and TMT labeling: Three biological replicates were used for whole-proteome profiling at each developmental time point. A single biological replicate from each of the six developmental time points was pooled with other labeled time points and processed for each TMT set (6-plex). Sample processing, including protein isolation, digestion, labeling with isobaric TMT, and analysis on liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed as described previously with few modifications.19 Briefly, samples were lysed by vortexing for two minutes at maximum speed using glass beads (0.5, 1, and 3 mm in diameter) in 8 M urea and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC). Protein lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g at 4 °C to preclude cell debris, and protein concentration was estimated using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. 100 µg of each sample was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for one hour and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes in the dark. The protein samples were then digested overnight at 37 °C using sequencing-grade trypsin (1:50) followed by desalting and labeling with 6-plex isobaric TMT according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The six developmental time points such as E15, E18, P0, P3, P6, and P9 were labeled individually in three independent TMT experiments using TMT-126, TMT-127N, TMT-127C, TMT, 128N, TMT-128C, and TMT-129N, respectively, with TMT reagents. The labeling reaction was carried out for one hour at room temperature, followed by quenching with 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). After labeling the peptides with TMT reagent, we checked the labeling efficiency, and it was more than 97%. The digested and labeled peptides from the six-time points were pooled and desalted with C¬18 SEP-PAK (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). The peptides were fractionated by basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography into 96 fractions, followed by concatenation into 24 fractions by combining every 24 fractions.   Mass spectrometry analysis: The fractionated peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled with the Easy-nLC 1200 nano-flow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides from each fraction were reconstituted in 10 % formic acid and loaded on a Thermo Fisher Scientific manufactured Acclaim PepMap100 Nano-Trap Column (100 μm × 2 cm) packed with 5 μm C18 particles at a flow rate of 5 μl per minute. Peptides were resolved at 250-nl/min flow rate using a linear gradient of 10 to 35 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in 95 % acetonitrile) over 95 minutes on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID), PepMap RSLC C18 and 2 µm C18 particles (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was fitted with an EASY-Spray ion source that was operated at a voltage of 2.0 kV.  Mass spectroscopy analysis was carried out in a data-dependent manner with a full scan in the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 350 to 1550 in the “Top Speed” setting, three seconds per cycle. Both MS and MS/MS were acquired, and full MS scans were measured at a resolution of 120,000 at an m/z of 200. Precursor ions were fragmented using the higher-energy collisional dissociation method and detected at a mass resolution of 30,000, at an m/z of 200. Automatic gain control for full MS was set to one million ions and for MS/MS was set to 0.05 million ions with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms and 100 ms, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds, and singly-charged ions were rejected. Internal calibration was carried out using the lock mass option (m/z 445.1200025) from ambient air.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: Precursor and fragment ion m/z values were extracted from MS raw files using the default spectrum selector, Xtract, and MS3-processor nodes in Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The tandem mass spectrometry data were searched using SEQUEST algorithms against a mouse neXtProt database (3.0.28; released on 2/11/2016). The search parameters used were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to two missed cleavages); b) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; and d) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) and TMT tags (+229.162932 Da) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1 % false-discovery rate. Proteome data derived from three 6-plex TMT labeling analysis using the Proteome Discoverer software were imported into Partek Genomics Suite v6.6 (Partek Inc. Saint Louis MO) for protein annotation and further analysis. Only those spectra with a Proteome Discoverer Isolation Interference value of <30% were accepted for further evaluation. One or more mass spectra are assigned by Proteome Discoverer to each NCBI gi identifier, which represents a single protein. For each protein the median of these multiple spectra values within a single TMT run was calculated to produce a single value representing that protein for that specific TMT dataset. The values of each TMT’s data set's six samples were quantile normalized to minimize any potential noise and experimental variation and subsequently converted to the log2 notation for statistical analyses. Partek Genomics Studio was used to perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA) creating plots from these expression values.  Despite quantile normalization it is apparent from the PCA plot (Fig. 1A), that there is considerable residual technical batch effect from the three TMT sets, which effect serves as an extraneous covariant. For that reason TMT set was incorporated as a second variable in the two-tailed two way ANOVA so that it would not distort the prime variable’s (time point comparison) statistics. Whereas the PCA plot’s first two dimensions, X- and Y-axes, reflect this set/batch effect, the third Z-axis clearly separates the time points and, further, recapitulates their developmental order.  In parallel, we created expression profile plots to examine the proteins differential expression across time using Spotfire DecisionSite with Functional Genomics v9.1.2 (TIBCO Spotfire, Boston, MA, USA). The earliest developmental stage, E15, was set as the reference point, and the remaining five time points were separately compared to E15, thus yielding individual protein fold changes between the E15 starting point and increasingly greater development. For each protein the average of its three TMT set log2 values (geometric mean) was taken to represent that protein for each time point. For graphical purposes, a virtual E15 versus E15 comparison (0.0-fold change of course) was included.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse ocular lens, Proteome, Mass-spectrometry

### Affiliations
The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287 USA
Johns Hopkins Wilmer Eye Institute

### Submitter
OM Genetics

### Lab Head
Dr S. Amer Riazuddin
The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287 USA


