### Accession
PXD034370

### Title
Microscopy-based functional single cell proteomic profiling of cells with abnormal DNA damage response dynamics

### Description
Tumor heterogeneity is an important source of cancer therapy resistance. Single cell proteomics has the potential to decipher protein content leading to heterogeneous cellular phenotypes. Single-Cell ProtEomics by Mass Spectrometry (SCoPE-MS) is a recently developed, promising, unbiased proteomic profiling techniques, which allows profiling several tens of single cells for >1000 proteins per cell. However, a method to link single cell proteomes with cellular behaviors is needed to advance this type of profiling technique. Here, we developed a microscopy-based functional single cell proteomic profiling technology, called FUNpro, to link the proteome of individual cells with phenotypes of interest, even if the phenotypes are dynamic or the cells of interest are sparse. FUNpro enables one i) to screen thousands of cells with subcellular resolution and monitor (intra)cellular dynamics using a custom-built microscope, ii) to real-time analyze (intra)cellular dynamics of individual cells using an integrated cell tracking algorithm, iii) to promptly isolate the cells displaying phenotypes of interest, and iv) to single cell proteomically profile the isolated cells. We applied FUNpro to proteomically profile a newly identified small subpopulation of U2OS osteosarcoma cells displaying an abnormal, prolonged DNA damage response (DDR) after ionizing radiation (IR). With this, we identified the PDS5A protein contributing to the abnormal DDR dynamics and helping the cells survive after IR.

### Sample Protocol
SCoPE-MS has been widely adapted and optimized in sample preparation, liquid chromatography and MS settings. SCoPE-MS combines the tandem mass tag (TMT) technology with an addition of carrier cells to identify and quantify peptides/proteins of single cells. We prepared the sample using the minimal ProteOmic sample Preparation method (mPOP): a 96-well plate pre-filled with 20 μL pure water and sorted with designated cells per well was frozen on dry ice for 5 min and heated by ThermoMixer C (Eppendorf) at 95 °C for 10 min followed by spinning down at 3000 rpm for 1 min. 20 μL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEABC, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each well of the plate, and 1 and 2 μL of 50 ng/μL trypsin (in 100 mM TEABC, Promega) was added to the wells with single cells and two hundred carrier cells, respectively. Digestion was performed at 37 °C ThermoMixer C with shaking speed at 650 rpm overnight. After digestion, the 96-well plate was then spun down at 3000 rpm for 1 min.  0.5 and 1 μL of 85 mM TMT labeling reagent (TMT10plex, Thermo Fischer) was then added to the wells with single cells and two hundred carrier cells, respectively. The labeling was performed at 25 C with shaking speed of 650 rpm for 1 hr. After labeling, 0.5 μL of 5% (v/v) hydroxylamine was added to each well, and the TMT labeling reaction was quenched at 25 C with shaking speed at 650 rpm for 15 min. All corresponding samples were combined into the same wells, respectively. 1 μL of 10% (v/v) formic acid (FA, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each combined well. After acidifying, the samples were desalted by μ-C18 ZipTip (EMD Millipore) and kept in the ZipTip at -80 °C before the MS analysis. Prior to the MS analysis, the samples were eluted by 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma-Aldrich) and speed-vacuum dried. The samples were resuspended with 0.1% (v/v) FA. Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fischer) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer) operating in positive mode. Peptide mixtures were trapped on a 2 cm x 100 μm Pepmap C18 column (Thermo Fisher 164564) and then separated on an in-house packed 50 cm x 75 μm capillary column with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch) at a flowrate of 250 nL/min, using a linear gradient of 0–32% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) during 120 min. The MS was performed in the data-dependent acquisition mode. Surveying full scan (MS1) was in the range of 375–1,400 m/z and the resolution was set to 120k. Fragmentation of the peptides was performed by HCD. The resolution of tandem mass spectrum (MS2) was set to 30K, automatic gain control (AGC) was 5E4 and the maximum injection time (IT) was 300 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.1): peptides were searched against SwissProt database (Homo sapiens, downloaded on 2021/10/8), static modification was left empty, variable modifications were deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M), and minimum peptide length was 7. The reporter ion MS2 analysis was used with the isotopic impurity correction factors provided by the manufacturer (TMT batch number: VB287465). The peptide-spectrum match (PSM)-level weighted ratio normalization and match between runs were used for identification. Other parameters were remained default. The proteins were filtered at 1% protein identification false discovery rate. Subsequently, the protein groups, peptide list, and PSMs were exported from MaxQuant for further processing. The protein groups list was further imported into Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) for differential protein analysis. The reversed proteins and contaminant proteins were removed, the proteins identified in less than 3 cells were removed, after which 1,588 unique proteins (10,053 unique peptides) were identified. After filtering, the cell types (Group 1 or Group 2) were annotated, the intensity was log2-transformed and normalized by subtracting the medians of columns and rows sequentially. The differential protein analysis by two-tailed t-test was computed, and significantly up-regulated proteins (FDR ≤ 0.05) were reported and highlighted in the volcano plot.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Single-cell proteomics

### Affiliations
Erasmus MC
Department of Molecular Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, The Netherlands. Oncode Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Pin-Rui Su

### Lab Head
Dr Miao-Ping Chien
Department of Molecular Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, The Netherlands. Oncode Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands.


