### Accession
PXD007967

### Title
Endegenous human milk peptides

### Description
Variations in endogenous peptide profiles, functionality, and the enzymes responsible for the formation of these peptides in human milk are understudied. Additionally, there is a lack of knowledge regarding peptides in donor human milk, which is used to feed preterm infants when mother’s own milk is not (sufficiently) available. To assess this, 29 human milk samples from the Dutch Human Milk Bank were analyzed as three groups, preterm late lactation stage (LS) (n=12), term early (n=8) and term late LS (n=9). Gestational age (GA) groups were defined as preterm (24-36 weeks) and term (>37 weeks). LS was determined as days postpartum as early (16-36 days) or late (55-88 days). Peptides, analyzed by LC-MS/MS, and parent proteins (proteins from matched peptide sequences) were identified and quantified, after which peptide functionality and the enzymes responsible for protein cleavage were determined. A total of 16 different parent proteins were identified from human milk, with no differences by GA or LS. We identified 1104 endogenous peptides, of which, the majority were from the parent proteins β-casein, polymeric immunoglobulin receptor, αs1-casein, osteopontin, and κ-casein. The absolute number of peptide differed by GA and LS with 30 and 41 differing sequences respectively (p<0.05) Odds likelihood tests determined that 32 peptides had a predicted bioactive functionality, with no significant differences between groups. Enzyme prediction analysis showed that plasmin/trypsin enzymes most likely cleaved the identified human milk peptides. These results explain some of the variation in endogenous peptides in human milk, leading to future targets that may be studied for functionality.

### Sample Protocol
Subjects and Samples  Human milk samples were provided by the Dutch Human Milk Bank (located at VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands).  Total Protein Total protein concentrations of the skim milk fraction were assessed by Pierce Protein BCA Assay Kit according to the manufacturers’ instructions. BSA and a tryptone enzymatic digest from casein (2 mg/mL) (Sigma-Aldrich) were used for standard curves.   Peptides Methods were based upon previously described methods with modifications. Briefly, a frozen 2 mL aliquot of human milk was thawed at room temperature. The sample was then defatted and skimmed by centrifugation at 1500g for 10 minutes. Skim milk was used for peptide isolation by TCA precipitation20 followed by a solid phase extraction (SPE) C18 column clean up step prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS. C18+ Stage tip columns were made in-house as described previously.19 The C18+ Stage tip column was washed two times with 200 μL methanol and conditioned with 100 μL of 1 mL/L HCOOH. The peptide samples were loaded on the C18+ Stage tip column followed by washing with 100 μL 1mL/L HCOOH. Peptides were eluted in 50 μL of 70% acetonitrile/ 30% 1 mL/L HCOOH and  dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf Vacufuge®) at 45 °C for 20 to 30 min until the volume of each sample decreased to 15 μL or less. Samples were reconstituted to 50 μL with 1 mL/L HCOOH for analysis by LC-MS/MS.  For validation of the reproducibility of our extraction method, three extraction replications were analyzed as two technical replicates each. The extraction replications were assessed qualitatively and quantitatively and showed that peptides sequences had a 87% overlap in every replicate and did not differ between samples according to analysis of variance (ANOVA) (q > 0.05) with an FDR of 1%. Additionally, extraction replicates were highly correlated with Spearman Rank coefficients ranging from 0.94 to 0.97, all together indicating that the combined extraction and LC-MS/MS method was highly reproducible.   LC-MS/MS Analysis of samples was performed on a nano-LC/LTQ-OrbitrapXL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometry system. A sample volume of 18 μL was injected onto the pre-concentration column and peptides were eluted onto a 0.10×200 mm Magic C18 resin analytical column with an acetonitrile gradient at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/min. The gradient consisted of an increase from 5% to 30% acetonitrile in water with 1 mL/L HCOOH in 50 min followed by a fast increase in the percentage acetonitrile to 50% (with 50% water and 1 mL/L HCOOH in both the acetonitrile and the water) in 3 minutes as a column cleaning step.19 A P777 Upchurch microcross was positioned between the pre-concentration and analytical column. An electrospray potential of 3.5 kV was applied directly to the eluent via a stainless steel needle fitted into the waste line of the microcross. Full scan positive mode FTMS spectra at a resolution of 15000 were obtained between m/z 280 and 1400 on the Orbitrap. MS/MS scans of the most abundant singly, doubly, and triply charged peaks in the FTMS scan were recorded in data dependent mode in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 7.500 (MS/MS threshold=10000, 45 s exclusion duration) using a contaminant m/z mass list to prevent selection of contaminants.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis For each run, MS/MS spectra were obtained and analyzed with MaxQuant v.1.5.5.1 with the Andromeda search engine.21 Parent proteins and peptides were quantified based on label free quantification (LFQ) with a minimum ratio count of 2 peptides. Match between runs was selected. Unspecified digestion settings were used, and peptide intensities were used for quantification. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was set for both the peptide spectrum match level and the protein level. First search, for mass recalibration, was done using a major human milk proteins list downloaded from UniProt on 05-2015. A human protein database was downloaded from UniProt on 25-04-2016 and used for Andromeda searches with a minimum peptide length of 7 and a maximum length of 50. A standard contaminants list from MaxQuant was included in the search. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. No fixed modifications were selected because the samples were not reduced.   Filtering and statistics on the MaxQuant output was done with Perseus v.1.5.5.3, as detailed below. Text files from MaxQuant were loaded into Perseus; for proteins, sample LFQ intensities and for peptides, sample intensities were used as main parameters. The peptide file used for analysis contained information on all identified peptides. Each peptide sequence could have underlying MS/MS evidence for this sequence both with and without modifications, which were counted as a single identified peptide sequence. Once samples were loaded, they were filtered for removal of reverse and contaminant sequences. Data was log10 transformed, and grouped by GA and LS. Data were filtered by rows based on valid values for a minimum of 50% occurrences of each peptide sequence. Missing peptide intensity values were imputed across the entire matrix, using random values from a normal distribution with a variation of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8,  meant to simulate expression below the limit of detection. Once imputed, values were normalized based on z-score which, Perseus calculated by subtracting the median intensity from individual intensities, and divided by the standard deviation.   Statistical Analysis Differences across the three groups in infant and maternal demographic and health characteristics were tested by ANOVA for continuous variables and chi-square tests for categorical variables with Stata Statistical Software13 (2014, StataCorp, College Station, Texas). Differences across groups in total skim milk protein concentrations were tested by ANOVA with Bonferroni corrections. Qualitative assessment of peptides by parent proteins were done in Microsoft Excel 2016 and peptide overlap was assessed by Venn diagram generated by the online available tool Venny (http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/).  Differences in protein and peptide profiles were assessed in Perseus v.1.5.5.322 and tested across GA, LS, and the interaction of GA and LS groups by ANOVA. For ANOVA, S0 was set to 0, with permutation-based FDR, where FDR was set to 0.05, which are the default settings in Perseus. For all analyses, a p-value of < 0.05 was considered significant. For volcano plots, two sided t-tests were used to determine differences based on GA or LS groups. For this analysis, the FDR was set to 0.05 and S0 was set to 0.1. The S0 value here allows for testing of artificial variance within groups and controls for differences between means, which allowed for a larger absolute difference between groups. Throughout, results were reported as means ± standard deviation (SD) unless noted otherwise.   Functionality Generalized prediction of bioactive functionality was determined with the utilization of web-based software PeptideRanker. PeptideRanker uses a novel N-to-1 neural network for the prediction of bioactive peptides, and uses four bioactive peptide databases (BIOPEP, PeptideDB, APD2 and CAMP) for a training set.   Enzyme Predictions Prediction of enzymes responsible for the cleavage of human milk proteins into the peptides detected was determined with the web-based software EnzymePredictor. Enzymes were classified and evaluated based on the total number of cleavages and their odds ratio (OR).

### Publication Abstract
Variations in endogenous peptide profiles, functionality, and the enzymes responsible for the formation of these peptides in human milk are understudied. Additionally, there is a lack of knowledge regarding peptides in donor human milk, which is used to feed preterm infants when mother's own milk is not (sufficiently) available. To assess this, 29 human milk samples from the Dutch Human Milk Bank were analyzed as three groups, preterm late lactation stage (LS) (n = 12), term early (n = 8) and term late LS (n = 9). Gestational age (GA) groups were defined as preterm (24-36 weeks) and term (&#x2265;37 weeks). LS was determined as days postpartum as early (16-36 days) or late (55-88 days). Peptides, analyzed by LC-MS/MS, and parent proteins (proteins from matched peptide sequences) were identified and quantified, after which peptide functionality and the enzymes responsible for protein cleavage were determined. A total of 16 different parent proteins were identified from human milk, with no differences by GA or LS. We identified 1104 endogenous peptides, of which, the majority were from the parent proteins &#x3b2;-casein, polymeric immunoglobulin receptor, &#x3b1;<sub>s1</sub>-casein, osteopontin, and &#x3ba;-casein. The absolute number of peptides differed by GA and LS with 30 and 41 differing sequences respectively (p &lt; 0.05) Odds likelihood tests determined that 32 peptides had a predicted bioactive functionality, with no significant differences between groups. Enzyme prediction analysis showed that plasmin/trypsin enzymes most likely cleaved the identified human milk peptides. These results explain some of the variation in endogenous peptides in human milk, leading to future targets that may be studied for functionality.

### Keywords
Endegenous, Peptides, Human milk

### Affiliations
Dairy Science & Technology, Food Quality & Design group, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, The Netherlands
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Kasper Hettinga

### Lab Head
Dr Kasper Hettinga
Dairy Science & Technology, Food Quality & Design group, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, The Netherlands


