### Accession
PXD006630

### Title
Nε- and O-Acetylation in Mycobacterium tuberculosis Lineage 7 is Biased Towards Proteins Involved in Growth, Virulence and Antimicrobial Resistance

### Description
Protein acetylation is one of the post-translational modifications (PTMs) involved in regulating a myriad of cellular processes in bacteria. Increasing evidence demonstrates that lysine acetylation is involved in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) virulence and pathogenesis. However, previous reports have detected acetylation at lysine residues using only reference strains. Here, we analyzed the global Nε- and O-acetylation of Mtb lineage 7 clinical isolates and H37Rv. Quantitative acetylome analysis resulted in identification of 2577 class-I acetylation sites derived from 987 proteins. These proteins were found to be involved in central metabolism, translation, stress responses and drug resistance. Interestingly, 261 acetylation sites on 164 proteins were differentially regulated between the two virulent strains. A total of 257 acetylation sites on 160 proteins were hypoacetylated in lineage 7. These proteins are involved in Mtb growth, virulence, energy metabolism, host-pathogen interaction and stress responses. Furthermore, Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of exclusively acetylated proteins identified revealed strain-specific enrichment of selected biological processes. Taken together, this study provides the first global analysis of O-acetylated proteins in Mtb. This quantitative acetylome data presents the abundance and diversity of acetylated proteins in Mtb and opens a new avenue of research in exploring the role of protein acetylation in fine-tuning Mtb physiology.

### Sample Protocol
A total cellular protein lysate were extracted using a lysis buffer containing 2% SDS, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 tablet per 50 ml EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and 1 tablet per 10 ml PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail. Proteins were pre-fractionated by 1.0 mm, 4%-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel, at 80 V for 5 min followed by 20 min at 200 V. Colloidal Blue stained gel lane was divided into 6 fractions, and each fraction was subjected to in-gel reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion. Peptide products were analyzed by nano-LC–MS/MS using a Q Exactive hybrid quadropole-orbitrap mass spectrometer interfaced with an EASY-spray ion source (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific) and coupled to a nano-LC HPLC (UltiMate 3000, Dionex). Peptides were injected in triplicates into a pre-analytic column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 2cm, nanoviper, C18, 3µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC, C18, 2µm, 100Å, 50µm x 15cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 120 min solvent gradient and flow rate of 0.3 μL/min at 60°C. The gradient used was from 2% to 30% solvent B for 90 min followed by 30% to 45% solvent B from 90 to 100 min. Thereafter the gradient was kept at 90% solvent B from 100 to 120 min, using 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 3% acetonitrile (ACN) as solvent A and 0.1% FA in 97% ACN as solvent B (FA: LC-MS grade, Fluka; ACN: LC-MS grade, Merck Laboratories). The MS instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. The full MS scans were acquired at 70K resolution, with automatic gain control target of 1 × 106 ions, maximum injection time of 200 ms and MS scan range 300-1800 m/z. Higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) was used for peptide fragmentation with normalized collision energy set to 28. The MS/MS scans were performed using a data-dependent top10 method at a resolution of 17.5K with an automatic gain control target of 5×104 ions at maximum injection time of 100 ms and isolation window of 2.0 m/z units. An under fill ratio of 10% and dynamic exclusion duration of 30s were applied.

### Data Protocol
Protein and PTM site identification from the raw MS data was performed by using the MaxQuant software with an integrated Andromeda search engine (version 1.5.7.4. The raw mass spectral data were searched against the Uniprot Mtb protein database (downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org/ on Jan 15, 2017, uniprot ID: UP000001584, Organism/Taxonomy ID: 83332 and with 3993 protein sequences) concatenated to reverse decoy database and protein sequences for common contaminants. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. The “re-quantify” and “match between runs” options were utilized with a retention time alignment window of 3 min. Dependent peptide search, second peptide, LFQ and iBAQ were enabled. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as the fixed modification and acetylation on protein N-terminal, conversion of N-terminal glutamine and glutamic acid to pyroglutamic acid and oxidation on methionine were set as the variable modifications. For the PTM analysis, acetyl (KSTY) was set as variable modification. Unique and razor peptides were used for protein quantification. Only peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids and detected in at least one or more of the replicates were considered for identification. For protein identification, a minimum of two peptides out of which at least one unique peptide was required per protein group. The threshold of protein identifications were determined by false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.  The bioinformatics analysis was performed using the Perseus software (version 1.5.6.0) as previously described 26. The protein group output from MaxQuant was used as the basis for all the subsequent statistical and GO enrichment analysis. All modified peptide spectra were validated by applying stringent site localization probability of ≥ 0.75 and PEP of ≤ 0.01 prior to further analysis. PTM sites identifications with localization probability < 0.75 and PEP > 0.01 or protein groups with matches to proteins from the reversed database or contaminant protein sequences were removed from the analysis.  Following protein identification by a MaxQuant database search, validation for multiple comparisons was corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction. For identification of significantly changed acetylation sites between the two Mtb lineages, a two tailed unpaired student`s T-test with FDR ≤ 0.05 and S0=2 was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing evidence demonstrates that lysine acetylation is involved in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) virulence and pathogenesis. However, previous investigations in Mtb have only monitored acetylation at lysine residues using selected reference strains. We analyzed the global N<sub>&#x3b5;</sub>- and O-acetylation of three Mtb isolates: two lineage 7 clinical isolates and the lineage 4 H37Rv reference strain. Quantitative acetylome analysis resulted in identification of 2490 class-I acetylation sites, 2349 O-acetylation and 141 N<sub>&#x3b5;</sub>-acetylation sites, derived from 953 unique proteins. Mtb O-acetylation was thereby significantly more abundant than N<sub>&#x3b5;</sub>-acetylation. The acetylated proteins were found to be involved in central metabolism, translation, stress responses, and antimicrobial drug resistance. Notably, 261 acetylation sites on 165 proteins were differentially regulated between lineage 7 and lineage 4 strains. A total of 257 acetylation sites on 161 proteins were hypoacetylated in lineage 7 strains. These proteins are involved in Mtb growth, virulence, bioenergetics, host-pathogen interactions, and stress responses. This study provides the first global analysis of O-acetylated proteins in Mtb. This quantitative acetylome data expand the current understanding regarding the nature and diversity of acetylated proteins in Mtb and open a new avenue of research for exploring the role of protein acetylation in Mtb physiology.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis; lineage 7; post-translational modifications; acetylome; nε-acetylation; o-acetylation.

### Affiliations
PhD candidate, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway
Department of Microbiology, Institute of clinical medicine, University of Oslo, Norway (Group leader )

### Submitter
Alemayehu Godana Birhanu

### Lab Head
Dr Tone Tonjum
Department of Microbiology, Institute of clinical medicine, University of Oslo, Norway (Group leader )


