### Accession
PXD022327

### Title
Protein quantification of mouse inner medulla (IM) sections using MS based proteomics -  WT vs. Dicer(AQP2Cre+) mice

### Description
In this project we investigated the global proteome alteration of dissected mouse inner medulla (IM) sections between the WT and the Dicer(AQP2Cre+) mice.  TMT labeling strategy was used to obtain protein quantification information from LC-MS based proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from dissected mouse IM tissue sections, and subsequently digested using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Samples were processed for TMT labeling to allow protein quantification between the WT and the Dicer(AQP2Cre+) mice IM tissue.  TMT labels were chosen radomly between the two samples groups. Mass spectrometry was carried out on a Tribrid Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using the MS3 setup to allow accurate protein quantification.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using SEQUEST against the uniprot mouse protein database (dated 25-03-2020) and quantified using Proteome discoverer 2.4. Protein quantification was based only on unique peptides. Only the ones that passed the Benjamini - hochberg FDR of 0.05 are considered significant changed. The LOG2 ratios of 0.6 (absolute) was used as cutoff for further comparison analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dicer, Im, Aqp2, Endoribonuclease

### Affiliations
Institute of biomedicine Aarhus University
Institute of biomedicine, AU

### Submitter
Lei Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Robert A. Fenton
Institute of biomedicine Aarhus University


