### Accession
PXD004261

### Title
Protein expression and phosphoproteome of brown adipose tissue in the hibernating ground squirrel

### Description
Mammalian hibernation is characterized by metabolic rate depression and a strong decrease in core body temperature that together create energy savings such that most species do not have to eat over the winter months. Brown adipose tissue (BAT), a thermogenic tissue that uses uncoupled mitochondrial respiration to generate heat instead of ATP, plays a major role in rewarming from deep torpor. The present study used label-free phosphoproteomics to investigate changes in BAT from thirteen-lined ground squirrels (Ictidomys tridecemlineatus), comparing euthermic squirrels with squirrels in deep torpor. Differential expression of mitochondrial proteins was also investigated. Surprisingly, mitochondrial membrane and matrix protein expression in BAT was largely constant between active euthermic squirrels and their hibernating counterparts. Validation by immunoblotting confirmed that the protein levels of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes were largely unchanged. However, phosphoproteomics showed that pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) phosphorylation increased during ground squirrel hibernation, and this was confirmed by immunoblotting with phospho-specific antibodies. PDH phosphorylation leads to its inactivation, which suggests that BAT carbohydrate oxidation is inhibited during hibernation. Phosphorylation of hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) also increased during hibernation, suggesting that HSL would be in a partly activated state in BAT to produce the fatty acids that are likely the primary fuel for thermogenesis during arousal.

### Sample Protocol
In the present study, we applied a gel- and label-free mass spectrometry (MS)-based strategy to quantify differential protein expression and changes in protein phosphorylation in BAT from euthermic 13-lined ground squirrels versus animals in deep torpor. The protocol involves protein extraction in SDS and trypsin digestion using the filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol, with off-line separation by hydrophilic interaction chromatography (HILIC) followed by on-line LC-MS/MS. Phosphopeptide enrichment on TiO2 was performed after the HILIC column for further analysis by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
The MS data was searched against a protein database constructed from sequences in the I. tridecemlineatus genome, annotated by blast analysis of the mouse, rabbit and rat genomes. The protocol allowed for both the identification and quantification of protein expression as well as the identification of phosphorylation sites on the same sampl

### Publication Abstract
Mammalian hibernation is characterized by metabolic rate depression and a strong decrease in core body temperature that together create energy savings such that most species do not have to eat over the winter months. Brown adipose tissue (BAT), a thermogenic tissue that uses uncoupled mitochondrial respiration to generate heat instead of ATP, plays a major role in rewarming from deep torpor. In the present study we developed a label-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) strategy to investigate both differential protein expression and protein phosphorylation in BAT extracts from euthermic vs. hibernating ground squirrels (<i>Ictidomys tridecemlineatus</i>). In particular, we incorporated the filter-assisted sample preparation protocol, which provides a more in-depth analysis compared with gel-based and other LC-MS proteomics approaches. Surprisingly, mitochondrial membrane and matrix protein expression in BAT was largely constant between active euthermic squirrels and their hibernating counterparts. Validation by immunoblotting confirmed that the protein levels of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes were largely unchanged in hibernating vs. euthermic animals. On the other hand, phosphoproteomics revealed that pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) phosphorylation increased during squirrel hibernation, confirmed by immunoblotting with phospho-specific antibodies. PDH phosphorylation leads to its inactivation, which suggests that BAT carbohydrate oxidation is inhibited during hibernation. Phosphorylation of hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) was also found to increase during hibernation, suggesting that HSL would be active in BAT to produce the fatty acids that are likely the primary fuel for thermogenesis upon arousal. Increased perilipin phosphorylation along with that of a number of other proteins was also revealed, emphasizing the importance of protein phosphorylation as a regulatory mechanism during mammalian hibernation.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial protein expression, Protein phosphorylation, Lipolysis, Metabolic depression

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Avenue Hippocrate 75, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Mark H. Rider
de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Avenue Hippocrate 75, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium


