### Accession
PXD033886

### Title
Overexpression of McHB7 Transcription Factor from Mesembryanthemum crystallinum Improves Plant Salt Tolerance

### Description
Mesembryanthemum crystallinum (common ice plant) is one of the facultative halophyte plants, and it serves as a model for investigating the molecular mechanisms underlying its salt stress response and tolerance. Here we cloned one of homeobox transcription factor (TF) gene McHB7 from ice plant, which has 60% similarity with the Arabidopsis AtHB7. Overexpression of McHB7 in Arabidopsis (OE) showed that the plants had significantly elevated relative water content (RWC), chlorophyll content, superoxide dismutase (SOD) and peroxidase (POD) activities after salt stress treatment. Proteomics analysis identified 145 to be significantly changed in abundance, and 66 were exclusively increased in the OE plants compared to wild type (WT). After salt treatment, 979 and 959 metabolites were significantly increased and decreased in OE plants compared to the WT, respectively. The results demonstrated McHB7 can improve photosynthesis and increase the leaf chlorophyll content, and affect TCA cycle by regulating metabolites (e.g., pyruvate) and proteins (e.g., citrate synthase). Also, McHB7 modulates the expression of stress-related proteins (e.g., superoxide dismutase, dehydroascorbate reductase and pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase B) to scavenge reactive oxygen species and enhance plant salt tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
One-gram fresh Arabidopsis leaves were ground into powder and immersed into 3 mL protein extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8, 10 mM EDTA, 0.9 M Sucrose, 20 mM 2-Mercaptoethanol, 1×protease inhibitor cocktail, and 1 mM PMSF) and 3 mL Tris-saturated phenol at 4 ℃ for 1 h. After centrifugation at 15,000 g for 15 min, the upper layer was collected and mixed with five times volume of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol to obtain protein precipitation. The precipitation was washed by 80% acetone twice and 100% acetone one time and then dissolved in 100 µL dissolution buffer (6 M Urea, 1 mM EDTA, 1% SDS, and 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH8.5) at 4 ℃ for 1 h. After centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 15 min, the supernatant was used for trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis as previously described. Four biological replicates were used in this experiment.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer™ 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for protein identification and quantification. The online software MetaboAnalyst 5.0 (https://www.metaboanalyst.ca) was used for data visualizing. WEGO 2.0 (https://wego.genomics.cn/) was used for protein ontology annotation. Venn diagram was made using Venny 2.1.0 (https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/). STRING was used to analyze the proteins interaction.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Mesembryanthemum crystallinum</i> (common ice plant) is one of the facultative halophyte plants, and it serves as a model for investigating the molecular mechanisms underlying its salt stress response and tolerance. Here we cloned one of the homeobox transcription factor (TF) genes, <i>McHB7</i>, from the ice plant, which has 60% similarity with the Arabidopsis <i>AtHB7</i>. Overexpression of the <i>McHB7</i> in Arabidopsis (OE) showed that the plants had significantly elevated relative water content (RWC), chlorophyll content, superoxide dismutase (SOD), and peroxidase (POD) activities after salt stress treatment. Our proteomic analysis identified 145 proteins to be significantly changed in abundance, and 66 were exclusively increased in the OE plants compared to the wild type (WT). After salt treatment, 979 and 959 metabolites were significantly increased and decreased, respectively, in the OE plants compared to the WT. The results demonstrate that the <i>McHB7</i> can improve photosynthesis, increase the leaf chlorophyll content, and affect the TCA cycle by regulating metabolites (e.g., pyruvate) and proteins (e.g., citrate synthase). Moreover, <i>Mc</i>HB7 modulates the expression of stress-related proteins (e.g., superoxide dismutase, dehydroascorbate reductase, and pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase B) to scavenge reactive oxygen species and enhance plant salt tolerance.

### Keywords
Salt stress;common ice plant;proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Genetics Institute, UF interdisciplinary Center for Biotechnology Research, Plant Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Florida
PhD student

### Submitter
Bowen Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Sixue Chen
Department of Biology, Genetics Institute, UF interdisciplinary Center for Biotechnology Research, Plant Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Florida


