### Accession
PXD020044

### Title
Neuronal differentiation of LUHMES cells is accompanied by substantial changes of the proteome

### Description
To study mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases, neuronal cell lines are important model systems and are often differentiated into postmitotic neuron-like cells to resemble more closely primary neurons obtained from brains. One such cell line is the Lund Human Mesencephalic (LUHMES) cell line which can be differentiated into dopamine-like neurons and is frequently used to study mechanisms of Parkinson’s disease (PD) and neurotoxicity. Neuronal differentiation of LUHMES cells is commonly verified by measurement of selected neuronal markers, but little is known about proteome-wide protein abundance changes during differentiation.  Using mass spectrometry and label-free quantification (LFQ) we compared the proteome of differentiated and undifferentiated LUHMES cells as well as of cultured primary murine midbrain neurons, which are mainly dopaminergic. Neuronal differentiation induced substantial changes of the LUHMES cell proteome (18.4% reveal protein abundance changes of more than 4-fold), with proliferation-related proteins (e.g. MCMs) being strongly down-regulated and neuronal and dopaminergic proteins being up to 1000-fold upregulated, such as L1CAM and SNCA. Several of these proteins, including MAPT and SYN1, may be useful new markers to experimentally validate neuronal differentiation of cultured LUHMES cells. Primary midbrain neurons were more closely related to differentiated than to undifferentiated LUHMES cells with respect to the abundance of proteins related to neurodegeneration or to genetic forms of PD. In summary, our comparative proteomic analysis demonstrates that differentiated LUHMES cells are a suitable model for studies on PD and neurodegeneration and provides a resource of the proteome-wide changes during neuronal differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
LUHMES cell culture LUHMES cells were cultured and differentiated as described previously (Sholz et al., 2011). 0.5 Million undifferentiated LUHMES (unLUHMES) cells were seeded into a Poly-D-Lysine coated 6-well containing growth media (DMEM F12, 1% N2 Supplement, 0.04 µg/mL bFGF) and harvested at day three in vitro. The live cell count was around 1 Million cells using Trypan blue and an automated cell counter (Biorad). For differentiation, 1 Million unLUHMES were seeded into a Poly-D-Lysine coated 6 well plate containing differentiation media (DMEM F12, 1% N2 Supplement, 1 µg/mL Tetracycline, 2 ng/mL GDNF, 500 µg/mL Dibutyril cAMP). At day 6 in vitro the morphology of difLUHMES were validated under the microscope and the cells were harvested.  Primary murine midbrain neuron culture The midbrains were isolated at embryonic day 16.5 from C57BL/6 mice and cultured as described by Kuhn et al., 2012. In brief, midbrains were isolated, after removal of the meninges the tissue was digested with papain, dissociated and 1 Million living cells were seeded onto a Poly-D-Lysine coated 6-well dish using Neurobasal Medium containing B27. The live cell count was determined using Trypan blue and an automated cell counter (Biorad). After 4h and at day 4 in culture, the medium was exchanged with fresh cultivation media (Neurobasal + B27 + 0.5mM glutamine + 1% P/S). The neurons were lysed at day 6 in vitro.  Sample preparation Cells were washed three times with 1 mL 1x PBS before being lysed in 250 µL STET buffer (1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 7.5). Lysate was incubated for 20 min on ice and cleared from cellular debris by a centrifugation step at maximum speed for 10 min at 4°C. Whole protein concentration was determined with a BCA protein assay kit according to manufacturer´s instructions (Interchim, UP40840A). 40 µg protein extract was digested of each biological replicate using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009). 30 kDa Vivacon filters were used. Desalting was performed using self-made C18 columns for stop-and-go extraction (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Afterwards, peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resolved in 0.5% formic acid.   Mass spectrometry analysis Proteome analysis was performed on a LC-MS/MS set up by coupling an EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) with a Q-ExactiveTM Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). 1.5 µg were injected of each biological replicate. A C18 column (30cm length, 75 µm ID, self-made) packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, 1.9 µm) was utilized for peptide separation. A binary gradient of mass spectrometry grade H2O and 80% acetonitrile (B) was chosen with a gradient time of 120 min, 50°C column temperature, flow rate of 250 nL/min: (3% B 0 min, 6% B 2 min, 30% B 92 min, 44%B 112 min, 75% B 121 min). All samples were analyzed wit data dependent acquisition by choosing the top 15 most abundant peptides for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation. A scan range of 300 to 1400 m/z, full scan at 120,000 resolution, maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms and automatic gain control (AGC) of 3x106 were used for MS1. The following settings were chosen for MS2: Resolution of 15,000; maximum IT of 100 ms; AGC of 1x105; Isolation window of 1.6 m/z; dynamic exclusion of 120 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) using default settings with a false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptide of 1%, allowance of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation as fixed and N-termini acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. However, a minimum peptide length of 6 was chosen. For the human LUHMES samples the human UniProt reference database (one protein per gene, downloaded 12th of June 2019, with 20,962 entries) was used. For the murine primary neurons the murine UniProt reference database (one protein per gene, downloaded 13th of June 2019, with 22,290 entries) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Neuronal cell lines are important model systems to study mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases. One example is the Lund Human Mesencephalic (LUHMES) cell line, which can differentiate into dopaminergic-like neurons and is frequently used to study mechanisms of Parkinson's disease and neurotoxicity. Neuronal differentiation of LUHMES cells is commonly verified with selected neuronal markers, but little is known about the proteome-wide protein abundance changes during differentiation. Using mass spectrometry and label-free quantification (LFQ), the proteome of differentiated and undifferentiated LUHMES cells and of primary murine midbrain neurons are compared. Neuronal differentiation induced substantial changes of the LUHMES cell proteome, with proliferation-related proteins being strongly down-regulated and neuronal and dopaminergic proteins, such as L1CAM and &#x3b1;-synuclein (SNCA) being up to 1,000-fold up-regulated. Several of these proteins, including MAPT and SYN1, may be useful as new markers for experimentally validating neuronal differentiation of LUHMES cells. Primary midbrain neurons are slightly more closely related to differentiated than to undifferentiated LUHMES cells, in particular with respect to the abundance of proteins related to neurodegeneration. In summary, the analysis demonstrates that differentiated LUHMES cells are a suitable model for studies on neurodegeneration and provides a resource of the proteome-wide changes during neuronal differentiation. (ProteomeXchange identifier PXD020044).

### Keywords
Luhmes cells, Murine midbrain neurons, Dopaminergic neuron, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


