### Accession
PXD033440

### Title
Loss of colonic primary cilia promotes inflammation and carcinogenesis

### Description
Primary cilia (PC) are important signaling hubs in cells and we explored their role in colorectal cancer (CRC) and colitis. In the colon we found PC to be mostly present on different subtypes of fibroblasts and exposure of mice to either chemically induced colitis-associated colon carcinogenesis (CAC) or dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced acute colitis decreased PC numbers. We employed conditional knock-out strains for the PC essential genes, Kif3A and Ift88, to generate mice with reduced numbers of PC on colonic fibroblasts. These mice showed an increased susceptibility in the CAC model as well as in DSS-induced colitis. Secretome and immunohistochemical analyses of DSS-treated mice displayed an elevated production of the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6 in PC-deficient colons.  An inflammatory environment diminished PC presence in primary fibroblast cultures. This was triggered by IL-6 as identified by RNAseq analysis together with blocking experiments, suggesting an activation loop between IL-6 production and PC loss. Notably, an analysis of PC presence on biopsies of patients with ulcerative colitis as well as CRC patients revealed decreased numbers of PC on colonic fibroblasts in pathological versus surrounding normal tissue. Taken together, we provide evidence that a decrease in colonic PC numbers promotes colitis and CRC.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse experiments were performed in strict accordance with the guidelines of the European Community (86/609/EEC) and the French National Committee (87/848) for care and use of laboratory animals. To study PC we used Kif3aflx/flx and Ift88flx/flx mice which have been previously described (Marszalek et al, 1999)(Haycraft et al, 2007). Tissue specific knock-out mice were obtained by crossing with ColVIcre-transgenic strain. To induce colitis, 8-12 week-old mice were treated for 7 days with 2.5% (w/v) dextran sodium sulfate (DSS; TdB Sweden) added in the drinking water. Mice were sacrificed at indicated time points. The weight of the mice was daily followed and in case weight loss was more important than 20% mice were sacrificed. For colitis-associated carcinogenesis, mice were intraperitoneally injected with azoxymethane (AOM), followed by three cycles of 2.5% (w/v) DSS administered in the drinking water (Figure 2A). In between the cycles the mice received no treatment for 2 weeks.  For histological analysis the entire colon was prepared according to the Swiss roll procedure, fixed with formaldehyde and embedded in paraffin.  Four μm sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, Alcian blue or deparaffinized and subsequently incubated with the primary antibody described below. Histological grading of AOM/DSS-induced tumors was determined with blinded genotype according to the described classification of intestinal neoplasia (Washington et al, 2013). The protocol for isolation of colonial fibroblasts (CF) was modified according to Roulis et al. (Roulis et al, 2014). Briefly, colons were isolated from mice, flushed with PBS/2% FCS, and then opened longitudinally and processed as follows. Intestinal pieces were cut into small pieces and incubated in EDTA containing buffer (PBS/2% FCS/1 mM EDTA/1 mM DTT) at 37°C for 45 minutes under continuous shaking to releases CEC. The tissue was further processed by treatment with 3 mg/ml Collagenase type I (Sigma) and 0.1 mg/ml Dispase (Dominique Dutscher SA, France) in DMEM for 30 min at 37°C to isolate CF. Cells were filtered through a 70-μm strainer, washed with PBS/2% FCS and subsequently analyzed or taken in culture. CF were cultured in DMEM/10%FCS for 2 passages (2P-CF). To induce formation of PC, 2P-CF were cultured for 24h in starvation medium containing 0.5% BSA. In specific experiments, cells were cultured in the presence of inflammatory or control conditioned medium. To obtain those, colons were isolated from control mice and animals treated for 7 days with DSS, washed with PBS and subsequently taken in culture for 4h in medium containing 0.5% BSA. For blocking experiments, xugml of antagonistic anti-IL-6 antibody MP5-20F3 and isotype control (rat IgG1) were used (both Biolegend).  To analyze the secretome of colitic colons, shotgun proteomics analyses were performed, accordingly with methods we described before (Pieragostino et al, 2019). Colons were isolated from ColVIcre-Ift88flx/flx and control mice (n=6 each) and kept in culture for 4h. Supernatants were assayed for protein concentration through Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) using Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MI, USA) standard for the calibration curve. Then, pooled samples were prepared according to the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method. 50 µg of proteins was digested for each pool by using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). For protein label free identification and quantification, tryptic peptides from each sample were analyzed in triplicate by LC-MS/MS using a Proxeon EASY-nLCII (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Milan, Italy) chromatographic system coupled to a Maxis HD UHR-TOF (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer as already described (Pieragostino et al, 2019).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics raw data were processed using a free computational platform, MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 (Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Peak lists, generated in MaxQuant, were searched using Andromeda peptide search engine against the UniProt database (released 2019_11, taxonomy Mus Musculus, 21,990 entries) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants and containing forward and reverse sequences. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines (C) was defined as fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines (M) and deamidation of asparagines (N) and glutamines (Q) were set as variable modifications. Mass tolerances were set by default to 0.07 Da in the ﬁrst search and 0.006 Da in the main search, instead TOF MS/MS match tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. A retention time tolerance of 0.7 min was used to align any time shift in acquisition between samples. False discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level was set at 2%, on the contrary at peptide level was set at 1% (Madonna et al, 2020). Intensity-based absolute quantiﬁcation (iBAQ) was used to quantify protein abundance in each sample. Bioinformatics analysis was performed with Perseus version 1.6.2.3. In order to define the proteins differentially expressed between colon KO distal and proximal compared to WT colon, a univariate statistical analysis was performed with a p-value threshold of 0.05 and results were visualized as Volcano Plot. Protein ratio (KO/WT) was used as protein expression input for functional analysis using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA tool, Ingenuity Systems, Mountain View, CA).

### Publication Abstract
Primary cilia (PC) are important signaling hubs, and we here explored their role in colonic pathology. In the colon, PC are mostly present on fibroblasts, and exposure of mice to either chemically induced colitis-associated colon carcinogenesis (CAC) or dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced acute colitis decreases PC numbers. We generated conditional knockout mice with reduced numbers of PC on colonic fibroblasts. These mice show increased susceptibility to CAC, as well as DSS-induced colitis. Secretome and immunohistochemical analyses of DSS-treated mice display an elevated production of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-6 in PC-deficient colons. An inflammatory environment diminishes PC presence in primary fibroblast cultures, which is triggered by IL-6 as identified by RNA-seq analysis together with blocking experiments. These findings suggest an activation loop between IL-6 production and PC loss. An analysis of PC presence on biopsies of patients with ulcerative colitis or colorectal cancer (CRC) reveals decreased numbers of PC on colonic fibroblasts in pathological compared with surrounding normal tissue. Taken together, we provide evidence that a decrease in colonic PC numbers promotes colitis and CRC.

### Keywords
Primary cilia, Colonic fibroblasts, Inflammation, Colitis, Colon carcinogenesis

### Affiliations
Department of Innovative Technologies in Medicine & Dentistry, University of Chieti, Italy
University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti

### Submitter
Maria Concetta Cufaro

### Lab Head
Dr Damiana Pieragostino
Department of Innovative Technologies in Medicine & Dentistry, University of Chieti, Italy


