### Accession
PXD017503

### Title
Dynamic protein modification of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum and the infected erythrocytes

### Description
Plasmodium falciparum, a lethal protozoan, undergoes a complex extra- and intraerythrocytic development cycle that requires intricate and flexible regulatory mechanisms in order to facilitate reproduction and maintain the parasite’s resistance to environmental stress. Protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) are essential processes following protein biogenesis that allow proteins to fulfill their diverse biological functions. Here, we present comprehensive PTMomic profiling of both P. falciparum and its erythrocytic host cells during the 48 hours after infection. Fine mappings of each protein in both P. falciparum and the infected red blood cells (pRBCs) were accomplished. More than two-thirds of the parasite and its host cell proteins underwent extensive and dynamic modification throughout the erythrocytic developmental stage of the malarial parasite. Apart from the finding that PTMs actively regulated P. falciparum gene activation and silencing, the key molecules involved in the host-parasite interaction and pathogenesis were essentially modified. The establishment of an atlas of PTMomes of P. falciparum and its host erythrocytes will promote a deeper understanding of the parasite biology and will provide a basis for the search for novel antimalarials.

### Sample Protocol
Cultivation of P. falciparum 3D7 strain parasites and sample preparation Highly synchronized cells of P. falciparum strain 3D7 were cultured at 5% parasitemia. Purified infected red blood cells obtained by the percoll-sorbitol purification method were harvested at 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, and 48 h during the intracellular cycle. All parasite cultures were maintained by standard methods. Samples were also collected at the same time points and were washed three times with PBS. Protein extraction and quality control Samples were sonicated three times on ice using a -intensity ultrasonic processor in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). Inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer for PTM experiments. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12, 000 g at 4°C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The quality of protein samples was detected using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea at a concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight, and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio was used for a second 4 h digestion. HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using an Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. TMT labeling TMT (tandem mass tags) is an in vitro labeling technology developed by Thermo that is widely used in the studies of differential expression protein analysis. The technique uses a 2-, 6- or 10-plex isotope label to covalently bind to the amino acids of the peptide, enabling simultaneous qualitative and quantitative analysis of proteins in 2/ 6/10 different samples. The TMT reagent structurally includes three chemical groups, a reporter group, a balance group, and a reactive group. The reactive group is specifically covalently bound to the amino acids of the peptide, and the TMT reagent is attached to the peptide. In the primary map, the same peptide from the same protein of different samples appears as a peak due to the integrity of the intact TMT reagent with the same total mass. However, in the collision chamber, the balance group will be lost in neutral , and the reporter group will produce corresponding reporter ions (two labels are 126 and 127 Da; six labels are 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, and 131 Da, and ten labels are 126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, and 131 Da). The intensity of these reporter ions represents the intensity of the corresponding sample protein/peptide segment, enabling simultaneous quantification of 2/ 6/ 10 different samples.

### Data Protocol
Database search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Homo sapiens (March 2018, contains 20, 317 sequences) and UniProt Plasmodium falciparum (isolate 3D7) (March 2018, contains 5, 369 sequences), along with revert decoys and a standard contaminants database from MaxQuant. The reverse decoy database was used to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching. The common contamination databases were used to eliminate the effects of contaminating proteins in the identification data. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to four missing cleavages for acylation and ubiquitination and two missing cleavages for phosphorylation and glycosylation. The minimum length of the peptide was set to seven amino acid residues, and the maximum number of peptide modifications was set to five. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the First search and 5 ppm in the Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was specified as fixed modification. Oxidation on methionine and acetylation on N-terminal of proteins were specified as variable modifications. In addition, variable modifications were specified for phosphorylation (on serine, threonine and tyrosine), acetylation, crotonylation, 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation and ubiquitination (with TMT tag on lysine), Deamidation 18O (N) and Deamidation (NQ). FDR for protein identification and PSM identification were adjusted to less than 1%, and the quantitative method was set to TMT-10plex. The minimal peptide length was adjusted to 7. Unique and razor peptides were selected for quantification, and the minimum ratio count was set to 2. The minimum score for modifying peptides was kept at 40, and the localization probability was greater than 0.75. Quality control of mass spectrometry Primary mass errors of most spectra were less than 10 ppm, which was consistent with the high-precision characteristics of orbitrap mass spectrometry. This indicated that the quality accuracy of the mass spectrometer was normal and that there was no excessive mass deviation to affect the qualitative and quantitative analysis of proteins. The match score between the spectrum and the peptide was negatively correlated with the distribution of the mass deviation. The higher the score, the smaller the quality deviation. This score characterized the credibility of peptide identification. Quality control of peptide lengths The sizes of most peptides ranged from 7 to 20 amino acids, consistent with the general rule of methods based on trypsin enzymatic and HCD fragmentation. Peptides with less than five amino acids produced too few fragment ions and therefore did not produce efficient sequence identification. Peptides with more than 20 amino acids were not suitable for fragmentation of HCD due to the high mass and charge number. In a word, the distribution of peptide lengths identified by mass spectrometry met quality control requirements. For biologically replicated and technically replicated samples, we examined whether the quantitative results of biological replicates or technical replicates were statistically consistent. Heatmaps were generated using Pearson's Correlation Coefficient between all samples. This coefficient is a measure of the degree of linear correlation between the two sets of data: a Pearson coefficient close to -1 indicates a negative correlation, and a value close to 1 represents a positive correlation, while values near 0 indicate no correlation. In this experiment, Pearson's Correlation Coefficients were calculated for each sample of each modification. The results showed that the repeatability of the three biological replicates was good. In short, the accuracy of the test instrument was normal; the peptide quality control was suitable; the biological repeatability was good, and the data could be used for subsequent analysis. Quantification of proteins or modification sites Relative abundance of proteins or modification sites were determined by the ion intensity ratio of TMT reporter from each PSM in MaxQuant. TMT ratios of proteins or PTM sites were calculated by the median of all of the PSM ratios, excluding the PSMs lacking TMT labels. Significantly changed proteins or modification sites The average ratio of proteins or modification sites at each time point during the IDC was used to describe the abundance, including the peak and the valley. The FDR was calculated based on an ANOVA test proposed by Benjamini and Hochberg. An FDR less than 1% was considered to be a significant difference.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum; infected erythrocytes; intraerythrocytic development cycle; dynamic epigenetics; phosphorylation; acetylation; crotonylation; 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation; n-glycosylation; ubiquitination.

### Affiliations
1. Key Laboratory of Livestock Infectious Diseases in Northeast China, Ministry of Education, Shenyang Agricultural University, 120 Dongling Road, Shengyang 110866, P.R. China
2. The Research Unit for Pathogenic Mechanisms of Zoonotic Parasites, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, 120 Dongling Road, Shenyang 110866, China.
Key Laboratory of Livestock Infectious Diseases in Northeast China, Ministry of Education, Shenyang Agricultural University, 120 Dongling Road, Shengyang 110866, P.R. China

### Submitter
Jianhua Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Qijun Chen
Key Laboratory of Livestock Infectious Diseases in Northeast China, Ministry of Education, Shenyang Agricultural University, 120 Dongling Road, Shengyang 110866, P.R. China


