### Accession
PXD011126

### Title
interacting proteins for MPP9 -  M-Phase Phosphoprotein 9 regulates ciliogenesis by modulating CP110-CEP97 complex localization at the mother centriole

### Description
To reveal the mechanism underlying MPP9-mediated negative regulation of cilia formation, we screened for MPP9-interacting proteins by mass spectrometry analysis in HEK293T cells overexpressing Flag-MPP9.

### Sample Protocol
For gel band: Each gel band was excised and digested in-gel with 2 ng/μL sequencing grade trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37 °C. Prior to the addition of the enzyme, gel pieces were dehydrated in acetonitrile, incubated in 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 56 C for 40 min, incubated in 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium biocarbonate at ambient temperature for 1 hr in the dark, then dehydrated again. The resulting peptides were extracted twice with 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile, then vacuum-centrifuged to dryness.   Instrument Parameters: For LC-MS/MS analysis, the samples were reconstituted in 0.2% formic acid, loaded onto a 100μm x 2 cm pre-column and separated on a 75μm  15 cm capillary column with laser-pulled sprayer. Both columns were packed in-house with 4 μm C18 bulk material (InnosepBio, P.R.China). An Easy nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific, USA) was used to deliver the following HPLC gradient: 5-35% B in 60 min, 35-75% B in 4 min, then held at 75% B for 10 min (A = 0.1% formic acid in water, B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The eluted peptides were sprayed into a Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with a nano-ESI source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with a full MS scan (375–1600 M/z) in FT mode at a resolution of 120000 followed by CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) MS/MS scans on the 10 most abundant ions in the initial MS scan. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 ions for Orbitrap scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. For dynamic exclusion, the following parameters were used: isolation window, 2 m/z; repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 25 s; and exclusion duration, 25 s.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis: The raw data files were converted to mascot generic format (“.mgf”) using MSConvert before submitted for database search. Mascot (version 2.3.02) carried out all database search with the following parameters: Carbamidomethyl (Cys) as fixed modification, Oxidation (Met) as variable modification; +/- 5 ppm for peptide pass tolerance and +/- 0.6 Da for fragment mass tolerance; max missed cleavages 2.

### Publication Abstract
The primary cilium is elongated from the mother centriole and has diverse signaling roles during development and disease. The CP110-CEP97 complex functions as a negative regulator of ciliogenesis, although the mechanisms regulating its mother centriole localization are poorly understood. Here we show that M-Phase Phosphoprotein 9 (MPP9) is recruited by Kinesin Family Member 24 (KIF24) to the distal end of mother centriole where it forms a ring-like structure and recruits CP110-CEP97 by directly binding CEP97. Loss of MPP9 causes abnormal primary cilia formation in growing cells and mouse kidneys. After phosphorylation by Tau Tubulin Kinase 2 (TTBK2) at the beginning of ciliogenesis, MPP9 is targeted for degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome system, which facilitates the removal of CP110 and CEP97 from the distal end of the mother centriole. Thus, MPP9 acts as a regulator of ciliogenesis by regulating the localization of CP110-CEP97 at the mother centriole.

### Keywords
Mpp9, Interacting proteins

### Affiliations
Peking university
Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of the Ministry of Education and State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, College of Life Sciences, Peking University

### Submitter
junlin teng

### Lab Head
Dr Jianguo Chen
Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of the Ministry of Education and State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, College of Life Sciences, Peking University


