### Accession
PXD011726

### Title
E. coli BW25113 proteomics  in nutrient-rich and minimal medium

### Description
E. coli BW25113 growth in a nutrient-rich medium supplemented with 20 proteinogenic amino acid medium was studied and compared to growth in minimal medium. Proteome data from these experiments revealed significant differences in amino acid synthesis and transport proteins that were reduced in the nutrient-rich meidum. Changes in energy production and conversion proteins were also observed as in nutrient-rich conditions pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and acetate producing proteins increased, while the TCA cycle proteins decreased.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome sample preparation, sample analysis by mass spectrometry, mass spectrometry data analysis, and relative and absolute protein quantification was performed as described by Peebo and others (Peebo et al. 2015). From each experiment, one sample with OD600nm ~4 was mixed with 100 µg of SILAC-labelled (Ong et al. 2002) biomass in a ratio of 1:1 on dry cell weight basis. The biomass mix was lysed and digested with trypsin. Resulting peptides were separated with Agilent 1200 nanoflow system (Agilent Technologies) and then injected to Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer with nanoelectrospray ionization source (Proxeon). The MS-data was analysed with MaxQuant software (Mann & Cox 2008) version 1.6.1.0. Peak lists were searched against an E. coli K-12 database using the Andromeda search engine built into MaxQuant. Full enzyme specificity was required, with an allowance of up to two missed cleavages. Trypsin was specified as the protease. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. The required false discovery rate was set to 1 % for both peptide and protein levels, and the minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. “Match between runs” option with a time window of 0.7 min was allowed.

### Data Protocol
For absolute protein quantification, the total protein approach (Arike et al. 2012, Wisniewski et al. 2012) based on label-free quantification intensities was used. For each protein, its relative fraction from the total proteome can be derived from the ratio of its individual LFQ intensity (reported by MaxQuant) to the total MS signal.  The total protein approach was applied only to the SILAC-labelled proteins mixed into each sample. To increase peptide identification by “Match between runs” function, additional E. coli BW25113 raw proteome MS files were supplemented to the MaxQuant search. This resulted in 19 replicate protein quantifications of the same SILAC-labelled sample. Next, the absolute protein quantities in the SILAC-labelled sample and the heavy-to-light ratios of all proteins reported by MaxQuant were used to quantify the proteins in unlabelled samples of interest. All protein quantities were normalised using the total protein content in samples determined by Lowry analysis (Lowry et al. 1951).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
E. coli rich medium

### Affiliations
Center of Food and Fermentation Technologies
head of R&D in Center of Food and Fermentation Technologies

### Submitter
Karl Peebo

### Lab Head
Dr Raivo Vilu
head of R&D in Center of Food and Fermentation Technologies


