### Accession
PXD020783

### Title
The role of Wnt/β‐catenin pathway mediators in aortic valve stenosis

### Description
Aortic valve stenosis (AVS) is a prevailing and life-threatening cardiovascular disease in adults over 75 years of age. However, the molecular mechanisms governing the pathogenesis of AVS are yet to be fully unraveled. With accumulating evidence that Wnt signaling plays a key role in the development of AVS, the involvement of intracellular Wnt molecules has become an integral study target in AVS pathogenesis. Thus, we hypothesized that the Wnt/β‐catenin pathway Wnt intracellular mediators, SFRP2, DVL2, GSK3β and β‐catenin are dysregulated in patients with AVS. Using immunohistochemistry, Real‐Time qPCR and Western blotting, we investigated the presence of SFRP2, GSK‐3β, DVL2 and β‐catenin in normal and stenotic human aortic valves. Markedly higher mRNA and protein expression of GSK‐3β, DVL2, β‐catenin and SFRP2 were found in stenotic aortic valves. This was further corroborated by observation of their abundant immunostaining, which displayed strong immunoreactivity in diseased aortic valves. Proteomic analyses of selective GSK3b inhibition in calcifying human aortic valve interstitial cells (HAVICs) revealed enrichment of proteins involved organophosphate metabolism, while reducing the activation of pathogenic biomolecular processes. Lastly, use of the potent calcification inhibitor, Fetuin A, in calcifying HAVICs significantly reduced the expression of Wnt signaling genes Wnt3a, Wnt5a, Wnt5b and Wnt11. The current findings of altered expression of canonical Wnt signaling in AVS suggest a possible role for regulatory Wnts in AVS. Hence, future studies focused on targeting these molecules are warranted to underline their role in the pathogenesis of the disease.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion Total proteins were extracted from HAVICs incubated in osteogenic media either in the absence or presence of 10 μM CHIR99021 for 3 weeks. The media and drug were replaced every 2-3 days. The cells were lysed using RIPA lysis buffer containing protease inhibitor and centrifuged to remove cell debris. Protein quantification was performed using a DC assay. Prior to digestion, detergent were removed from samples using Pierce Detergent removal column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Total proteins (50 µg) were diluted in in a solution containing 8 M urea, 10 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.5) and 5 mM DTT, heated for 2 minutes at 95°C, followed by an incubation of 30 minutes at room temperature. The samples were then alkylated, in the dark, for 30 minutes at room temperature by adding chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 7.5 mM (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint-Louis, USA). Urea was then decreased to 2 M by adding 3 volumes of 50 mM NH4HCO3. The proteins were then digested by adding 1 μg of Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and incubated overnight at 30°C. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) to a final concentration of 0.2%. The peptides were then purified with ZipTip 100-μl micropipet  tips containing a C18 column (EMD Millipore, Burlington, USA), eluted 3 times with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid (FA) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The eluted peptides were then concentrated by centrifugal evaporator at 65°C until complete drying and then resuspended in 25 μl of 1% FA. Peptides were assayed using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and read at an absorbance of 205 nm. The peptides were then transferred to a glass vial (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and stored at -20°C until analysis by mass spectrometry.   LC-MS/MS analysis  Trypsin-digested peptides were separated by LC-MS/MS. Samples (250 ng of digested peptides) were injected into an HPLC (nanoElute, Bruker Daltonics) and loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column, 0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation) with a constant flow of 4 µl/min and eluted onto an analytical C18 Column (1.9 µm beads size, 75 µm x 25 cm, PepSep). Peptides were eluted over a 2-hour gradient of acetonitrile (5-37%) in 0.1% FA at 500 nL/min while being injected into a TimsTOF Pro Mass Spectrometer equipped with a ZDV sprayer source (Bruker Daltonics). Data was acquired using data-dependent auto-MS/MS with a 100-1700 m/z mass range, with PASEF enabled a number of PASEF scans set at 10 (1.27 seconds duty cycle) and a dynamic exclusion of 0.4 minute, m/z dependent isolation window and collision energy of 42.0 eV. The target intensity was set to 20,000, with an intensity threshold of 2,500.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification by MaxQuant analysis  The raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) by using embedded tims-DDA specific parameters and the Uniprot human database (10/04/2018, 74,811 entries). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis were: 2 miscleavages were allowed, fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine, enzymes were Trypsin (K/R not before P). Variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and carbamylation (K, N-term).  Label-free quantification with LFQ minimum ratio count of 2, identification values "PSM FDR", "Protein FDR" and "Site decoy fraction" of 0.05 were also used during analysis. Proteins positive for at least one of the "Reverse" and "Potential contaminant" categories were subsequently eliminated.

### Publication Abstract
Aortic valve stenosis (AVS) is a prevailing and life-threatening cardiovascular disease in adults over 75 years of age. However, the molecular mechanisms governing the pathogenesis of AVS are yet to be fully unraveled. With accumulating evidence that Wnt signaling plays a key role in the development of AVS, the involvement of Wnt molecules has become an integral study target in AVS pathogenesis. Thus, we hypothesized that the Wnt/&#x3b2;-catenin pathway mediators, SFRP2, DVL2, GSK3&#x3b2; and &#x3b2;-catenin are dysregulated in patients with AVS. Using immunohistochemistry, Real-Time qPCR and Western blotting, we investigated the presence of SFRP2, GSK-3&#x3b2;, DVL2, and &#x3b2;-catenin in normal and stenotic human aortic valves. Markedly higher mRNA and protein expression of GSK-3&#x3b2;, DVL2, &#x3b2;-catenin and SFRP2 were found in stenotic aortic valves. This was further corroborated by observation of their abundant immunostaining, which displayed strong immunoreactivity in diseased aortic valves. Proteomic analyses of selective GSK3b inhibition in calcifying human aortic valve interstitial cells (HAVICs) revealed enrichment of proteins involved organophosphate metabolism, while reducing the activation of pathogenic biomolecular processes. Lastly, use of the potent calcification inhibitor, Fetuin A, in calcifying HAVICs significantly reduced the expression of Wnt signaling genes Wnt3a, Wnt5a, Wnt5b, and Wnt11. The current findings of altered expression of canonical Wnt signaling in AVS suggest a possible role for regulatory Wnts in AVS. Hence, future studies focused on targeting these molecules are warranted to underline their role in the pathogenesis of the disease.

### Keywords
Immunohistochemistry, Human, Real-time qpcr, Proteomics, Calcification

### Affiliations
University of Sherbrooke, FM Boisvert lab
Divisions of Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada

### Submitter
Dominique Levesque

### Lab Head
Dr Adel Schwertani
Divisions of Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada


