### Accession
PXD042188

### Title
Post-transplant diabetes mellitus after kidney transplantation

### Description
Diabetes mellitus (DM) after transplantation remains a crucial clinical problem in kidney transplantation. To obtain insights into molecular  mechanisms underlying the development of post-transplant diabetes mellitus (PTDM) and its early impact on glomerular structures, here we comparatively analyze the proteome of histologically normal appearing glomeruli from patients with PTDM from normoglycemic (NG) transplant recipients, and from recipients with pre-existing type 2 DM (PTDM)

### Sample Protocol
Glomeruli from 10um thick FFPE sections were microdisected using PALM Microbeam System and proteins were isolated using FASP protocol and trypsin digestion. Digested peptides were eluted and desalted using OASIS HBL microelution plates, dried and and resuspended in 2%acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. NAnoLC-ESI_LTQ orbitrap Elite was usend for tamdem mass spectometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectometer files were analyzed usinf MAxQuant. Spectra were searched in Andromeda. Label-free quantificarion was used to identify the relative amount of proteins in each sample. Proteome analysis was performed usinf Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Tranplantation, Kidney, Ptdm. t2dm

### Affiliations
Departemnt of Clinical Medicien, University of bergen, 5021, Bergen, Norway
HelseBergen

### Submitter
Jessica Furriol

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Peter Marti
Departemnt of Clinical Medicien, University of bergen, 5021, Bergen, Norway


