### Accession
PXD035845

### Title
Extracellular vesicles from osteogenic differentiated human BMSCs

### Description
Pathological processes like osteoporosis or steroid-induced osteonecrosis of the hip are accompanied by increased bone marrow adipogenesis. Such disorder of adipogenic/osteogenic differentiation, which affects also bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) contributes to bone loss during aging. Therefore, we investigated the effects of extracellular vesicles (EVs) isolated from human (h)BMSCs during different stages of osteogenic differentiation on osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation capacity of naïve hBMSCs.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated EV samples (EV_D0 and EV_D28_35) were purified from the culture supernatant of corresponding three hBMSCs culture groups, obtained from three patients, and total protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. Approximately 5 µg of total protein was reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56 °C and further alkylated in 30 mM of Iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at RT in the dark. The remaining IAA was quenched with 30 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for a further 15 min at RT. Subsequently, samples were digested using the S-Trap™ (ProtiFi, US) mini procedure according to the manufacturer’s instruction.  All peptide/protein samples were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS using 500 ng per sample. Samples were loaded on an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid chromatography (RSLC) nano system with a ProFlow flow control device coupled to a Lumos Fusion orbitrap mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Scientific). Loaded peptides were concentrated on a trapping column (Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 100 μm, 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) using 0.1 % TFA at a flowrate of 10 μl/min. For sample separation a reversed phase column (Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 75 μm 50 cm, Thermo Scientific) using a binary gradient was used

### Data Protocol
All MS raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.3.0.523 (Thermo Scientific, Germany) and searched in target/decoy mode against a human Uniprot database (www.uniprot.org) using MASCOT algorithm. The search parameters were: precursor and fragment ion tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.5 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively; trypsin set as enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine set as dynamic modification; using Percolator false discovery rate (strict) set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identification. A Label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis was performed including replicates for each condition. Only proteins identified with ≥ 2 unique peptides, protein ratio calculation for pairwise and t-test (background based), p-Value < 0.05 were considered as significantly regulated. All significantly different regulated proteins were further subjected to Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses. The following bioinformatics analyses including Venn diagram, GO, and KEGG et al. of annotated protein were conducted with the b ioinformatics platform STRING database (http://string-db.org) and the platform Dr. Tom (https://biosys.bgi. Com/) provided by the Beijing Genomics Institute (BGI). Prism8. 21 software (GraphPad, USA) was used for statistical analysis. Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used when no EVs group was set to 100%, and two-tailed Mann-Whitney U-test or two-way ANOVA with Tukey's multiple comparisons test was used to compare differences between the groups. P < 0.05 was considered as statistical significant.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoporosis, or steroid-induced osteonecrosis of the hip, is accompanied by increased bone marrow adipogenesis. Such a disorder of adipogenic/osteogenic differentiation, affecting bone-marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs), contributes to bone loss during aging. Here, we investigated the effects of extracellular vesicles (EVs) isolated from human (h)BMSCs during different stages of osteogenic differentiation on the osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation capacity of na&#xef;ve (undifferentiated) hBMSCs. We observed that all EV groups increased viability and proliferation capacity and suppressed the apoptosis of na&#xef;ve hBMSCs. In particular, EVs derived from hBMSCs at late-stage osteogenic differentiation promoted the osteogenic potential of na&#xef;ve hBMSCs more effectively than EVs derived from na&#xef;ve hBMSCs (na&#xef;ve EVs), as indicated by the increased gene expression of COL1A1 and OPN. In contrast, the adipogenic differentiation capacity of na&#xef;ve hBMSCs was inhibited by treatment with EVs from osteogenic differentiated hBMSCs. Proteomic analysis revealed that osteogenic EVs and na&#xef;ve EVs contained distinct protein profiles, with pro-osteogenic and anti-adipogenic proteins encapsulated in osteogenic EVs. We speculate that osteogenic EVs could serve as an intercellular communication system between bone- and bone-marrow adipose tissue, for transporting osteogenic factors and thus favoring pro-osteogenic processes. Our data may support the theory of an endocrine circuit with the skeleton functioning as a ductless gland.

### Keywords
Ev, Bmsc

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
ISAS e.V. Bunsen-Kirchhoff-Str. 11 44139 Dortmund Germany

### Submitter
Yvonne Reinders

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
ISAS e.V. Bunsen-Kirchhoff-Str. 11 44139 Dortmund Germany


