### Accession
PXD026931

### Title
Maternal plasma proteome profiling of biomarkers for stratification of early-onset and late-onset preeclampsia

### Description
Hypertension in pregnancy is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in pregnancy, affecting up to 10% of all gestations1. Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy include chronic hypertension, gestational hypertension, eclampsia and pre-eclampsia, all of which increase the risk of complications in both mothers and babies during gestation. Preeclampsia, in particular, is characterised by the new-onset of gestational hypertension in the presence of proteinuria or other organ damage. It affects 5-7% of pregnancies and causes approximately 76,000 maternal deaths and 500,000 foetal deaths worldwide each year2.   The classification of preeclampsia has been evolving over the last decade. In 2013, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) and International Society for the Study of Hypertension in Pregnancy (ISSHP) in the absence of proteinuria included other symptoms/features including liver dysfunction, thrombocytopenia, cerebrovascular events or foetal growth restriction (FGR) in the diagnosis of preeclampsia 1,3,4. Despite the fact that preeclampsia is a multifactorial and heterogeneous disorder, it is now widely accepted that preeclampsia is stratified depending on the time of onset into: i) early-onset PE (EOPE) manifested before 34 weeks of gestation, and ii) late-onset PE (LOPE) manifested from 34 weeks of gestation. Although EOPE and LOPE share the same diagnostic criteria, these two phenotypes of preeclampsia lead to different outcomes. EOPE is commonly associated with FGR, abnormal uterine artery Doppler often leading to preterm birth and higher risk of post-pregnancy morbidities5,6. On the other hand, LOPE appears to be a less severe disorder, often with normal or slightly increased uterine resistance index and a low rate of FGR6,7. Distinct delineation between EOPE and LOPE is still not well understood, with most patients with preeclampsia presenting elements of both pathologies proposing a clinical spectrum for preeclampsia.   The lack of untargeted discovery studies involving ‘omics’ analyses has impeded understanding of the molecular differences between these two phenotypes of preeclampsia. Notably, a study from 20058 utilised a proteomics approach using urine samples from a cohort of pregnant women with EOPE and healthy controls, however the differences between EOPE and LOPE were not elucidated. Another more recent bioinformatics study, identified overlapping pathogenic mechanisms between preeclampsia, hypertension and heart disease but could not stratify between EOPE and LOPE due to underreported of data related to individual phenotypes9.  In this study, we conducted an unbiased, comprehensive proteomics investigation using plasma samples collected from patients with EOPE (n=17) and LOPE (n=11), compared with age- and BMI-matched normotensive controls (n=18). The use of plasma samples is able to better reflect the pathogenesis of EOPE and LOPE as systemic conditions centred by widespread endothelial dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
All plasma samples were thawed and kept on ice during the entire process of proteomic experiment. Plasma sample preparation was adjusted from the previously described methods (Harney et al. 2019). Briefly, 1 μL (~50-60 μg peptides determined by BCA assay) of plasma samples were resuspended in lysis buffer composed of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and 20 mM acrylamide monomer at a sample to buffer ratio of 1:25, and heated to 95°C for 10 minutes for denaturation, reduction and alkylation. The lysates were diluted 1:9 with water. Proteins were digested in sequencing grade trypsin (1 μg/μL; Promega, USA) overnight at 37°C, at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:250. The digestion was ceased by equal volumn of ethyl acetate containing 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), followed by settling until two phases appeared.   The peptide mixtures were then cleaned, concentrated and enriched through stop-and-go-extraction tips (StageTips). The StageTip was made by a core extracted from a 47 mm styrene divinyl benzene-reversed phase sulfonate disk using a 14G flat-ended needle. The core was then inserted into an ordinary 100 μL pipette tip from the top until it reaches the maximal depth. Prior to sample addition, the tips were cleaned by 100 μL 100% acetonitrile and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 1 minute. The tips were equilibrated with 100 μL 0.1% TFA in water and 30% methanol/1% TFA and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 3 minutes for each. The two phases of each sample were mixed by vigorous vortex, followed by an extraction of the volume equivalent of ~10 μg digested peptides loaded onto each StageTip. The loaded peptides were washed twice by 100 μL 99% ethyl acetate/1% TFA, followed by a wash with 100 μL 0.2% TFA in water. To elute, 100 μL 5% ammonium hydroxide/80% acetonitrile was added in each tip and centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 5 minutes into an autosampler vial (Thermo Fischer, USA). Samples in the vials were dried in SpeedVac vacuum concentrator (Thermo Fisher) at highpower for 1 hour. The peptides were then resuspended in 25 μL 0.1% formic acid.  Using an Acquity M-class nanoLC system (Waters, USA), 5 µL of the sample was loaded at 15 µL/min for 3 mintues onto a nanoEase Symmetry C18 trapping column (189 µm x 20 mm) before being washed onto a PicoFrit column (75 µmID x 300 mm; New Objective, USA) packed with Magic C18AQ resin (3 µm;Michrom Bioresources, CA). Peptides were eluted from the column and into the source of an Q Extractive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer) using the following program: 5-30% MS buffer B (98% acetonitrile + 0.2% formic acid) over 90 minutes, 30-80% MS buffer B over 3 minutes, 80% MS buffer B for 2 minutes, 80-5% for 3 minutes. The eluting peptides were ionised at 2400V. A Data Dependant MS/MS (dd-MS2) experiment was performed, with a survey scan of 350-1500 Da performed at 70,000 resolution for peptides of charge state 2+ or higher with an AGC target of 3e6 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The top 12 peptides were selected fragmented in the HCD cell using an isolation window of 1.4 m/z, an AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. Fragments were scanned in the Orbitrap analyser at 17,500 resolution and the product ion fragment masses measured over a mass range od 120-2000 Da. The mass of precursor peptides was then excluded for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data files were searched using PEAKS Studio X+ (Bioinformatics Solutions, CA) against the PEAKS DB human proteome database (2019) and a database of common contaminants (2019) with the following parameter settings: fixed modifications =none; variable modications =propionamide, oxidised methionine, deamidated asparagine; enzyme =semi-trypsin; number of allowed missed cleavages =3; peptide mass tolerance =10 ppm; MS/MS mass tolerance =0.05 Da. The results of the search were then filtered to include peptides with a -log10P score that was determined by the False Discovery Rate (FDR) of <1%, in which decoy database search matches were <1% of the total matches . All statistical analyses were performed in R (4.0.2). All proteomic data were Log2-transformed prior to entering pipelines in R. Differential expression (DE) analysis of proteomes by disease groups was conducted using the lmFit and eBayes functions in the limma package (Ritchie et al. 2015), where an empirical linear model is fitted to the proteomic data to identify the DE proteins in each disease group comparison while adjusting for age, gender and diabetes in i) acute HFpEF vs HCM, ii) chronic HFpEF vs HCM and iii) acute HFpEF vs chronic HFpEF. The limma analyses were designed as multi-group comparison, that is, all samples in three disease groups were used to estimate the variance of proteins. We next performed the pairwise-contrasts between each two groups to identify the DE proteins. Pathway analyses were performed with mean-rank gene set tests using geneSetTest function implemented in limma package, in which t-statistics from DE proteins were ranked. Pathways were annotated by the Reactome database (Croft et al. 2010). Analyses of abnormal left ventricular (LV) geometry were performed by unpaired t-tests of Log2-transformed protein intensity between concentric hypertrophy/remodelling (defined as RWT >0.42 (Lang et al. 2015); n=14) and eccentric hypertrophy (defined as LVMI >95 g/m2 for women or >115 g/m2 for men and RWT ≤0.42 (Lang et al. 2015); n=10), to identify the protein perturbations between different patterns of LV structural remodelling. Network plots of DE proteins were generated with the igraph package (Csardi et al. 2006). Each node was representative of a DE protein; and each edge represented a pairwise Pearson correlation between each protein pair. Only the most correlated nodes were shown (Pearson correlation [r] >0.7), while colour of the edges is indicative of Pearson r. The edge width was coded proportional to the scores derived from STRING database (Szklarczyk et al. 2019). The functional classifications of nodes were annotated by DAVID (Huang et al. 2009 x2). The Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to calculate the adjusted P values, also known as FDR, for all mentioned analyses. DE proteins were defined as FDR <0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Preeclampsia is still the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in pregnancy without a cure. There are two phenotypes of preeclampsia, early-onset (EOPE) and late-onset (LOPE) with poorly defined pathogenic differences. This study aimed to facilitate better understanding of the mechanisms of pathophysiology of EOPE and LOPE, and identify specific biomarkers or therapeutic targets. In this study, we conducted an untargeted, label-free quantitative proteomic analyses of plasma samples from pregnant women with EOPE (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;17) and LOPE (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;11), and age, BMI-matched normotensive controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;18). Targeted proteomics approach was also employed to validate a subset of proteins (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;17). In total, there were 26 and 20 differentially abundant proteins between EOPE or LOPE, and normotensive controls, respectively. A series of angiogenic and inflammatory proteins, including insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 4 (IGFBP4; EOPE: FDR&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.0030 and LOPE: FDR&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.00396) and inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H2-4&#xa0;(ITIH2-4), were significantly altered in abundance in both phenotypes. Through validation we confirmed that ITIH2 was perturbed only in LOPE (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.005) whereas ITIH3 and ITIH4 were perturbed in both phenotypes (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). Overall, lipid metabolism/transport proteins associated with atherosclerosis were highly abundant in LOPE, however, ECM proteins had a more pronounced role in EOPE. The complement cascade and binding and uptake of ligands by scavenger receptors, pathways, were associated with both EOPE and LOPE.

### Keywords
Plasma, Preeclampsia, Biomarkers, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, University of Technology Sydney
University of technology Sydney

### Submitter
Matthew Padula

### Lab Head
Dr Lana McClements
School of Life Sciences, University of Technology Sydney


