### Accession
PXD017833

### Title
Pyruvate kinase variant of fission yeast reprograms energy metabolism triggering systemic changes in cell regulation, growth and stress resistance

### Description
Cells balance glycolysis with respiration to support their energetic and biosynthetic needs in different environmental or physiological contexts. With abundant glucose, many cells prefer to grow by fermentation. Using 161 natural isolates of fission yeast, we investigated the genetic basis and phenotypic effects of the fermentation-respiration balance. The laboratory and a few other strains depended more on respiration. This trait was associated with a single-nucleotide polymorphism in a conserved region of Pyk1, the sole pyruvate kinase in fission yeast, while most organisms possess isoforms with different activity. This variant reduced Pyk1 activity and glycolytic flux. Replacing the ‘low-activity’ pyk1 allele in the laboratory strain with the ‘high-activity’ allele was sufficient to increase fermentation and decrease respiration. This metabolic reprogramming triggered systems-level adaptations in the transcriptome and proteome, and in cellular traits, including increased growth and chronological lifespan, but decreased resistance to oxidative stress. Thus, low Pyk1 activity provides no growth advantage but stress tolerance, despite increased respiration. The genetic tuning of glycolytic flux may reflect an adaptive trade-off in a species lacking pyruvate-kinase isoforms.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed with 1X PBS and centrifuged for 3 min at 600 x g at room temperature. Subsequently, cells were washed with 1 ml room temperature lysis buffer (LB: 100 mM HEPES, 1 mM MgCl2, 150 mM KCl, pH 7.5), transferred to 1.5 ml tubes and centrifuged at 600 x g for 5 min at room temperature. After discarding the supernatant, the cell pellets were flash-frozen at -80°C and stored until use. To lyse the cells, pellets were resuspended in 400 μl cold LB and mixed with the same volume of acid-washed glass beads (Sigma Aldrich). The mixture was then transferred to a FastPrep-24TM 5G Instrument (MP Biomedicals) where the cells were disrupted at 4°C by 8 rounds of beads-beating at 30 sec with 200 sec pause between the runs. Samples were then centrifuged at 1000 x g for 2 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and protein concentration determined with the bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Then, 100 μg of proteome samples were subjected to the sample preparation workflow for MS analysis. In the first step, sodium deoxycholate (Sigma Aldrich) was added to the samples to a final concentration of 5% followed by the addition of Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubation at 37°C for 30 min under shaking at 550 rpm to reduce disulfide bridges. Next, the alkylation of free cysteine residues was achieved by adding iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) at 40 mM final concentration. After 45 min incubation at room temperature in the dark, samples were diluted 1:5 with freshly prepared 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate and pre-digested with lysyl endopeptidase LysC (Wako Chemicals) at an enzyme to substrate (E/S) ratio of 1:100 for 4 h at 37°C under shaking at 800 rpm. Digestion was completed by treatment with sequencing-grade trypsin (promega) at an E/S ratio of 1:100 for 16h at 37°C, under shaking at 180 rpm. Protease digestions were quenched by lowering the reaction pH to <3 with the addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 1%.

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source and a nano-flow LC system (Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 40 cm x 0.75 µm i.d. column (New Objective, PF360-75-10-N-5) packed in house with 1.9 um C18 beads (Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur 120). For LC fractionation, buffer A was 0.1% formic acid and buffer B was 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile and the following gradient was employed: linear from 5% to 25% buffer B over 100 min, linear from 25% to 40% buffer B over 10 min, linear from 40% to 90 % buffer B over 5 min. and isocratic with buffer B concentration fixed at 90% for 5 min. The flow rate was 300 nL/min and the column was heated to 50 °C. For shotgun LC-MS/MS data acquisition (DDA), 1 μL peptide digests from each sample were injected independently at a concentration of 1 μg/uL. MS1 spectra were acquired from 350 to 1500 m/z at a resolution of 70000. The 20 most intense precursors that exceeded 1300 ion counts were selected for fragmentation at 25 eV normalized collision energy and the corresponding MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17500 using maximally 100,000 ions, collected for maximally 55 msec. All multiply charged ions were used to trigger MS-MS scans followed by a dynamic exclusion for 30 sec. Singly charged precursor ions and ions of undefinable charged states were excluded from fragmentation. One μL peptide digest from the same samples were also measured in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode on an Orbitrap QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the DIA settings reported123. The collected DDA spectra were searched against the S. pombe fasta database (PMID:25432776), using the Sorcerer™-SEQUEST® database search engine (Thermo Electron), allowing up to two missed cleavages. Cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.99492) were allowed as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Monoisotopic peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The identified proteins were filtered using the high peptide confidence setting in Protein Discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific), which correspond to a filter for 1% FDR on peptide level. For generation of spectral libraries, the DDA spectra were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 as described above and imported in the Spectronaut software (version 8,Biognosys AG)124. DIA-MS targeted data extraction was performed with Spectronaut version 8 (Biognosys AG)124 with default settings. Retention time prediction type was set to dynamic iRT with correction factor 1 for determination of XIC extraction windows. Retention time correction was performed with a non-linear calibration strategy, and interference correction on MS2 level was enabled125. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with the mProphet approach126 and set to 1% at peptide precursor level

### Publication Abstract
Cells balance glycolysis with respiration to support their metabolic needs in different environmental or physiological contexts. With abundant glucose, many cells prefer to grow by aerobic glycolysis or fermentation. Using 161 natural isolates of fission yeast, we investigated the genetic basis and phenotypic effects of the fermentation-respiration balance. The laboratory and a few other strains depended more on respiration. This trait was associated with a single nucleotide polymorphism in a conserved region of Pyk1, the sole pyruvate kinase in fission yeast. This variant reduced Pyk1 activity and glycolytic flux. Replacing the "low-activity" pyk1 allele in the laboratory strain with the "high-activity" allele was sufficient to increase fermentation and decrease respiration. This metabolic rebalancing triggered systems-level adjustments in the transcriptome and proteome and in cellular traits, including increased growth and chronological lifespan but decreased resistance to oxidative stress. Thus, low Pyk1 activity does not lead to a growth advantage but to stress tolerance. The genetic tuning of glycolytic flux may reflect an adaptive trade-off in a species lacking pyruvate kinase isoforms.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, S. pombe, Glycolysis, Fermentation

### Affiliations
ETH
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Valentina Cappelletti

### Lab Head
Dr Picotti Paola
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


