### Accession
PXD000511

### Title
Cdh1 Proteomic Analysis -  A Synthetic Lethal Interaction between APC/C and Topoisomerase Poisons Uncovered by Proteomic Screens

### Description
The Anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) cofactor Cdh1 modulates proliferation and cell cycle exit by targeting multiple cell cycle regulators for ubiquitin-dependent degradation. Lack of Cdh1 results in structural and numerical chromosome aberrations, a hallmark of genomic instability, although the specific targets involved in these defects are not well understood. Here, we use MS-based proteomics to identify substrates of Cdh1 important for cell cycle regulation. To this end, we performed three experiments: 1 - SILAC analysis of Cdh1 deficient asynchronous MEFs (samples were fractionated by means of SDS-PAGE and IEF) 2 - iTRAQ analysis of Cdh1 deficient synchronous MEFs (samples were fractionated by means of IEF) 3 - iTRAQ analysis of brain tissue in a Cdh1 deficient Mouse (samples were fractionated by means of IEF)  LC-MS was carried out using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos as described in Eguren et al.  iTRAQ raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3 interfaced with Mascot 2.2  SILAC raw data was processed using MaxQuant suite using Andromeda as search engine  Further details can be found in Eguren et al.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The Anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) cofactor Cdh1 modulates cell proliferation by targeting multiple cell-cycle regulators for ubiquitin-dependent degradation. Lack of Cdh1 results in structural and numerical chromosome aberrations, a hallmark of genomic instability. By using a proteomic approach in Cdh1-null cells and mouse tissues, we have identified kinesin Eg5 and topoisomerase 2&#x3b1; as Cdh1 targets involved in the maintenance of genomic stability. These proteins are ubiquitinated and degraded through specific KEN and D boxes in a Cdh1-dependent manner. Whereas Cdh1-null cells display partial resistance to Eg5 inhibitors such as monastrol, lack of Cdh1 results in a dramatic sensitivity to Top2&#x3b1; poisons as a consequence of increased levels of trapped Top2&#x3b1;-DNA complexes. Chemical inhibition of the APC/C in cancer cells results in increased sensitivity to Top2&#x3b1; poisons. This work identifies in&#xa0;vivo targets of the mammalian APC/C-Cdh1 complex and reveals synthetic lethal interactions of relevance in anticancer treatments.

### Keywords
Apc/c, Ubiquitination, Mouse, Cdh1, Cell cycle, Silac, Itraq

### Affiliations
Fernando García Martínez, Ph.D. Proteomics Unit, Spanish National cancer Research Center, CNIO, MADRID, SPAIN

### Submitter
Fernando Garcia

### Lab Head


