### Accession
PXD037993

### Title
Effect of parkin insufficiency on turnover rates of liver and striatal synaptic mitochondrial proteins

### Description
Using longitudinal metabolic labeling in a knock-out mouse model we assessed the effects of parkin insufficiency on the half-lives of mitochondrial proteins in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria isolated by discontinuous Percoll gradient centrifugation were lysed in 4% SDS/ 100 mM Tris/ 100 mM DTT pH 7.4.  50 mcg of protein lysate was processed using the FASP method.  Briefly, proteins were denatured with 8M Urea, alkylated with iodoacetamide, washed, and digested overnight with trypsin.  Typtic digests were eluted and peptides were captured and desalted by strong cation exchange followed by drying in vacuo.  Dried peptides were solubilized in 0.1% formic acid and quantified by NanoDrop using the Scopes Method. Injection samples prepared in autosampler vials were composed of 2.5 mcg of total peptide in 0.1% formic acid/ 2% acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Precursor feature refinement of MS data for turnover analysis was performed using Hardklor (v2.3.0) and Bullseye (v1.30). A database search was performed using Comet (2018.01 rev. 2) against a UniProt library composed of canonical proteins for Mus musculus (UP000000589) in addition to contaminant proteins. A static modification of 57.021461 Da for cysteine was set to account for carbamidomethyl modifications, while dynamic modifications of 3.0188325 Da for leucine and 15.9949 Da for methionine were set to account for [5,5,5-2H3]-leucine and methionine oxidation, respectively. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm with tryptic enzyme specificity allowing two missed cleavages per peptide. False discovery metrics were re-scored with the Crux-Percolator (3.02.0) using reversed sequences as decoys. Proteins were filtered with an FDR q-value threshold of 0.01, and the output was transformed to the BlibBuild spectrum sequence list format for import into Topograph using a custom R script.             Protein half-lives were calculated based on data from all peptides detected using the Topograph-daily x64 release. Proteins were represented by at least 10 total values of percent newly synthesized per genotype. Shared peptides were excluded from the analysis and only unique peptides were used. Cutoffs were applied utilizing the quality controls generated by Topograph; turnover score ≥0.98, deconvolution score ≥0.95, total area under the curve ≥1,000,000, and data points above or below the protein mean by more than 2 standard deviations. For the half-life calculations, data points from all biological replicates were pooled. Proteins with excessive variability of percent newly synthesized values were excluded and determined as follows. To create a measure analogous to a coefficient of variation, the 95% confidence interval generated by Topograph for each half-life was divided by the half-life value. Proteins with a 95% confidence interval/half-life ratio ≥0.3 were excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse, Neurodegeneration, Liver, Striatal synapatic, Half-life, Mitophagy, Parkinson’s disease, Parkin, Topograph

### Affiliations
Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Nebrasks Medical Center, Omaha NE
Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha NE

### Submitter
Andrew Trease

### Lab Head
Dr Howard S. Fox
Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha NE


