### Accession
PXD028332

### Title
Antibiotic-Chemoattractants Enhance Neutrophil Clearance of Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
S. aureus is a deadly pathogen due to its abilities to readily develop antibiotic resistance and evade our immune system. Antibiotic resistance in S. aureus is associated with reduced levels of neutrophil recruitment, which is a vital step in triggering an immune response to resolve infection. In this work, we report enhanced antibiotic agents that act as potential dual-function antibiotic-chemoattractants, enabling augmented neutrophil recruitment to S. aureus along with direct killing. Our agents exploit formylated peptides as chemoattractants for neutrophil recruitment, which is combined with the targeted binding of vancomycin to bacteria that generates a chemoattractant gradient for neutrophil recruitment. The combination of in vitro assays, cellular assays, infection-on-a-chip and in vivo mouse models, determined that these antibiotic-chemoattractants improve the recruitment, engulfment and killing of S. aureus by neutrophils. Furthermore, optimizing the fPep sequence can play an important role in the enhancement of neutrophil activity through differential activation of formyl peptide receptors. This offers an alternate approach in antibiotic development to overcome the threat of antibiotic resistance in the clinic.

### Sample Protocol
N/A. These are all chemically synthesized peptides.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were analyzed with QualBrowser (XCalibur 3.0.63, Thermo Scientific) to view spectra and to generate extracted ion chromatograms.

### Publication Abstract
The pathogen Staphylococcus aureus can readily develop antibiotic resistance and evade the human immune system, which is associated with reduced levels of neutrophil recruitment. Here, we present a class of antibacterial peptides with potential to act both as antibiotics and as neutrophil chemoattractants. The compounds, which we term 'antibiotic-chemoattractants', consist of a formylated peptide (known to act as chemoattractant for neutrophil recruitment) that is covalently linked to the antibiotic vancomycin (known to bind to the bacterial cell wall). We use a combination of in vitro assays, cellular assays, infection-on-a-chip and in vivo mouse models to show that the compounds improve the recruitment, engulfment and killing of S. aureus by neutrophils. Furthermore, optimizing the formyl peptide sequence can enhance neutrophil activity through differential activation of formyl peptide receptors. Thus, we propose antibiotic-chemoattractants as an alternate approach for antibiotic development.

### Keywords
Antibiotic, Superbug, Immunotherapeutic, Innate immunity, Neutrophil, Chemotaxis

### Affiliations
Monash University
Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, 3800 Australia

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Max J Cryle
Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, 3800 Australia


