### Accession
PXD039610

### Title
Characterization and proteomic analysis of plasma EVs recovered from healthy and diseased dogs with Canine Leishmaniosis

### Description
Dogs are highly valued companions and work animals that are susceptible to many life-threatening conditions like canine leishmaniosis (CanL). Plasma-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs), exploited extensively in biomarker discovery, constitute a mostly untapped resource in veterinary sciences. Thus, the definition of proteins associated with plasma EVs recovered from healthy and diseased dogs with a relevant pathogen would be important for biomarker development. For this, we recovered using size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), EVs from 19 healthy and 20 CanL dogs’ plasma and performed proteomic analysis by LC-MS/MS to define their core proteomic composition and search for CanL-associated alterations. EVs-specific markers were identified in all preparations and also non-EVs proteins. Some EVs markers like CD82 were specific to the healthy animals, while others like the Integrin beta 3 were identified in most samples. The EVs-enriched preparations allowed the identification of 529 canine proteins that were identified in both groups, while 465 and 154 were only identified in healthy or CanL samples, respectively. A GO enrichment analysis revealed few CanL-specific terms. Leishmania spp. protein identifications were also found alt-hough with only 1 unique peptide. Ultimately, CanL-associated proteins of interest were identified and a core proteome was revealed that will be available for intra- and inter-species comparisons.

### Sample Protocol
After physical characterization of EVs the proteomic analysis proceeded. Digestion of the samples (10-100 µg protein) was performed with trypsin/LysC (1:50) overnight following solid-phase-preparation (SP3) previously described. The concentration of the resulting peptides was measured by fluorescence. The proteomic analysis of EVs was performed by injection of 500 ng of peptides in a nano LC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadru-pole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as pre-viously described. The LC-MS/MS raw data was analysed by Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For protein identification the proteomes from two taxonomic selections were considered, Leishmania infantum (8,045 entries, 2019_11), Canis lupus familiaris (45,301 entries, 201_11) from UniProt together with a database of common contaminants from MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
Canine peptides were selected based on a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Canis lupus familiaris proteins identified only with one unique peptide were also excluded. Common contaminants were excluded from the analysis. The data for canine proteins was analysed using the merged data from the CanL dogs EVs and the merge data of the healthy dogs EVs. Moreover, for quantification purposes, the data was analysed using the data from both groups to perform the ratio of abundances (CanL/Healthy). The data was transformed into logarithmic scale (Log2). Subsequently, a statistical analysis was performed considering the ratio of abundances. Thus, a fold change and a correspondent p-value were reported for each protein. This data allowed the construction of a volcano plot that highlighted the upregulated and the downregulated proteins. Enrichment analysis of canine proteins with statistically different abun-dance in CanL dogs were performed with the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (David 2021).  Leishmania infantum proteins were evaluated in an individual sample level. Leish-mania infantum proteins with one unique peptide identified were considered. Proteins identified in healthy dogs EVs were considered false positives and were excluded from the analysis. All peptides identified were subjected to homology analysis in NCBI, and peptides only identified in Leishmania species were valued. Moreover, the proteins were only considered as potential candidates if they appeared in several individual samples.

### Publication Abstract
Dogs are highly valued companions and work animals that are susceptible to many life-threatening conditions such as canine leishmaniosis (CanL). Plasma-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs), exploited extensively in biomarker discovery, constitute a mostly untapped resource in veterinary sciences. Thus, the definition of proteins associated with plasma EVs recovered from healthy and diseased dogs with a relevant pathogen would be important for biomarker development. For this, we recovered, using size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), EVs from 19 healthy and 20 CanL dogs' plasma and performed proteomic analysis by LC-MS/MS to define their core proteomic composition and search for CanL-associated alterations. EVs-specific markers were identified in all preparations and also non-EVs proteins. Some EVs markers such as CD82 were specific to the healthy animals, while others, such as the Integrin beta 3 were identified in most samples. The EVs-enriched preparations allowed the identification of 529 canine proteins that were identified in both groups, while 465 and 154 were only identified in healthy or CanL samples, respectively. A GO enrichment analysis revealed few CanL-specific terms. <i>Leishmania</i> spp. protein identifications were also found, although with only one unique peptide. Ultimately, CanL-associated proteins of interest were identified and a core proteome was revealed that will be available for intra- and inter-species comparisons.

### Keywords
Canine leishmaniosis; leishmania infantum; extracellular vesicles; proteomics; exosomes; leishmaniasis; leishmania; dogs; parasites

### Affiliations
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health

### Submitter
Nuno Santarém

### Lab Head
Dr Anabela Cordeiro da Silva
i3S - Institute for Research and Innovation in Health


