### Accession
PXD022409

### Title
Maternally inherited piRNAs silence transposons during Drosophila embryogenesis

### Description
The piRNA pathway controls transposon expression in animal germ cells, thereby ensuring genome stability over generations. piRNAs are maternally deposited and required for proper transposon silencing in adult offspring. However, a long-standing question in the field is the precise function of maternally deposited piRNAs and its associated factors during embryogenesis. Here, we probe the spatio-temporal expression patterns of several piRNA pathway components during early stages of development. Amongst those, factors required for transcriptional gene silencing (TGS) showed ubiquitous abundance in somatic and pole cells throughout the first half of embryogenesis. We further analysed the transcriptomes of various embryo stages and correlated these with the presence of selected chromatin marks. We found that a number of transposon families show bursts of transcription during early embryonic stages. Transposons heavily targeted by maternally deposited piRNAs accumulated repressive chromatin marks following their spike in expression. Furthermore, depletion of maternally deposited Piwi protein in early embryos resulted in increased expression of transposons targeted by inherited piRNAs and was accompanied by a strong loss of repressive chromatin marks at coding sequences. Overall, our data suggests a pivotal role for the piRNA pathway in transposon defence during Drosophila embryogenesis in somatic cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation from whole embryos and quantitative mass spectrometry 100µl of w1118 embryos for time points 0-2h, 5-7h and 10-12h AEL were collected in three biological replicates on agar plates and dechorionated as previously described (chapter 2.5). Embryos were lysed in lysis buffer (0.1% SDS, 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1x Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) using a rotating pestle on ice for 2min or until entirely homogenised. Lysate was heated for 5min at 90°C and probe sonicated for 20sec (20% power with pulse of 1sec). Debris was pelleted by centrifugation at full speed for 10min at 4°C and supernatant transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was measured using Bradford Assay (Bio Rad). 100µg protein was digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C. TMT chemical isobaric labelling was performed as described previously (Papachristou et al., 2018). Peptide fractions were analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the nano-ESI Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data processing Raw data files were processed according to previous reports (Papachristou et al., 2018). Spectral .raw files were analysed with the SequestHT search engine on Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer 2.1 for peptide and protein identification. Data was searched against a modified FlyBase protein database with following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.5 Da. Dynamic Modifications were oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da) and Static Modifications were TMT6plex at any amino-terminus, lysine (+229.163 Da) and methylthio at cysteine (+45.988). The Reporter Ion Quantifier node included a TMT 6plex (Thermo Scientific Instruments) Quantification Method, for MS3 scan events, HCD activation type, integration window tolerance 20 ppm and integration method Most Confident Centroid. Peptides with an FDR >1% were removed. The downstream workflow included signal to noise (S/N) calculation of TMT intensities. Level of confidence for peptide identifications was estimated using the Percolator node with decoy database search. Strict FDR was set at q-value < 0.01.  Bioinformatics Analysis of proteomics data Processed data files were analysed as described in a previous publication (Papachristou et al., 2018) using qPLEXanalyzer in R with multimapping peptides included in the analysis. Bar graphs showing protein intensities for Piwi and volcano plots with indicated comparisons were plotted using ggplot2 in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryogenesis, Pirna, Tmt-ms, Drosophila

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute University of Cambridge United Kingdom
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Martin Fabry

### Lab Head
Dr Gregory J Hannon
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute University of Cambridge United Kingdom


