### Accession
PXD030927

### Title
Comparative glycomics study on the surface of SKOV3 versus IOSE80 cell lines

### Description
Both SKOV3 and IOSE80 cells were cultured and extracted the proteins. With sequential digestion by trypsin, enriched by Zwitterionic Hydrophilic Interaction chromatography (ZIC-HILIC), the intact N-glycopeptides were then isotopic diethyl labelled and analyzed using C18-RPLC-MS/MS (HCD).

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Both human SKOV3 and IOSE80 cells were harvested at about 80% confluence. Wash the cells with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and then scraped off cell culture plates using lysis buffer containing 0.1M Tris-HCL, 4% SDS, protease and phosphatase inhibitors on ice. Sonicated the collections for 30 min. The cell debris was then dislodged by centrifugation for 15 min at 14,000 g. Measure the protein concentrations by BCA assay and adjusted them into 1 mg/ml for −80°C storage. For tryptic peptides, protein concentrations were denatured in 10 mM DTT at 55 ℃ for 30 min. To reduce the denatured proteins, 100 μL 200 mM DTT was putted in for incubation at 37°C. After that, alkylated reduced proteins by 100 μL 200 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. A 6-fold volume of pre-cooled acetone was then added and incubated at -20℃ overnight. Supernatants were removed after 30 min centrifuge at 10,000 g. The residue was then dissolved in 10 ml 50 mM ABC and digested using trypsin (enzyme/protein, 1:50, w/w) at the condition of 37 ℃ overnight. The products were then acidified by TFA to the 3% (v/v) concentration. Desalting and ZIC‑HILIC enrichment  Desalt the digested peptides using C18 (Phenomenex, 15 μm, 300 Å, protein: particle, 1:50, w/w) SPE column. Gradient elution from 400 μL 50% ACN (0.1% TFA) to 400 μL 80% ACN (0.1% TFA) was conducted before vacuum concentration in Speedvac. Desalted N-glycopeptides were redissolved in a loading buffer containing 80% ACN with 5% TFA and then fill into the ZIC‑HILIC particles (Merk Millipore, 5 μm, 300 Å, protein: particle was 1:30) SPE column. After binding, enriched peptides were subsequently eluted by 300 μL 0.1% TFA three times, followed by 200 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3. All the combined eluates were collected and dried in the Speedvac evaporator.  Isotopic Labelling  Isotopic labelling of sugar chains was prepared as described previously[23]. Briefly, tryptic peptides after desalt and enrichment from two identical aliquots of SKOV3 and IOSE80 cells were redissolved separately in 100 μL TFE followed by adding 0.25 μL/μg 20% CH3CHO /13CH313CHO and an equal amount of 0.6M NaBH3CN solution, respectively. Vortex for 1 min immediately and then incubated at 37 ℃ for 1 h. An equal volume of 4% NH4OH finally quenched the reaction. Mix the labelled N-glycopeptides and dry them in the Speedvac for storage. The pellets were finally resuspended in 50μL H2O for further study. C18-RPLC-MS/MS (HCD) Analysis Before C18-RPLC-MS/MS (HCD) analysis, a repeated desalination step was made on the enriched and labelled N-glycopeptides. After gradient elution by 250 μL 50% CAN to 250 μL 80% CAN, elution was dried by Speedvac and redissolved by 30 μL ultrapure water. Mix intact SKOV3 and IOSE80 N-glycopeptides in the ratio of 1:1 and separate them by C18-RPLC on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Trapped the N-glycopeptides on a 5-cm column (360 μod × 200 μid) and then separated them on a 75-cm analytical column (360 μod × 75 μid). Both columns were packed with C18 particles (Phenomenex, 5 μm, 300 Å). Prepare two buffers: Buffer A (99.9% H2O and 0.1% FA) and Buffer B (99.9 % ACN and 0.1 % FA) spare. Set the mobile phase loading flow rate constantly at 5μL/min and separation flow rate at 30 nL/min with multi-step gradient elution: 2% buffer B within 12 min for loading samples; 2 %~40 % buffer B increased lin 188min for elution; increased to 95% buffer B within the following 10min and held for another 5 min for edulcoration; decreased to 2% buffer B in the last 25min for balance. To detect eluted N-glycopeptides, Q Exactive mass spectrometer with nano-ESI tandem (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA)) was applied: spray voltage at 1.9 kV; capillary tubes at 300 ℃. To acquire MS spectra, using the following settings: m/z range at 700-2000; automatic gain control (AGC) target at 3×105; mass resolution at 60 k, and maximum injection time at 20 ms. To acquire MS/MS spectra in the Top 20 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode , the following setting were applied: AGC target at 2×105; mass resolution at 30 k; maximum injection time at 250 ms; isolation window at 3.0 m/z; dynamic exclusion at 20.0 s,  and stepped HCD normalized collision energies (NCEs) at 20%, 30% and 31%, respectively. Using settings above, we obtained three technical replicate (TR) raw data sets (TR1, TR2, and TR3).

### Data Protocol
Identification by GPSeeker GPSeeker then analyzed the PRLC-MS/MS (HCD) raw datasets (TR1, TR2, and TR3) for intact N-glycopeptide identification and quantitation. Details have been recorded before[23, 24]. Briefly, to search the SKOV3 and IOSE80 cells intact N-glycopeptides, four theoretical databases were customized created (two labels: light and heavy diethylation (L/H) and two directions: forward and reverse (F/R)) based on the human proteome pre-downloaded from UniProt (20375 entries, http://www.uniprot.org/) and putative human N-glycan database in GPSeeker. Customized the initial target and decoy searches: protease was set trypsin; miss cleavage number allowed 1; Select and add N-acetylglucosylation as dynamic PTMs. Static PTMs adopted in this research included: light [(12CH212CHO)2] and heavy [(13CH213CHO)2] demethylation on the N-terminus and lysine; reductive alkylation on cysteine and designated the m/z measuring range of 700-2000. Set the search parameters in the MS spectra: isotopic peak m/z deviation (IPMD) at 20.0 ppm; isotopic peak abundance cutoff (IPACO) at 40%, and isotopic peak abundance deviation (IPAD) at 50%, respectively. Refinement parameters to obtain further N-glycopeptide spectrum matches (GPSM): Y1 ions were set to MS/MS spectra Top4 abundant; minimum percentage of peptide matching products ions was set to ≥ 10%. Each pair of the three technical replicate was searched. Combine the target and decoy GPSMs in a MS excel. After ranked with decreasing pg-scores, a critical pg-score was chosen to ensure FDR ≤1%. Qualitative information, including the N-glycan identifications (IDs), structure-diagnostic ions, N-glycosites, composition and linkage of N-glycans and corresponding N-glycoprotein accession numbers were finally obtained for further study after removing the duplicates.  Relative quantitation by GPSeekerQuan Based on the matching results from GPSeeker, we then conducted GPSeekerQuan tool to find out the precursor ions in the first-order mass spectrum corresponding to each ID. For each precursor ion isotope profile, a sum of the top3 isotopic peaks intensity was collected for relative quantification, and the relative ratio of the IOSE80/ SKOV3 group was calculated. To further screen the final differentially expressed N-glycopeptides IDs, quantitative results that at least two among the three TRs were required to be observed. Besides, FC was controlled ≥1.5, p-value＜0.05 calculated by t-test was classified.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Objective:</b> Site<b>-</b> and structure-specific quantitative N-glycoproteomics study of differential cell-surface N-glycosylation of ovarian cancer SKOV3 cells with the non-cancerous ovarian epithelial IOSE80 cells as the control. <b>Methods:</b> C18-RPLC-MS/MS (HCD with stepped normalized collision energies) was used to analyze the 1: 1 mixture of labeled intact N-glycopeptides from SKOV3 and IOSE80 cells, and the site- and structure-specific intact N-glycopeptide search engine GPSeeker was used to conduct qualitative and quantitative search on the obtained raw datasets. <b>Results:</b> With the control of the spectrum-level false discovery rate &#x2264;1%, 13,822 glycopeptide spectral matches coming from 2,918&#xa0;N-glycoproteins with comprehensive N-glycosite and N-glycan structure information were identified; 3,733&#xa0;N-glycosites and 3,754&#xa0;N-glycan sequence structures were confirmed by site-determining and structure-diagnostic fragment ions, respectively. With the control of no less than two observations among the three technical replicates, fold change &#x2265;1.5, and <i>p</i>-value &#x2264; 0.05, 746 DEPGs in SKOV3 cells relative to IOSE80 cells were quantified, where 421 were upregulated and 325 downregulated. <b>Conclusion:</b> Differential cell-surface N-glycosylation of ovarian cancer SKOV3 cells were quantitatively analyzed by isotopic labeling and site- and structure-specific N-glycoproteomics. This discovery study provides putative N-glycoprotein biomarker candidates for future validation study using multiple reaction monitoring and biochemical methods.

### Keywords
Skov3 iose80

### Affiliations
Affiliated Hangzhou First People's Hospital,  Zhejiang University School of Medicine
Affiliated Hangzhou First People's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Ying Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Zhou
Affiliated Hangzhou First People's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine


