### Accession
PXD038066

### Title
Sarcomeric Proteoform Landscape in Ischemic Cardiomyopathy Defined by Top-down Proteomics

### Description
In ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM), left ventricular systolic dysfunction leads to reduced blood flow and oxygen supply to the heart. Alterations in sarcomeric protein function and expression play prominent roles in the onset and progression of cardiomyopathies; however, the molecular mechanisms underlying ICM remain poorly defined. Herein, we have implemented a top-down liquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics method for the simultaneous quantification of sarcomeric protein expression and modifications in non-failing donor (n = 16) compared to end-stage failing ICM (n = 16) human cardiac tissues. Our top-down proteomics platform provided a “bird’s eye view” of proteoform families with high mass accuracy and reproducibility. In addition, quantification of post-translational modifications (PTMs) and expression reveal significant changes in various sarcomeric proteins extracted from ICM tissues. Changes include altered phosphorylation and expression of cardiac troponin I (cTnI) and enigma homolog 2 (ENH2) as well as a marked increase in muscle LIM protein (MLP) and calsarcin-1 phosphorylation in ICM hearts. Our results imply that the contractile apparatus of the sarcomere is severely dysregulated during ICM. Thus, this study is the first to uncover significant molecular changes to multiple sarcomeric proteins in end-stage ischemic heart failure patients using LC-MS-based top-down proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Human Cardiac Tissue Collection. Left ventricular (LV) myocardium from nonfailing donor hearts with no history of heart diseases were used as control tissues (donor, n = 16). Apex myocardium from failing ICM hearts were collected during left ventricular assist device implantation (ICM, n = 16).32 Donor heart tissue was stored in cardioplegic solution prior to dissection and snap-frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 ℃. ICM heart tissue was stored on dry ice immediately after surgical removal and then stored at -80 ℃. Donor and ICM hearts were obtained from the University of Wisconsin (UW)-Madison Organ and Tissue Donation and University of Michigan, respectively. The procedures for the collection of human non-failing donor heart and ICM failing heart tissues were approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of the UW-Madison and University of Michigan, respectively. Available clinical deidentified data for the heart tissues used in this study can be found in Table S1.  Sample Preparation. Sarcomeric proteins were extracted from human heart tissues as previously published.33 First, ~10 mg of heart tissue was quickly homogenized at 4 ℃ and washed twice in 100 L of HEPES buffer (25 mM HEPES pH = 7.4, 60 mM NaF, 10 mM L-Methionine, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, and 1x Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail) with a Teflon pellet pestle. The homogenate was centrifuged at 21,000 g for 30 minutes at 4 ℃. The pellets were re-dispersed in 50 L of freshly prepared trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) buffer (1% TFA pH = 2.0, 1 mM TCEP, 10 mM L-Methionine). The homogenate was centrifuged at 21,000 g for 30 minutes at 4 ℃ and the supernatant was collected. All samples were normalized to 0.08 mg/mL protein in 0.2% formic acid with 2 mM L-methionine by the Pierce BCA assay prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Top-down Data Acquisition. Top-down LC-MS/MS was carried out by using a NanoAcquity ultra-high pressure LC system (Waters) coupled to a high-resolution maXis II quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). 5 L (400 ng) of total protein was injected onto a home-packed PLRP column (PLRP-S, 10-m particle size, 500-m inner diameter, 1,000 Å pore size) using an organic gradient of 5 to 95% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 0.2% formic acid in water; mobile phase B: 0.2% formic acid in 50:50 acetonitrile:isoproponal) at a flow rate of 12 L/min and temperature of 35 ℃. Column pressure was maintained between 700-1200 psi. Mass spectra were taken at a scan rate of 0.5 Hz over 530-2000 m/z range. A total of three replicate runs were collected for each concentration between 250-1200 ng to establish instrument sensitivity and reproducibility. Samples were randomized to correct for batch effects.    Data-dependent LC-MS/MS was performed on sarcomeric protein extracts. The three most intense ions in each mass spectrum were selected and fragmented by collision-activated dissociation (CAD) with a scan rate of 2 Hz from 200-3000 m/z. The isolation window for online AutoMS/MS CAD was 10 m/z. The collision DC bias was set from 18 to 35 eV for CAD with nitrogen as the collision gas.  Data Analysis. LC-MS raw files were processed and analyzed with Compass DataAnalysis 4.3 (Bruker Daltonics) software. All chromatograms were smoothened by the Gauss algorithm with a smoothing width of 2.04 s. Sophisticated Numerical Annotation Procedure (SNAP) peak-picking algorithm (quality factor: 0.4; signal-to-noise ratio (S/N): 3.0) was used to determine the monoisotopic mass of all detected ions. Mass spectra were deconvoluted using the Maximum Entropy algorithm within the DataAnalysis 4.3 software. The resolving power for Maximum Entropy deconvolution was set to 60,000k for proteins that were isotopically resolved.  Protein modifications were determined by calculating the relative abundance of the most abundant proteoforms. In order to quantify protein expression, the top 3-5 most abundant charge states ions of all proteoforms of the same protein were combined to generate one extracted ion chromatogram (EIC) (Table S2). The area under of the curves (AUCs) of each EIC was then manually integrated using the DataAnalysis 4.3 software.   LC-MS/MS data was processed using in-house developed MASH Native software.34 The fragment ions in the MS/MS spectra were assigned based on the protein sequence of myofilament and Z-disk proteins in Uniprot protein database (UniProtKB). Monoisotopic masses were used for all proteoform determinations, and all fragment ions were manually validated with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Ischemic cardiomyopathy (ICM) is a prominent form of heart failure, but the molecular mechanisms underlying ICM remain relatively understudied due to marked phenotypic heterogeneity. Alterations in post-translational modifications (PTMs) and isoform switches in sarcomeric proteins play important roles in cardiac pathophysiology. Thus, it is essential to define sarcomeric proteoform landscape to better understand ICM. Herein, we have implemented a top-down liquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics method for the identification and quantification of sarcomeric proteoforms in the myocardia of donors without heart diseases (<i>n</i> = 16) compared to end-stage ICM patients (<i>n</i> = 16). Importantly, quantification of post-translational modifications (PTMs) and expression reveal significant changes in various sarcomeric proteins extracted from ICM tissues. Changes include altered phosphorylation and expression of cardiac troponin I (cTnI) and enigma homologue 2 (ENH2) as well as an increase in muscle LIM protein (MLP) and calsarcin-1 (Cal-1) phosphorylation in ICM hearts. Our results imply that the contractile apparatus of the sarcomere is severely dysregulated during ICM. Thus, this is the first study to uncover significant molecular changes to multiple sarcomeric proteins in the LV myocardia of the end-stage ICM patients using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based top-down proteomics. Raw data are available via the PRIDE repository with identifier PXD038066.

### Keywords
Human heart proteomics, Quantitative proteomics, Myofilament proteins, Ischemic cardiomyopathy, Top-down proteomics, Sarcomere, Z-disk proteins

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
Professor, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology Professor, Department of Chemistry Director of Mass Spectrometry Human Proteomics Program School of Medicine and Public Health University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Emily  Chapman

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Ge
Professor, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology Professor, Department of Chemistry Director of Mass Spectrometry Human Proteomics Program School of Medicine and Public Health University of Wisconsin-Madison


