### Accession
PXD008945

### Title
Proteomic characterization of plasma-derived exosomes from P. vivax infected FRG huHep mice

### Description
This project focused in the proteomic characterization of plasma-derived exosomes from Plasmodium vivax infected FRG huHep mice, a suitable in vivo model for the development of pre-erythrocytic stages of this parasite. P. vivax is responsible for the vast majority of Malaria cases outside Africa. This parasite evolved a latent liver stage form called hypnozoite that cannot be detected using the current diagnostic methods.  This represent a major limitation to the Malaria elimination goal. Exosomes are extracellular vesicles involved in intercellular communication and in a large variety of physiological functions. Recently, this vesicles have been recognized for the immense potential to be used as biomarkers in the context of non-invasive diagnostic approaches from liquid biopsies. The exploration of the protein content of exosomes secreted into the bloodstream of P. vivax infected FRG huHep mice represents an interesting approach to tackle the big challenge of identifying a hypnozoite biomarker which in the future could help to identify hypnozoites carriers in Malaria vivax relapsing patients.

### Sample Protocol
• Mice were infected with P. vivax sporozoites as previously described (Mikolajczak et al., 2015). A first experimental infection (EI1) was completed using six female FRG huHep mice by intravenous injection of 1 million sporozoites. Infected mice were euthanized 8 days post infection (dpi), exsanguinated and livers harvested. Four un-infected FRG huHep mice were used as controls. A second experimental infection (EI2) was completed and mice were euthanized 8 (N=4), 10 (N=4), 16 (N=3) and 21 (N=1) dpi (Supplementary Figure 1).  Mice euthanized at day 10 received an intraperitoneal injection of human reticulocytes as previously described (Mikolajczak et al., 2015). Animals were euthanized and exsanguinated by cardiac puncture. Whole blood from individual animals was collected in tubes using a syringe preloaded with 0.1 mL of 250U/mL heparin. Samples were processed within 30 minutes by centrifugation at 2,000xg for 5 minutes at 4°C to remove platelets and platelet-derived vesicles. Plasma samples were immediately transferred into a clean tube and frozen at -80ºC.   • Exosomes were isolated from plasma samples of uninfected and P. vivax infected FRG huHep mice by size exclusion chromatography (SEC) following our own standard methodologies (de Menezes-Neto et al., 2015). 100 µl of SEC fractions F7, F8, F9, F10 were pooled and designated as exosomal-enriched fractions (ExEFs). Similarly, 100 ul of SEC fractions F5, F6, F11, F12 were pooled and designated as microvesicles-enriched fraction (MvEF).  • ExEF and MvEF were mixed with equal volume of RIPA buffer [50 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 % NP-40, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM DTT, 1:100 protease inhibitors (Thermo Scientific)], incubated at 70ºC and further sonicated for 10 minutes with cycles of 30 seconds at the highest intensity (Bioruptor-Diagenode) to ensure exosomal membrane disruption. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000x g during 15 minutes at 4ºC and supernatant recovered. Proteins were then precipitated with cold acetone [1/6 ratio (v/v)] O/N at -20ºC and recovered after subsequent centrifugation at 16,000xg during 15 minutes at 4ºC. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in 30 µl 6M Urea and further reduced in 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT; Sigma) for 1 hour at 37ºC and alkylated with 55 mM of Iodoacetoamine (IAM, Sigma) during 30 minutes at RT. Samples were brought to 2M Urea and digested with a concentration of Lys-C (Wako) corresponding to 10% (µg) of the digested sample, overnight at 37ºC. Subsequently, samples were further diluted to 1M Urea and digested for 12 hours with a concentration of Trypsine (Promega) corresponding to 10% (µg) of the digested sample. Finally, samples were desalted on MicroSpin C18 columns (The Nest Group), evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid. Approximately one µg of each sample was analyzed using Liquid chromatography (nanoLCULTRA-EKSIGENT) followed by mass spectrometry on a 90 minutes gradient in the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  As a quality control BSA controls were digested in parallel and ran between each sample to avoid carryover and assess the instrument performance.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed with the search algorithm Mascot v2.5.1 (http://www.matrixscience.com) on the Proteome DiscovererTM Software V2.0 (Thermo Scientific) using three protein databases: Uniprot Plasmodium vivax (31374 entries), Uniprot human (20133 entries) and Uniprot mouse databases (16832 entries), downloaded on April 28th, 2017. Peptides have been filtered based on:  i) minimum peptide length of 7; (ii) maximum false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins of 1%; (iii) minimum peptides per protein of 1 and minimum unique peptides per protein of 1; (iv) minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40; (v) main search error of 4 ppm.  Mouse and human proteins were accepted if more than 2 unique peptides were identified with a false discovery rate < 1% and assigned with the category of Master protein by Proteome DiscovererTM software. In the case of proteins identified by 1 unique peptide, a criterion of its presence in at least 2 samples was applied.  Assigned contaminants, keratins and abundant proteins plasma (de Menezes-Neto et al., 2015) were removed. For P. vivax protein identification, a different criterion was applied, accepting proteins identified with 1 unique peptide, FDR < 1%, category of Master Protein by Proteome Discoverer software after confirming individual high quality spectrum. P. vivax proteins Uniprot entries were used to retrieve protein sequences and blasted to Plasmodium Genomic Database (http://plasmodb.org/) against Plasmodium vivax proteins in order to identify and assign the corresponding gene name in the SalI and P01 strains. Redundant entries were filtered out from the final list of proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are extracellular vesicles of endocytic origin containing molecular signatures implying the cell of origin; thus, they offer a unique opportunity to discover biomarkers of disease. <i>Plasmodium vivax</i>, responsible for more than half of all malaria cases outside Africa, is a major obstacle in the goal of malaria elimination due to the presence of dormant liver stages (hypnozoites), which after the initial infection may reactivate to cause disease. Hypnozoite infection is asymptomatic and there are currently no diagnostic tools to detect their presence. The human liver-chimeric (FRG huHep) mouse is a robust <i>P. vivax</i> infection model for exo-erythrocytic development of liver stages, including hypnozoites. We studied the proteome of plasma-derived exosomes isolated from <i>P. vivax</i> infected FRG huHep mice with the objective of identifying liver-stage expressed parasite proteins indicative of infection. Proteomic analysis of these exosomes showed the presence of 290 and 234 proteins from mouse and human origin, respectively, including canonical exosomal markers. Human proteins include proteins previously detected in liver-derived exosomes, highlighting the potential of this chimeric mouse model to study plasma exosomes derived unequivocally from human hepatocytes. Noticeably, we identified 17 parasite proteins including enzymes, surface proteins, components of the endocytic pathway and translation machinery, as well as uncharacterized proteins. Western blot analysis validated the presence of human arginase-I and an uncharacterized <i>P. vivax</i> protein in plasma-derived exosomes. This study represents a proof-of-principle that plasma-derived exosomes from <i>P. vivax</i> infected FRG-huHep mice contain human hepatocyte and <i>P. vivax</i> proteins with the potential to unveil biological features of liver infection and identify biomarkers of hypnozoite infection.

### Keywords
Plasmodium vivax, Humanized liver chimeric mouse, Exosomes

### Affiliations
- Institute for Global Health, Hospital Clinic, Universitat de Barcelona. Barcelona. Spain.  - Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies, Barcelona, Spain.  - Institute for Health Sciences Germans Trias I Pujol. Barcelona, Spain
ISGlobal, Hospital Clínic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain

Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain

IGTP Institut d’Investigació Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain

### Submitter
Hernando A del Portillo

### Lab Head
Dr Hernando A del Portillo
- Institute for Global Health, Hospital Clinic, Universitat de Barcelona. Barcelona. Spain.  - Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies, Barcelona, Spain.  - Institute for Health Sciences Germans Trias I Pujol. Barcelona, Spain


