### Accession
PXD018952

### Title
Lowering Sample Requirements to Study Tyrosine Kinase Signaling using Phosphoproteomics with the TMT Calibrator Approach

### Description
Analysis of tyrosine kinase signaling is critical for the development of targeted cancer therapy. Currently, immunoprecipitation (IP) of phosphotyrosine (pY) peptides prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is used to profile kinase substrates. A typical protocol requests 10 mg of total protein from ~108 cells or 50-100 mg of tissue. Large sample requirements can be cost prohibitive or not feasible for certain experiments. Sample multiplexing in chemical labeling reduces the protein amount required for each sample, and newer approaches use a material-rich reference channel as a calibrator to trigger detection and quantification for even smaller samples.  Here, we demonstrate that the tandem mass tag (TMT) calibrator approach reduces the sample input for pY profiling 10-fold (to ~1 mg total protein per sample from 107 cells grown in 1 plate), while maintaining the depth of pY proteome sampling and the biological content of the experiment.  This strategy opens more opportunities for pY profiling of large sample cohorts and samples with limited protein quantity such as immune cells, xenograft models, and human tumors.

### Sample Protocol
PC9 lung cancer cells (n = 10^7) were treated with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) vehicle control, Erlotinib (0.5 micromolar), or Osimertinib (0.5 micromolar) for 1 hour.  One bulk preparation (n = 10^8) was treated with DMSO and used as the material-rich reference sample; cell lysis and protein extraction were performed according to the vendor's protocol (#8803S, Cell Signaling Technology). Bradford assays (Coomassie Plus, Pierce) estimated the protein concentration in each sample.  Then, 1 mg of total protein from each sample and 10 mg from the reference sample were reduced, alkylated, digested and desalted according to vendor protocol (C-18 Sep-Pak, Waters). The peptides were dissolved in 700 microliters of immuno-affinity purification (IAP) buffer. P-Y-1000 antibody beads were used to enrich pY-peptides according to vendor protocol.   TMT11plex reagents were used with the 130C channel left empty due to expected interference from the 131C channel. A small aliquot (80 micrograms or 10% of the provided reagent) was used to label enriched pY peptides. LC-MS/MS of each TMT reaction verified expected reporter ion labeling using MaxQuant analysis and label incorporation > 98% by spectral counting (Mascot, Matrix Science and Proteome Discoverer, Thermo).  After passing QC, labeling was quenched with aqueous 5% hydroxylamine, and samples were combined and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  IMAC enrichment (Cell Signaling Technology #20432) was performed to remove excess TMT reagent and unmodified peptides.  A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph interfaced with an electrospray quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (RSLCnano and Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo) were used for LC-MS/MS peptide sequencing and TMT quantification.  Peptide separation was performed as previously described and described in detail in the Supporting Information.  MS   survey scans were acquired for m/z 440-2,000 using 60,000 resolution, 3E6 AGC target, and 45 ms Max IT for ion accumulation. Twenty data dependent tandem mass spectra were acquired with 45,000 resolution, 1E5 AGC target, 150 ms Max IT, isolation window 0.8 with 0.2 offset, fixed first mass at m/z 100, and 2 normalized collision energy (NCE) values of 24 and 30 to optimize sequence information and TMT reporter ion intensity. Precursors with charge 1 or >7 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion (10 ppm mass tolerance and 15 s duration) avoided resampling peaks.

### Data Protocol
For this upload, LC-MS/MS data were searched with Mascot to identify tyrosine phosphorylated peptides from human entries in the UniProt database.  For the manuscript, MaxQuant (v.1.6.2.10) identified and quantified pY peptides in human proteins from the UniProt August 2019 release using default MS2 TMT11plex settings with PSM FDR set at 0.05 and phosphoSTY as a variable modification. MaxQuant results were normalized,[ ] prior to visualization using Perseus (v.1.6.2.3).

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of tyrosine kinase signaling is critical for the development of targeted cancer therapy. Currently, immunoprecipitation of phosphotyrosine (pY) peptides prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is used to profile tyrosine kinase substrates. A typical protocol requests 10&#xa0;mg of total protein from &#x2248;10<sup>8</sup> cells or 50-100&#xa0;mg of tissue. Large sample requirements can be cost prohibitive or not feasible for certain experiments. Sample multiplexing using chemical labeling reduces the protein amount required for each sample, and newer approaches use a material-rich reference channel as a calibrator to trigger detection and quantification for smaller samples. Here, it is demonstrated that the tandem mass tag (TMT) calibrator approach reduces the sample input for pY profiling tenfold (to &#x2248;1&#xa0;mg total protein per sample from 10<sup>7</sup> cells grown in one plate), while maintaining the depth of pY proteome sampling and the biological content of the experiment. Data are available through PRIDE (PXD019764 for label-free and PXD018952 for TMT). This strategy opens more opportunities for pY profiling of large sample cohorts and samples with limited protein quantity such as immune cells, xenograft models, and human tumors.

### Keywords
Signaling, Calibrator, Tyrosine phosphorylation, Tmt, Cancer

### Affiliations
Molecular Oncology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr John M. Koomen, PhD
Molecular Oncology Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


