### Accession
PXD022792

### Title
Systemic inflammation and metabolic disturbances are central pathways related to mortality of ill severely malnourished children

### Description
This study aimed to characterize systemic processes associated with inpatient mortality among children with CSM using multi-omics approaches

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples (10μl) were depleted the top 12 abundant plasma proteins using spin columns (Thermo scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. Labelled peptide pool samples were generated using the Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex kit (Thermo scientific) and desalted using ZipTips (Millipore) according to manufacturers’ instructions. Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-flow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) on a 75 µm × 50 cm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) and measured using a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the chromatography system via a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Columns containing the protein identifiers (IDs), protein names, gene names, were extracted from the ProteinGroup Matrix file from Maxquant. Proteins with >20% missing values and subjects with >60% missing proteins were removed. Data imputation for the remaining samples with <20% missing values was performed using k-nearest neighbour method. The data was then batch-corrected using the combat software and log10 transformed.

### Publication Abstract
Children admitted to hospital with an acute illness and concurrent severe malnutrition [complicated severe malnutrition (CSM)] have a high risk of dying. The biological processes underlying their mortality are poorly understood. In this case-control study nested within a multicenter randomized controlled trial among children with CSM in Kenya and Malawi, we found that blood metabolomic and proteomic profiles robustly differentiated children who died (<i>n</i> = 92) from those who survived (<i>n</i> = 92). Fatalities were characterized by increased energetic substrates (tricarboxylic acid cycle metabolites), microbial metabolites (e.g., propionate and isobutyrate), acute phase proteins (e.g., calprotectin and C-reactive protein), and inflammatory markers (e.g., interleukin-8 and tumor necrosis factor-&#x3b1;). These perturbations indicated disruptions in mitochondria-related bioenergetic pathways and sepsis-like responses. This study identified specific biomolecular disturbances associated with CSM mortality, revealing that systemic inflammation and bioenergetic deficits are targetable pathophysiological processes for improving survival of this vulnerable population.

### Keywords
Severe malnutrition, Mortality, Proteomics, Children.

### Affiliations
KEMRI Wellcome Trust Programme
KEMRI Wellcome Trust Research Programme

### Submitter
James Njunge

### Lab Head
Dr James Njunge
KEMRI Wellcome Trust Research Programme


