### Accession
PXD024235

### Title
Phosphoproteomic characterization of primary AML samples and relevance for response towards FLT3-inhibitors

### Description
Kinase hyperactivity is a common driver of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and serves as a therapeutic target. The most frequent genetic aberration leading to hyperactive kinase signaling and poor prognosis is internal tandem duplication (ITD) of the FMS-tyrosine-like Kinase 3-gene (FLT3). FLT3-ITD induces ligand independent activation of FLT3 and downstream pathways leading to proliferation, decreased apoptosis and partial differentiation block. Combined with chemotherapy, FLT3-Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor (FLT3-TKI) midostaurin improves overall survival (OS) of newly diagnosed FLT3-mutated AML patients, whereas single agent gilteritinib proved superior to chemotherapy in relapsed/refractory FLT3-mutated AML patients . As the primary targets of currently approved FLT3-TKIs are tyrosine (Y) kinases, we hypothesized that direct evaluation of tyrosine phosphorylation status could reveal pY phosphorylation profiles associated with FLT3-TKI response. Therefore, we used label-free pTyr-based phosphoproteomics in 35 primary AML samples (18 FLT3-WT, 17 FLT3-ITD), to identify differentially phosphorylated proteins underlying response to the FLT3-TKIs gilteritinib and midostaurin. We identified a total of 3024 unique phosphosites (median 1299 per sample, range 286 – 1612, pS:pT:pY 11.9%:9.5%:78.6%). Due to low number of identified phosphosites, we excluded two samples from further analyses. On the remaining 33 samples, we additionally performed IMAC  global phosphoproteomics and on 17 samples protein expression analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Primary AML samples were thawed in RPMI. Cells (5 mg protein) were lysed in lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycero- phosphate) and were sonicated followed by centrifugation. Dithiotreitol (DTT) ( 4 mM, 30 min at 55°C) was added, followed by, iodoacetamide (10 mM,15 min in the dark). The solution was then diluted to 2 M Urea via the addition of 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at a final concentration of 5 µg/ml overnight (room temperature). The digests were then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1% and desalted using (500mg) Oasis HLB columns (Waters). Columns were equilibrated in 0.1% TFA. Subsequently, bound peptides were washed twice with 0.1% TFA, eluted in 0.1 % TFA/80% ACN and lyophillized . pTyr peptides (5 mg) were enriched using pTyr-1000 beads (Cell Signaling Techniologies) according to the protocol of the manufacturer with volumes proportionally scaled-down. Eluted phosphopeptides were desalted using a STAGE tip containing SDB-XC material (3M). Global phosphopeptide enrichement was performed from 200 µg peptides using IMAC cartridges on a BRAVO Assaymap liquid handler (Agilent). Phosphopeptides (pTyr and IMAC) were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 20 µl 0.5% TFA/4% ACN prior to injection; 18 µl was injected using partial loop injection. LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 50 cm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap (C18, 1.9 μm) column. After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap trap at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 90 min (125 min inject-to-inject) at 35°C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured from m/z 350-1400 at resolution 120.000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges and a maxIT of 100ms. The top 15 for peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 26% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 64 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. This results in an intensity threshold for MS/MS of 1.3E5. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s. Protein expression was analyzed using Data-independent analysis on the same Q Exactive HF instrument and LC system. The DIA-MS method consisted of an MS1 scan from 350 to 1400 m/z at 120,000 resolution (AGC target of 3E6 and 60 ms injection time). For MS2, 24 variable size DIA segments were acquired at 30,000 resolution (AGC target 3E6 and auto for injection time). The DIA-MS method starting at 350 m/z included one window of 35 m/z, 20 windows of 25 m/z, 2 windows of 60 m/z and one window of 418 m/z, which ended at 1400 m/z. Normalized collision energy was set at 28. The spectra were recorded in centroid mode with a default charge state  of 3+ and a first mass of 200 m/z. An AML spectral library based on pooled AML DDA data was used (included in Spectronaut zipfile).

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide identification MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot reference proteome (human: downloaded 2019_02 canonical and isoforms, 42417 entries and 2020_04) using MaxQuant 1.6.4.0. or 1.6.43.0.  Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 6 (default MaxQuant settings). Identifications were propagated across samples with the match between runs option checked. Label-free phosphosite quantification was done using the phosphosite intensities. DIA data was processed using Spectronaut (Biognosys) using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aml, Imac, Flt3, Phosphoproteomics, Ptyr, Midostauri, Label-free, Gilteritinib

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


