### Accession
PXD004311

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of liver from methylmercury-exposed Atlantic cod

### Description
In order to investigate the underlying mechanisms of methylmecury (MeHg)-mediated toxicity to Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua), we analyzed the liver proteome of fish exposed in vivo to MeHg (0, 0.5, 2 mg/kg body weight) for 2 weeks. Label-free quantitative mass spectrometry enabled quantification of 1143 proteins, and 125 were differentially regulated between MeHg-treated samples and controls. Six proteins among the top differentially regulated (T23O, GLNA EPS8L2, APOA4, RAP1B, CZTZ) were analyzed using selected reaction monitoring (SRM). Supported by bioinformatics analyses, we conclude that MeHg disrupts mainly redox homeostasis and energy generating metabolic pathways in cod liver, the latter potentially modulated through MeHg-induced oxidative stress.

### Sample Protocol
The study was approved by the National Animal Research Authority. Juvenile Atlantic cod (G. morhua) of mixed gender (body weight of 260–530g) were divided into four 500L-tanks (n=10/group) and acclimated for 6 days in continuously running seawater (temperature 10◦ C and salinity 34‰). The fish were fed daily with pellets (Ewos marin 6 mm, EWOS, Bergen, Norway). Methylmercury chloride (CH3 HgCl) (Strem Chemicals, Newburyport, USA) was dissolved in the vehicle (20% acetone and 80% soybean oil). The fish were injected (i.p.) with vehicle (control), 0.5 or 2 mg/kg body weight methylmercury chloride. The doses were divided into two and the first half injected on day 1, and the second half after 1 week.  After 14 days the fish were sacrificed by decapitation and liver samples were dissected and snap frozen. Frozen individual liver samples obtained from controls (n=10), 0.5 mg/kg BW MeHg (n= 9) and 2 mg/kg BW MeHg (n= 9) groups were thawed on ice, washed and homogenized in PBS with pH 7.4. The homogenate was centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 10 min and the supernatant containing hepatic proteins was digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides purified as described previously (Berle et al. Fluids and barriers of the CNS 10, 17. 2013). For label-free the peptide samples (1 µg) were dissolved in 1% aqueous formic acid (FA) and injected into an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated using a 90 min HPLC gradient with increasing acetonitrile concentration with mass spectrometer settings as previously described (Berle et al. Fluids and barriers of the CNS 10, 17. 2013) but the normalized collision energy was set to 35% and the dynamic exclusion to 30s. For SRM analysis of the proteins T23O, GLNA EPS8L2, APOA4, RAP1B and CZTZ corresponding crude synthetic peptides with stable isotope labelled C-terminal (K13C6, 15N2 or R13C6, 15N4) (SIS) were spiked in equal amounts into the digested protein samples at approximately the same level as the endogens peptide. Samples were desalted with Oasis HLB µElution Plate (Waters), and analyzed on a Q-Trap 5500 (AB SCIEX) connected to a Dionex Ultimate NCR-3500RS LC. The peptides were dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1%FA (Buffer A) and 1 µg peptides was trapped on the pre-column (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm x 75 µm i.d, 3 µm C18 beads) in buffer A at a flowrate of 5 µl/min for 5 minutes before separation by reverse phase chromatography (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap 100, 15 cm x 75 µm i.d., 3 µm C18 beads) at a flow of 250 nL/min. The nano LC gradient consisted of a linear gradient starting at 5% of 90% ACN, 0.1% FA (buffer B) and ramping to 40% buffer B over 45 minutes (0-45 min). In half a minute the gradient was ramped to 90% buffer B (45-45.5 min) and held for 6 minutes (45.5-51.5 min.) followed by ramping to 5% buffer B for 3.5 minutes (51.5-55 min) and equilibration of the column in 15 minutes (55-70 min). The Collision energy (CE) for each peptide was calculated according to the following formulas; CE = 0.044 x m/z +10 for doubly charged precursors and CE = 0.05 x m/z + 9 for triply precursors.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis LC-MS® v4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd) was used for label-free quantification. Only peptide features with charges between +2 to +5 containing the top 10 ranked MSMS spectra (with precursor intensities more than 0) and where MSMS was executed on the highest precursor isotopes (less than 6) were accepted. The MSMS spectra list was sorted by rank and the fragment ions in the MSMS spectra were limited to 200 allowing deisotoping and charge deconvolution prior to export as an mgf file for identification. The mgf file was searched using SearchGUI v1.18.1 using the option “Delete duplicate spectra titles”. The search engines X!Tandem, MS Amanda and MS-GF+ Beta were used for searches in the Ensembl Gadus morhua protein database. Protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of a complement of the database and the decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were: trypsin with a maximum of 1 missed cleavages; 10 ppm as MS1 and 0.5 Da as MS2 tolerances; carbamidomethyl Cys as fixed modification; oxidation of Met as variable modification. Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker v0.28. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. The results were exported as validated PSMs and imported into Progenesis. The sum of the normalized abundances of 1143 quantified unique proteins was exported from Progenesis and analyzed further using statistical analyses and bioinformatics. The SRM data was analyzed using Skyline v1.4 with the most abundant transition for quantification. Student's t-test was used to calculate the p-value between sample groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Orbitrap velos pro, 5500 qtrap, Liver, Methylmercury, Label-free, Atlantic cod (gadus morhua), Srm

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
Department of Biology, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Odd Andre Karlsen

### Lab Head
Dr Odd Andre Karlsen
Department of Biology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway


