### Accession
PXD023823

### Title
Proteomic and transcriptomic profiling reveal different aspects of aging in the kidney

### Description
The kidney is an excellent model for studying organ aging. Kidney function shows steady decline with age and is easy to assay using urine or blood samples. However, little is known about the molecular changes that take place in the kidney during the aging process. In order to better understand the molecular changes that occur with age, we measured mRNA and protein levels in 188 genetically diverse mice at ages 6, 12, and 18 months. We observed distinctive change in mRNA and protein levels as a function of age. Changes in both mRNA and protein are associated with increased immune infiltration and decreases in mitochondrial function. Proteins show a greater extent of change and reveal changes in a wide array of biological processes including unique, organ-specific features of aging in kidney. Most importantly, we observed functionally important age-related changes in protein that occur in the absence of corresponding changes in mRNA. Our findings suggest that mRNA profiling alone provides an incomplete picture of molecular aging in the kidney and that examination of changes in proteins is essential to understand aging processes that are not transcriptionally regulated.

### Sample Protocol
Kidney samples were homogenized in 1 ml of lysis buffer (1% SDS, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.8) and Roche complete protease inhibitors). Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 37°C followed by alkylation with 15 mM for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding 5 mM dithiothreitol for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. A 500 l aliquot was then methanol/chloroform precipitated. The samples were allowed to air dry before resuspending the samples in 1 ml of 8 M urea and 50 mM Tris (pH 8.8) before diluting the urea concentration down to ~1.5 M urea with 50 mM Tris. Proteins were quantified using a BCA assay. Protein was then digested using a combination of Lys-C/trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:100. First, protein was digested overnight with Lys-C followed by 6 hour digestion with trypsin all at 37°C. Samples were then acidified using formic acid to approximately pH 3. Samples were then desalted using a SepPak column. Eluents were then dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Peptide pellets were resuspended in 110 l of 200 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8) and peptides were quantified by a BCA assay. 70 g of peptides (100 l of sample + 30 l of 100% acetonitrile) were then labeled with 15 l of 20g/l of the corresponding TMT 10-plex reagent (DO or founder strains) or TMT 8-plex reagent (CC strains) for 2 hrs at room temperature. The reaction was quenched using 8 l of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 minutes. Peptides were then acidified using 150 l of 1% formic acid, each set of 10 samples were mixed and desalted using a SepPak column. In total, 25 TMT 10-plex reactions and 3 8-plex reactions were performed (21 DO mice, 4 founder strains and 3 CC strains). The full labeling schemes for the DO mice, the founder strains and CC strains are provided as supplementary tables (Supplementary table 1, 2 and 7). Basic reverse phase fractionation Each of the 28 TMT experiments were separated by basic reversed phase chromatography. Samples were loaded onto an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID and 220 mm in length). Using an Agilent 1100 quaternary pump equipped with a degasser and a photodiode array (PDA) detector (set at 220 and 280-nm wavelength), peptides were separated using a 50 min linear gradient from 18% to 40% acetonitrile in 10mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 at a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min. Peptides were separated into a total of 96 fractions which were consolidated into 24. Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each fraction was desalted via StageTip, dried via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS processing. Liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) Peptides from every odd fraction (12 fractions total) from basic reverse phase fractionation were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with a Proxeon ultra high pressure liquid chromatography unit. Peptide mixtures were separated on a 100 m I.D. microcapillary column packed first with ~0.5 cm of 5 m Magic C18 resin followed by 40 cm of 1.8 m GP-C18 resin. Peptides were separated using a 3hr gradient of 6-30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.125% formic acid with a flow rate of ~400nl/min. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (400-1400 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (1.2 x 105 resolution setting and an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 2 x 105). The subsequent MS2-MS3 analysis was conducted with a top 10 setting or a top speed approach using a 2 second duration. The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID). CID was performed with a collision energy of 35%, an AGC setting 4 x 103, an isolation window of 0.5 Da, a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 ms and the rapid ion trap setting. Previously analyzed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 40 seconds. During the MS3 analyses for TMT quantification, precursors were isolated using a 2.5 Da m/z window and fragmented by 35% CID in the ion trap. Multiple fragment ions (SPS ions) were co-selected and further fragmented by HCD. Precursor ion selection was based on the previous MS2 scan and the MS2-MS3 was conducting using sequential precursor selection (SPS) methodology. HCD used for the MS3 was performed using 55% collision energy and reporter ions were detected using the Orbitrap with a resolution setting of 60,000, an AGC setting of 50,000 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searching and reporter ion quantitation Software tools were used to convert mass spectrometric data from raw file to the mzxml format33. Erroneous charge state and monoisotopic m/z values were corrected as per previous publication33. MS/MS spectra assignments were made with the Sequest algorithm34 using an indexed Ensembl database (Mouse: Mus_musculus NCBIM37.61). Databases were prepared with forward and reversed sequences concatenated according to the target-decoy strategy35. All searches were performed using a static modification for cysteine alkylation (57.0215 Da) and TMT on the peptide N-termini and lysines. Methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da) was considered a dynamic modification. Mass spectra were searched with trypsin specificity using a precursor ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.8 Da. Sequest matches were filtered by linear discriminant analysis as described previously33, first to a dataset level error of 1% at the peptide level based on matches to reversed sequences35. Peptide probabilities were then multiplied to create protein rankings and the dataset was again filtered to a final dataset level error of 1% FDR at the protein level. The final peptide-level FDR fell well below 1% (~0.2% peptide level). Peptides were then assigned to protein matches using a reductionist model, where all peptides were explained using the least number of proteins. Peptide quantitation using TMT reporter ions was accomplished as previously published16,17. Briefly, a 0.003 Da m/z window centered on the theoretical m/z value of each reporter ion was monitored for each of the 8-10 reporter ions, and the intensity of the signal closest to the theoretical m/z value was recorded. TMT signals were also corrected for isotope impurities based on the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were only considered quantifiable if the total signal-to-noise for all channels was >200 and the isolation specificity was >0.55%. Within each TMT experiments, peptide quantitation was normalized by summing the values across each channel and then each channel was corrected so that each channel had the same summed value. Protein quantitation was performed by summing the signal-to-noise for all peptides for a given protein. Protein quantitative measurements were then scaled to 100 (equal expression across all channels would be a value of 10). Normalization across each of the 10plex experiments was performed using quantile normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Little is known about the molecular changes that take place in the kidney during the aging process. In order to better understand these changes, we measured mRNA and protein levels in genetically diverse mice at different ages. We observed distinctive change in mRNA and protein levels as a function of age. Changes in both mRNA and protein are associated with increased immune infiltration and decreases in mitochondrial function. Proteins show a greater extent of change and reveal changes in a wide array of biological processes including unique, organ-specific features of aging in kidney. Most importantly, we observed functionally important age-related changes in protein that occur in the absence of corresponding changes in mRNA. Our findings suggest that mRNA profiling alone provides an incomplete picture of molecular aging in the kidney and that examination of changes in proteins is essential to understand aging processes that are not transcriptionally regulated.

### Keywords
Ageing, Proteomics, Qtl, Kidney

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA

### Submitter
Joel Chick

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Gygi
Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA


