### Accession
PXD003099

### Title
Modifications of fungal membrane proteins profile under pathogenicity induction: a proteomic analysis of Botrytis cinerea membranome.

### Description
Botrytis cinerea is a model phytopathogenic fungus that infects more than 200 different relevant crops, thus being classified among the top ten fungal plant diseases. B. cinerea exhibits a wide arsenal of tools to infect plant tissues. Most of these factors are related to signal transduction cascades, in which membrane proteins play a key role as a bridge between environmental conditions and intracellular molecular processes. This work describes the first proteomic approach to study the membranome of B. cinerea under different pathogenicity condition induced by using different plant-based elicitors: Glucose and Tomato Cell Wall (TCW). A discovery proteomics analysis of membrane protein extracts was carried out by mass spectrometry. A total of 2,794 proteins were successfully identified, and approximately 46% of them could be classified as membrane proteins based on the presence of transmembrane regions and covalent post-translational modifications. Further analyses showed significant differences in the fungal membranome composition depending on the available carbon source: 804 proteins were exclusively identified when the fungus was cultured in the presence of glucose as sole carbon source, and 251 proteins were exclusively identified in the presence of TCW. Besides, among the 1737 common proteins, a subset of 898 proteins presented clear differences in their abundance and in order to clarify the specific changes produced in the membranome, proteins were categorized according to their gene ontology annotation shown different profiles. As a result of this work, we present here the first description of the membranome of B. cinerea, which will certainly provide a better understanding of this important subproteome in B. cinerea.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental Procedures Fungal stain and growth conditions. B. cinerea B05.10 strain (kindly provided by Dr. Paul Tudzunski from the University of Münster, Germany) was used for this study. Conidial stock suspension were prepared and maintained as previously reported (12). Two different carbon sources were included in our study: glucose (GLU) (Panreac AppliChem) and Tomato Cell Wall (TCW) obtained from tomato fruits (Lycopersicon esculentum cv bola) of commercial maturity and deproteinized as previously reported (English et al. 1971). Flasks of 500 mL capacity, containing 250 mL of Minimal salt medium (MSM) (50 mM NH4Cl, 7.3 mM KH2PO4, 4.2 mM MgSO4, 6.7 mM KCl, 0.07 mM FeSO4) supplemented with 1% of the assayed carbon source, were inoculated with B. cinerea conidia to a final concentration of 5·104 conidia/mL. Cultures were incubated in an orbital shaker at 180 rpm at 22 ºC under alternating 12-h light/dark cycles for 5 days. After 5 days mycelia were collected by filtration in a 30-µm nylon filter (Sefar Nytal) and store at -80ºC until its use for membrane protein extraction.  Membrane protein isolation. Immediately prior to the membrane protein extraction, mycelium was ground into a fine powder with liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. Membrane protein extraction was carried out from 100 mg of powdered mycelium using “ReadyPrepTM Protein Extraction Kit (membrane I)” (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer specifications. For each biological replica, a total of 5 membrane protein extractions were done. After protein extraction,  all the replicas from the same biological sample were pooled, precipitated with acetone and re-dissolved  in 300 µL of Urea 6 M, Ammonium Bicarbonate 0.2 M Buffer . The total membrane protein extracts obtained from each biological sample were quantified by Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer system (Invitrogen).   Analysis and identification of proteins by LC-MS/MS. 150 µg of each sample dissolved in 6 M urea, 0.2 M NH4HCO3 was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mM, 37 ºC, 60 min), and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM, 20 mM, 25 ºC, 30 min). Samples were diluted up to 2 M urea, digested overnight with Lys-C at 37 ºC, and then diluted 2-fold again and digested overnight with trypsin at 37 ºC. Peptide mixtures were desalted using a MacroSpin Column C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc, Southborough, MA). A 2-μg aliquot of the peptide mixture was analyzed twice using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a nano-LC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) equipped with a reversed-phase chromatography 25 cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos, Japan) with a gradient of 3 to 35% ACN with 0.1% FA in 360 min at a flow of 0.25 µL/min The Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 325 °C. The instrument was externally calibrated using Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer. An internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 as the calibrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode. In all experiments, full MS scans were acquired over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution setting of 60,000. For each MS scan, the twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation with CID at normalized collision energy of 35% in the LTQ linear ion trap. All data were acquired with Xcalibur 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed by Proteome Discoverer software v.1.4.0.288 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) using MASCOT v2.3 (Matrix Science, United Kingdom) as search engine and a B. cinerea NCBI database that included the most common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation for cysteines was set as fixed modification whereas acetylation in protein N-terminal, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide tolerance was 7 ppm in MS and 0.5 Da in MS/MS mode, maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 3. Peptides were filtered based on the FDR (False Discovery rate) lower than 1%. Protein quantification was calculated either using the R package MSStats (Clough et al., 2012) for proteins that were observed in the two states or using the Proteome Discoverer output for proteins that were completely absent in one of the two conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Botrytis cinerea is a model fungus for the study of phytopathogenicity that exhibits a wide arsenal of tools to infect plant tissues. Most of these factors are related to signal transduction cascades, in which membrane proteins play a key role as a bridge between environment and intracellular molecular processes. This work describes the first description of the membranome of Botrytis under different pathogenicity conditions induced by different plant-based elicitors: glucose and tomato cell wall (TCW). A discovery proteomics analysis of membrane proteins was carried out by mass spectrometry. A total of 2794 proteins were successfully identified, 46% of them were classified as membrane proteins based on the presence of transmembrane regions and lipidation. Further analyses showed significant differences in the membranome composition depending on the available carbon source: 804 proteins were exclusively identified when the fungus was cultured with glucose as a sole carbon source, and 251 proteins were exclusively identified with TCW. Besides, among the 1737 common proteins, a subset of 898 proteins presented clear differences in their abundance. GO enrichment and clustering interaction analysis revealed changes in the composition of membranome with increase of signalling function in glucose conditions and carbohydrate degradation process in TCW conditions. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003099 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD003099).

### Keywords
Botritys cinerea, Phytopathogenicity, Proteomics, Membranome

### Affiliations
Andalusian Center for Grape and Grapevine Research. CeiA3. Marine and Environmental Sciences Faculty. University of Cadiz. Puerto Real, 11510, Cádiz, Spain.
Center of genomic regulation

### Submitter
Cristina Chiva

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Javier Fernández-Acero
Andalusian Center for Grape and Grapevine Research. CeiA3. Marine and Environmental Sciences Faculty. University of Cadiz. Puerto Real, 11510, Cádiz, Spain.


