### Accession
PXD026598

### Title
Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis for protein expression

### Description
According to a previous study on the microscopic examination of stem barks in ramie, bast fibers from different parts of stem bark showed distinct differences at the developmental level: specifically, the barks in the top part of stem (TPS) did not initiate fiber growth, whereas barks in the middle part of stem (MPS) had a large number of fibers with thickening secondary walls. We have performed the phosphoproteome analysis for the tissues of TPS and MPS, and then carried out the comparison of phosphorylation level of proteins between two tissues, thereby to identified differentially phosphorylated proteins. These datasets represent the raw UHPLC spectra for phosphoproteome of ramie TPS and MPS.

### Sample Protocol
The elite cultivar Zhongzhu 1 was planted in the experimental farm of the Institute of Bast Fiber Crops, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Yuanjiang, China, in June 2016. As shown in Fig. S1, the TPS and MPS bark were separately collected from five individuals of Zhongzhu 1 (30 days old) and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Three replicates were sampled for the TPS and MPS bark. The sample powder was ground with liquid nitrogen and sonicated in lysis buffer. Then, an equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol was added, and the mixture was vortexed. After centrifugation, the proteins were precipitated using ammonium sulfate saturation. Finally, the protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
To verify the differences in protein expression by UHPLC-MS/MS analysis, nine proteins were targeted for quantification by PRM analysis. The method of protein extraction and trypsin digestion was the same as that used for proteome analysis. Then, the peptide mixture was loaded onto a PicoFrit capillary column (Woburn, MA, USA) packed with ReproSil-Pur Basic C18 reverse-phase resin and separated in an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system with a gradient of 6–23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 38 min, followed by 23–35% solvent B over 14 min and increasing to 80% solvent B over 4 min, with a flow-rate of 400 nL/min. The eluate was examined via mass spectrometry using Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to the UPLC online. After a full-scan event, the MS/MS scans in PRM mode were triggered for target proteins. The set parameters were the same as those of the proteome and phosphoproteome UHPLC-MS/MS analysis. Three biological replicates were performed. Finally, PRM data were analyzed using Skyline software with the following parameters: enzyme, trypsin [KR/P]; max missed cleavages, 0; peptide length, 7–25; static modification, Cys carbamidomethyl; variable modification, Met oxidation; max variable modifications, 3. The following transition settings were used: (1) precursor charges, 2 and 3; (2) ion charges, 1 and 2; (3) ion types, b, y, and p; (4) product ions, from ion 3 to the last ion; and (5) ion match tolerance, 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome, Ramie, Differential expression

### Affiliations
Hu Nan

### Submitter
Zeng Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Zeng Zheng
Hu Nan


