### Accession
PXD003588

### Title
Nano Random Forests to mine proteomics data for protein complexes and their relationships in quantitative proteomics data

### Description
This project has integrated SILAC proteomics data of wild type and knockout mitotic chromosomes, and used machine learning technique random forests to identify chromosomal complexes with high precision, and small training sets.

### Sample Protocol
proteins were separated into a hogh and low molecular weight fractons by sds-PAGE, in-gel digested using trypsin, and fractionated into 30 fractions wach using strong cation exchange chromatography. The individual SCX fractions were desalted using StageTips and analyzed by Liquid chromatograhy-MS on a LTQ -Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to high-performance liquid chromatography via nanoelectrospray ion source. the 6 most intense ions of a full MS acquired in the orbitrap analyzer were fragmented and analyzed in the linear-ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The MS Data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.0.5.12 for generationg peak lists, searching peptides, protein identification, and protein identification against the uniprot database release 2013_07

### Publication Abstract
Ever-increasing numbers of quantitative proteomics data sets constitute an underexploited resource for investigating protein function. Multiprotein complexes often follow consistent trends in these experiments, which could provide insights about their biology. Yet, as more experiments are considered, a complex's signature may become conditional and less identifiable. Previously we successfully distinguished the general proteomic signature of genuine chromosomal proteins from hitchhikers using the Random Forests (RF) machine learning algorithm. Here we test whether small protein complexes can define distinguishable signatures of their own, despite the assumption that machine learning needs large training sets. We show, with simulated and real proteomics data, that RF can detect small protein complexes and relationships between them. We identify several complexes in quantitative proteomics results of wild-type and knockout mitotic chromosomes. Other proteins covary strongly with these complexes, suggesting novel functional links for later study. Integrating the RF analysis for several complexes reveals known interdependences among kinetochore subunits and a novel dependence between the inner kinetochore and condensin. Ribosomal proteins, although identified, remained independent of kinetochore subcomplexes. Together these results show that this complex-oriented RF (NanoRF) approach can integrate proteomics data to uncover subtle protein relationships. Our NanoRF pipeline is available online.

### Keywords
Kinetochore, Machine learning, Smc, Silac, Chicken, Mitotic chromosomes

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Luis Montano

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
University of Edinburgh


