### Accession
PXD007126

### Title
Identification of a precursor processing protease from the spider Cupiennius salei essential for venom neurotoxin maturation

### Description
Spider venom neurotoxins and cytolytic peptides are expressed as elongated precursor peptides, which are post-translationally processed by proteases to yield the active mature peptides. The recognition motifs for these processing proteases, first published more than ten years ago, include the Processing Quadruplet Motif (PQM) and the inverted Processing Quadruplet Motif (iPQM). However, the identification of the relevant proteases was still pending. Here we describe the purification of a neurotoxin precursor processing protease from the venom of the spider Cupiennius salei. The chymotrypsin – like serine protease is a 28 kDa heterodimer with optimum activity at venom’s pH of 6.0. We designed multiple synthetic peptides mimicking the predicted cleavage sites of neurotoxin precursors. Using these peptides as substrates, we confirm the biochemical activity of the protease in propeptide removal from neurotoxin precursors by cleavage C-terminal of the PQM. Furthermore, the PQM protease also cleaves the iPQM relevant for heterodimerization of a subgroup of neurotoxins. An involvement in the maturing of cytolytic peptides is very likely, due to high similarity of present protease recognition motifs. Finally, bioinformatics analysis, identifying sequences of homolog proteins from 18 spiders of 9 families, demonstrate the wide distribution and importance of the isolated enzyme for spiders. In summary, we establish the first example of a PQM protease, essential for maturing of spider venom neurotoxins. In the future, the here described protease may be established as powerful tool for production strategies of recombinant toxic peptides, adapted to the maturing of spider venom toxins.

### Sample Protocol
For protein identification, dried protein fractions were reconstituted in Laemmli buffer containing 20 mM DTT and separated on a 12.5% SDS-PAGE. Protein bands were excised and prepared for mass spectrometry as described elsewhere [1]. For enzymatic digests with proteases other than trypsin, the procedure was slightly modified: For chymotrypsin digestion, incubations were done at room temperature for 6 hours. For proteinase-K digestion, no ProteaseMax (Promega) was used and digestion was carried out at 37°C for 30 minutes. Peptide extracts were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS as described elsewhere [2]. MS scans were recorded in data-dependent acquisition mode acquiring MS1 and MS2 spectra in the Orbitrap detector with a cycle time of 3 s and the following settings: scan range 400 – 2000 m/z; MS1 and MS2 resolution at 120,000 and 30,000, AGC of 400,000 and 50,000, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms for both, respectively; including 2+ and 3+ ions only without exclusion time and an isolation width of 1.6 m/z; HCD fragmentation with a relative collision energy of 30%. All fragment spectra peak list files in Mascot generic file format were created with ProteomeDiscoverer version 2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific) keeping the six most intense fragment ions in a sliding window of 20 m/z.  [1] Gunasekera, K., Wuthrich, D., Braga-Lagache, S., Heller, M. & Ochsenreiter, T. Proteome remodelling during development from blood to insect-form Trypanosoma brucei quantified by SILAC and mass spectrometry. BMC Genomics 13, 556, doi:10.1186/1471-2164-13-556 (2012).  [2] Brugger, V. et al. Delaying histone deacetylase response to injury accelerates conversion into repair Schwann cells and nerve regeneration. Nat Commun 8, 14272, doi:10.1038/ncomms14272 (2017).

### Data Protocol
Fragment spectra were interpreted with SearchGUI (version 3.2.14)[3] and Peptide Shaker (version 1.16.5)[4]. We used an in-house database (venomProteome.fasta) containing (1) all Araneae sequences in Swiss-Prot (as of 04/03/2017, n = 1490), (2) additionally identified peptides and proteins from our C. salei venom gland transcriptome (personal communication Kuhn-Nentwig) including the cDNA derived sequences of the two isoforms of the PQM protease (n = 85), and (3) known contaminants (n = 218). The search engine was X! TANDEM (version 2015.12.15.2) and the search parameters: max. missed cleavages: 3 (for trypsin and chymotrypsin) and option “unspecific” (for proteinase K), precursor ions tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance: 0.01 Da, fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of C, variable modifications: oxidation of M. The results were filtered applying a false discovery rate of ≤ 1%.  [3] Vaudel, M., Barsnes, H., Berven, F. S., Sickmann, A. & Martens, L. SearchGUI: An open-source graphical user interface for simultaneous OMSSA and X!Tandem searches. Proteomics 11, 996-999, doi:10.1002/pmic.201000595 (2011).  [4] Vaudel, M. et al. PeptideShaker enables reanalysis of MS-derived proteomics data sets. Nature biotechnology 33, 22-24, doi:10.1038/nbt.3109 (2015).

### Publication Abstract
Spider venom neurotoxins and cytolytic peptides are expressed as elongated precursor peptides, which are post-translationally processed by proteases to yield the active mature peptides. The recognition motifs for these processing proteases, first published more than 10 years ago, include the processing quadruplet motif (PQM) and the inverted processing quadruplet motif (iPQM). However, the identification of the relevant proteases was still pending. Here we describe the purification of a neurotoxin precursor processing protease from the venom of the spider <i>Cupiennius salei</i> The chymotrypsin-like serine protease is a 28-kDa heterodimer with optimum activity at venom's pH of 6.0. We designed multiple synthetic peptides mimicking the predicted cleavage sites of neurotoxin precursors. Using these peptides as substrates, we confirm the biochemical activity of the protease in propeptide removal from neurotoxin precursors by cleavage C-terminal of the PQM. Furthermore, the PQM protease also cleaves the iPQM relevant for heterodimerization of a subgroup of neurotoxins. An involvement in the maturing of cytolytic peptides is very likely, due to high similarity of present protease recognition motifs. Finally, bioinformatics analysis, identifying sequences of homolog proteins from 18 spiders of 9 families, demonstrate the wide distribution and importance of the isolated enzyme for spiders. In summary, we establish the first example of a PQM protease, essential for maturing of spider venom neurotoxins. In the future, the here described protease may be established as a powerful tool for production strategies of recombinant toxic peptides, adapted to the maturing of spider venom toxins.

### Keywords
Ipqm, Enzyme purification, Processing quadruplet motif, Protease, Venom, Cupiennius salei, Neurotoxin, Propeptide, Pqm

### Affiliations
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Switzerland
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 6, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland

### Submitter
Nicolas Langenegger

### Lab Head
Dr Lucia Kuhn-Nentwig
Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 6, CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland


