### Accession
PXD020557

### Title
Convergence of plasma metabolomics and proteomics analysis to discover signatures of high-grade serous ovarian cancer

### Description
The purpose of this study is to find candidate biomarkers by analyzing metabolites and proteins with differential amounts in 10 ovarian cancer patient plasmas and 10 healthy female plasmas. Only MS files for plasma proteins are uploaded here. The metabolite quants were obtained using Biocrates AbsolutedIDQ p400, and MS data was not uploaded but only the quantitative value table was uploaded.

### Sample Protocol
1. Plasma protein sample preparation and tryptic digestion Plasma samples were sequentially prepared by high abundant plasma protein depletion and trypsin/Lys-C digestion steps. At first, we depleted the high abundant plasma proteins by Multiple Affinity Removal Column Human 14 (100 x 4.6 mm; MARS14, Agilent, CA, USA) column equipped in HPLC systems. And we digested the proteins to peptide by the amicon-adapted enhanced FASP method and salt were removed sequentially by the C18 desalting cartridge (Sep-Pak C18 1cc, Waters, USA). First, 40 uL of plasma was injected into MARS14 depletion column in which the top fourteen abundant proteins (albumin, IgA, IgG, IgM, a1-antitrypsin, a1-acid glycoprotein, apolipoprotein A1, apolipoprotein A2, complement C3, transferrin, a2-marcoglobulin, transthyretin, haptoglobin and fibrinogen) were depleted. For this, the mixture was 4-fold diluted with a proprietary “Buffer A” and loaded onto MARS14 column on a Shimadzu HPLC system. Unbound fraction was buffer-exchanged into 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 8) and 20mM dithiothreitol and concentrated through ultrafiltration using Vivaspin 500 3 kDa cutoff filter (Sartorius, Japan) to approximately 50 uL and transfer a new filter unit (Nanosep, 30 kDa, Pall cooperation). Add in 200 L of 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.5) and centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 15 min repeated twice. Discard the flow-through form the collection tube. Add 100 µl of iodoacetamide solution and mix at 600 rpm in a thermo-mixer for 1 min and incubate without mixing for 20 min. Centrifuge the filter units at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Add 100 µl of 8M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) to the filter unit and centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 15 min. Repeat this step twice. Add 100 µl of ABC to the filter unit and centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Repeat this step twice. Add 40 µl ABC with Lys-C/trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio 1:25) and mix at 600 rpm in thermo-mixer for 1 min. Incubate the units in a wet chamber at 37°C for 12h. Transfer the filter units to new collection tubes. Centrifuge the filter units at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Add 40 uL of 0.5 M NaCl and centrifuge the filter units at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Formic acid was then added to a final concentration of 0.3% to stop the digestion reaction. The peptide mixture was then desalted with a Sep Pak C-18 cartridge (Waters, USA), lyophilized with a cold trap (CentriVap Cold Traps, LABCONCO), and stored at -80 °C until use.   Digested peptides were separated using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides from the bead column were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and separated on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 column (500 mm x 75 μm i.d., 3 um, 100 Å) equipped with a C18 Pepmap trap column (20 mm x 100 um i.d., 5 um, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, USA) over 200 min (350 nl/min) using a 0–48% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO for 150 min at 50°C. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a nano-ESI source. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan and twenty data-dependent MS/MS scans. The target value for the full scan MS spectra, selected from a 350 m/z to 1800 m/z, was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The selected ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in the following parameters: 2 Da precursor ion isolation window and 27% normalized collision energy. The ion target value for MS/MS was set to 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. Repeated peptides were dynamically excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched using the SequestHT on Proteome discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) against the SwissProt human database (May 2017). Briefly, precursor mass tolerance was set to ± 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.02 Da. The search parameters were set as default including cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications with 2 miscleavages. False discovery rates (FDRs) were set for 1% for each analysis using “Percolator”. From the Sequest search output, peptide filters which peptide confidence, peptide rank, score versus charge state and search engine rank were default value of proteome discoverer. And label free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using peak intensity for unique and razor peptide of each protein and excluded peptides including methionine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
The 5-year survival rate in the early and late stages of ovarian cancer differs by 63%. In addition, a liquid biopsy is necessary because there are no symptoms in the early stage and tissue collection is difficult without using invasive methods. Therefore, there is a need for biomarkers to achieve this goal. In this study, we found blood-based metabolite or protein biomarker candidates for the diagnosis of ovarian cancer in the 20 clinical samples (10 ovarian cancer patients and 10 healthy control subjects). Plasma metabolites and proteins were measured and quantified using mass spectrometry in ovarian cancer patients and control groups. We identified the differential abundant biomolecules (34 metabolites and 197 proteins) and statistically integrated molecules of different dimensions to better understand ovarian cancer signal transduction and to identify novel biological mechanisms. In addition, the biomarker reliability was verified through comparison with existing research results. Integrated analysis of metabolome and proteome identified emerging properties difficult to grasp with the single omics approach, more reliably interpreted the cancer signaling pathway, and explored new drug targets. Especially, through this analysis, proteins (PPCS, PMP2, and TUBB) and metabolites (L-carnitine and PC-O (30:0)) related to the carnitine system involved in cancer plasticity were identified.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Lc-msms, Metabolome, Proteome, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.
Asan Medical Center

### Submitter
Kyunggon Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kyunggon Kim
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.


