### Accession
PXD014045

### Title
Quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics reveal that PIM3 modulates cell migration via regulating Rho GTPase signaling

### Description
Stable cell line was used for this study, so there are minimum variations between samples. For the lable free based quantitative analysis of the whole proteome, three biological replicates for each condition were investigated. For the phosphoproteomic analysis, three biological replicates and two technical replicates were analyzed, resulting in twelve data for quantification. Statistical analysis was performed using student’s t-test

### Sample Protocol
Cells were disrupted using 8M urea solution in 50 mM TEAB supplemented with 75mM NaCl,5 mM NaF,5 mM Na3VO4, and protease inhibitor cocktail, and phosphatase inhibitors, and followed by 1 min of sonication (5-s on and 5-s off, amplitude 32%),and then the cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 rcf for 30 min .Cellular proteins were quantified using BCA assay. Each aliquot of 400 μg of cell debris was diluted to 500 μl with 8M urea solution. Next, the protein digestion was performed by filter-aided sample preparation(FASP). The proteins were reduced by 10 mM DTT for 45 min at room temprerature and alkylated by 40 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in the dark, and terminate the alkylation by 40 mM DTT for 45 min.Then, the sample solution was transferred to a 10-kDa filter and centrifuged for 30 min at room timeperature , and the ultra-fraction tube was washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate three times by centrifugation at 14,000g for 30 min at room temperature. and digested with trypsin by a protease:protein ratio of 1:50 at 37 °C for 12 hours. The next day , the peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14,000g for 30 min. The filter tubes were washed twice with 200 μL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate by centrifugationat 14,000g for 30 min. The flow-through fractions were collected and pooled, and the peptide concentration was measured using a NanoDrop 2000C at 280-nm absorbance, and measure 100 ug for fraction of peptides and 2 mg for phosphopeptide enrichment. The samples were dried with Savant SpeedVac (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and then store at-80°C. High pH reversed-phase fractionation of peptide.

### Data Protocol
The proteome samples were analyzed by a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). 500 ng peptides were loaded onto a 150 μm×2 cm C18 trap column and separated on a 150 μm×30 cm C18 analytical column using a 5-35% B gradient (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 150 min. The mass scan range was set from 350 to 1，800 m/z. The full MS resolution was set as 120,000. The AGC target was set as 5E5 and the maximum injection time was set as 50 ms. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode with the 20 most abundant ions (charge state z ≥ 2) selected for higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy. The isolation window for MS/MS was set as 1.6 m/z. The MS/MS spectra were acquired with 15,000 resolution, 5E3 AGC, and 50 ms maximum injection time. For the lable free quantitative analysis of cellular proteome, MaxQuant(version1.6.3.4) was used to process the MS raw data(24 files). Peak lists were generated and searched against the swiss human protein database (release August 2018) containing 20325 sequence entries. Peptide and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification, and oxidized methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with up to three missed cleavage sites. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide identifications, and two or more peptides were required for protein identification. Only unique peptides were employed for quantification. student’s t-test was employed for statistical analysis, and P < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
The proto-oncogene serine/threonine-protein kinase PIM3 plays critical roles in cancer, and it has been extensively exploited as a drug target. Here, we investigated the quantitative changes in the cellular proteome and phosphoproteome in liver cancer cells overexpressing PIM3 to obtain a better understanding of the regulatory functions of PIM3 and the underlying molecular mechanisms. This work depicted the landscape of gene expression and protein phosphorylation potentially regulated by PIM3. A signaling network analysis showed that PIM3 may coordinate various cellular processes, for example, signal transduction, cell cycle, apoptosis, and so forth. Intriguingly, quantitative phosphoproteomics revealed that the PIM3 overexpression elevated the phosphorylation of multiple Rho GTPase modulators that target RhoA, a central modulator of cell movement. Further investigations confirmed that PIM3 activated RhoA to subsequently regulate cytoskeletal rearrangements and cell migration. Taken together, this study comprehensively mapped the proteome and phosphoproteome regulated by PIM3 and revealed its role in promoting liver cancer cell migration and invasion by modulating Rho GTPase signaling.

### Keywords
Pim3 rho gtpase

### Affiliations
Tianjin University
Department of Pathogen Biology and Department of Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China

### Submitter
Na  Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Ruibing Chen
Department of Pathogen Biology and Department of Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China


