### Accession
PXD025890

### Title
Identification of RNF111 substrates by integrative ubiquitome and proteome analysis

### Description
In the present work, we sought to identify exhaustively the endogenous substrates ubiquitinated and degraded by the E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF111 in presence of TGF-β signaling by performing label free quantitative proteomics after enrichment of ubiquitinated proteins (ubiquitome) in parental U2OS cell line compared to U2OS CRISPR engineered clones expressing a truncated form of RNF111 devoid of C-terminal Ring domain. We compare two methods of enrichment for ubiquitinated proteins prior to mass spectrometry proteomics analysis, the diGly remnant peptide immunoprecipitation with a K-e-GG antibody and a novel approach using protein immunoprecipitation with an ubiquitin pan (Pan UB) nanobody that recognizes all ubiquitin chains and mono-ubiquitination. These ubiquitomes were compared to the corresponding proteome to identify proteins ubiquitinated and degraded by RNF111 upon TGF-β signaling pathway.

### Sample Protocol
For DiGly ubiquitome analysis, parental U2OS cells were compared to RNF111-RING KO clone#2 in 3 biological replicate experiments. For each condition, cells were grown to 90% confluence in 8 x 150 mm plates and treated with 10µM MG132 for 4h followed by 1h TGF-β (2 ng/µl) treatment before lysis in freshly prepared urea buffer (8M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 μg/ml aprotinin, 10 μg/ml leupeptin, 50 μM PR-619, 1 mM chloroacetamide, 1 mM PMSF). Samples were prepared according to the protocol described in Udeshi et al, 2013. Nature Protocol. The final Peptide eluates were dried and resuspended in 8µl 0.1% formic acid (FA) / 3% acetonitrile (MeCN) (vol/vol) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Spectra were recorded on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For Pan UB ubiquitome analysis, 4 biological replicate samples for parental U2OS cell line (n=4) were compared to 4 biological replicate for RNF111-RING KO clone#1 and ARK RING-KO clone#2 (n=8).For each condition, cells were grown to 90% confluence in a 150 mm plates and treated with 10µM MG132 for 4h followed by 1h TGF-β (2 ng/µl) before lysis in RIPA buffer. Lysates were sonicated (10 seconds ON, 10 seconds OFF, four times) and cleared lysates were quantified using BCA quantification. 6 mg of proteins were immunoprecipitated with 50µl of Ubiquitin Pan Selector beads slurry (Nanotag Biotechnologies) on a rotator for 1h at 4°C. After 3 washes with RIPA buffer, and 2 washes with 150 mM NaCL, 50 mM TRIS pH 7.5, proteins were eluted twice with 150µl of freshly prepared solution of triethylamide (TEA) 1,4% for 5 min at room temperature under agitation. The 300µl TEA eluates were neutralized with 100µl of Tris 1M pH 7,5 and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1h at 37 °C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were then diluted in 400µl of 25mM ammonim bicarbonate (ABC), digested at 37°C for 2 hour with 0.4µg of trypsin/LysC (Promega) before overnight digestion by adding 1µg of trypsin/LysC. Sample were then loaded onto homemade SepPak C18 Tips packed by stacking one AttractSPE® disk (#SPE-Disks-Bio-C18-100.47.20 Affinisep) and 2mg beads (#186004521 SepPak C18 Cartridge Waters) into a 200 µL micropipette tip for desalting. Peptide were eluted using 40/60 MeCN / H2O + 0.1% FA and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Sample were resuspended in 10µl 0.3% TFA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) For proteome analysis, 3 biological replicate samples for parental U2OS cell line (n=3) were compared to 3 biological replicate for ARK RING-KO clone#1 and ARK RING-KO clone#2 (n=6). For each condition, cells were grown to 90% confluence in a 6 well plates and treated with 2 ng/µl TGF-β for 1h before lysis in freshly prepared urea buffer (8M urea, 200mM ammonium bicarbonate, EDTA-free protease Inhibitor). After sonication, lysates were quantified by BCA and 300µg of proteins were reduced and alkylated by adding successively 5 mM DTT and 10 mM IAA as previously described. Samples were then diluted in 200mM ABC to reach a final concentration of 1 M urea and digested overnight at 37 °C with Trypsin (Worthington) at a ratio of 1/50. 150 µg of each sample were separated (Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase peptide fractionation kit) into six fractions using elution buffers containing the following percentages of acetonitrile: 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, 20 and 50%. Eluted peptides were vacuum concentrated to dryness and resuspended in 20 µl of 0.1% FA / 3% CH3CN (vol/vol) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on an RSLCnano system coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For identification, the raw MS files were searched against the Homo sapiens UniProt database (UP000005640) combined with common contaminants (245 sequences) for the diGly ubiquitome analyses. The search was conducted using SEQUEST-HT through Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1 for the diGly ubiquitome, 2.2 for the proteome and 2.4 for the Pan UB ubiquitome). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two miscleavage sites were allowed for the proteome and Pan UB ubiquitome and three for the diGly ubiquitome. Oxidized methionine, Carbamidomethyl cysteines, N-terminal acetylation, were set as variable modifications and GlyGly on lysine (+114.0429) was added for the ubiquitomes analyses. Methionine-loss and Methionine-loss + N-terminal acetylation were also added to the Pan UB variable modifications. For all analyses, the maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions. For fragment ions, it was set respectively to 0.6 Da and 0.02 Da for the proteome and the ubiquitomes. For proteome analyses the Top N peaks filter of Proteome Discoverer was set to the 6 most intense peaks every 100 Da. FDR calculation used Percolator (The et al., 2016) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.9 (Poullet et al., 2007). The label free quantification was performed using peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ (Valot et al., 2011, version 2.2.21). For proteome and ubiquitome quantifications, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) were used and missed cleavages were allowed. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was used and p-values were adjusted with the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tgf-beta, Ubiquitome, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Rnf111

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Facility (LSMP) - Institut Curie
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Victor Laigle

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


