### Accession
PXD033007

### Title
Proteomic comparison of Arabidopsis thylakoid membranes: wild-type with genotypes hope2 and pgr5

### Description
The light reactions of photosynthesis couple electron and proton transfers across the thylakoid membrane, generating NADPH for carbon fixation and a proton motive force (dominated by ΔpH in chloroplasts) to drive ATP production by the ATP synthase complex. Regulation of NADPH and ATP levels to meet metabolic requirements alongside the dissipation of excess solar energy when it exceeds these requirements are critical to plant growth under fluctuating light environments. To investigate mechanisms involved in the regulation of the light reactions of photosynthesis, we describe proteomic comparisions between two mutant Arabidopsis strains and their respective wild-type background strains: (1) hope2 (ATP synthase γ1-subunit G143D mutant vs. wild-type background Col-0) and (2) pgr5 (impaired stability of the Proton Gradient Regulation 5 (PGR5) protein vs. wild-type background gl1).

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis plants were homogenized in a blender in ice-cold buffer containing 50 mM Na phosphate pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2, 300 mM sucrose, 10 mM NaF. After filtration through muslin, the homogenate was centrifuged at 3750 rpm at 4C for 15 min and the pelleted chloroplasts resuspended in 10 mM Tricine pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM NaF. After 60 s on ice, the chloroplasts were broken by the addition of an equal volume of 10 mM Tricine pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM NaF containing 400 mM sucrose. Thylakoid membranes were recovered by centrifugation as above then washed once in 10 mM Na phosphate pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM NaCl, 100 mM sucrose before storage at -80°C in the same buffer. For protein extraction, thylakoid membranes were sonicated in ice-cold 1% Na dodecanoate, 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 for 5 min and reduced following the addition of 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine-HCl and incubation for 30 min. Cys side-chains then were derivatized with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate by incubation at room temperature for 10 min. Proteins were digested with 1:25 (w/w) premixed trypsin/endoproteinase Lys-C (Promega) at 37°C for 3 h. Dodecanoate was extracted with an equal volume of ethyl acetate and 0.1 vol 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) with vortexing for 60 s. After centrifugation at 15,700 xg for 5 min, the lower peptide-containing aqueous phase was recovered, dried in a vacuum concentrator, desalted in a C18 spin column (Thermo Scientific) and the eluate re-dried for storage at -20°C. For analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 3% ACN and 400 ng injected onto a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap system coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano LC (Thermo Scientific) delivering the following gradient profile: 97% solvent A ((0.1% FA) to 10% solvent B (0.08% FA, 80% ACN) over 5 min, 10% to 50% solvent B over 3 h at 300 nL/min. The MS was programmed for data-dependent acquisition with profile full-scan MS (120,000 resolution) and up to 10 centroid product ion scans (30,000 resolution) per cycle.

### Data Protocol
MS datafiles were converted to mzML using MSConvert (ProteoWizard). Proteins were identified and quantified using FragPipe (v. 652 16.0), searching the Arabidopsis thaliana reference proteome database (www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000006548, downloaded on 2/09/2021) and selecting the MaxLFQ algorithm with the ‘match-between-runs’ option. All other parameters were as per default. MaxLFQ intensities were normalized to the intra-analysis sum of MaxLFQ intensities of the following proteins: PSBA, PSBB, PSBC, PSBD, PSBE, PSBF, PSBH, PSBO1, PSBO2, PSBP1, PSBP2, PSBQ1, PSBQ2, PSBR, PSAA, PSAB, PSAC, PSAD, PSAE1, PSAE2, PSAF, PSAG, PSAH, PSAK, PSAL, PSAN, PSAO, PETA, PETB, PETC, PETD, ATPA, ATPB, ATPC, ATPD, ATPE, ATPF, ATPH, ATPI.

### Publication Abstract
The light reactions of photosynthesis couple electron and proton transfers across the thylakoid membrane, generating NADPH, and proton motive force (pmf) that powers the endergonic synthesis of ATP by ATP synthase. ATP and NADPH are required for CO2 fixation into carbohydrates by the Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle. The dominant &#x394;pH component of the pmf also plays a photoprotective role in regulating photosystem II light harvesting efficiency through nonphotochemical quenching (NPQ) and photosynthetic control via electron transfer from cytochrome b6f (cytb6f) to photosystem I. &#x394;pH can be adjusted by increasing the proton influx into the thylakoid lumen via upregulation of cyclic electron transfer (CET) or decreasing proton efflux via downregulation of ATP synthase conductivity (gH+). The interplay and relative contributions of these two elements of &#x394;pH control to photoprotection are not well understood. Here, we showed that an Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) ATP synthase mutant hunger for oxygen in photosynthetic transfer reaction 2 (hope2) with 40% higher proton efflux has supercharged CET. Double crosses of hope2 with the CET-deficient proton gradient regulation 5 and ndh-like photosynthetic complex I lines revealed that PROTON GRADIENT REGULATION 5 (PGR5)-dependent CET is the major pathway contributing to higher proton influx. PGR5-dependent CET allowed hope2 to maintain wild-type levels of &#x394;pH, CO2 fixation and NPQ, however photosynthetic control remained absent and PSI was prone to photoinhibition. Therefore, high CET in the absence of ATP synthase regulation is insufficient for PSI photoprotection.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Cyclic electron transfer, Atp synthase, Hope2, Pgr5

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield
School of Biosciences, The University of Sheffield, UK.

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Matt Johnson
School of Biosciences, The University of Sheffield, UK.


