### Accession
PXD036349

### Title
Profiling proteome changes during polyamine depletion within the Leishmania donovani polyamine pathway gene deletion mutants, del-odc (ornithine decarboxylase) and del-spdsyn (spermidine synthase)

### Description
Polyamines are aliphatic polycations that have emerged as important determinants of cell growth and viability in rapidly proliferating cells, including in the pathogenic protozoan parasite Leishmania donovani. In L. donovani, the polyamine spermidine is synthesized by the successive conversion of ornithine into putrescine (catalyzed by ornithine decarboxylase or ODC) and putrescine into spermidine (catalyzed by spermidine synthase or SPDSYN). Deletion of either ODC (del-odc) or SPDSYN (del-spdsyn) from the L. donovani genome renders these parasites auxotrophic for polyamines and these mutants are impaired in their ability to survive both in culture and within the mammalian host without the addition of exogenous polyamine supplementation. Significantly, del-odc parasites immediately cease proliferation after putrescine is removed from the culture media and perish within two weeks, while spermidine starved del-spdsyn mutants, which retain intracellular putrescine pools, show a slow-growth phenotype, and persist for several weeks in culture. To elucidate the key differences within the proteome of putrescine-starved del-odc cells and spermidine-starved del-spdsyn parasites, a shotgun quantitative proteomics approach was undertaken using TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS analysis. Briefly, three biological replicates each for mid-log phase del-odc and del-spdsyn promastigotes grown in the presence of exogenous putrescine (for del-odc) or spermidine (for del-spdsyn) supplementation were washed to remove the exogenous polyamine supplementation and incubated in polyamine-free media. At 24 and 48 h, cells from each biological replicate were isolated and prepared for tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and downstream LC-MS/MS analyses. Peptides were identified using a database generated from the reference genome of L. donovani BPK282A1 strain. Changes in relative protein abundance for the polyamine-starved del-odc and del-spdsyn cell lines at 24 and 48 h were calculated by comparing aggregate total reporter ion intensities for each protein to that of the corresponding polyamine-supplemented 0-h timepoint.

### Sample Protocol
L. donovani BOB (MHOM/SD/62/1S-CL2) promastigote cell lines lacking genes for either ornithine decarboxylase (del-odc) or spermidine synthase (del-spdsyn) were used in this study [PubMed IDs: 19064633, 9920931, 11420108, 14550894, 15037106]. Both cell lines are auxotrophic for polyamines and were routinely cultured in DME-L supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated chicken serum (DME-L/CS) and either 100 uM putrescine (del-odc) or 100 uM spermidine (del-spdsyn) as previously described [1–3], as well as in the presence of antibiotic corresponding to the gene replacement marker 20 ug/ml G418 (del-odc) or 30 uM puromycin (del-spdsyn). The genotype of each cell line was verified by a PCR-based strategy, demonstrating either the loss of the ODC or SPDSYN genes, and the presence of the appropriate drug-resistance marker gene.   Three independent biological replicates of either the del-odc or del-spdsyn promastigote cell line grown in the presence of polyamine supplementation to mid-log phase were washed 4 times in polyamine-free DME-L/CS and then resuspended at either 4 x 10^6 cells m/L (del-odc) or 2 x 10^6 cells m/L (del-spdsyn) in 100 mL polyamine-free DME-L/CS in a T175 flask. At 24 and 48 h, 2 x 10^8 cells m/L were removed from each flask, washed twice in 25 mL of PBS, and once in 500ul of PBS. After washing, the cell pellet was lysed in 100ul of 5% SDS made up in milliQ H2O. The cell lysate was heated to 98C for 15 min, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80C until further analysis. In addition to the 24 and 48 h, t=0 h samples of cells cultured in polyamine-replete media (+ 100 uM putrescine for del-odc and + 100 uM spermidine for del-spdsyn) were also collected for comparison. For the t=0h samples, 2 x 10^8 cells m/L were removed immediately prior to the washes in polyamine-free DME-L/CS and processed for downstream analyses as described above.  Protein concentrations of L. donavani samples were determined by a Pierce BCA protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). 50ug protein from each sample was transferred to 1.5 ml Lobind centrifuge tubes and SDS protein extraction buffer (5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB) added to bring the volume to 75ul. Samples were solubilized by shaking at 90C for 5 min, reduced with 3.4ul of 0.5M dithiothreitol and incubated at 95C for 10 min, and alkylated with of 6.8ul of 0.5M iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min in the dark. Samples were acidified with 8.5ul of 12% aqueous phosphoric acid, and 562ul of S-Trap protein binding buffer added. S-Trap micro columns (Protifi, Farmingdale, NY) were placed into 2.0 mL polypropylene tubes (to collect the flow-through). 165ul of acidified SDS lysate/MeOH S-Trap buffer mixture from each sample was transferred to the micro column and centrifuged for 3 min at 4,000 xg. Each column was washed 5 times by adding 150ul of S-Trap protein binding buffer. Columns containing the bound sample proteins were transferred to 1.5 ml Lobind centrifuge tubes and 40ul of 80ng/ul sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, Cat # V5111) in 50 mM TEAB was added. Digestion was performed at 37C overnight.   After digestion, peptides were eluted by sequential addition of 40ul of TEAB, 40ul of 0.2% aqueous formic acid, and 40ul of 50% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid, with centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 4 min between each addition. The elutions were combined, dried by vacuum centrifugation, 100ul of 50% methanol added, and samples dried again. Samples were reconstituted in 100ul of water at 37C in a shaker and peptide concentrations determined using a Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat # 23275). For the TMTpro labeling step, 12 ug of the peptide from each L. donavani sample were dried and reconstituted in 100 ul of 100mM TEAB.   A tandem mass tag (TMTpro) 18-plex reagent kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat # 90309) was used to label samples. 12ul of anhydrous acetonitrile was added to 100ug of TMTpro 18-plex reagents. The peptide samples in 20ul 100mM TEAB were immediately added, and labeling performed with shaking at RT for 1 h. 2ul of each labeled sample were combined and analyzed for total reporter ion intensity normalization. Calculated volumes of each labeled sample were mixed to produce 50ug of total peptides with equal total intensities from all 18 samples. The labeling reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min at RT.  The multiplexed samples were dissolved in 10 mM ammonium formate, pH = 9 buffer and injected onto a NanoEase 5-micron XBridge BEH130 C18 300-micron x 50 mm column (Waters Corporation) at 3 ul/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9). Peptides from mouse aortas were eluted by sequential injection of 20 µl volumes of 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 40, 50, 90% ACN (20 fractions).

### Data Protocol
Eluted peptides were diluted at a 3-way union with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 24 ul/min flow rate and delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100-micron x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5-micron trap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a switching valve. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2-micron, 75-micron x 25 cm EasySpray column (ThermoFisher Scientific). Labeled peptides were then separated at low pH using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 100 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at a 300 nL/min flow rate.   Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument (Thermo Scientific) configured with an EasySpray NanoSource. Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at resolution=120,000, with internal mass calibration enabled, and data-dependent MS2 scans using dynamic exclusion performed in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution=50,000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation of the top 10 ions in the linear ion trap, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole.   Proteome UP000008980 (Leishmania Donavani, taxon ID 981087) FASTA sequences (7,960 proteins) were downloaded May 2022 from www.UniProt.org. Common contaminants (175 entries), neomycin, and puromycin sequences were added, and sequence-reversed entries were concatenated for a final protein FASTA file of 16,274 sequences. Note that gene LDBPK_120100 is incorrectly annotated as ODC and the actual OCD entry is from gene LDBPK_120105.   The 20 binary instrument were processed with the PAW pipeline (https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline). Binary files were converted to text files using MSConvert. Python scripts extracted TMTpro reporter ion peak heights and fragment ion spectra in MS2 format. The Comet search engine (version 2016.03) was used: 1.25 Da monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance, 1.0005 Da monoisotopic fragment ion tolerance, fully tryptic cleavage with up to two missed cleavages, variable oxidation of methionine and proline residues, static alkylation of cysteines, and static modifications for TMTpro labels (at peptide N-termini and at lysine residues).   Top-scoring peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using interactive delta-mass and conditional Peptide-prophet-like linear discriminant function scores. Incorrect delta-mass and score histogram distributions were estimated using the target/decoy method. The filtered PSMs were assembled into protein lists using basic and extended parsimony principles and required two distinct peptides per protein. The final list of identified proteins, protein groups, and protein families were used to define unique and shared peptides for quantitative use. Total (summed) reporter ion intensities were computed from the PSMs associated with all unique peptides for each protein.   The protein intensity values for each biological sample in each biological condition were compared for differential protein levels using the Bioconductor package edgeR in Jupyter notebooks. Result tables (proteomics summaries, reporter ion intensities, and statistical testing results) were generated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stress-response, Starvation, Spermidine synthase, Polyamine, Quantitative proteomics, Leishmania, Psr-ohsu, Tandem mass tags, Ornithine decarboxylase

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy  Pacific University of Oregon  222 SE 8th Ave, Ste 451,  Hillsboro, OR 97123, USA
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola S. Carter
School of Pharmacy  Pacific University of Oregon  222 SE 8th Ave, Ste 451,  Hillsboro, OR 97123, USA


