### Accession
PXD020085

### Title
Proteomic analysis of successful and biologically compromised bone fracture healing

### Description
Bone fracture healing shows approximately 10-15% non-unions, although theoretically it has the potential of scarless regeneration. With regards to our aging society, a better understanding of the healing process is needed to allow for more sophisticated treatment options. Particular the early phase, which is a high complex and dynamic process in regards to nutrient and engery requirements. Here we investigate the proteomic (and metabolic) characteristics of the local microenvironment from successful (in young female Sprague-Dawley rats) and biologically compromised (in aged female rats with a minimum litter of three)bone reneration at day 3, 7 and 14 after osteotomy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein content of homogenized bone hematoma and callus tissue was determined by BCA assay. Afterwards samples were digested in urea buffer, DTT and IAA, before subjected to a double digest of Lys-C and trypsin. Digested samples were desalted using STAGE tips before loading.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was proessed using MaxQuant, and peptides identified with the build in peptide search machine Andromeda.For protein quantification LFQ intensities calculated by MaxQuant were used. Only unique and unmodified peptides were used for LFQ quantification, in order to keep the LFQ calculation isoform specific

### Publication Abstract
Bone regeneration after fracture is a complex process with high and dynamic energy demands. The impact of metabolism on bone healing progression and outcome, however, is so far understudied. Our comprehensive molecular profiling reveals that central metabolic pathways, such as glycolysis and the citric acid cycle, are differentially activated between rats with successful or compromised bone regeneration (young versus aged female Sprague-Dawley rats) early in the inflammatory phase of bone healing. We also found that the citric acid cycle intermediate succinate mediates individual cellular responses and plays a central role in successful bone healing. Succinate induces IL-1&#x3b2; in macrophages, enhances vessel formation, increases mesenchymal stromal cell migration, and potentiates osteogenic differentiation and matrix formation in vitro. Taken together, metabolites-here particularly succinate-are shown to play central roles as signaling molecules during the onset of healing and in steering bone tissue regeneration.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Bone, Rattus norvegius

### Affiliations
B(IH)CRT, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany
Julius Wolff Institut, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany
BIMBS, MDC-Berlin Buch, Germany

Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, 10115, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Julia Löffler

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kempa
Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, 10115, Berlin, Germany


