### Accession
PXD017251

### Title
Deep Characterization of the IFN-I/III-Stimulated Proteome  in HBV-Transfected or Native HepG2 Cells

### Description
To expand knowledge of the effects of interferon at the proteomic level, we treated HepG2 cells with IFN-alpha and IFN-lambda for 24 hours. HepG2.2.15 cells, a model for HBV infection, were also examined versus controls. MTT assays showed that optimized IFN levels (100 ng/ml) did not induce apoptosis relative to untreated controls. Including controls, more than 6,000 proteins were identified. Five replicates each of IFN-alpha treatment, IFN-lambda treatment, and control were performed, allowing confident identification of differentially expressed proteins. While a number of publications suggest that no interferon effect is evident upon HBV infection, our own results strongly suggest otherwise. Differential alterations of the proteasome were noted when comparing HBV infection against IFN-treatment. We also note that differential effects upon IFN treatment significantly overlapped with transcriptomic datasets when upregulation was examined. However, proteins downregulated upon IFN treatment show little overlap with these transcriptomic datasets.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were seeded in T-75 flask for 24 hour and then stimulated with 100 ng/ml of IFN-λ3 or 100 ng/ml of IFN-α2a or left untreated for another 24 hour. After tryptic digestion, the peptides from untreated cells, IFN-α2a-treated cells, and IFN-λ3-treated cells were labeled with light, medium, and heavy isotope of dimethyl labeling, respectively. The labeled peptides from 3 groups were combined and dried in vacuum concentrator. For the study comparing proteome of HepG2 and HepG2.2.15 cells, both cell lines were grown in completed media containing high glucose DMEM, 10% FBS, 1% MEM-NEAA, and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin. G418 was added into the HepG2.2.15’s medium. When the cells reached 80-90% confluency, the cells were harvested and proceeded the tryptic digestion. Light and Heavy isotopes of dimethylation were used to labeled peptides from HepG2 and HepG2.2.15, respectively. The two labeled groups were combined and dried in vacuum concentrator. The labeled and dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and subjected to high pH reversed-phase fractionation. The fractionated peptides were dried in vacuum concentrator. The dried samples were resuspended in 0.1% FA to a final volume of 15 μl prior to MS injection. The peptides were then analyzed via an EASY-nLC1000 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo). The peptides were eluted in 5–40% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 70 min followed by 40–95% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 20 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS methods included a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans at a resolution of 17,500. The normalized collision energy of HCD fragmentation was set at 32%. An MS scan range of 350 to 1400 m/z was selected and precursor ions with unassigned charge states, a charge state of +1, or a charge state of greater than +8 were excluded. A dynamic exclusion of 30 s was used.

### Data Protocol
The peaklist-generating software used in this study was Proteome Discoverer™ Software 2.1 (Thermo). The SEQUEST-HT search engine was employed in data processing. MS raw data files were searched against the Human Swiss-Prot Database (20,219 proteins, June 2017) and the Hepatitis B Virus Swiss-Prot Database (225 proteins, June 2017), as well as a list of common protein contaminants (www.thegpm.org/crap/). The following parameters were set for the search: (1) digestion enzyme: trypsin; (2) maximum allowance for missed cleavages: 2; (3) maximum of modifications: 4; (4) fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da), as well as light, medium, and heavy dimethylation of N termini and lysine (+28.031300, +32.056407, and +36.075670 Da); (5) variable modifications: oxidation of methionine (+15.99491 Da). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Known contaminant ions were excluded. The Proteome Discoverer decoy database together with the Percolator algorithm were used to calculate the false positive discovery rate of the identified peptides based on Q-values which were set to 1%. The Precursor Ions Quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer™ Software was employed to quantify the relative MS signal intensities of dimethyl labeled-peptides. The control channels were used as denominators to generate abundance ratios of IFN-λ3/control and IFN-α2a/control in case of HepG2 treated with IFN-λ3 or IFN-α2a. For comparing between HepG2.2.15 and HepG2, the control channel was HepG2. Log2 of the normalized ratio was used to calculate the mean and standard deviation of fold change across all five biological replicates. When these ratios were found in less than three experiments, the relevant proteins were excluded. Significantly differentially regulated proteins were determined by unpaired t-tests with p value < 0.05 considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatitis b virus, Quantitative proteomics, Interferon lambda3, Interferon alpha

### Affiliations
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Research Affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand
Chulalongkorn university

### Submitter
Poorichaya Somparn

### Lab Head
Dr Trairak Pisitkun
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Research Affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand


