### Accession
PXD003089

### Title
Mouse SJ, LC-MS/MS -  Proteome rearrangements after auditory learning: high-resolution profiling of synapse-enriched protein fractions from mouse brain

### Description
Learning and memory processes are accompanied by rearrangements of synaptic protein networks. While various studies have demonstrated the regulation of individual synaptic proteins during these processes, much less is known about the complex regulation of entire synaptic proteomes. Recently, we reported that auditory discrimination learning in mice is associated with a relative down-regulation of proteins involved in the structural organization of synapses in various brain regions. Aiming at the identification of biological processes and signaling pathways involved in auditory memory formation, here a label-free quantification approach was utilized to identify regulated synaptic junctional proteins and phosphoproteins in the auditory cortex, frontal cortex, hippocampus and striatum of mice 24 h after the learning experiment. Twenty proteins, including postsynaptic scaffolds, actin modeling proteins and RNA-binding proteins, were regulated in at least three brain regions pointing to common, cross-regional mechanisms. Most of the detected synaptic proteome changes were, however, restricted to individual brain regions. For example, several members of the Septin family of cytoskeletal proteins were upregulated only in the hippocampus, while Septin-9 was down-regulated in the hippocampus, the frontal cortex and the striatum. Meta analyses utilizing several databases were employed to identify underlying cellular functions and biological pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Animals and behavioral experiments Twelve male 10 to 16 week-old C57BL/6J mice were used for this study. They were housed and treated as described (Kähne et al. 2012). Animal experiments were performed in accordance with the regulations of the German Federal Law, the respective EU regulations and NIH guidelines, and were approved by the Landesverwaltungsamt Halle/Saale for the State Saxony-Anhalt. Mice were trained in a two-way shuttle box go/no-go task to discriminate between sequences of rising (4– 8 kHz, CS+) and falling FM tones (8–4 kHz, CS−) to avoid mild foot-shock (AV group, n=6) as previously described (Kähne et al. 2012). The training session consisted of 60 trials, i.e. 30 presentations of each CS+ and CS− in pseudo-randomized order, and lasted ~25 min. Naïve littermates were used as controls (NV group, n=6). Brain dissection and tissue fractionation Twenty-four hours after completion of training, AV and NV mice were killed, the brain regions AC, FC, HIP, and STR (Fig. 1) were dissected as described (Kähne et al. 2012), frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C. For preparation of protein samples enriched for synaptic junctional structures (SJ-enriched samples), (Smalla et al. 2000; 2012), tissue was homogenized in 300 μl of 10 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.1, 0.5% Triton X-100 containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After incubation for 1 h at 4°C, samples were centrifuged at 100,000×g for 1 h. The resulting pellets were rehomogenized in the same buffer and centrifuged again. The final pellets were resuspended in 500 μl of deionised water and stored at −80°C. Aliquots were subjected to SDS-PAGE to adjust protein amounts for proteome analysis. For further fractionation, the adjusted SJ-enriched samples were heated in SDS-sample buffer, and 4 μl aliquots were separated by SDS-PAGE (3% stacking gel, 12% separation gel) in a Mini PROTEAN® System (Biorad). After Coomassie staining, gel pieces covering the molecular weight range of ~35-170 kDa were manually excised. In-gel digestion was performed according to (Shevchenko et al. 1996) with slight modifications: gel pieces were washed twice [in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 followed by 100% acetonitrile (ACN)]. Afterwards cysteine residues were carbamidomethylated by dithiothreitol and subsequent iodoacetamide treatment. Gel pieces were washed twice again, dried, rehydrated in freshly prepared digestion buffer, i.e., 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 12.5 ng/μl of trypsin (Promega, TrypsinGold), and incubated at 37°C overnight. Tryptic peptides were extracted with 25 mM NH4HCO3 followed by ACN under sonication and lyophilized. Phosphopeptide-enriched and phosphopeptide-depleted fractions were prepared from the tryptic peptides of the SJ-enriched samples by TiO2 chromatography (adapted from ref. Thingholm et al. 2008). Briefly, tryptic peptides were dissolved in 80% ACN/2.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and mixed with ~2 mg Titansphere TiO2-beads (GL Sciences, Japan). After incubation for 1 h at room temperature, the beads were spun down (16,000xg, 1 min) and the supernatants were collected. The beads were washed in 80% ACN/2.5% TFA, followed by 80% ACN/0.1% TFA and 0.1% TFA, and the combined supernatants were lyophilized. They represented the phosphopeptide-depleted fraction and were re-dissolved prior to proteome analysis. The TiO2-beads were finally washed with 400 mM NH4OH/30% ACN and resulting eluates were concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge to a volume of ~6 μl for proteome analysis (phosphopeptide-enriched fraction). Proteome analysis Phosphopeptide-depleted and phosphopeptide-enriched fractions from SJ-enriched protein samples were analyzed by high-resolution MS to allow label-free quantification and reliable discovery of posttranslational modifications. LC-MS/MS was performed on a hybrid dual-pressure linear ion trap/orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with an EASYnLC Ultra HPLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). For analysis peptide samples were adjusted to 10 μl 2% ACN/0.1% TFA and fractionated on a 75 μm (inner diameter), 25 cm PepMap C18-column, packed with 2 μm resin (Dionex, Germany). Separation was achieved through applying a gradient from 2 to 35% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over 150 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. An Orbitrap full MS scan was followed by up to ten LTQ MS/MS runs using CID fragmentation of the most abundantly detected peptide ions. Essential MS settings were as follows: full MS (FTMS; resolution 60.000; m/z range 400-2000); MS/MS (Linear Trap; minimum signal threshold 500; isolation width 2 Da; dynamic exclusion time setting 30 s; singly-charged ions were excluded from selection). Normalized collision energy was set to 35%, and activation time to 10 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Raw data processing, protein identification and phosphopeptide assignment of the high-resolution orbitrap data sets were performed using ProteomeDiscoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). For a combined database search, Sequest and Mascot algorithms were used. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by Percolator 2.04 algorithm and set to <1%. Label-free quantification was performed using PEAKS Studio V.7.0 label-free algorithm (Bioinformatics Solutions). The resulting data were re-evaluated using Progenesis LC-MS software package (Nonlinear Dynamics/Waters). Phospho-site determination was performed by phosphoRS 3.0 (Taus et al. 2011) and the resulting data were evaluated using the Progenesis LCMS software package. Proteins with abundance ratios (AV/NV) of >1.5 or <1/1.5 at p<0.05 were considered as significantly regulated. Note: due to malfunctions during SJ preparation and/or nanoLC-­‐MS/MS, the numbers of individual animal data sets were diminished for AC to n=4 per group and for FC to n=5 in the AV group.

### Publication Abstract
Learning and memory processes are accompanied by rearrangements of synaptic protein networks. While various studies have demonstrated the regulation of individual synaptic proteins during these processes, much less is known about the complex regulation of synaptic proteomes. Recently, we reported that auditory discrimination learning in mice is associated with a relative down-regulation of proteins involved in the structural organization of synapses in various brain regions. Aiming at the identification of biological processes and signaling pathways involved in auditory memory formation, here, a label-free quantification approach was utilized to identify regulated synaptic junctional proteins and phosphoproteins in the auditory cortex, frontal cortex,&#xa0;hippocampus, and striatum of mice 24&#xa0;h after the learning experiment. Twenty proteins, including postsynaptic scaffolds, actin-remodeling proteins, and RNA-binding proteins, were regulated in at least three brain regions pointing to common, cross-regional mechanisms. Most of the detected synaptic proteome changes were, however, restricted to individual brain regions. For example, several members of the Septin family of cytoskeletal proteins were up-regulated only in the hippocampus, while Septin-9 was down-regulated in the hippocampus, the frontal cortex, and the striatum. Meta analyses utilizing several databases were employed to identify underlying cellular functions and biological pathways. Data are available via ProteomeExchange with identifier PXD003089. How does the protein composition of synapses change in different brain areas upon auditory learning? We unravel discrete proteome changes in mouse auditory cortex, frontal cortex, hippocampus, and striatum functionally implicated in the learning process. We identify not only common but also area-specific biological pathways and cellular processes modulated 24&#xa0;h after training, indicating individual contributions of the regions to memory processing.

### Keywords
Learning and memory, Phosphoproteomics, Chemical synapse, Quantitative mass spectrometry, Auditory learning, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
University Magdeburg, Inst. Exp. Internal Medicine Leipziger Str.44 39120 Magdeburg Germany
University Magdeburg

### Submitter
Thilo Kaehne

### Lab Head
Dr Thilo Kaehne
University Magdeburg, Inst. Exp. Internal Medicine Leipziger Str.44 39120 Magdeburg Germany


