### Accession
PXD004963

### Title
Bicarbonate induced redox proteome changes in Arabidopsis suspension cells

### Description
Climate change as a consequence of increasing atmospheric CO2 affects plant growth and productivity. CO2 is not only a carbon donor for photosynthesis but also an environmental signal that can perturb cellular redox homeostasis and lead to modifications of redox-sensitive proteins. Although redox regulation of protein functions has emerged as an important mechanism in several biological processes, protein redox modifications and how they function in plant CO2 response remain unclear. Here iodoTMTRAQ proteomics technology was employed to analyze changes in protein redox modifications in Arabidopsis thaliana suspension cells in response to bicarbonate (mimic of elevated CO2) in a time-course study. A total of 47 potential redox-regulated proteins were identified with functions in carbohydrate and energy metabolism, transport, ROS scavenging, cell structure modulation and protein turnover. This inventory of previously unknown protein redox switches in Arabidopsis thaliana bicarbonate responses lays a foundation for future research toward understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying plant CO2 responses.

### Sample Protocol
The harvested cells were grounded in liquid nitrogen in a mortar with pestle. Approximately 300 mg fine powder was transferred into a 2-mL Eppendorf tube and mixed with 1 mL protein extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.8), 10 mM EDTA, 1 M sucrose, 1 mM PMSF, and 20 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) for 1h at room temperature (RT). The NEM in the extraction buffer is to block free thiols and prevent them from further oxidation. The homogenates were centrifuged at 15 000 g for 15 min at 4°C, and the supernatants were added to 5 volume of 100 mM ammonium sulfate/methanol. Samples were maintained at −20 °C overnight and then centrifuged at 15 000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The resulting pellets were washed with 100 mM ammonium sulfate/methanol twice, cold 80% acetone twice, and 100% acetone once. The pellets were lyophilized, dissolved in 6 M urea, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and 1% SDS. Protein samples were prepared from three independent biological replicates, and protein concentration was determined as previously described (Parker et al., 2012).Reverse labeling of thiols were performed as described by Parker et al. (2012). Reduced thiols for reverse labeling were generated by incubation with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 1 h at 50 °C. We labeled 5, 30, 120 min control samples with 126 m/z, 128 m/z and 130 m/z, and the treatment samples with 127 m/z, 129 m/z, and 131 m/z. Labeling was performed at 37 °C for 2 h in the dark, then quench the reaction by adding 0.5 M DTT and incubating sample for 15 minutes at 37 °C in the dark. The samples were then separated in 12 % SDS-PAGE gel at 120 v for 5 min and 80 v for 10 min. A 1:20-fold trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) in-gel digestion was performed according to the iTRAQ manual (AB Sciex Inc.) at 37 °C for 16 h. Peptides were cleaned up with C18 desalting columns (The Nest Group Inc., Southborough, MA) and then lyophilized to dryness.The purified peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (AB Sciex Inc., Framingham, MA, USA). The three time-point control samples were labeled with the reporter tags 113, 115, and 117, respectively; and three time-point NaHCO3-treated samples were labeled with the reporter tags 114, 116, and 118, respectively. The labeling reactions were carried out at 37 °C for 2 h. Labeled peptides were desalted with C18-solid phase extraction and dissolved in strong cation exchange (SCX) solvent A (25% (v/v) acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium formate, and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, pH 2.8). The peptides were fractionated using an Agilent high-performance liquid chromatographer (HPLC) 1260 with SCX column (PolySULFOETHYL A, 100×2.1 mm, 5μM, 300 Å)(The Nest Group Inc., Southborough, MA). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 0-20% solvent B (25% (v/v) acetonitrile and 500 mM ammonium formate, pH 6.8) over 80 min followed by ramping up to 100% solvent B in 5 min. Peptide absorbance at 280 nm was monitored, and 20 fractions were collected, followed by desalting and and lyophilization (Parker et al., 2015). The fractionated peptides were resuspended in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and separated on an EASY-nLC 1000HPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were loaded on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 pre-column (20 mm × 75 μm; 3 μm-C18), then separated on a PepMap RSLC analytical column (250 mm × 75 μm; 2 μm-C18) at a flow rate of 350 nL/min using solvent A and B (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile), the solvent gradient was 2–30% solvent B in 100 min, 30–98% solvent B in 10 min then isocratic of 98% solvent B for 10 min. The separated labeled peptides were analyzed on the Q Exactive Plus MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), which was run in positive ion mode and data dependent scanning with high collision dissociation (HCD) as previously described by Jones et al (Jones et al., 2013) with minor modifications. The chromatography peak width was 4 s and the default charge state was 3. The full MS resolution was 70,000 with a scan range of 400–2000 m/z, an AGC target of 1e6 and maximum Injection time of 100 ms. The resolution of quadrupole mass analyzer for MS/MS acquisition was 17,500, an AGC target of 1e6, and maximum IT of 55 ms, a loop count of 8, an isolation window of 2 m/z, and the NCE of 35. The underfill ratio was 1%, intensity threshold was 1.8e5, charge exclusion was 1, 6–8, and > 8. A lock mass of polysiloxane ion (445.12003 m/z) was used for real-time mass calibration. The spray voltage was set to be 1700, the capillary temperature was 260 °C, and the maximum spray current was 50.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for protein identification based on searching the raw data against the uniprot Arabidopsis thaliana database (downloaded in April, 2015) with 52,461 entries.  Proteome Discoverer nodes for spectrum grouper and spectrum selector were set to default with the spectrum properties filter set to a minimum and maximum precursor mass of 300 Da and 5 kDa, respectively. The SEQUEHT algorithm was used for protein identification. Parameters were set to two maximum missed cleavage sites of trypsin digestion. Tolerances were set to a 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and a 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance. Dynamic modifications included phosphorylation (+79.966 (S, T, Y)), oxidation (+15.995 Da (M)), N-ethylmaleimide (+124.048 Da (C)), iTRAQ8plex (+304.205 Da (K), and iodoTMT6plex (+329.227 Da (C)). The N-terminal modification was set for iTRAQ8plex (+304.205 Da). Percolator was used for protein identification with parameters of a strict target false discovery rate of 0.01 and a relaxed target false discovery rate of 0.05. The reporter ion quantifier node was set with a peak integration tolerance of 20 ppm, and the event detector used mass precision set at 2 ppm accuracy with a signal-to-noise ratio threshold of 3. Quantification was performed using iodoTMT and iTRAQ reporter ion peak intensities. Peptide results were filtered to include only peptides with false discovery rate confidence and cysteine residues. Labeled unique peptides were selected for the relative protein quantification. To avoid effect of technical and systematic errors on quantification results, two steps data normalization were performed. Unique peptide peak intensities for each label of iodoTMT were exported, and ratios were calculated accordingly from the median-normalized peak intensity values. Student’s t-test (two-tailed) on the log2-transformed treated/control ratios was performed. A peptide with a p<0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. For the iTRAQ data, unique peptides were normalized to the total summation of their intensities based on the 113 tagged peptides. Protein grouping was performed by summation of repeated peptides followed by median calculation for the summed peptides belonging to the same protein. After ratio calculation between each treatment protein value and the corresponding control value, a second normalization step for all the ratios to a median equal to one was carried out. Log transformation of the normalized ratios and t-testing for significant differences between the control and treatment ratios were conducted with the null hypothesis of log2 (averaged ratio) = 0. The significant peptides labeled with iodoTMT were compared and contrasted with the significant proteins quantified via iTRAQ. Student’s t-test was conducted between the fold change of iodoTMT labeled peptides and the fold change of the corresponding proteins quantified via iTRAQ. A correction factor was applied to the fold change of iodoTMT-labeled peptides, taking into account the fold change of the protein quantified via iTRAQ.

### Publication Abstract
Climate change as a result of increasing atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub> affects plant growth and productivity. CO<sub>2</sub> is not only a carbon donor for photosynthesis but also an environmental signal that can perturb cellular redox homeostasis and lead to modifications of redox-sensitive proteins. Although redox regulation of protein functions has emerged as an important mechanism in several biological processes, protein redox modifications and how they function in plant CO<sub>2</sub> response remain unclear. Here a new iodoTMTRAQ proteomics technology was employed to analyze changes in protein redox modifications in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> suspension cells in response to bicarbonate (mimic of elevated CO<sub>2</sub>) in a time-course study. A total of 47 potential redox-regulated proteins were identified with functions in carbohydrate and energy metabolism, transport, ROS scavenging, cell structure modulation and protein turnover. This inventory of previously unknown redox responsive proteins in Arabidopsis bicarbonate responses lays a foundation for future research toward understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying plant CO<sub>2</sub> responses.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Bicarbonate, Oxidative stress, Co2, Iodotmt, Itraq, Redox-proteomics

### Affiliations
UF
Shenyang argriculture University

### Submitter
ZEPENG Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Zepeng  
UF


