### Accession
PXD039754

### Title
RNxQuest: an extension to the xQuest pipeline enabling analysis of protein-RNA cross-linking/mass spectrometry data

### Description
The recently introduced cross-linking of isotope-labelled RNA coupled with mass spectrometry (CLIR-MS) technique enables protein-RNA cross-links to be used as precisely localized distance restraints in de novo structural modelling. The novel data type requires a bespoke data analysis approach. The new RNxQuest Python package supports this approach. Here we demonstrate the performance of the new package using a mixture of novel and published datasets.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of protein-RNA complexes is described in the respective PRIDE submission for each of the original datasets (CLIR-MS with FOX1, MBNL1 and PTBP1 complexes: PXD029930; protein-RNA cross-linking of Cas9: PXD016254, protein-RNA cross-linking of human RBPs: PXD000513). For monolink datasets produced using bovine serum albumin (BSA), 100 ug aliquots of BSA were prepared in PBS at 0.67 mg/mL, and cross-linked with 4 different cross-linking reagents: DSS, DSG, ADH, PDH. For DSS and DSG reactions, the cross-linking reagent was used at 0.5 mM. For ADH, a linker concentration of 8.3 mg/ml was used, with 12 mM DMTMM. For PDH, identical concentrations were used, adjusted for differing molar mass. DSS and DSG reactions were quenched with ammonium bicarbonate, added to 50 mM. ADH and PDH reactions were quenched by gel filtration with Zeba spin columns. After cross-linking, BSA samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis according to Leitner et al. 2014 (Nature Protocols). Both SEC enriched and unenriched samples were analysed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS using a Thermo easy nLC-1000 coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Elite.  Further experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
For BSA, converted mzXML files were searched with xQuest (version 2.1.5, available at https://gitlab.ethz.ch/leitner_lab/xquest_xprophet) against a target and decoy database for bovine serum albumin protein. The decoy database was generated using the xdecoy.pl script included with xQuest, using the reverse and shuffle features sequentially. Individual analysis runs for each data set were defined manually (without the RNxQuest package), one per expected light-heavy delta mass in the data set (i.e. one per cross-linking reagent). A mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the mass shift was used, with a maximum retention time difference between scan pairs of 1 min.  Additional search settings: enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 2; MS mass tolerance, 10 ppm; MS/MS mass tolerance, 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for XL ions. Only mono-link type identifications were searched for. Amino acid reactivity was restricted to the known reactivity of the cross-linking reagents (lysine for DSS and DSG, aspartic acid and glutamic acid for ADH and PDH). Where FDR analysis was carried out using xProphet (version 2.5.5, available at https://gitlab.ethz.ch/leitner_lab/xquest_xprophet), default parameters were used. For analysis of protein-RNA cross-linking datasets, MS/MS spectra were searched using the RNxQuest Python package (version 1.0, available at https://gitlab.ethz.ch/leitner_lab/rnxquest) as an interface to xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.5, against the expected sequence of the protein, depending on the complex in the sample. All possible nucleotide adducts the RNA sequence used in each sample (1-4 residues in length) were specified as “mono-link” mass shifts, and their corresponding mass shifts between unlabeled and labeled RNA were considered (according to the 13C15N labelling scheme described in Dorn, G. et al., Nat Methods 14, 487–490 (2017), according to the newly introduced 13C labelling scheme with a delta mass of 5.01 Da per nucleotide in the RNA adduct), or with light-only search settings. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. FDR analysis was carried out using three available strategies in the RNxQuest package: observed FDR, transferred FDR, or mokapot. Resulting IDs were further refined by mass accuracy, and plotted using the RNxQuest JuPyter notebook based post-processing pipeline.    Cross-link identifications for each data set in the corresponding publication are supplied in spreadsheet files in csv format. A separate spreadsheet explains which files correspond to each dataset. Further experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking and mass spectrometry (XL-MS) workflows are increasingly popular techniques for generating low-resolution structural information about interacting biomolecules. <i>xQuest</i> is an established software package for analysis of protein-protein XL-MS data, supporting stable isotope-labeled cross-linking reagents. Resultant paired peaks in mass spectra aid sensitivity and specificity of data analysis. The recently developed cross-linking of isotope-labeled RNA and mass spectrometry (CLIR-MS) approach extends the XL-MS concept to protein-RNA interactions, also employing isotope-labeled cross-link (XL) species to facilitate data analysis. Data from CLIR-MS experiments are broadly compatible with core <i>xQuest</i> functionality, but the required analysis approach for this novel data type presents several technical challenges not optimally served by the original <i>xQuest</i> package. Here we introduce <i>RNxQuest</i>, a Python package extension for <i>xQuest</i>, which automates the analysis approach required for CLIR-MS data, providing bespoke, state-of-the-art processing and visualization functionality for this novel data type. Using functions included with <i>RNxQuest</i>, we evaluate three false discovery rate control approaches for CLIR-MS data. We demonstrate the versatility of the <i>RNxQuest</i>-enabled data analysis pipeline by also reanalyzing published protein-RNA XL-MS data sets that lack isotope-labeled RNA. This study demonstrates that <i>RNxQuest</i> provides a sensitive and specific data analysis pipeline for detection of isotope-labeled XLs in protein-RNA XL-MS experiments.

### Keywords
Uv cross-linking; mbnl1; fox1; ptbp1; bsa; cross-linking; xl-ms; structural proteomics; protein-rna; rna-protein; protein-rna complex; rna-protein complex; clir-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Christopher Sarnowski

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


