### Accession
PXD016378

### Title
Tumor necrosis factor α-induced protein 1 as a novel tumor suppressor through selective downregulation of CSNK2B blocks Nuclear Factor-κB activation in hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Background: Tumor necrosis factor α-induced protein 1 (TNFAIP1) is frequently downregulated in cancer cell lines and promotes cancer cell apoptosis. However, its role, clinical significance and molecular mechanisms in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are unknown.  Methods: The expression of TNFAIP1 in HCC tumor tissues and cell lines was measured by Western blot and immunohistochemistry. The effects of TNFAIP1 on HCC proliferation, apoptosis, metastasis, angiogenesis and tumor formation were evaluated by Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK8), Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP Nick-End Labeling (TUNEL), transwell, tube formation assay in vitro and nude mice experiments in vivo. The interaction between TNFAIP1 and CSNK2B was validated by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), Co-immunoprecipitation and Western blot. The mechanism of how TNFAIP1 regulated nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-κB) pathway was analyzed by dual-luciferase reporter, immunofluorescence, quantitative Real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and Western blot. Findings: The TNFAIP1 expression is significantly decreased in HCC tissues and cell lines, and negatively correlated with the increased HCC histological grade. Overexpression of TNFAIP1 inhibits HCC cell proliferation, metastasis, angiogenesis and promotes cancer cell apoptosis both in vitro and in vivo, whereas the knockdown of TNFAIP1 in HCC cell displays opposite effects. Mechanistically, TNFAIP1 interacts with CSNK2B and promotes its ubiquitin-mediated degradation with Cul3, causing attenuation of CSNK2B-dependent NF-κB trans-activation in HCC cell. Moreover, the enforced expression of CSNK2B counteracts the inhibitory effects of TNFAIP1 on HCC cell proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo.  Interpretation: Our results support that TNFAIP1 can act as a tumor suppressor of HCC by modulating TNFAIP1/CSNK2B/NF-κB pathway, implying that TNFAIP1 may represent a potential marker and a promising therapeutic target for HCC. Fund: This work was supported in part by the financial support from the China Natural Science Foundation (No. 81972642, No. 81601122 and No. 81770389), Hunan Natural Science Foundation (No. 2017JJ3205), Cooperative Innovation Center of Engineering and New Products for Developmental Biology of Hunan Province (No. 20134486), and the Scientific Research Fund of Hunan Provincial Education Department (17B162).

### Sample Protocol
For liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, MHCC97H cells transfected with Myc-tagged TNFAIP1 plasmid and subjected to incubation with anti-Myc antibody. The potential TNFAIP1-binding proteins were pulled down by Co-IP and performed with LC-MS/MS analysis. Briefly, the proteins solution, pulled down by Co-IP, was separated by 12% SDS-PAGE. After electrophoresis, the protein gel was sliced and washed with acetonitrile (ACN) and followed by natural drying. The drying protein gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 40 min at 56 °C and subsequently alkylated with 50mM IAM for 30 min in the dark. And then the protein gel pieces were digested with trypsin (Gibco) overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, the peptides were extracted with 0.1% formic acid (FA) and desalted with C18 cartridge and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) and EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) was used to identify the peptides according to the standard protocols [25].

### Data Protocol
Statistical analyses were performed with SPSS 13.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Data are shown as means ± SEM. The association between TNFAIP1 expression and HCC patients’ clinicopathological variables were analyzed using Pearson's χ2 test. For comparisons of 2 groups, a 2-tailed Student’s t-test was used. Comparisons of multiple groups were performed by using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Dunnett's post hoc test. All experiments were repeated at least 3 times. Statistical significance was concluded at *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein kinase casein kinase ii beta, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Nuclear factor-κb, Tumor suppressor, Tumor necrosis factor α-induced protein 1

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs lnc.
State Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology of Freshwater Fish, College of Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, 410081, P. R. China.

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Liu
State Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology of Freshwater Fish, College of Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, 410081, P. R. China.


