### Accession
PXD002452

### Title
Characterisation of two distinct Nucleosome Remodelling and Deacetylase Complex (NuRD) assemblies in embryonic stem cells.

### Description
Pluripotency and self-renewal, the defining properties of embryonic stem cells, are brought about by transcriptional programs involving an intricate network of transcription factors and chromatin remodelling complexes. The Nucleosome Remodelling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex plays a crucial and dynamic role in the regulation of stemness and differentiation. Several NuRD-associated factors have been reported but how they are organised has not been investigated in detail. Here, we have combined affinity purification and blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis followed by protein identification by mass spectrometry and protein correlation profiling to characterise the topology of the NuRD complex. Our data show that in mouse embryonic stem cells the NuRD complex is present as two distinct assemblies of differing topology with different binding partners. Cell cycle regulator Cdk2ap1 and transcription factor Sall4 associate only with the higher mass NuRD assembly. We further establish that only isoform Sall4A, and not Sall4B, associates with NuRD. By contrast, Suz12, a component of the PRC2 Polycomb repressor complex, associates with the lower mass entity. In addition, we identify and validate a novel NuRD-associated protein, Wdr5, a regulatory subunit of the MLL histone methyltransferase complex, which associates with both NuRD entities. Bioinformatic analyses of published target gene sets of these chromatin binding proteins are in agreement with these structural observations. In summary, this study provides an interesting insight into mechanistic aspects of NuRD function in stem cell biology. The relevance of our work has broader implications because of the ubiquitous nature of the NuRD complex. The strategy described here can be more broadly applicable to investigate the topology of the multiple complexes an individual protein can participate in.

### Sample Protocol
BN gels were excised into 48 identical (1.5 mm x 5 mm) slices and processed as described previously (35). Peptides were re-dissolved in 0.5% formic acid and analysed with online nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 Nano/Capillary LC System (Dionex). Samples were first loaded and desalted on a nanotrap (100µm id x 2 cm) at 10 µL/min with 0.1% formic acid for 10 min and then separated on an analytical column (75 µm id x 15 cm) (both PepMap C18, Dionex) over a 30 min linear gradient of 4%–28% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min. The Orbitrap Velos was operated in standard data-dependent acquisition. The survey scans (m/z 380-1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400, and one microscan was acquired per spectrum. The ten most abundant multiply charged ions with a minimal intensity of 3000 counts were subject to MS/MS in the linear ion trap at an isolation width of 2 Th. Dynamic exclusion width was set at ± 10 ppm for 45 s. The automatic gain control target value was regulated at 1x10e6 for the Orbitrap and 5000 for the ion trap, with maximum injection time at 150 ms for Orbitrap and 100 ms for the ion trap, respectively

### Data Protocol
Spectral analysis for protein identification and quantitation was performed using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.1.2). MS data from the BN-PAGE fractions were processed in batch as separate experiments to derive independent quantification values for each fraction. The minimum ratio count was set to one, unique and razor peptides were used for quantification, and iBAQ values were computed. The Mouse Uniprot reference proteome (January 2014) was used for the database search. All other parameters were kept at default settings. The proteinGroups results file was processed in Perseus (Version 1.5.0.31) for removal of contaminants, reverse IDs and proteins only identified by site. We used five replicates of a non-relevant FTAP2-tag control (P. Tate, manuscript in preparation) affinity purification to draw a list of common non-specific binding proteins in FLAG affinity purifications (data not shown). Data visualisation and further processing was performed using scripts developed in R (Version 2.15.3). Hierarchical clustering was carried out using the average distance in a Manhattan distance matrix and the resulting clustering was visualised in a heat-map across all BN-PAGE fractions.

### Publication Abstract
Pluripotency and self-renewal, the defining properties of embryonic stem cells, are brought about by transcriptional programs involving an intricate network of transcription factors and chromatin remodeling complexes. The Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex plays a crucial and dynamic role in the regulation of stemness and differentiation. Several NuRD-associated factors have been reported but how they are organized has not been investigated in detail. Here, we have combined affinity purification and blue native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis followed by protein identification by mass spectrometry and protein correlation profiling to characterize the topology of the NuRD complex. Our data show that in mouse embryonic stem cells the NuRD complex is present as two distinct assemblies of differing topology with different binding partners. Cell cycle regulator Cdk2ap1 and transcription factor Sall4 associate only with the higher mass NuRD assembly. We further establish that only isoform Sall4a, and not Sall4b, associates with NuRD. By contrast, Suz12, a component of the PRC2 Polycomb repressor complex, associates with the lower mass entity. In addition, we identify and validate a novel NuRD-associated protein, Wdr5, a regulatory subunit of the MLL histone methyltransferase complex, which associates with both NuRD entities. Bioinformatic analyses of published target gene sets of these chromatin binding proteins are in agreement with these structural observations. In summary, this study provides an interesting insight into mechanistic aspects of NuRD function in stem cell biology. The relevance of our work has broader implications because of the ubiquitous nature of the NuRD complex. The strategy described here can be more broadly applicable to investigate the topology of the multiple complexes an individual protein can participate in.

### Keywords
Mouse, Blue native, Deacetylase complex, Lc-ms/ms, Affinty purification, Embryonic stem cells, Nucleosome remodelling, Nurd

### Affiliations
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK.
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jytoi Choudhary
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK.


