### Accession
PXD016776

### Title
Comprehensive chemical proteomics for target deconvolution of the redox active drug auranofin

### Description
Chemical proteomics encompasses novel drug target deconvolution methods in which compound modification is not required. Herein we use Thermal Proteome Profiling, Functional Identification of Target by Expression Proteomics and multiplexed redox proteomics for deconvolution of auranofin targets to aid elucidation of its mechanisms of action. Auranofin (Ridaura®) was approved for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in 1985. Because several clinical trials are currently ongoing to repurpose auranofin for cancer therapy, comprehensive characterization of its targets and effects in cancer cells is important. Together, our chemical proteomics tools confirmed thioredoxin reductase 1 (TXNRD1) as a main auranofin target, with perturbation of oxidoreductase pathways as the top mechanism of drug action. Additional indirect targets included NFKB2 and CHORDC1. Our comprehensive data can be used as a proteomic signature resource for further analyses of the effects of auranofin. Here we also assessed the orthogonality and complementarity of different chemical proteomics methods that can furnish invaluable mechanistic information and thus the approach can facilitate drug discovery efforts in general.

### Sample Protocol
TR-TPP experiment in lysate and living cells HCT116 cells were grown, trypsinized, washed and lysed by 5X freeze-thawing in liquid nitrogen. The lysates were either incubated with 500 nM of auranofin or DMSO for 2h. The lysate was then aliquoted into 10 microtubes each. The aliquots were incubated for 3 min at 37-67 °C (37, 41, 44, 47, 50, 53, 56, 59, 63 and 67) (temperatures correspond to TMT labels 126-131, respectively) in SimpliAmp Thermal Cycler (Thermo). After heating, samples were kept at room temperature for 3 min and subsequently immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The sample constituents were centrifuged at 100,000g at 4 °C for 20 min using Optima LE-80 ultracentrifuge (Beckman). Protein concentration in the soluble fraction was measured in the samples treated with lowest temperatures (37 and 41 °C from each replicate) using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo), the same volume corresponding to 50 µg of protein (in samples treated with lowest temperatures) was transferred from each sample. DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM for 1 h at room temperature. Subsequently, IAA was added to a final concentration of 50 mM in room temperature for 1 h in the dark. Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. After precipitation of proteins using methanol/chloroform, the protein pellet was dissolved in 25 µL of 8 M urea in 20 mM EPPS (pH 8.5) and was then diluted with EPPS buffer to reduce urea concentration to 4 M. Lysyl Endopeptidase (Wako) was added at a 1 : 100 w/w ratio to protein and incubated at room temperature overnight. After diluting urea to 1 M, trypsin (Promega) was added at the ratio of 1 : 100 w/w and the samples were incubated for 6 h at room temperature. TMT10 reagents were added 4x by weight to each sample, followed by incubation for 2 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by addition of 0.5% hydroxylamine. Samples were combined, acidified by TFA, cleaned using Sep-Pak (Waters) and dried using a DNA 120 SpeedVac™ concentrator (Thermo). Samples were then resuspended in 0.1% TFA and separated into 8 fractions using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo). After resuspension in 0.1% FA (Fluka), each fraction was run with a 140 min gradient. FOR TR-TPP experiment in living cells, cells were treated with 2 µM or 3 µM auranofin for 2 h inside the flasks. Cells were freeze-thawed after heating. The rest of the protocol is similar to the above. Redox proteomics experiments Cells were treated with 3 µM auranofin or corresponding amount of DMSO for 2h, similar to the TR-TPP experiment. Cell pellets were washed and lysed with 4 cell-pellet volumes of HES buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1mM EDTA, 1% SDS and protease inhibitor). Samples were sonicated on ice for 45s, 30% amplitude, 3s on/off cycles using Branson probe sonicator. Fifty µg protein was taken from each sample and incubated with the first set (labels 126, 127 and 128) of 4.4 mmol/L iodoTMTX for 2h at 37 °C with vortexing in the dark (free SH and SSH groups are labeled in this stage). Proteins were precipitated with methanol/chloroform to remove the excess iodoTMTX. Samples were dissolved in HES buffer and incubated with 1 mM DTT for 1h at 37 °C in the dark. Subsequently, 4.4 mmol/L of the second set of iodoTMTX (labels 129, 130 and 131) labels were added to the samples. Therefore, each sample was labeled with a distinct pair of labels to allow for pooling. The reaction was quenched by adding 20 mM final concentration of DTT and incubating samples for 15 minutes at 37 °C in the dark. After a second precipitation, protein pellets were dissolved in 100 μL of Tris and urea 8M. Auranofin and DMSO-treated samples were pooled separately. The digestion and cleaning was similar to the above. The samples were fractionated into 8 using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo). FITExP experiment  For FITExP experiments, HCT116, A375 and RKO cells were treated with auranofin for 48h at LC50 concentrations. Methotrexate and paclitaxel were included in these experiments to increase the specificity of detection for differentially expressed proteins. Sample preparation was done according to Saei et al. (Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, 2018. mcp.RA118.000610). Proteomics Proteins digests (1 µg) were analyzed in a randomized order by LC-MS/MS. Samples were loaded onto a 50 cm column (EASY-Spray, 75 µm internal diameter (ID), PepMap C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å pore size) connected to an Easy-nLC 1000 pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and eluted with a gradient reaching from 2% to 30% of buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2% H2O) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Except for the TPP experiment with 2 µM auranofin in living cells which were analyzed by Q Exactive Plus instrument, all other samples were analyzed using the Fusion instrument.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from mass spectrometry were searched in MaxQuant, version 1.5.6.5, for quantification of proteins. The Andromeda search engine was run against the International Protein Index (human version UP000005640_9606, 92957 entries). Methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification (expect for redox proteomics experiments where iodoTMT was chosen for quantification). No more than two missed cleavages were allowed and a 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. All the contaminants were removed in the first step and only protein with at least two peptides were considered in all cases. Data were processed by Excel and R. The curve fitting was performed using the R package already made available in Franken, H., et al. (Nature protocols, 2015. 10(10): p. 1567).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drug, Chordc1, Resource, Compound, Thioredoxin reductase, A375, Chemotherapeutic, Expression, Proteomics, Rko, Nfkb2, Hct116, Database, Mass spectrometry, Cancer, Auranofin

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics,Karolinska Institutetl, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Amir Ata Saei 

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics,Karolinska Institutetl, Stockholm, Sweden


