### Accession
PXD017585

### Title
MicroRNA-host gene lncRNA  regulates the cell cycle re-entry post cellular quiescence

### Description
Cellular quiescence is coupled with cellular development, tissue homeostasis, and cancer progression. Both quiescence and cell cycle re-entry are controlled by active and precise regulation of gene expression. However, the roles of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) during these processes remain to be elucidated. By performing a genome-wide transcriptome analyses, we identify thousands of differentially expressed lncRNAs, including ~30 of the less-characterized class of microRNA-host-gene lncRNAs (lnc-MIRHGs), during cellular quiescence and during serum-stimulation in human diploid cells. We observe that the mature MIR222HG display serum-stimulated induction due to enhanced pre-RNA splicing. Serum-stimulated binding of the pre-mRNA splicing factor SRSF1 to a micro-exon, which partially overlaps with the primary miR-222 precursor, facilitates enhanced MIR222HG splicing. In serum-stimulated cells, SRSF1 negatively regulates the Drosha/DGCR8-catalyzed cleavage of pri-miR-222, thereby increasing the cellular pool of the mature MIR222HG. Further, loss-of-function studies indicate that the mature MIR222HG facilitates the serum-stimulated cell cycle re-entry in a microRNA-independent manner. Mechanistically, MIR222HG, along with ILF3/2 complex, forms RNA:RNA duplex with DNM3OS lncRNA, thereby promoting DNM3OS stability. The current study identifies a mechanism in which the interplay between splicing versus microprocessor complex dictates the serum-induced expression of lnc-MIRHG MIR222HG for efficient cell cycle re-entry.

### Sample Protocol
Interacting proteins were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and each lane cut into 10 slices. The protein bands were then in-gel digested with trypsin (Thermo) overnight at 37 °C, as described (Shevchenko Nat Prot PMID: 17406544). The peptides were extracted following cleavage and lyophilized. The dried peptides were solubilized in 2% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid, 97.5% water for mass spectrometry analysis. They were trapped on a trapping column and separated on a 75 µm x 15 cm, 2 µm  Acclaim PepMap reverse phase column (Thermo Scientific) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min followed by online analysis by tandem mass spectrometry using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer using a linear gradient from 96% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 55% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 30 minutes. Parent full-scan mass spectra were collected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer set to acquire data at 120,000 FWHM resolution; ions were then isolated in the quadrupole mass filter, fragmented within the HCD cell (HCD normalized energy 32%, stepped ± 3%), and the product ions analyzed in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo) was used to search the data against human proteins from the UniProt database using SequestHT. The search was limited to tryptic peptides, with maximally two missed cleavages allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation set as a variable modification. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da. The Percolator node was used to score and rank peptide matches using a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular quiescence and cell cycle reentry regulate vital biological processes such as cellular development and tissue homeostasis and are controlled by precise regulation of gene expression. The roles of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) during these processes remain to be elucidated. By performing genome-wide transcriptome analyses, we identify differential expression of several hundreds of lncRNAs, including a significant number of the less-characterized class of microRNA-host-gene (<i>MIRHG</i>) lncRNAs or lnc-<i>MIRHGs</i>, during cellular quiescence and cell cycle reentry in human diploid fibroblasts. We observe that <i>MIR222HG</i> lncRNA displays serum-stimulated RNA processing due to enhanced splicing of the host nascent pri-<i>MIR222HG</i> transcript. The pre-mRNA splicing factor SRSF1 negatively regulates the microprocessor-catalyzed cleavage of pri-miR-222, thereby increasing the cellular pool of the mature <i>MIR222HG</i> Association of SRSF1 to pri-<i>MIR222HG</i>, including to a mini-exon, which partially overlaps with the primary miR-222 precursor, promotes serum-stimulated splicing over microRNA processing of <i>MIR222HG</i> Further, we observe that the increased levels of spliced <i>MIR222HG</i> in serum-stimulated cells promote the cell cycle reentry post quiescence in a microRNA-independent manner. <i>MIR222HG</i> interacts with <i>DNM3OS</i>, another lncRNA whose expression is elevated upon serum-stimulation, and promotes cell cycle reentry. The double-stranded RNA binding protein ILF3/2 complex facilitates <i>MIR222HG</i>:<i>DNM3OS</i> RNP complex assembly, thereby promoting <i>DNM3OS</i> RNA stability. Our study identifies a novel mechanism whereby competition between the splicing and microprocessor machinery modulates the serum-induced RNA processing of <i>MIR222HG</i>, which dictates cell cycle reentry.

### Keywords
Mir-222; quiescence; cell cycle; lncrna

### Affiliations
National Cancer Institute, NIH
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Lisa Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Lisa M. Jenkins
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health


