### Accession
PXD003509

### Title
Complexome profiling of membrane fraction from Nox4 overexpressing HEK293 cells

### Description
Within the family of NADPH oxidases, Nox4 is unique as it is predominantly localized in the endoplasmic reticulum, has constitutive activity and generates H2O2. We hypothesize that these features are consequences of a so far unidentified Nox4-interacting protein.  Blue native gel electrophoresis of solubilized membranes from HEK293 cells (overexpressing Nox4) separated macromolecular complexes containing Nox4. The combination of native gel electrophoresis and quantitative mass spectrometry was applied to identify proteins that co-migrate with Nox4. In addition, the data set contains information about macromolecular protein complexes in human cellular membranes that are stable to the solubilization with digitonin.

### Sample Protocol
Nox4 stable transduced HEK cells were mechanically homogenized in homogenization (HM) buffer (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM TRIS/HCl pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM Orthovanadat (OV), 10 nM Okadaic Acid (OA), protein-inhibitor mix (PIM), 40 µg/ml Phenylmethylsulfonylfluorid (PMSF)) using a pre-cooled motor-driven glas/Teflon Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer at 2000 rpm and 40 strokes. Homogenates were differentially centrifuged: for 10 min at 3000×g, the supernatant at 9000×g for 20 min and the resulting supernatant at 15000×g for 30 min. 15000×g pellets containing 200 µg protein were resuspended in 20 µl buffer A (50 mM NaCl, 50 mM imidazole pH 7, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilized with digitonin (detergent/protein ratio 6 g/g). Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 22000×g and the supernantant was supplemented with 2.5 µl 50% Glycerol and 3 µl  Coomassie dye solution (5% Serva Blue G250, 500 mM Aminocaproic acid). Samples were loaded onto 3% to 16% acrylamide gradient gels following blue native electrophoresis (BN-PAGE). Blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid). Each lane was cut into 40 equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacteamide. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in a speed vacuum and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid.  Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ LTQ/Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer with an Agilent1200 nano-HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography) at the front end. Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Zorbax 300SB-C18, Agilent Technologies) followed by separation on in-house packed 3 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) picotip emitter tip (diameter 75 µm, 10 cm long, New Objectives) using a gradient from 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 50 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for 60 min with a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Each run was finished by washout with 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and column equilibration in 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. MS data were recorded by data dependent Top10 acquisition selecting the ten most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for fragmentation using dynamic exclusion of 3 min with a resolution of 30,000 at 400Th. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap by CID at 35% collision energy. Lock mass option for m/z= m/z 445.120025 was enabled to ensure high mass accuracy during many following runs.

### Data Protocol
X calibur Raw files were analyzed by proteomics software Max Quant (1.5.2.8). The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin, missed cleavages were limited to 2. Following variable modifications were selected: at N-terminus acetylation (+42.01), oxidation of methionine (+15.99), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (-0.98) as fixed modification Carbamidomethylation (+57.02), on cysteines. Human reference proteome set from Uniprot (Download April 2015, 68506 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins. False discovery rate (FDR) was 1%. Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were used for protein profiles in native gels.

### Publication Abstract
Within the family of NADPH oxidases, NOX4 is unique as it is predominantly localized in the endoplasmic reticulum, has constitutive activity, and generates hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). We hypothesize that these features are consequences of a so far unidentified NOX4-interacting protein. Two-dimensional blue native (BN) electrophorese combined with SDS-PAGE yielded NOX4 to reside in macromolecular complexes. Interacting proteins were screened by quantitative SILAC (stable isotope labeling of amino acids in cell culture) co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) in HEK293 cells stably overexpressing NOX4. By this technique, several interacting proteins were identified with calnexin showing the most robust interaction. Calnexin also resided in NOX4-containing complexes as demonstrated by complexome profiling from BN-PAGE. The calnexin NOX4 interaction could be confirmed by reverse Co-IP and proximity ligation assay, whereas NOX1, NOX2, or NOX5 did not interact with calnexin. Calnexin deficiency as studied in mouse embryonic fibroblasts from calnexin(-/-)mice or in response to calnexin shRNA reduced cellular NOX4 protein expression and reactive oxygen species formation. Our results suggest that endogenous NOX4 forms macromolecular complexes with calnexin, which are needed for the proper maturation, processing, and function of NOX4 in the endoplasmic reticulum.

### Keywords
Blue native electrophoresis, Lc-msms, Complexome profiling, Macromolecular complexes

### Affiliations
Institut für Kardiovaskuläre Physiologie, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf Brandes
Institut für Kardiovaskuläre Physiologie, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


