### Accession
PXD006114

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of in vivo resistance to EGFR-targeted therapy in lung cancer cells

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics profiling of in vivo signaling changes in 41 therapy resistant (osimertinib or EGFR/Met bispecific antibody treament) tumors from four xenograft NSCLC models.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor homogenization by sonication in 8M urea followed by reduction with DTT and alkylation with iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested into peptides using trypsin and desalted. Lyophilized peptides were labelled with TMT6-plex or TMT10-plex. Phosphopeptides were enriched by phosphotyrosine immoprecipitation and  immobolized metal ion chromotography (IMAC) before LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14  (Thermo) and searched against human Swissprot database using Mascot version 2.4.

### Publication Abstract
Approximately 10% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients in the United States and 40% of NSCLC patients in Asia have activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations and are eligible to receive targeted anti-EGFR therapy. Despite an extension of life expectancy associated with this treatment, resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors and anti-EGFR antibodies is almost inevitable. To identify additional signaling routes that can be cotargeted to overcome resistance, we quantified tumor-specific molecular changes that govern resistant cancer cell growth and survival. Mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics was used to profile <i>in vivo</i> signaling changes in 41 therapy-resistant tumors from four xenograft NSCLC models. We identified unique and tumor-specific tyrosine phosphorylation rewiring in tumors resistant to treatment with the irreversible third-generation EGFR-inhibitor, osimertinib, or the novel dual-targeting EGFR/Met antibody, JNJ-61186372. Tumor-specific increases in tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides from EGFR family members, Shc1 and Gab1 or Src family kinase (SFK) substrates were observed, underscoring a differential ability of tumors to uniquely escape EGFR inhibition. Although most resistant tumors within each treatment group displayed a marked inhibition of EGFR as well as SFK signaling, the combination of EGFR inhibition (osimertinib) and SFK inhibition (saracatinib or dasatinib) led to further decrease in cell growth <i>in vitro</i> This result suggests that residual SFK signaling mediates therapeutic resistance and that elimination of this signal through combination therapy may delay onset of resistance. Overall, analysis of individual resistant tumors captured unique <i>in vivo</i> signaling rewiring that would have been masked by analysis of <i>in vitro</i> cell population averages. <i>Mol Cancer Ther; 16(11); 2572-85. &#xa9;2017 AACR</i>.

### Keywords
Tyrosine phosphorylation, Nsclc, Xenografts, Drug resistance, Mass spectrometry, Egfr

### Affiliations
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Kristina Bennet Emdal

### Lab Head
Dr Forest White
Massachusetts Institute of Technology


