### Accession
PXD024603

### Title
ArfGAP1 inhibits mTORC1 lysosomal localization and activation

### Description
The mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) integrates nutrients, growth factors, stress, and energy status to regulate cell growth and metabolism. Amino acids promote mTORC1 lysosomal localization and subsequent activation. However, the subcellular location or interacting proteins of mTORC1 under amino acid deficient conditions is not completely understood. Here, we identify ADP-ribosylation factor GTPase-activating protein 1 (ArfGAP1) as a crucial regulator of mTORC1. ArfGAP1 interacts with mTORC1 in the absence of amino acids and inhibits mTORC1 lysosomal localization and activation. Mechanistically, the membrane curvature sensing amphipathic lipid packing sensor (ALPS) motifs that bind to vesicle membranes, are crucial for ArfGAP1 to interact with and regulate mTORC1 activity. Importantly, ArfGAP1 represses cell growth through mTORC1 and is an independent prognostic factor for the overall survival of pancreatic cancer patients. Our study identifies ArfGAP1 as a critical regulator of mTORC1 that functions by preventing the lysosomal transport and activation of mTORC1, with potential for cancer therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry identification of Raptor interacting proteins, Flag-Raptor was immunoprecipitated with the FLAG M2 affinity gel (#A2220 from Sigma) from RagA/B KO HEK293A cells stably expressing Flag-tagged Raptor. Four 15 cm plates were collected and cells lysed in 4 ml of lysis buffer. After centrifugation, cell lysates were incubated with 50 l anti-Flag M2-Agarose slurry (which was pre-blocked with BSA and washed with lysis buffer before use) for 2 hours. After 5 times of wash with lysis buffer, immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted with 40 l of 3XFlag peptide (#F3290 from Sigma) for 1h. Elution was repeated and eluted proteins were pooled, boiled in SDS loading buffer, and resolved by SDS-PAGE on 4-15% precast gels (#4561094 from Bio-Rad). The gel was stained using Pierce Silver Stain for Mass Spectrometry Kit (#24600). Bands which showed up in Flag-tagged Raptor lane but not in the empty control were excised and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Full samples were also excised from the gel and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Samples were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide, and then digested with trypsin (MS grade) overnight at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were de-salted via solid phase extraction (SPE) prior to mass spectrometry analysis. LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC liquid chromatography system coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
To generate MS/MS spectra, MS1 spectra were first acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution 120,000). Peptide precursor ions were then isolated and fragmented using high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD). The resulting MS/MS fragmentation spectra were acquired in the ion trap. MS/MS spectral data was searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) against entries included in the Human Uniprot protein database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) was searched as a static modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) and acetylation of peptide N-termini (+42.011 Da) were searched as dynamic modifications. Precursor and product ion mass tolerances of 15 ppm and 0.6 Da were used, respectively. Peptide spectral matches were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and additionally proteins were filtered to a 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vesicle trafficking, Mtorc1, Amino acid, Lysosome, Arfgap1

### Affiliations
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
UTSW

### Submitter
Delong Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Jenna Lee Jewell
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center


