### Accession
PXD015282

### Title
DNMT1 IP-MS alalysis to identify ubiquitin-dependent interacting partners

### Description
Stable inheritance of DNA methylation is critical for maintaining the differentiated phenotypes in multicellular organisms. However, the molecular basis ensuring high fidelity of maintenance DNA methylation is largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate that two distinct modes of DNMT1 recruitment, one is DNA replication-coupled and the other is uncoupled mechanism, regulate the stable inheritance of DNA methylation. PCNA-associated factor 15 (PAF15) represents a primary target of UHRF1 and undergoes dual mono-ubiquitylation (PAF15Ub2) on chromatin. PAF15Ub2 specifically interacts with DNMT1 and controls the recruitment of DNMT1 in a DNA replication-coupled manner. Thus, loss of PAF15Ub2 results in impaired DNA methylation at sites replicating during early S phase. In contrast, outside of S phase or when PAF15 ubiquitylation is perturbed, UHRF1 ubiquitylates histone H3 to promote DNMT1 recruitment. Together, we identify replication-coupled and uncoupled mechanisms of maintenance DNA methylation, both of which collaboratively ensure the stable DNA methylation.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, Xenopus egg extracts were supplemented with energy regeneration mix (2 mM ATP, 20 mM phosphocreatine, and 5 g/ml creatine kinase). For UbVS reactions, egg extracts were incubated with 20 M UbVS (Boston Biochem, Cambridge, MA, USA) for 30 min at 22˚C. Demembranated sperm nuclei (3,000-4,000 sperm/l in the final reaction) were added to egg extracts and incubated with or without 58 M ubiquitin (Boston Biochem) at 22˚C. For chromatin spin-downs from the egg extracts, sperm nuclei were incubated in 15-25 l of the extract preparation. The extracts were diluted with 200 l of ice-cold chromatin purification buffer (CPB; 50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH7.7) containing 2% sucrose, 0.1% NP-40, and 2 mM N-ethylenemaleimide (NEM) and kept on ice for 5 min. Diluted extracts were layered over 1.5 ml of a 30% sucrose cushion in CPB and centrifuged at 15,000×g for 10 min at 4˚C using a swing–bucket rotor. The chromatin pellet was resuspended and digested in 100 l digestion buffer (10 mM HEPES-KOH, 50 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM CaCl2, 0.1% Triton X-100, pH 7.5 and 10 M PR-619) containing 4 U/ml micrococcal nuclease (MNase) at 22˚C for 20 min. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 10 mM EDTA, and the mixture was centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 10 min. For the pull-down experiment, 5 g purified recombinant xDNMT1 or its mutant were coupled with 20 l of anti-FLAG M2 affinity resin at 4˚C for one hour. The beads were collected and washed with CPB buffer containing 2% sucrose and then incubated with MNase-digested chromatin. After incubation at 4˚C for one hour, beads were washed with CPB buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100.  Immunoprecipitated proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Bio-Safe Coomassie (Bio-Rad). Gels were washed in Milli-Q water, and excised. The gel pieces were washed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBC)/30% acetonitrile (ACN) for >2 hrs, and subsequently with 50 mM AMBC/50% ACN for >1 hr. The gels were then dehydrated in 100% ACN for 15 min. Trypsin digestion was performed by incubation at 37°C for 12–15 hrs with 20 ng/L modified sequence- grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM AMBC, 5% ACN, pH 8.0. After digestion, the peptides were extracted four times with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/70% ACN. Extracted peptides were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation. For the LC-MS/MS analyses, a Nanoflow UHPLC, Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), was connected online to a quadrupole-equipped Orbitrap MS instrument (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on C18 analytical columns (Reprosil-Pur 3 µm, 75 m id × 12 cm packed tip column, Nikyo Technos Co., Ltd.) in a 90-min three-step gradient (0–40% Solvent B for 72 min, 40–100% for 12 min, and 100% for 6 min) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q Exactive was operated using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent MS/MS mode, and the top 10 most intense ions with a charge state of +2 to +5 were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 28. Resolution and automatic gain control (AGC) targets were set to 70,000 and 3E6, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using a Sequest HT search program in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Maximum missed cleavage sites of trypsin was set to three. Acetylation (Protein N-term and Lys), oxidation (Met), GlyGly modification (Lys), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr) and pyroglutamate conversion (N-term Gln) were selected as variable modifications. Peptide identification was filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) <0.01. Non-label protein quantification was performed using a Precursor Ions Quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Stable inheritance of DNA methylation is critical for maintaining differentiated phenotypes in multicellular organisms. We have recently identified dual mono-ubiquitylation of histone H3 (H3Ub2) by UHRF1 as an essential mechanism to recruit DNMT1 to chromatin. Here, we show that PCNA-associated factor 15 (PAF15) undergoes UHRF1-dependent dual mono-ubiquitylation (PAF15Ub2) on chromatin in a DNA replication-coupled manner. This event will, in turn, recruit DNMT1. During early S-phase, UHRF1 preferentially ubiquitylates PAF15, whereas H3Ub2 predominates during late S-phase. H3Ub2 is enhanced under PAF15 compromised conditions, suggesting that H3Ub2 serves as a backup for PAF15Ub2. In mouse ES cells, loss of PAF15Ub2 results in DNA hypomethylation at early replicating domains. Together, our results suggest that there are two distinct mechanisms underlying replication timing-dependent recruitment of DNMT1 through PAF15Ub2 and H3Ub2, both of which are prerequisite for high fidelity DNA methylation inheritance.

### Keywords
Dnmt1 ubiquitin

### Affiliations
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science
Division of Cancer Cell Biology, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan

### Submitter
Akinori Endo

### Lab Head
Dr Atsuya Nishiyama
Division of Cancer Cell Biology, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan


