### Accession
PXD040398

### Title
Towards unravelling biological mechanisms behind radiation-induced oral mucositis via mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Description
Objective: Head and neck cancer (HNC) accounts for almost 850,000 new cases per year. Radiotherapy (RT) is used to treat the majority of these patients. A common side-effect of RT-treatment is onset of oral mucositis: a painful irritation and swelling in mouth, which decreases the quality of life and is the major dose-limiting factor in RT. To understand the origin of oral mucositis, the biological mechanisms post-ionizing radiation (IR) need to be understood. This knowledge can be used to develop new treatment targets for oral mucositis and markers for the early identification of “at risk” patients. Results: Mass spectrometry-based proteomics identified 5879 proteins in primary keratinocytes and 4597 proteins in OKF6 cells. Amongst them, 212 proteins in primary keratinocytes and 169 proteins in OKF6 cells were significantly differentially abundant 96 h after 6 Gy irradiation compared to sham-irradiated controls. Protein-protein in silico enrichment predicted interferon (IFN) response and DNA strand elongation pathways as mostly affected pathways in both cell systems. Both pathways were confirmed in OKF6 cells. Immunoblot validations showed a decrease in minichromosome maintenance (MCM) complex proteins 2-7 and an increase in IFN associated proteins STAT1 and ISG15. In line with affected IFN signalling, mRNA levels of IFNβ and interleukin 6 (IL-6) increased significantly following irradiation and also levels of secreted IL-1β IL-6, IP-10, and ISG15 were elevated.  Conclusion: This study has investigated biological mechanisms in keratinocytes post-in vitro ionizing radiation. A common radiation signature in keratinocytes was identified. A role of IFN response in keratinocytes along with increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and proteins could hint towards a possible mechanism for oral mucositis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Radioimmunoprecipitation buffer (RIPA, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Illinois, USA) containing 25 mM Tris.HCl (pH 7.6), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% SDS was combined with 1X Halt™ Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) to lyse the cells. The frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice and incubated with lysis buffer (5 min, 95 °C). The samples were then subjected to five sonication cycles (30 sec ON/30 sec off, 4 °C) on a Bioruptor® Pico sonication device (Diagenode, Liege, Belgium) followed by centrifugation (10 min, 22000 g, 4 °C) (26) The supernatant containing protein lysate was then transferred to new Eppendorf Protein LoBind® tubes. Protein concentration was determined using a colorimetric assay (RC DC™, BioRad, California, USA), as per manufacturers recommendation, in duplicates using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as an internal standard.  Mass spectrometry Ten µg of OKF-6 cell lysate and 5 µg of primary keratinocytes lysate were used for mass spectrometry measurements. From each sample, total proteins were proteolyzed with LysC (Wako Chemicals, Neuss, Germany) and trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany), using a modified filter-aided sample preparation protocol(27, 28). Eluted peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in the data-dependent mode in fully randomized measurement order. Approximately 0.5 µg peptides per sample were automatically loaded to the online coupled ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A nano trap column was used (300-µm ID X 5mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) before separation by reversed phase chromatography (Acquity UHPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column 75 µm ID X 250 mm, 1.8 µm; Waters, Eschborn, Germany) at 40 °C. Peptides were eluted from the column at 250 nL/min using increasing acetonitrile concentration (in 0.1% formic acid) from 3% to 41% over a linear 95-min gradient. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60 000 with an AGC target of 3 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms from 300 to 1500 m/z. From the MS scan, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation via HCD with a normalized collision energy of 27, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15 000 with a AGC target of 105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Unassigned charges, charges of +1, and above +8 were excluded from precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
Data processing – protein identification Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.4.1.15) was used for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine) against SwissProt human database (release 2020_02, 20432 sequences), considering full tryptic specificity, allowing for up to one missed tryptic cleavage site, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a static modification. Dynamic modifications included deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met; and a combination of Met loss with acetylation on protein N-terminus. Percolator (29) was used for validating peptide spectrum matches and peptides, accepting only the top-scoring hit for each spectrum, and satisfying the cutoff values for FDR <1%, and posterior error probability <0.01. The final list of proteins complied with the strict parsimony principle. Data processing – label-free quantification The quantification of proteins, after precursor recalibration, was based on abundance values (intensity) for unique peptides. Abundance values were normalized to the total peptide amount to account for sample load errors. The protein abundances were calculated summing the abundance values for top 3 admissible peptides. The final protein ratio was calculated using median abundance values of total replicate analyses each (and values above 100-fold as well as below 0.01-fold were contained into these bins, respectively). The statistical significance of the ratio change was ascertained employing the approach described before (30), which is based on the presumption that we look for expression changes for proteins that are just a few in comparison to the number of total proteins being quantified. The quantification variability of the non-changing "background" proteins can be used to infer which proteins change their expression in a statistically significant manner. Proteins identified (<1% FDR) with at least two unique peptides, in at least 50 % of the samples, and with a fold change of ± 1.5 (6 Gy/0 Gy) along with an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered as significantly deregulated and used for bioinformatics analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stat phosphorylation, Biomarker, Interferon response, Mcm complex, Keratinocytes, Radiotherapy, Mass spectrometry-based proteomics

### Affiliations
Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz zentrum Muenchen
Research Unit Protein Science, Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Stefanie Hauck

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Hauck
Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz zentrum Muenchen


