### Accession
PXD032812

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Methylglyoxal Modifications Reveals Susceptibility of Glycolytic Enzymes to Dicarbonyl Stress

### Description
Methylglyoxal (MGO) is a highly reactive cellular metabolite that glycates lysine and arginine residues to form post-translational modifications known as advanced glycation end products. Because of their low abundance and low stoichiometry, few studies have reported their occurrence and site-specific locations in proteins. Proteomic analysis of WIL2-NS B lymphoblastoid cells in the absence and presence of exogenous MGO was conducted to investigate the extent of MGO modi-fications. We found over 500 MGO modified proteins, revealing an over-representation of these modifications on many glycolytic enzymes, as well as ribosomal and spliceosome proteins. Moreover, MGO modifications were observed on the active site residues of glycolytic enzymes that could alter their activity. We similarly observed modification of glycolytic enzymes across several epithelial cell lines and peripheral blood lymphocytes, with modification of fructose bisphosphate aldolase being observed in all samples. These results indicate that glycolytic proteins could be particularly prone to the formation of MGO adducts.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, 100 µg of protein was reduced and alkylated with 10 mM dithiothreitol and 15 mM chloroacetamide, respectively. Sample was diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicar-bonate to reduce urea concentration to 0.8 M. Trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega, V5280, 2 µg) was added and samples were incubated for 8 h at 37 °C at 500 rpm. Following incuba-tion, 10.2 µL of formic acid  was added to terminate the reaction and acidify the sample. For ProAla digestion, 20 µg of protein was reduced and alkylated with 10 mM dithiothreitol and 15 mM chloroacetamide, respectively. Sample was diluted with 33 mM HCl to reduce the urea concentration to 0.3 M and pH to ~1.5. ProAlanase enzyme (Promega, VA2161, 0.2 µg) was added, and samples were incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. All subsequent steps were the same for trypsin and ProAla digests. Peptides were purified using in-house packed C18 stage tips  [40]. Stage tips were conditioned with 40 µL of acetonitrile and equilibrated with 80 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the stage tip and washed with 40 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Samples were then eluted with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Eluates were dried using a Speed-Vac and reconstituted in 20 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific). Data were processed with the Sequest HT search engine against a concatenated database con-taining the 74,811 forward entries from the UniProt human database (1 December 2019) and their respective decoy counterparts. Trypsin or ProAlanase (cleaves C-terminal to pro-line and alanine residues) was specified as the enzyme and a maximum of five miscleav-ages was allowed. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, re-spectively. Arginine and lysine carboxyethylation (+72.021129), arginine methylglyox-al-hydroimidazolone (+54.010565), methionine oxidation (+15.994915) , N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565), N-terminal methionine loss (−131.040485), N-terminal methio-nine loss and acetylation (−89.02992) were set as dynamic modifications, with cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021464) designated a static modification. Protein and peptide identification  false discovery rates were both set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The accurate segregation of sister chromatids is complex, and errors that arise throughout this process can drive chromosomal instability and tumorigenesis. We recently showed that methylglyoxal (MGO), a glycolytic by-product, can cause chromosome missegregation events in lymphocytes. However, the underlying mechanisms of this were not explored. Therefore, in this study, we utilised shotgun proteomics to identify MGO-modified proteins, and label-free quantitation to measure changes in protein abundance following exposure to MGO. We identified numerous mitotic proteins that were modified by MGO, including those involved in the separation and cohesion of sister chromatids. Furthermore, the protein abundance of Securin, an inhibitor of sister chromatid separation, was increased following treatment with MGO. Cytological examination of chromosome spreads showed MGO prevented sister chromatid separation, which was associated with the formation of complex nuclear anomalies. Therefore, results from this study suggest MGO may drive chromosomal instability by preventing sister chromatid separation.

### Keywords
Methylglyoxal, Post-translational modifications, Lc-ms/ms, Glycation

### Affiliations
Clinical and Health Sciences, Health and Biomedical Innovation , University of South Australia, Adelaide 5000, Australia
Univeristy of South Australia

### Submitter
Leigh Donnellan

### Lab Head
Dr Permal Deo
Clinical and Health Sciences, Health and Biomedical Innovation , University of South Australia, Adelaide 5000, Australia


