### Accession
PXD007234

### Title
Menstrual fluid factors facilitate tissue repair: Identification and functional action in endometrial and skin repair

### Description
Repair after damage is essential for tissue homeostasis. Post-menstrual repair of the uterine endometrium is a unique cyclical manifestation of rapid, scar-free, tissue repair taking ~3-5 days. Skin repair post-wounding is slower (~2 weeks) and, in the case of chronic wounds, takes months/years to restore integrity. Herein, the unique ‘rapid-repair’ endometrial environment is translated to the ‘slower-repair’ skin environment. Menstrual fluid (MF), the milieu of post-menstrual endometrial repair, facilitates healing of endometrial and keratinocyte ‘wounds’ in vitro, promoting cellular adhesion and migration, stimulates keratinocyte migration in an ex vivo human skin-reconstruct model and promotes re-epithelialization in an in vivo porcine wound model. Proteomic analysis of MF identified a large number of proteins; several proteins were selected for further investigation, with the endometrium demonstrated as the source of these factors. Functionally, they promote repair of endometrial and keratinocyte wounds by promoting migration, differing significantly from currently available wound-repair treatments, which mainly promote proliferation. Development of these and other menstrual fluid factors into a ‘migration-inducing’ treatment paradigm will provide novel therapies for tissue repair.

### Sample Protocol
Unbiased proteomics: Particulate matter was removed from MF and PB (n=7 matched samples) by centrifugation at 14000rpm for 25 minutes. Samples were applied to a MARS-human 14 column (Agilent Technologies) to remove high abundance proteins (albumin, IgG, anti-trypsin, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin, fibrinogen, alpha2-macroglobulin, alpha1 acid-glycoprotein, IgM, apolipoprotein AI, apolipoprotein AII, complement C3, transthyretin)19. Samples were concentrated using a centrifugal speed-vacuum and then subjected to protein digestion using a FASP (filter aided sample preparation) column (Expedeon Inc, CA, USA).  Enrichment of low abundance proteins:  A combinatorial peptide ligand library (CPLL, ProteoMiner, BioRad) technology was used to enrich low abundance proteins using a large diverse library of combinatorial peptide ligands conjugated to beads to reduce the dynamic range of proteins concentrations, but maintaining representatives of all proteins within the original sample. CPLL was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, tubes containing CPLL resin were rehydrated and excess storage buffer removed using wash buffer. 1mg of MF or matched PB (each n=5) was added to each column and rotated end-to-end for 2 hours at room temperature before centrifugation at 1000rpm for 1 minute: flow-through containing non-captured proteins was discarded. The column was washed 3 times with wash buffer and once with de-ionized water. Captured proteins were eluted using the provided elution reagent, which was added to the columns, vortexed for 5 seconds then incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature with intermittent vortexing. Tubes were centrifuged at 1000rpm for 1 minute and flow-through harvested. Elution was repeated three times and eluates pooled.  Affinity capture for heparin and fibronectin binding proteins: 100µl each of gelatin-agarose (fibronectin binding, Sigma-Aldrich) or heparin-agarose (Sigma-Aldrich) slurry was added to spin columns. Storage buffer was removed by centrifugation at 1000rpm for 1 minute and the agarose washed 3 times with 0.01M Tris-HCl. 50µl of MF or matched PB (each n=6, equal protein concentration) was mixed with 100µl binding buffer (0.01M Tris-HCl), added to the columns and rotated end-to-end for 90 minutes. Columns were centrifuged at 1000rpm for 1 minute to remove unbound proteins. Proteins bound to heparin were eluted with 0.01M Tris-HCl, 2M NaCl three times and eluates pooled. Proteins bound to fibronectin were eluted with 8M Urea.  Peptide concentrations after digest were measured using a NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo-Fisher) at 205 nm, and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a 0.1% final concentration. Solvent was removed in a CentriVap concentrator (Labconco) and peptides were resuspended in MilliQ water containing 3% acetonitrile (CAN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 100 ng/l. 5 µl of each sample were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a nanoAcquity system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures were loaded on a 20mm trap column with 180m inner diameter (nanoAcquity UPLC 2G-V/MTrap 5m Symmetry C18) at 1% buffer B, and separated by reverse-phase chromatography using a 150 mm column with 75m inner diameter (nanoAcquity UPLC 1.7m BEH130 C18) on a 60 minutes linear gradient from 1% to 50% buffer B (A: Milli-Q water, 3% ACN, 0.1% FA; B: Milli-Q water, 80% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a 500nl/min constant flow rate. The Q-Exactive was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the ten most abundant peaks. The instrument was controlled using Exactive series version 2.1 build 1502 and Xcalibur 3.0. Full-scans (m/z 350–1,850) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated with a target value of 10000 ions and an isolation width of 3 m/z and fragmented using HCD with normalized collision energy of 27 and stepped collision energy of 15%. Maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50ms for full MS scan and 80ms for MS/MS. Underfill ratio was set to 2% and dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analysed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.4.1.2)78, The database search was performed using the Ludwig NR non-redundant protein database (version Q113, http://www.wehi.edu.au/faculty/advanced_research_technologies/proteomics/wehi_systems_biology_mascot_server/) with strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 4 missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while N-acetylation of proteins N-termini, oxidation of methionine and pyroglutamate at peptides N-termini Glu and Gln were set as variable modifications. During the MaxQuant main search, precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ions were allowed a mass deviation of 20 ppm. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. The match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Further analysis was performed using a custom pipeline developed in Pipeline Pilot (Biovia), which takes as input the MaxQuant output files allPeptides.txt, peptides.txt and evidence.txt. A feature was defined as the combination of peptide sequence, charge and modification. Features not found in at least half the number of replicates in each group were removed. Proteins identified from hits to the reverse database and proteins with only one unique peptide were also removed. To correct for injection volume variability, feature intensities were normalized by converting to base 10 logarithms and then multiplying each value by the ratio of maximum median intensity of all replicates over median replicate intensity.  The probability of differential expression of each feature between groups was calculated using the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test.  Features assigned to the same protein differ in the range of intensity due to their chemico-physical properties and charge state. To further correct for these differences, each intensity value was multiplied by the ratio of the maximum of the median intensities of all features for a protein over the median intensity of the feature. The probability of differential expression between groups was calculated using the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test excluding any non-unique sequences and any features with modifications other than oxidation and carbamidomethylation.

### Publication Abstract
Repair after damage is essential for tissue homeostasis. Postmenstrual endometrial repair is a cyclical manifestation of rapid, scar-free, tissue repair taking &#x223c;3-5 d. Skin repair after wounding is slower (&#x223c;2 wk). In the case of chronic wounds, it takes months to years to restore integrity. Herein, the unique "rapid-repair" endometrial environment is translated to the "slower repair" skin environment. Menstrual fluid (MF), the milieu of postmenstrual endometrial repair, facilitates healing of endometrial and keratinocyte "wounds" in vitro, promoting cellular adhesion and migration, stimulates keratinocyte migration in an ex vivo human skin reconstruct model, and promotes re-epithelialization in an in vivo porcine wound model. Proteomic analysis of MF identified a large number of proteins: migration inhibitory factor, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin, follistatin like-1, chemokine ligand-20, and secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor were selected for further investigation. Functionally, they promote repair of endometrial and keratinocyte wounds by promoting migration. Translation of these and other MF factors into a migration-inducing treatment paradigm could provide novel treatments for tissue repair.-Evans, J., Infusini, G., McGovern, J., Cuttle, L., Webb, A., Nebl, T., Milla, L., Kimble, R., Kempf, M., Andrews, C. J., Leavesley, D., Salamonsen, L. A. Menstrual fluid factors facilitate tissue repair: identification and functional action in endometrial and skin repair.

### Keywords
Human, Woulnd healing factors

### Affiliations
WEHI
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of medical research

### Submitter
Giuseppe Infusini

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Ian Webb
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of medical research


