### Accession
PXD013518

### Title
Transcriptome and proteome profiles of the diazotroph Nitrospirillum amazonense strain CBAmC in response to the sugarcane apoplast fluid

### Description
The diazotrophic CBAmC strain of Nitrospirillum amazonense has been reported to promote growth of sugarcane variety RB867515 when inoculated under field conditions in a consortium with four other nitrogen-fixing bacteria. The present work had the objective of accessing the influence of the sugarcane apoplast fluid from variety RB867515 on the global transcriptomic and proteomic profiles of CBAmC strain cultured in vitro. The comparative analysis between the transcriptome and proteome profiles showed strong consistency between the results of the two approaches. Data analysis revealed that expression levels of transcripts and proteins related to cell motility and signal transduction, among other functions, were strongly downregulated in the presence of the apoplast fluid. In contrast, transcripts and proteins were upregulated for functional categories including chaperones, iron homeostasis and multidrug efflux transporters. In conclusion, the results showed that the metabolic state of N. amazonense during cultivation in the presence of the apoplast fluid is directed to functions capable of supporting adaptation to the complex environment of the sugarcane apoplast.

### Sample Protocol
Biological material The commercial sugarcane variety RB867515 (responsive to inoculation in terms of productivity) (Reis et al. 2009) was planted in the experimental field of Embrapa Agrobiologia (Seropédica, Brazil, 22º44'52.5 ''S 43º40'15.2''W).  The sugarcane apoplast fluid was prepared essentially as described (Dong et al. 1994). The apoplast fluid that leaked from the stem pieces to the tube bottom, surrounding the spacer, was collected, sterilized through a 0.22-μm porosity filter, and stored at -70 °C. The CBAmC strain of N. amazonense (Schwab et al. 2018) was routinely grown at 30 °C, 180 rpm, for 16 h, in liquid LGI medium (Magalhães et al. 1983) supplemented with 5 g/L sucrose as a carbon source and 10 mM sodium glutamate as the sole source of nitrogen.  Proteomic procedures Sample processing The cell pellet stored at -20 °C was resuspended and washed in 1 mL of resuspension solution (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM KCl, pH 8.0). This washing consisted of centrifuging for 10 min, at 12,000 x g, 4 °C, discarding the supernatant, and resuspending again in 2 mL of resuspension solution. The centrifugation step was repeated in order to obtain the cell pellet. To the cell pellet 0.5 mL of solubilization solution (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% Triton X-100, 1 mM phenylethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)) were added. The suspension was shaken vigorously for 30 seconds and then kept for 30 min at room temperature under stirring. Cell lysis and release of protein content were accomplished through sonication using a model 500 device (Fisher Scientific) in 10 cycles of a 20-second pulse at 10% amplitude followed by a 1-minute rest. Then, the system was centrifuged for 90 min at 12,000 x g, 4 °C and the supernatant was transferred into a new tube. Protein concentration was measured using the 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare), and bovine serum albumin (BSA, GE Healthcare) as standard. The samples were stored at -20 °C until further processing.  Trypsin digestion For trypsin digestion, 100 μg of proteins from each sample were precipitated using the methanol / chloroform methodology (Nanjo et al. 2012), and then resolubilized in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea. The resulting solution was desalted using an Amicon Ultra-0.5 kDa centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore, Germany). Filters were filled to maximum capacity and centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 10 min at 20 °C. Two filter washes were performed with  8 M urea and then twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5, using the same centrifugation setup as above. After the last washing, approximately 50 μL per sample remained. Then, these samples were submitted to trypsin digestion essentially as previously described (Calderan-Rodrigues et al. 2014).  Mass spectrometry   A NanoACQUITY UPCL® connected to a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK) was used for ESI-LC-MS/MS analysis of peptides. The chromatography step was performed by injecting 1 μL of the digested sample (500 ng/μL). To ensure standardized molar values, normalization among samples was based on stoichiometric measurements of the total ion count of the races of the calibration runs prior to the analyses. For the chromatographic step, the samples were loaded onto the nanoAcquity UPLC 5 μm C18 (180 μm × 20 mm) column at 5 μL/min for 3 min, and then to the 1.8 μm nanoAcquity HSS T3 analytical reverse phase column (75 μm × 150 mm) at 400 nL/min, with a column temperature of 45 °C. For peptide elution, a binary gradient was used with mobile phase, consisting of: initial 93% of A and 7% of B; change to 60% of A and 40% of B until 91.12 min; change to 0.1% of A and 99.9% of B until 92.72 min, maintaining these proportions until 106 min; change to 93% of A and 7% of B until 106.1 min, maintaining these proportions until 120 min (solvent A: 0,1% formic acid; solvent B: 0,1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometry runs were performed in positive and resolution mode (V mode), 35,000 FWHM, with ionic mobility and in independent data acquisition mode (DIA), using Ion Mobility Spectrometry (IMS) velocity of 600 m/s, and helium and IMS gas flow of 180 and 90 mL/min, respectively; the transfer collision energy increased from 19 to 55 V in the high energy mode; cone and capillary voltages were of 30 and 2750 V, respectively; and the source temperature was at 70 °C. In Time-Of-Flight (TOF) parameters, the scanning time was adjusted to 0.5 s in continuous mode with a mass range of 50 to 2000 Da. The human (Glu1)-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich) at 100 fmol/μL was used as an external calibrator and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s. The acquisition of mass spectra was performed using MassLynx software v4.0.

### Data Protocol
Spectra processing and database searches were performed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics Software V.2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). The following parameters were used for the analysis: Apex3D of 150 counts for low energy threshold, 50 counts for high energy threshold, and 750 counts for intensity threshold; a minimal fragment per peptide equal to two, a minimum fragment per protein equal to five, a minimum peptide per protein equal to two, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY), a standard false discovery rate (FDR) value at a maximum of 1%, a peptide score greater than four, and a maximum mass error of 10 ppm. The protein data of CBAmC deposited in the NCBI database was used as reference. The relative free quantitative analyses of labels were performed based on the ratio of protein ion counts between contrasting samples. After data processing and to ensure the quality of results, only unique proteins in three of three runs were accepted. In addition, differentially abundant proteins were selected based on a 1.5-fold-change, and Student's T-test p-value <0.05. Functional annotation was performed using Blast2Go (Conesa et al. 2005). A total of 1153 proteins were identified with an average of 11 peptides per protein, and were considered valid only when found in all replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcripts; proteins; bacteria-plant interaction; saccharum spp.

### Affiliations
Embrapa
Embrapa Agrobiologia, Seropédica-RJ, Brazil.

### Submitter
Stefan Schwab

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Schwab
Embrapa Agrobiologia, Seropédica-RJ, Brazil.


