### Accession
PXD024721

### Title
Tetrahydrocurcumin ameliorates Alzheimer's pathological phenotypes by inhibition of microglial cell cycle arrest and apoptosis via Ras/ERK signaling

### Description
1,7-bis(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)heptane-3,5-dione (tetrahydrocurcumin, THC) is a major bioactive metabolite of curcumin (the principal active ingredient of Curcuma longa L.), and overcomes the low bioavailability of curcumin, demonstrating the potential anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and neuroprotective properties, etc, some of which were considered to be even superior to curcumin. In the present study, the protective properties of THC in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice, and the effects of THC against Aβ-induced toxicity in BV-2 cells were explored. The data in vitro showed that Aβ induced decreased cell viability, and cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in BV-2 cells, which could be ameliorated by THC. In vivo, THC administration was able to rescue learning and memory, and reduce Aβ burden in the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice. By comprehensive proteomic analysis of the hippocampus of mice, a total of 157 differentially expressed proteins were identified in APP/PS1 mice treated with THC (comparing with APP/PS1 mice), which were enriched in “T cell activation”, “lymphocyte proliferation” and “protein oligomerization”, etc. The results of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis suggested that the effects of THC on the cell cycle and apoptosis were mostly related to the “Ras signaling pathway” and “JAK−STAT signaling pathway”, etc. Using Western blot and ELISA, the down-regulation of Gab2 and K-Ras, and the up-regulation of caspase-3, TGF-β1 and TNF-ɑ were found in APP/PS1 mice. THC attenuated the abnormal expression of Gab2, K-Ras, caspase-3 and TNF-ɑ, and up-regulated Bag1 and TGF-β1 expression in APP/PS1 mice. In BV-2 cells, Aβ induced the down-regulation of Gab2, K-Ras and TGF-β1, and the overexpression of caspase-3, PARP1, cleaved-PARP1 and TNF-ɑ, which were markedly restored by THC. Moreover, THC up-regulated Bag1 expression in BV-2 cells treated with Aβ. The decreased transcriptional expression levels of Ccnd2 and Cdkn1a was also observed in Aβ-treated BV-2 cells. THC treatment alleviated down-regulation of Ccnd2, but did not affect the abnormal transcriptional expression of Cdkn1a caused by Aβ in BV-2 cells. For the first time, we identified that the action of THC in preventing AD was associated with inhibition of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis of microglia via the Ras/ERK signaling pathway, shedding new light on the role of THC in alleviating the progression of AD.

### Sample Protocol
All chemicals and solvents (HPLC grade) were obtained from Sigma Aldrich (Gillingham, UK) unless otherwise stated. The hippocampi of the mouse brains were dissected from mice. Three samples for each group (n=3 pools each, 3 mouse hippocampi per pool) were analyzed in the present study. Brain tissue was ground in liquid nitrogen into cell powder. Then, lysis buffer (4×the volumes of brain tissue, 8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) were added to the cell powder which was then sonicated three times on ice. Cell debris was removed after centrifugation at 12000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was collected, and protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Multi Sciences Biotech, 70-PQ0012). The protein solution was then reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at RT in the dark, then diluted with 100 mM TEAB (so urea concentration <2M). Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for initial digestion overnight at 37 °C then a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for an additional 4 h digestion. Trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) coupled with quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (timsTOFPro) represents a successor to the impact II instrument, featuring an additional ion mobility analyzer. In addition to the incorporation of TIMS, the instrument design goals included similar or better mass resolution (>35,000) and improved robustness through a change in ion path. Briefly, tryptic peptides dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in ddH2O) were separated using NanoEluteUHPLC system. A gradient with increasing solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) concentration from 6 to 22% over 70 min, from 22 to 32% over 14 min, from 32 to 80% over 3 min, was then maintained at 80% for the final 3 min. All processes were performed at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) coupled online to the UPLC, setting with an electrospray voltage of 1.4 kV. A full m/z scan range of 100 to 1700 was conducted. Parallel cumulative serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode was used for data acquisition. After first-stage MS acquisition, a secondary spectrogram with the charge of the parent ion over the range 0-5 was collected in PASEF mode 10 times. A dynamic MS/MS elimination time of 24 seconds was selected.

### Data Protocol
The resultant MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). The MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt Mouse proteome database (17,022 total sequences). Reverse decoy database was applied to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) due to random matching, in addition to a common contamination library to eliminate the data from contaminating proteins. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 40 ppm for the first search and 40 ppm in the main search, with a mass tolerance for fragment ions set at 0.04 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, with methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and deamidation as variable modifications. The FDR for protein identification and peptide-spectral match (PSM) identification was set at 1%. For the analysis of differentially expressed proteins, mass spectrometry was used to measure each protein's corresponding signal intensity to obtain its label free quantitation (LFQ) value in each sample using a label-free quantitative calculation. Briefly, depending on the protein's intensity, the relative quantity of each protein in each sample was obtained and corrected with median normalization. The ratio of the quantitative mean values of the comparison group was used to ultimately determine whether a protein was differentially expressed. The relative quantity of each sample was as recorded as its log2 value, and the corresponding p-values calculated using a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test. Relative quantitative values>1.2/1 or <1/1.2 were considered significantly up-regulated or down-regulated at p-values<0.05. Gene ontology (GO) annotation of the proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Where identified proteins had not been annotated in the UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan tool (v.5.14-53.0) was used to annotate the protein’s GO function based on a protein sequence alignment method. Proteins were classified by GO annotation using three categories: “biological process”, “cellular component”, and “molecular function”. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed proteins against all identified proteins. GO enrichment having a corrected p-value<0.05 was considered as significant. Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways. KAAS (v.2.0) was used to identify enriched pathways using a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to evaluate enrichment of the differentially expressed proteins against all identified proteins, after which annotation results were mapped onto the KEGG pathway database using KEGG Mapper (v.2.5). Pathways with a corrected p-value< 0.05 were considered as significant. Additional hierarchical clustering was performed based on differentially expressed protein functional classification. All obtained categories, and their p-values, were first collated after enrichment, and then those categories in which at least one cluster had a p-value<0.05, were selected. This filtered p-value matrix was transformed using the function x = −log10 (P-value). Finally, the x-values were z-transformed for each functional category. The z-scores were then clustered using one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Membership of clusters was visualized using a heat map created using the R Package pheatmap (v.2.0.3).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tetrahydrocurcumin; microglia; cell cycle; cell apoptosis; ras/erk signaling pathway; alzheimer’s disease

### Affiliations
Sichuan University; Chengdu University
Sichuan University;Chengdu university

### Submitter
Yu Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Xiao
Sichuan University; Chengdu University


