### Accession
PXD041505

### Title
beta 1 integrin signaling governs necroptosis via the chromatin remodeling factor CHD4

### Description
Fibrosis, characterized by sustained activation of myofibroblasts and excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, is known to be associated with chronic inflammation. RIPK3, a key kinase mediating TNF-driven necroptosis signaling, is upregulated in fibrosis and contributes to the TNF-mediated inflammation. In bile duct ligation-induced liver fibrosis, we found that myofibroblasts are the major cell type expressing RIPK3. Genetic ablation of beta1 integrins, the major profibrotic ECM receptors in fibroblasts, not only abolished ECM fibrillogenesis but also blunted RIPK3 expression via an epigenetic mechanism mediated by the chromatin remodeling factor CHD4. While the function of CHD4 has been conventionally linked to NuRD and ChAHP complexes, we found that CHD4 potently repressed a set of genes, including Ripk3, with high locus specificity but independent of either the NuRD or ChAHP complex. Thus, our data uncover that beta1 integrin intrinsically links fibrotic signaling to RIPK3-driven inflammation via a novel mode of action of CHD4.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  Lysed cell pellets (in 300µL PreOmics Lyse buffer) were incubation at 95 °C for 2 min and subsequently sonicated using a Bioruptor Plus sonication system (Diogenode) for 10x30sec at high intensity. Samples were incubated once more at 95 °C for 2 min and sonicated. Then, samples were diluted 1:1 with water and digested for 1.5hrs at 37 °C with 1 µg of LysC and overnight at 37 °C with 1 µg trypsin (Promega). The peptide mixture was acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (Merck) to a final concentration of 1%, followed by desalting of the peptides via SCX StageTips. Samples were vacuum dried and re-suspended in 6 µl of buffer A (0.1% formic acid). LC-MS/MS data acquisition The peptides (3 µl) were loaded onto a 30-cm column (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) via the autosampler of the Thermo Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 60 °C. Eluting peptides were directly sprayed onto the mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated with a flow rate of 250 nL/min by a gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) from 2% to 30%B over 120 minutes followed an increase to 60%B over 10 minutes then to 95%B over the next 5 minutes and finally the percentage of buffer B was maintained at 95%B for another 5 minutes.   The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with MS1 scans from 300 to 1750 m/z (resolution of 60000 at m/z =200), and up to 15 of the top precursors were selected for fragmentation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 28). The MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15000 (at m/z = 200). AGC target for MS1 and MS2 scans were set to 3x106 and 1x105 respectively within a maximum injection time of 100 and 25 ms for MS1 and MS2 scans respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.6.17.0) [https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.1511]. Shortly, the peak list was searched against the Uniprot database of mus musculus with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. MaxQuant by default enables individual peptide mass tolerances, which was used in the search. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The match-between-run option was enabled, and proteins were quantified across samples using the label-free quantification algorithm in MaxQuant generating label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Fibrosis, characterized by sustained activation of myofibroblasts and excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, is known to be associated with chronic inflammation. Receptor-interacting protein kinase 3 (RIPK3), the central kinase of necroptosis signaling, is upregulated in fibrosis and contributes to tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-mediated inflammation. In bile-duct-ligation-induced liver fibrosis, we found that myofibroblasts are the major cell type expressing RIPK3. Genetic ablation of &#x3b2;1 integrin, the major profibrotic ECM receptor in fibroblasts, not only abolished ECM fibrillogenesis but also blunted RIPK3 expression via a mechanism mediated by the chromatin-remodeling factor chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein 4 (CHD4). While the function of CHD4 has been conventionally linked to the nucleosome-remodeling deacetylase (NuRD) and CHD4-ADNP-HP1(ChAHP) complexes, we found that CHD4 potently repressed a set of genes, including Ripk3, with high locus specificity but independent of either the NuRD or the ChAHP complex. Thus, our data uncover that &#x3b2;1 integrin intrinsically links fibrotic signaling to RIPK3-driven inflammation via a novel mode of action of CHD4.

### Keywords
Integrin, Ripk3, Necroptosis, Chd4, Fibrosis, Inflammation

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry
1. Gene Center and Department of Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany 2. Research group Molecular Mechanisms of Inflammation, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Barbara Steigenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Veit Hornung
1. Gene Center and Department of Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany 2. Research group Molecular Mechanisms of Inflammation, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


