### Accession
PXD029577

### Title
Ribosome-bound Upf1 forms distinct 80S complexes and conducts mRNA surveillance

### Description
Upf1, Upf2, and Upf3 are the central regulators of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), the eukaryotic mRNA quality control pathway generally triggered when a premature termination codon is recognized by the ribosome. The NMD-related functions of the Upf proteins likely commence while these factors are ribosome-associated, but little is known of the timing of their ribosome binding, their specificity for ribosomes translating NMD substrates, or the nature and role of any ribosome:Upf complexes. Here, we have elucidated details of the ribosome-associated steps of NMD. By combining yeast genetics with selective ribosome profiling and co-sedimentation analyses of polysomes with wild-type and mutant Upf proteins, our approaches have identified distinct states of ribosome:Upf association. All three Upf factors manifest progressive polysome association as mRNA translation proceeds, but these events appear to be preceded by formation of a Upf1:80S complex as mRNAs initiate translation. This complex is likely executing an early mRNA surveillance function.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cultures were grown, whole cell yeast lysates were prepared and digested with RNaseI, and ribosomes were recovered. FLAG-tagged protein-associated ribosomes were isolated by immunopurification using anti-FLAG M2 Affinity gel. Eluate was collected by centrifugation and spun through Amicon Ultra 2ml 100K centrifugal filter units (Millipore) until the volume was <200μl. The concentrate from one reaction set was pooled into one Amicon Ultra 2ml 100K centrifugal filter unit and spun until the total volume was approximately 160μl. The concentrate was layered on top of a 1M sucrose cushion in IP buffer plus 1X protease inhibitors, 10U/ml Superase-In, and spun at 166,180g for 100 minutes at 4°C in a TLA100 rotor. Supernatant was removed and the pellet was resuspended in 60μl IP buffer plus 0.5mM DTT, 1X protease inhibitors, 20U/ml Superase-In; and A260 was determined on a spectrophotometer. Mass spectrometry analyses were performed by the Mass Spectrometry Facility of the UMass Chan Medical School. Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry by disrupting total or immunopurified ribosomes in 1X Laemmli buffer and running on a 4-20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Protein Gel in 1X Tris/Glycine/SDS buffer (BioRad) for 5 minutes. Gels were stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (BioRad) and destained in water. Fragments were excised and cut into 1x1 mm pieces, transferred to microfuge tubes, and each added 1 mL of water, followed by a solution of 20 µL of 45 mM of 1,4 dithiothreitol (DTT) in 200 µL of 250 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were incubated at 50°C for 30 minutes, cooled to room temperature, added 20 µL of 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubated for 30 min. Excessive DTT and IAA was removed, and the gel pieces washed with water (3x, 1 mL each), followed by 1mL of a 1:1 solution of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate:acetonitrile, quenched with 200 µL of acetonitrile and dried in a Speed Vac. Gel pieces were rehydrated in a mixture of 4 ng/µL trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) and 0.01% ProteaseMAX (Promega) in 50 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 18 hours at 37°C. Supernatants were collected and further extraction was performed by adding 200 µL of 80:20 solution of acetonitrile:1% (v/v) formic acid in water. Supernatants were combined, peptides were lyophilized in a Speed Vac and resuspended in 25 µL of 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis. Data was acquired using a NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q Exactive hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) (N-terminal FLAG-tagged datasets) or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer (C-terminal FLAG-tagged datasets). Peptides were trapped and separated using an in-house 100 µm I.D. fused-silica precolumn (Kasil frit) packed with 2 cm ProntoSil (Bischoff Chromatography, DE) C18AQ (200Å, 5µm) media and configured to an in-house packed 75 µm I.D. fused-silica analytical column (gravity-pulled tip) packed with 25 cm Magic (Bruker, Billerica, MA) C18AQ (100Å, 3µm) media, respectively. Mobile phase A was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. Following a 3.8 µL sample injection, peptides were trapped at flow rate of 4 µL/min with 5% B for 4 min, followed by gradient elution at a flow rate of 300 nL/min from 5-35% B in 60 min, wash and reconditioning (total run time ~90 min). Electrospray voltage was delivered by liquid junction electrode (1.4 kV) located between the columns and the transfer capillary to the mass spectrometer was maintained at 275°C. Mass spectra were acquired over m/z 300-1750 Da with a resolution of 60,000 (m/z 200), maximum injection time of 30 ms, and an AGC target of 700,000. Tandem mass spectra were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (2 sec cycle) with an isolation width of 1.2 Da, HCD collision energy of 30%, resolution of 15,000, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and an AGC target of 10,000. Biological triplicates of each strain (input and IP) were analyzed in technical triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo, version 2.1.1.21) and searched against Uniprot Yeast (downloaded 07/2021) database using Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.6.2). Search parameters were as follows: full tryptic specificity with up to 2 missed cleavages; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.05 Da; cysteine carbamidomethylation considered as a fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, peptide N-terminal (E,Q) pyroglutamate conversion, serine/threonine phosphorylation and lysine ubiquitination (GG) were specified as variable modifications. Peptide and protein validation and annotation was done in Scaffold 4.8.9 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) employing Peptide Prophet Protein Prophet algorithms. Peptides were filtered at a 1% FDR, while protein identification threshold was set to greater than 99% probability and with a minimum of 2 identified peptides per protein. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) calculated and normalized across biosamples in Scaffold, is used as a measure of protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Upf1, Upf2, and Upf3, the central regulators of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), appear to exercise their NMD functions while bound to elongating ribosomes, and evidence for this conclusion is particularly compelling for Upf1. Hence, we used selective profiling of yeast Upf1:ribosome association to define that step in greater detail, understand whether the nature of the mRNA being translated influences Upf1:80S interaction, and elucidate the functions of ribosome-associated Upf1. Our approach has allowed us to clarify the timing and specificity of Upf1 association with translating ribosomes, obtain evidence for a Upf1 mRNA surveillance function that precedes the activation of NMD, identify a unique ribosome state that generates 37-43 nt ribosome footprints whose accumulation is dependent on Upf1's ATPase activity, and demonstrate that a mutated form of Upf1 can interfere with normal translation termination and ribosome release. In addition, our results strongly support the existence of at least two distinct functional Upf1 complexes in the NMD pathway.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Upf proteins, Selective ribosome profiling, Nmd substrates

### Affiliations
UMass Chan Medical School
Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems UMass Chan Medical School 368 Plantation Street Worcester, MA 01655

### Submitter
Robin Ganesan

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Jacobson
Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems UMass Chan Medical School 368 Plantation Street Worcester, MA 01655


