### Accession
PXD004074

### Title
Pre-40S ribosome biogenesis factor Tsr1 is an inactive structural mimic of translational GTPases

### Description
Budding yeast Tsr1 is an essential ribosome biogenesis factor that is required for cytoplasmic steps in 40S subunit maturation. S. cerevisiae Tsr1 was expressed as an N-terminal GST fusion protein in E. coli. A mutant Tsr1ΔNΔloop was generated in which residues 410 to 476 of Tsr1 were replaced with a short glycine and serine rich sequence; in addition, the N-ternimal 45 amino acid residues were replaced by five amino acid residues “GPDSD”. Tsr1ΔNΔloop allowed for generating native crystals that diffracted to 3.6 Å. Here we characterize both wild type Tsr1 and Tsr1ΔNΔloop using cross-linking/mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Respectively, 12 ug of purified Tsr-1 and Tsr1 ΔNΔloop samples were cross-linked using BS3 with 1:1 protein to cross-linker ratio at a final protein concentration of 0.3M. The cross-linking reaction was incubated at 4 ºC for 2 hour and then quenched with ammonium bicarbonate (with a final concentration of 0.8M) at 4 ºC for 30 minutes. Cross-linked proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE using a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel (Life technologies) and MOPS running buffer (Life Technologies). The protein bands were visualized using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Life Technologies).  Monomer bands of cross-linked Tsr-1 and Tsr1 ΔNΔloop were excised, in-gel reduced and alkylated, then digested using trypsin following a standard protocol (1). A  6-μg aliquot of digest from each sample was desalted using C18-StageTips (2) prior to mass spectrometric analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase analytical column of the same type as described above. Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Peptides were loaded at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and eluted at 200 nl/min. The separation gradient consisted of a linear increase from 2% mobile phase B to 40% mobile phase B in 139 minutes and a subsequent linear increase to 95% B over 11 minutes. Eluted peptides were directly sprayed into the Q Exactive mass spectrometer. MS data were acquired in the data-dependent mode. For each acquisition cycle, the MS spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap at 140,000 resolution. The ten most intense ions in the MS spectrum, with a precursor charge state 3+ or greater, were fragmented by Higher Energy Collision Induced Dissociation (HCD). The fragmentation spectra were thus recorded in the Orbitrap at 35,000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was enabled, with single-repeat count and a 60 second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant version 1.5.0.12 (3) with default parameters, except that “Top MS/MS Peaks per 100 Da” was set to 20. Identification of cross-linked peptides was conduct using Xi software (ERI, Edinburgh).  The peak lists of Tsr-1 sample were searched against Tsr-1 and reversed Tsr-1 (as decoy) sequences, while the peak lists of Tsr1 ΔNΔloop sample was searched against Tsr1 ΔNΔloop and reversed Tsr1 ΔNΔloop (as decoy) sequences. Search parameters were as follows: MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS2 accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; specificity, fully tryptic; allowed number of missed cleavages, four; cross-linker, BS3; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine; modifications by BS3 that are hydrolyzed or amidated on the other end. The linkage specificity for BS3 was assumed to be for lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N-termini. We only accepted identified cross-linked residue pairs with estimated 5% false discovery rate (FDR) (Fischer et al, submitted).

### Publication Abstract
Budding yeast Tsr1 is a ribosome biogenesis factor with sequence similarity to GTPases, which is essential for cytoplasmic steps in 40S subunit maturation. Here we present the crystal structure of Tsr1 at 3.6&#x2009;&#xc5;. Tsr1 has a similar domain architecture to translational GTPases such as EF-Tu and the selenocysteine incorporation factor SelB. However, active site residues required for GTP binding and hydrolysis are absent, explaining the lack of enzymatic activity in previous analyses. Modelling of Tsr1 into cryo-electron microscopy maps of pre-40S particles shows that a highly acidic surface of Tsr1 is presented on the outside of pre-40S particles, potentially preventing premature binding to 60S subunits. Late pre-40S maturation also requires the GTPase eIF5B and the ATPase Rio1. The location of Tsr1 is predicted to block binding by both factors, strongly indicating that removal of Tsr1 is an essential step during cytoplasmic maturation of 40S ribosomal subunits.

### Keywords
Pre-40s ribosome biogenesis, Cross-linking/mass spectrometry, Protein structure

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, UK Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
Technischen Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, UK Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany


