### Accession
PXD039176

### Title
H3K4me3 regulates RNA polymerase II promoter-proximal pause-release

### Description
Trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4me3) is associated with transcriptional start sites and proposed to regulate transcription initiation. However, redundant functions of the H3K4 SET1/COMPASS methyltransferase complexes complicate elucidation of the specific role of H3K4me3 in transcriptional regulation. Here, by using mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) as a model system, we show that acute ablation of shared subunits of the SET1/COMPASS complexes leads to complete loss of all H3K4 methylation. H3K4me3 turnover occurs more rapidly than H3K4me1 and H3K4me2 and is dependent on KDM5 demethylases. Surprisingly, acute loss of H3K4me3 does not have detectable effects on transcriptional initiation but leads to a widespread decrease in transcriptional output, an increase in RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) pausing and slower elongation. Notably, we show that H3K4me3 is required for the recruitment of the Integrator Complex Subunit 11 (INTS11), which is essential for the eviction of paused RNAPII and transcriptional elongation. Thus, our study demonstrates a distinct role for H3K4me3 in transcriptional pause-release and elongation rather than transcriptional initiation.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin fractions were prepared as described previously with some modifications. Briefly, cells were lysed by swelling and mechanical force in buffer A (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 10 mM Sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM Sodium azide, 1× protease inhibitor cocktail, and 0.2% NP40). Then, nuclei were collected by centrifugation and chemically lysed in buffer C (20 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, 420 mM NaCl2, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, 10 mM Sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM Sodium azide, 1× protease inhibitor cocktail, and 0.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)). Lysates were centrifuged at 20,800 g for 45 min at 4 °C. The pellet contains the insoluble chromatin fraction and consists of DNA and proteins tightly bound to chromatin. To solubilize the chromatin pellet, 750 U Benzonase (Sigma) was added, followed by 10 min incubation on ice and 5 min of agitation at room temperature. Clarified lysate was collected and protein concentration was quantified by Bio-Rad Bradford’s reagent. Approximately 4 mg lysates from SILAC heavy or light cells were mixed 1:1 and incubated with 50 μl Streptavidin magnetic beads (Pierce, 88817) at 4 °C on a rotating wheel for overnight. The beads were washed four times with RIPA buffer. Eluates from biotin pull-down were transferred to fresh microfuge tubes. NuPAGE Sample Loading Buffer was added to beads and heated at 90 °C for 5 min. A magnetic rack was used to separate beads from the proteins. The supernatant was then run on an SDS-PAGE gel (Bis-Tris, 4-12%) enough to get the sample into the gel. Gel sections were excised, washed, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with trypsin at 37 °C. Homemade C18 StageTips were prepared as described and preconditioned with a 50 μL wash of methanol, 50 μL wash of 70% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and two 50 μL washes of 0.1% TFA at 1000 g. Peptides were then loaded on to StageTips and washed with 50 μL of 0.1% formic acid (FA) and were eluted with 60 μL of 70% ACN/0.1% FA. Samples were then vacuum centrifuged by SpeedVac and reconstituted in 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS and were analyzed by microcapillary liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry using a NanoAcquity (Waters) with a 100-μm inner-diameter × 10-cm length C18 column (1.7 μm BEH130, Waters) configured with a 180-μm × 2-cm trap column coupled to a Q-Exactive (QE) Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min using a 4 hr acetonitrile gradient (0.1% formic acid). The QE Plus was operated in automatic, data-dependent MS/MS acquisition mode with one MS full scan (380–1600 m/z) at 70,000 mass resolution and up to ten concurrent MS/MS scans for the ten most intense peaks selected from each survey scan. Survey scans were acquired in profile mode and MS/MS scans were acquired in centroid mode at 17,500 resolutions with an isolation window of 1.5 amu and normalized collision energy of 27. AGC was set to 1 × 106 for MS1 and 5 × 104 and 50 ms max IT for MS2. Charge exclusion of unassigned, +1, and greater than 6 enabled with dynamic exclusion of 15 s.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS data was processed with the MaxQuant software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany; version 1.5.3.30). The default was used for first search tolerance and main search tolerance: 20 and 6 ppm, respectively. Labels were set to Arg10 and Lys8. MaxQuant was set up to search the reference mouse proteome database downloaded from Uniprot on January 9th, 2020. Maxquant performed the search assuming trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavages. Peptide, site, and protein FDR were all set to 1% with a minimum of 1 peptide needed for identification but two peptides needed to calculate a protein level ratio. The following modifications were used as variable modifications for identifications and included for protein quantification: oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus, ubiquitination of lysine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues, and carbamidomethyl on cystine. Intensities measured in all replicates were log2-transformed and statistically analyzed via ANOVA. P-value was computed by Fisher’s test and corrected with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
H3k4me3

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Program and Center for Epigenetics Research, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA
MSKCC

### Submitter
Zhuoning Li

### Lab Head
Dr Kristian Helin
Cell Biology Program and Center for Epigenetics Research, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA


