### Accession
PXD010150

### Title
Nanowell-Mediated Two-Dimensional Liquid Chromatography Proteome Profiling of Mammalian Cells

### Description
Proteomic data from technical developments of a nanowell-mediated two-dimensional (2D) reversed-phase nanoflow liquid chromatography (LC) separation for in-depth proteome profiling of low-nanogram samples.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Proteins with deamidated/citrullinated amino acids play critical roles in the pathogenesis of many human diseases; however, identifying these modifications in complex biological samples has been an ongoing challenge. Herein we present a method to accurately identify these modifications from shotgun proteomics data generated by a deep proteome profiling study of human pancreatic islets obtained by laser capture microdissection. All MS/MS spectra were searched twice using MSGF+ database matching, with and without a dynamic +0.9840 Da mass shift modification on amino acids asparagine, glutamine, and arginine (NQR). Consequently, each spectrum generates two peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) with MSGF+ scores, which were used for the Delta Score calculation. It was observed that all PSMs with positive Delta Score values were clustered with mass errors around 0 ppm, while PSMs with negative Delta Score values were distributed nearly equally within the defined mass error range (20 ppm) for database searching. To estimate false discovery rate (FDR) of modified peptides, a "target-mock" strategy was applied in which data sets were searched against a concatenated database containing "real-modified" (+0.9840 Da) and "mock-modified" (+1.0227 Da) peptide masses. The FDR was controlled to &#x223c;2% using a Delta Score filter value greater than zero. Manual inspection of spectra showed that PSMs with positive Delta Score values contained deamidated/citrullinated fragments in their MS/MS spectra. Many citrullinated sites identified in this study were biochemically confirmed as autoimmunogenic epitopes of autoimmune diseases in literature. The results demonstrated that in situ deamidated/citrullinated peptides can be accurately identified from shotgun tissue proteomics data using this dual-search Delta Score strategy. Raw MS data is available at ProteomeXchange (PXD010150).

### Keywords
Proteomics, 2d lc, Microfluidics

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Ryan Kelly
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


