### Accession
PXD045012

### Title
Automating data analysis for hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry using data-independent acquisition methodology

### Description
We developed an HX-MS2 strategy that supports the acquisition of CID-generated fragment ions alongside their peptide precursors. The approach enables true auto-validation of HX data by mining the rich set of deuterated fragments, using the extra dimension of data to simultaneously confirm the peptide ID and authenticate (even correct) MS1-based deuteration calculations. The high redundancy provided by the fragments generates an opportunity to determine the confidence of deuterium calculations using a combinatorial strategy. The approach requires DIA-based acquisition methods that are available on most MS platforms, making the switch to HX-MS2 straightforward. Considerable time is saved through auto-validation and more importantly, more complex samples can now be characterized and at higher throughput, as illustrated in a drug binding analysis of the ultralarge kinase DNA-PKcs, isolated directly from mammalian cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples consisted of directly bought protein (Phosphorylase B), recombinant protein expressed in baculovirus-infected insect cells (Polymerase Theta ATP-binding domain) or a protein isolated and affinity enriched from V3 CHO cells (DNA-PKcs). Proteins were prepared in 25 mM HEPES buffer pH 7.4 with 150 - 250 mM NaCl). Proteins alone or with ligands were subjected to a typical HX-MS workflow with in-solution D2O labelling (H2O was used for mapping runs) and subsequent in-solution Nepenthesin II protease digestion. Data were acquired in DDA mode for mapping purposes of H2O incubated samples, or in DIA mode for acquisition of D2O incubated samples.

### Data Protocol
Mapping runs were processed using the PIPE module of Mass Spec Studio 2.0. Unfiltered peptide lists from OMSSA+ search were exported for use with deuterated data. Deuterated data were processed using a new Mass Spec Studio 2.0 DEAL module with DIA functionality that is the topic of this study.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Dna-pk, Dia, Swath-ms, Hx-ms

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada

### Submitter
Frantisek Filandr

### Lab Head
Dr David C.
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada


