### Accession
PXD014447

### Title
SERRATE interacts with the nuclear exosome targeting complex to degrade primary miRNA precursors in Arabidopsis

### Description
0.3g of flowers were ground in liquid nitrogen. The powder  was extracted for 30 min [H2] in 1.5 ml of lysis buffer (50mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 50mM NaCl, 1% Triton x-100 and 1 x cOmplete™ EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche)). After removal of cell debris by centrifugation (2 times 10 min, 16000 x g, 4 °C) the cleared supernatants were incubated for 30 min with GFP or FLAG antibodies coupled to magnetic microbeads (μMACS GFP and DYKDDDDK  isolation Kits, Miltenyi). Beads were loaded on magnetized MACS separation columns equilibrated with lysis buffer and washed 4 times with 300 µl washing buffer (50mM Tris HCL pH 7.5, 25 or 50 mM NaCl, 0,1 % Triton). Samples were eluted in 50 µl of pre-warmed elution buffer (Milteny). Control IPS were performed in Col-O using either GFP or FLAG antibodies.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) as described before (Chicois et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the TAIR 10 database with a decoy strategy. Peptides were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science, London, UK) and data were further imported into Proline 1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from at least three independent biological replicates. This spectral count was submitted to a negative-binomial test using an edgeR GLM regression through the R-package (R v3.5.0).

### Publication Abstract
SERRATE/ARS2 is a conserved RNA effector protein involved in transcription, processing and export of different types of RNAs. In Arabidopsis, the best-studied function of SERRATE (SE) is to promote miRNA processing. Here, we report that SE interacts with the nuclear exosome targeting (NEXT) complex, comprising the RNA helicase HEN2, the RNA binding protein RBM7 and one of the two zinc-knuckle proteins ZCCHC8A/ZCCHC8B. The identification of common targets of SE and HEN2 by RNA-seq supports the idea that SE cooperates with NEXT for RNA surveillance by the nuclear exosome. Among the RNA targets accumulating in absence of SE or NEXT are miRNA precursors. Loss of NEXT components results in the accumulation of pri-miRNAs without affecting levels of miRNAs, indicating that NEXT is, unlike SE, not required for miRNA processing. As compared to se-2, se-2 hen2-2 double mutants showed increased accumulation of pri-miRNAs, but partially restored levels of mature miRNAs and attenuated developmental defects. We propose that the slow degradation of pri-miRNAs caused by loss of HEN2 compensates for the poor miRNA processing efficiency in se-2 mutants, and that SE regulates miRNA biogenesis through its double contribution in promoting miRNA processing but also pri-miRNA degradation through the recruitment of the NEXT complex.

### Keywords
Exosome, Next, Mirna biogenesis, Serrate, Pri-mirnas

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UPR 2357, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Heike Lange
Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UPR 2357, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.


