### Accession
PXD012245

### Title
Label-free, quantitative analysis of PKA-dependent phosphoproteome changes in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Protein kinase A (PKA), the main effector of second messenger cAMP, is highly conserved among eukaryotes and a paradigm for the mechanisms of regulation of protein kinases by ligands. The unique PKA holoenzymes in the phylogenetically distant protozoan parasite Trypanosoma are unresponsive to cAMP in vitro and in vivo. By small molecule screening and optimization, we designed direct, membrane-permeable activators binding with a kD of 9 nM to the CNB pockets of the T. brucei regulatory PKA subunit. 7-Cyano-7-deazainosine has low toxicity and thus is a perfect tool to explore cAMP-independent PKA signaling in these important pathogens. This project describes PKA-induced phosphoproteome changes of the bloodstream stage of T. brucei.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 6×108 Trypanosoma brucei cells treated or not with 8 µM 7-Cyano-7-deazainosine (activator of T. brucei protein kinase A) for 15 min were lysed in 300 µl 4 % (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.1 M Tris pH 8.5 for 5 min at 95°C (according to the protocol of Humphrey et al., 2018 (1). Samples were sonicated using a Bioruptor (Diagenode) (high power, two cycles of 10 min each, 30 sec on/off). Protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay and samples were adjusted to equal concentrations. Sample preparation  and mass spectrometry was exactly carried out as described by Humphrey et al [1].  1.Humphrey SJ, Karayel O, James DE, Mann M. High-throughput and high-sensitivity phosphoproteomics with the EasyPhos platform. Nature Protocols, Volume 13, pages 1897–1916 (2018)

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 was used to identify proteins and quantify by LFQ with the following parameters: Database, TriTrypDB-39_TbruceiTREU927_AnnotatedProteins ; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 0.5 Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Phosphorylation (STY); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. For proteomic analysis, identified proteins were considered as statistically significant with FDR:0.05 and s0:1 (Two sample-test adjusted for multiple comparisons, Perseus). Phosphopeptide analysis was carried in Perseus as suggested by Humphrey et al [1].

### Publication Abstract
Protein kinase A (PKA), the main effector of cAMP in eukaryotes, is a paradigm for the mechanisms of ligand-dependent and allosteric regulation in signalling. Here we report the orthologous but cAMP-independent PKA of the protozoan Trypanosoma and identify 7-deaza-nucleosides as potent activators (EC<sub>50</sub>&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;6.5&#x2009;nM) and high affinity ligands (K<sub>D</sub>&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;8&#x2009;nM). A co-crystal structure of trypanosome PKA with 7-cyano-7-deazainosine and molecular docking show how substitution of key amino acids in both CNB domains of the regulatory subunit and its unique C-terminal &#x3b1;D helix account for this ligand swap between trypanosome PKA and canonical cAMP-dependent PKAs. We propose nucleoside-related endogenous activators of Trypanosoma brucei&#xa0;PKA&#xa0;(TbPKA). The existence of eukaryotic CNB domains not associated with binding of cyclic nucleotides suggests that orphan CNB domains in other eukaryotes may bind undiscovered signalling molecules. Phosphoproteome analysis validates 7-cyano-7-deazainosine as powerful cell-permeable inducer to explore cAMP-independent PKA signalling in medically important neglected pathogens.

### Keywords
Protein kinase a; pka; trypanosoma; 7-cyano-7-deazainosine; label-free quantitative phosphoproteome analysis

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Biozentrum LMU, Genetics Großhaderner Strasse 2-4 82152 Planegg-Martinsried phone +4989218074603 http://www.genetik.biologie.uni-muenchen.de/research/boshart/index.html

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Michael Boshart (Genetics, Biochemistry, Cell Biology) Prof. Dr. Michael Boshart
Biozentrum LMU, Genetics Großhaderner Strasse 2-4 82152 Planegg-Martinsried phone +4989218074603 http://www.genetik.biologie.uni-muenchen.de/research/boshart/index.html


