### Accession
PXD018905

### Title
Accurate Prediction of Kinase-Substrate Networks Using Knowledge Graphs

### Description
Phosphorylation of specific substrates by protein kinases is a key control mechanism for vital cell-fate decisions and other cellular processes. However, discovering specific kinase-substrate relationships is time-consuming and often rather serendipitous. Computational predictions alleviate these challenges, but the current approaches suffer from limitations like restricted kinome coverage and inaccuracy. They also typically utilise only local features without reflecting broader interaction context. To address these limitations, we have developed an alternative predictive model. It uses statistical relational learning on top of phosphorylation networks interpreted as knowledge graphs, a simple yet robust model for representing networked knowledge. Compared to a representative selection of six existing systems, our model has the highest kinome coverage and produces biologically valid high-confidence predictions not possible with the other tools. Specifically, we have experimentally validated predictions of previously unknown phosphorylations by the LATS1, AKT1, PKA and MST2 kinases in human. Thus, our tool is useful for focusing phosphoproteomic experiments, and facilitates the discovery of new phosphorylation reactions. Our model can be accessed publicly via an easy-to-use web interface (LinkPhinder).

### Sample Protocol
Hek-293 cells were regularly grown in Dulbeccos modified medium supplemented with 10% foetal serum. Subconfluent cell were transfected with Lipofectamine (Invitrogene) following manufacturers instructions. pSG5-gag-AKT was previously described [35]. LATS1 siRNA and AKT siRNA were from Dharmacorn and sequences have been described before [28]. Twenty four hours after tranfection HEK293 cells were serum deprived for 16 hours. Subsiquently, cell were lysed in 20mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, phosphatase inhibitors (2mM NaF, 10mMb-Gycerolphosphate, 2 MM Na4P2O4) and protease inhibitors (5 µg/ml Leupeptin and 2.2 µg/ml 36aprotinin). Cell lysates were separated by SDS-PAGE analysed by western blotting. Phosphorylated proteins were immunoprecipitated with pAKTSubstrate specific antibody. Briefly, the lysates were incubated with 1µl of antibody and 5µl of protein-G sepharose beads for 1 hour at 4C in an orbital wheel. The immunoprecipitates were washed 3 times with lysis buffer. 2 bed volumes of denaturing laemli buffer were added to the dry pelleted beads and immunocomplex were eluted by boiling the samples at 100C for 5 minutes. Anti-creb, anti-LATS1 anti-P53 anti-tub, p-YAP-S127 were obtained from commercial sources. HeLa cells were transiently transfected with a GFP-tagged LATS1 construct or a GFP construct as control. After 2 days they were serum starved overnight and left untreated (control) or were treated with FasL (50nM) or Etoposide (50muM) for 16 hours. Then, cells were lysed with Lysis buffer (20mM 4-(2 hydroxyethyl)-1piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) pH7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, phosphatase inhibitors (10 mM β-Gycerolphosphate, 1mM Na3VO4, 2mM Na4P2O7, 2 mM NaF) and protease inhibitors (5 µg/ml Leupeptin and 2.2 µg/ml Aprotinin), and proteins were immunoprecipitated using GFP-trap A (Chromotek) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The beads were washed 3 times with lysis buffer followed by two washes with the same buffer not containing NP-40. The proteins immunoprecipitated onto GFP-beads were prepared for masss-spectrometry analysis as previously described [36]. Briefly, the immunoprecipitates were digested in two steps. Firstly, by adding 60µl of elution buffer-1 (2M urea, 50mM TrisHCl pH7.5, 5µg/ml Trypsin), to each sample and incubation at 27◦C on a shaker. After 30 minutes initial digestion the samples were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm in a table top centrifuge for 30 seconds and the supernatant was collected into a new Eppendorf tube. In the second step 25µl of elution buffer-2 (2M urea, 50mM Tris-HCL pH7.5, 1mM Dithiothreitol) was added 37per sample followed by centrifugation as above. The supernatant was collected into a new Eppendorf tube. The elution step was repeated, and both supernatants were combined and incubated overnight at room temperature to allow trypsin digestion to go to completion. The, samples were alkylated by adding 20 µl iodoacetamide (5mg/ml), and incubation for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. The reaction was stopped by adding 1 µl 100% Trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to each sample. 100 µl of each sample was immediately loaded into equilibrated handmade C18 StageTips containing Octadecyl C18 disks (Supelco) for desalting. Tips were previously activated by washing with 50µl of 50% AcN and 0.1%TFA. After a quick centrifugation the tips were washed with 50µl of 0.1%TFA. 100mul samples was loaded onto the tip washed twice with 50µl of 0.1% TFA and eluted twice with 25µl of 50% AcN and 0.1% TFA solution. The eluates were combined and concentrated until the volume was reduced to 5µl using a CentriVap Concentrator (Labconco). Samples were diluted to obtain a final volume of 15µl by adding 0.1% TFA and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13000rpm. 12µl of the samples were analysed by MS. The samples were analysed by liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (Nanoflow Ultimate 3000 LC and Q-Exactive mass spectrometer [Thermo]). A 10 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter, HLPC c18-reversed pahes column was used. Samples were loaded at 600nl/min and peptides were eluted at a constant flow rate of 250nl/ min for 40 min. A multisegment linear gradient of 2-135% buffer (98% Acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) in positive ion mode was used. Data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode selecting the 12 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis. Mass spectra were analysed by MaxQuant. Label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry was performed using a Ultimate3000 RSLC system that was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following tryptic digest, the peptides were loaded onto a nano-trap column (300 µM i.d x 5mm precolumn that was packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µM, 100 ; Thermo Scientific) running at a flow rate of 30 µl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid made up in HPLC water. The peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 µM i.d. 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µM, 100 ; Thermo Scientific) after 3 minutes by a linear gradient from 2% to 30%of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC water) in buffer A (2% acentonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water) using a flow rate if 300 nl/min over 150 minutes. The remaining peptides were eluted using a short gradient from 30% to 95% in buffer B for 10 minutes. The mass spectrometry parameters were as follows: for full mass spectrometry spectra, the scan range was 335-1500 with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z=200. MS/MS acquisition was performed using top speed mode with 3 seconds cycle time. Maximum injection time was 50 ms. The AGC target was set to 400,000, and the isolation window was 1 m/z. Positive Ions with charge states 2-7 were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation. The dynamic exclusion duration was set at 60 seconds and the lock mass option was activated and set to a background signal with a mass of 445.12002. 68Analysis of mass spectrometry data Analysis was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Trypsin was set to be the digesting enzyme with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbmidomethylation was set for fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine and N-thermal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The data was then analysed with the minimum ratio count of 2. The first search peptide was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 5 ppm and the ”re-quantify” option was selected. For protein and peptide identification the Human subset of the SwissProt database (Release 2015 12) was used and the contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 1 and a minimum of 6 amino acids was tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment window of 20 minutes. Mass spectrometry was performed using a Ultimate3000 RSLC system that was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following tryptic digest, the peptides were loaded onto a nano-trap column (300 µM i.d x 5mm precolumn that was packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µM, 100 ; Thermo Scientific) running at a flow rate of 30 µl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid made up in HPLC water. The peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75 µM i.d. 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µM, 100 ; Thermo Scientific) after 3 minutes by a linear gradient from 2% to 30%of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC water) in buffer A (2% acentonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC water) using a flow rate if 300 nl/min over 150 minutes. The remaining peptides were eluted using a short gradient from 30% to 95% in buffer B for 10 minutes. The mass spectrometry parameters were as follows: for full mass spectrometry spectra, the scan range was 335-1500 with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z=200. MS/MS acquisition was performed using top speed mode with 3 seconds cycle time. Maximum injection time was 50 ms. The AGC target was set to 400,000, and the isolation window was 1 m/z. Positive Ions with charge states 2-7 were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation. The dynamic exclusion duration was set at 60 seconds and the lock mass option was activated and set to a background signal with a mass of 445.12002. 68Analysis of mass spectrometry data Analysis was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Trypsin was set to be the digesting enzyme with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbmidomethylation was set for fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine and N-thermal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The data was then analysed with the minimum ratio count of 2. The first search peptide was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 5 ppm and the ”re-quantify” option was selected. For protein and peptide identification the Human subset of the SwissProt database (Release 2015 12) was used and the contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 1 and a minimum of 6 amino acids was tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment window of 20 minutes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Statistical relational learning, Machine learning, Kinase-substrate predictions, Linkphinder, Cell signaling

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin

### Submitter
David Matallanas

### Lab Head
Dr David Gomez
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin


