### Accession
PXD001396

### Title
mTRAQ labeled natural proteome from HeLa

### Description
To identify proteotypic peptides, HeLa cells digest labeled with mTRAQdelta0 were extensively fractionated and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from HeLa cell with Trizol and dissolved in digestion buffer (0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate containing 7 M guanidine hydroxide), heated at 56C for 30 min, diluted with three volumes of water and digested with Lys-C  for 4 h at 37̊C. After further two-fold dilution with water, samples were digested with trypsin for 14 h at 37̊C. To block of cystein/cystine residue, digest was treated with TCEP for 30 min at 37̊C, followed by alkyration with iodoacetoamide at RT for 30 min. Resulting cell digests were freeze-dried, and labeled with mTRAQd0 reagent (1 unit) for 2 h at RT. We fractionated the labeled digest by using a strong-cation chromatography (mini-S, GE HealthCare) followed by a reverse-phase chromatography at alkaline pH (pH9.6). Resulting 39-fractions were collected and subjected to DDA.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (mgf) were obtained by using AB SCIEX MS Data Converter. MASCOT search was performed against IPI human 3.1.6  concatenated with decoy sequences with following parameter settings: Trypsin was selected as enzyme used, allowed number of missed cleavages was set 2 and mTRAQd0-label on NH2-terminus/Lys, carbamidomethylation on Cys were selected as fixed modification. Oxidized methionine, mTRAQd0-label on Tyr were searched as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerances were 50 ppm and tolerance of MS/MS ions was 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela proteome, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Nakayama K.I. lab, Dep. Mol. Cell. Biol., Med. Inst. Bioreg, Kyushu University
Med. Inst. Bioregulation, Kyshu Univ.

### Submitter
Masaki Matsumoto

### Lab Head
Dr Masaki Matsumoto
Nakayama K.I. lab, Dep. Mol. Cell. Biol., Med. Inst. Bioreg, Kyushu University


