### Accession
PXD027825

### Title
HA-MOP knockin mice express the canonical µ-opioid receptor but lack detectable splice variants

### Description
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are notoriously difficult to detect in native tissues. In an effort to resolve this problem, we have developed a novel mouse model by fusing the hemagglutinin (HA)-epitope tag sequence to the amino-terminus of the µ-opioid receptor (MOP). Although HA-MOP knock-in mice exhibit reduced receptor expression, we found that this approach allowed for highly efficient immunodetection of low abundant GPCR targets. We also show that the HA-tag facilitates both high-resolution imaging and immunoisolation of MOP. Mass spectrometry (MS) confirmed post-translational modifications, most notably agonist-selective phosphorylation of carboxyl-terminal serine and threonine residues. MS also unequivocally identified the carboxyl-terminal 387LENLEAETAPLP398 motif, which is part of the canonical MOP sequence. Unexpectedly, MS analysis of brain lysates failed to detect any of the 15 MOP isoforms that have been proposed to arise from alternative splicing of the MOP carboxyl-terminus. For quantitative analysis, we performed multiple successive rounds of immunodepletion using the well-characterized rabbit monoclonal antibody UMB-3 that selectively detects the 387LENLEAETAPLP398 motif. We found that >98% of HA-tagged MOP contain the UMB-3 epitope indicating that virtually all MOP expressed in the mouse brain exhibit the canonical amino acid sequence.

### Sample Protocol
Male and female knock-in mice expressing HA-MOP (Oprm1em1Shlz, MGI:6117675) and aged 8-30 weeks between 25 and 35 g body weight were used to investigate MOP phosphorylation pattern and alternative splice variants in vivo. Briefly, after mice i.p. administration of saline or morphine sulfate (30 mg/kg for 30 min) or fentanyl citrate (300 µg/kg for 15 min) or etonitazene (30 µg/kg for 30 min) and HA immunoprecipitation from dissected brains, immunoprecipitates were boiled in SDS sample buffer containing 30 mM DTT for 5 min at 100 °C. Subsequently, brain extracts were alkylated in 90 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. 60 µl of reduced/alkylated protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE on 10% polyacrylamide gels followed by gel staining with colloidal Coomassie blue. At the expected molecular weight of HA-MOP receptor, a band was excised and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using modified porcine trypsin (Promega, France) at 20 ng/µl. Tryptic peptides were extracted and analyzed in triplicate by on-line nanoLC using an Ultimate 3000 system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an ETD-enabled LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as previously described21,22. Survey scan MS was performed in the Orbitrap over a 300–2000 m/z mass range with resolution set to a value of 60,000 at m/z 400. The 20 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for subsequent CID/ETD fragmentation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap (LTQ). The settings for the data-dependent decision tree-based CID/ETD method were as follows: ETD was performed instead of CID if charge state was 3 and m/z less than 650, or if the charge state was 4 and the m/z less than 900, or if the charge state was 5 and the m/z less than 950. ETD was performed for all precursor ions with charge states > 5. The normalized collision energy was set to 35% for CID. The reaction time was set to 100 ms and supplemental activation was enabled for ETD. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 30 seconds to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide. For internal calibration the 445.120025 ion was used as lock mass. 3-4 technical replicates were performed for each condition.

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry files were processed with Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for database search with the Mascot search engine (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) combined with the Percolator algorithm (version 2.05) for PSM search optimization and the phosphoRS algorithm (version 3.1,23) for phosphorylation site localization. For both fragmentation techniques, the parameters set for creation of the peak lists were: parent ions in the mass range 300–5000 Da and no grouping of MS/MS scans. The non-fragmented filter was used to simplify ETD spectra with the following settings: the precursor peak was removed within a 4 Da window, charged reduced precursors were removed within a 2 Da window, and neutral losses from charged reduced precursors were removed within a 2 Da window (the maximum neutral loss mass was set to 120 Da). Peak lists were searched against SwissProt database with taxonomy Mus musculus (16761 sequences) implemented with the mouse HA-tagged MOP receptor sequence and the sequences of 19 predicted MOP isoforms produced by alternative splicing already described in the UniProt entry. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P and a maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Mascot results were validated by the target-decoy approach using a reverse database at the same size. The Percolator algorithm was used to calculate a q-value for each peptide-spectrum match (PSM), peptides and PSM were validated based on Percolator q-values at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) set to 5%. Then, peptide identifications were grouped into proteins according to the law of parsimony and filtered to 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are notoriously difficult to detect in native tissues. In an effort to resolve this problem, we have developed a novel mouse model by fusing the hemagglutinin (HA)-epitope tag sequence to the amino-terminus of the &#xb5;-opioid receptor (MOP). Although HA-MOP knock-in mice exhibit reduced receptor expression, we found that this approach allowed for highly efficient immunodetection of low abundant GPCR targets. We also show that the HA-tag facilitates both high-resolution imaging and immunoisolation of MOP. Mass spectrometry (MS) confirmed post-translational modifications, most notably agonist-selective phosphorylation of carboxyl-terminal serine and threonine residues. MS also unequivocally identified the carboxyl-terminal <sup>387</sup>LENLEAETAPLP<sup>398</sup> motif, which is part of the canonical MOP sequence. Unexpectedly, MS analysis of brain lysates failed to detect any of the 15 MOP isoforms that have been proposed to arise from alternative splicing of the MOP carboxyl-terminus. For quantitative analysis, we performed multiple successive rounds of immunodepletion using the well-characterized rabbit monoclonal antibody UMB-3 that selectively detects the <sup>387</sup>LENLEAETAPLP<sup>398</sup> motif. We found that &gt;98% of HA-tagged MOP contain the UMB-3 epitope indicating that virtually all MOP expressed in the mouse brain exhibit the canonical amino acid sequence.

### Keywords
Brain, Phosphorylation, Mouse, Opioid receptor family, Mop splice variants, Pharmacology, Nanolc-ms/ms cid/etd

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Jena UniversityHospital - Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Drackendorfer Straße 1, Jena, Germany
IPBS-CNRS

### Submitter
Carine Froment

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Schulz
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Jena UniversityHospital - Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Drackendorfer Straße 1, Jena, Germany


