### Accession
PXD040504

### Title
NRF2 activation reprogrammes defects in oxidative metabolism to restore macrophage function in COPD

### Description
Rationale: COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease) is a disease characterized by persistent airway inflammation and disordered macrophage function. The extent to which alterations in macrophage bioenergetics contribute to impaired antioxidant responses and disease pathogenesis has yet to be fully delineated.  Objectives: Through the study of COPD alveolar (AM) and peripheral monocyte-derived (MDM) macrophages, we sought to establish if intrinsic defects in core metabolic processes drive macrophage dysfunction and redox imbalance.  Methods: AM and MDM from COPD and healthy donors underwent functional, metabolic and transcriptional profiling.   Results: We observe that AM and MDM from COPD donors display a critical depletion in glycolytic and mitochondrial respiration derived energy reserves and an over reliance on glycolysis as a source for ATP, resulting in reduced energy status. Defects in oxidative metabolism extend to an impaired redox balance associated with defective expression of the NADPH generating enzyme, malic enzyme 1, a known target of the anti-oxidant transcription factor NRF2. Consequently, selective activation of NRF2 resets the COPD transcriptome, resulting in increased generation of TCA cycle intermediaries, improved energetic status, favorable redox balance and a recovery of macrophage function.   Conclusion: In COPD an inherent loss of metabolic plasticity leads to metabolic exhaustion and reduced redox capacity which can be rescued by activation of the NRF2 pathway. Targeting these defects, via NRF2 augmentation, may therefore present an attractive therapeutic strategy for the treatment of the aberrant airway inflammation described in COPD.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic Mass spectrometry analysis: For each sample 1.5 mg of peptide was analysed by data independent acquisition (DIA). Peptides were injected onto a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano, Thermo Scientific) and electrosprayed into an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). For liquid chromatography the following buffers were used: buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Samples were loaded at 10 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The trap column was washed for 3 min at the same flow rate with 0.1% TFA then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 3% buffer B to 6% buffer B in 5 min, then from 6% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 115 min, and finally to 80% buffer B within 7 min. The column was then washed with 80% buffer B for 4 min and re-equilibrated in 3% buffer B for 15 min. Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry-over. The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. The data was acquired using an easy spray source operated in positive mode with spray voltage at 2.445 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature at 250oC. The MS was operated in DIA mode. A scan cycle comprised a full MS scan (m/z range from 350-1650), with RF lens at 40%, AGC target set to custom, normalised AGC target at 300%, maximum injection time mode set to custom, maximum injection time at 20 ms, microscan set to 1 and source fragmentation disabled. MS survey scan was followed by MS/MS DIA scan events using the following parameters: multiplex ions set to false, collision energy mode set to stepped, collision energy type set to normalized, HCD collision energies set to 25.5, 27 and 30%, orbitrap resolution 30000, first mass 200, RF lens 40%, AGC target set to custom, normalized AGC target 3000%, microscan set to 1 and maximum injection time 55 ms. Data for both MS scan and MS/MS DIA scan events were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of proteomic DIA-MS data: Raw mass spec data files were searched using Spectronaut (Biognosys) version 16.0.220606.53000 using the directDIA function. The following search settings were used: minimum peptide length 7, maximum peptide length 52, cleavage enzyme Trypsin, maximum missed cleavages 2, protein and peptide FDR was set at 0.01, profiling and cross run normalisation were disabled. Carbamidomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification while Acetyl (N-term), Deamidation (NQ) and Oxidation (M) were selected as variable modifications. Data were searched against a human database with isoforms from Uniprot release 2021 01. Estimated protein copy numbers and concentration were calculated using the proteomic ruler and Perseus. The normalized intensity for each identified protein was calculated by dividing the individual protein intensity by the total intensity obtained per sample to correct for technical variances during data acquisition between samples, prior to determining significance on Peresus .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Malic enzyme 1., Nuclear factor erythroid 2–related factor 2 (nrf2), Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, Metabolism, Macrophage

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh Centre for Inflammation Research, The Queen’s Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah R. Walmsley
University of Edinburgh Centre for Inflammation Research, The Queen’s Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK


