### Accession
PXD041088

### Title
LC-MS proteomic characterization of human amniotic mesenchymal stromal cells secretome

### Description
LC-MS proteomic analysis was applied to the conditioned medium of mesenchymal stromal cells isolated from the amniotic membrane of human term placenta in the attempt to define its molecular profile in relation to the immunomodulatory property exerted. DMEMF12 cell free culture medium was used as control sample (CTRL) of reference for proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The proteome of the human amniotic mesenchymal stromal cells secretome was characterized by analyzing four different batches of secretome pool (Pools I-IV) and ) and three DMEM F12 cell free culture medium control samples (CTRL 1-3) by Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP, 10 kDa molecular mass filter cut-off) digestion using trypsin enzyme and triplicate (run1-3) Liquid Chromatography-nanoESI-Orbitrap Elite Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis in gradient elution using C18 (2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) chromatographic columns. MS operated in positive ionization mode and CID tandem MS fragmentation in top 20 DDS mode. MS/MS spectra acquisition was performed in the linear ion trap at normal scan rate.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data were elaborated by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific) based on SEQUEST HT cluster as search engine against the Homo Sapiens UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein knowledgebase (released in 2021_4). LC-MS data from CTRL samples have been additionally elaborated against the Bos taurus UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein knowledgebase (released in 2022_02).The signal to noise (S/N) threshold was set to 1.5. The set enzyme was trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites; minimum and maximum peptide length was 6 and 144 residues, respectively. Mass tolerance was 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da and 0.02 Da; use average precursor mass False; use average fragment mass False. Methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) and N-Terminal  acetylation (+42.011 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02 Da) was set as static modification. Protein and peptide identification was validated by the Percolator node, with the strict target value of False Discovery Rate (FDR) set at 0.01 and the relaxed value at 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Secretome, Human amniotic mesenchymal stromal cells

### Affiliations
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche (SCITEC) "Giulio Natta"
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche (SCITEC) "Giulio Natta" Italy

### Submitter
Claudia Desiderio

### Lab Head
Dr Claudia Desiderio
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche (SCITEC) "Giulio Natta" Italy


