### Accession
PXD038116

### Title
Arabidopsis DMC1 ubiquitination sites identification, LC-MS/MS

### Description
To characterize the mechanism of DMC1 ubiquitination as well as further explore the impact of DMC1’s ubiquitination on meiosis, we attempted to identify the potential DMC1 ubiquitination sites. The in vitro ubiquitination assay using recombinant DMC1 heterologously expressed and purified from E. coli as substrate was conducted. Then mass spectrometry assay was performed to identify the ubiquitination sites of DMC1. Five DMC1 lysine residues (K45, K70, K101, K162, and K290) were identified as potential ubiquitination sites.

### Sample Protocol
The purified protein samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37˚C for 45 min and then alkylated with 100 mM acrylamide at 25˚C for 1 h. The FASP method was adopted for protein digestion. The protein samples were transferred to Microcon PL-10 filters and centrifuge at 13800 g for three-time buffer displacement, and then dissolved with digestion buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). Trypsin was added at a ratio of enzyme/protein (w/w) as 1:50 and the solutions were incubated at 37˚C for overnight digestion. After digestion, the solution was collected by centrifugation and the filter was washed twice with 10% ACN. Finally, the filtrates were pooled and vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac.
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Samples were loaded and analyzed on an in-house packed C18 columns (75 μm i.d. × ~20 cm; 1.9 μm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The mobile phases consisted of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The peptides were eluted using the following gradients: 5-8% B in 3 min, 8-44% B in 45 min, 44-100% B in 2 min, and 100% B for 10 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data acquisition mode was set to obtain one MS scan followed by sequential HCD-MS/MS acquisitions with a cycle time of 3 s. All spectral data were detected by Orbitrap mass analyzer. For the MS scans, the mass range was set as 350-1600 at a resolution of 60000, and the automatic gain control (AGC) target was set as standard. For the MS/MS scans, the resolution was set as 15000, the precursor isolation window was 1.6 m/z, the dynamic exclusion was 30 s with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot Server (v2.7, Matrix Science). Data were searched using the following parameters: the protein sequences downloaded from TAIR were set as database; trypsin/P as the enzyme; up to four missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; propionamidation on cysteine as static modification, oxidation on methionine and ubiquitination on lysine as variable modification. The incorporated Percolator in Proteome Discoverer was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 were used for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Meiotic recombination requires the specific RecA homolog DMC1 recombinase to stabilize strand exchange intermediates in most eukaryotes. Normal DMC1 levels are crucial for its function, yet the regulatory mechanisms of DMC1 stability are unknown in any organism. Here, we show that the degradation of Arabidopsis DMC1 by the 26S proteasome depends on F-box proteins RMF1/2-mediated ubiquitination. Furthermore, RMF1/2 interact with the Skp1 ortholog ASK1 to form the ubiquitin ligase complex SCF<sup>RMF1/2</sup>. Genetic analyses demonstrate that RMF1/2, ASK1 and DMC1 act in the same pathway downstream of SPO11-1 dependent meiotic DNA double strand break formation and that the proper removal of DMC1 is crucial for meiotic crossover formation. Moreover, six DMC1 lysine residues were identified as important for its ubiquitination but not its interaction with RMF1/2. Our results reveal mechanistic insights into how the stability of a key meiotic recombinase that is broadly conserved in eukaryotes is regulated.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Dmc1, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Fudan University
School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, China

### Submitter
Wanyue Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Yingxiang Wang
School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, China


