### Accession
PXD009417

### Title
Proteomics of MCF7 cells (LC-MS/MS Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid)

### Description
We developed RiboLace, a novel method based on a new puromycin-containing molecule, for the isolation of active ribosomes and associate RNAs by means of an antibody-free and tag-free pull-down approach. We compared riboLace translation estimates with protein levels determined by proteomics in MCF7 cells. RiboLace can be easily and rapidly used to obtain  a transcriptome-wide snapshot of active translation from  eukaryotic in vitro and in vivo systems.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7 cells were grown in 100 mm petri dishes in complete medium (DMEM, 10% FBS and 2mM L-Glutamine and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin solution) till around 80% of confluence and then cells, 2 dishes for each sample, were lysed with RIPA buffer (50mM Tris pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 0.25% Igepal, 1mM EDTA and 0.5% Sodium Deoxycholate) in the presence of 0.5% Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktails, 5μg/mL Peptastin A and 0.25% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail.  Proteins were then extracted from the cytoplasmic cell lysates by methanol-chloroform procedure and treated as follow to obtain peptides for mass spectrometry analysis. Proteins extract was first solubilized in a denaturation buffer (6 M urea/2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0), then incubated at room temperature (RT) for 30min with 0.5mM DTT (around 50µg of protein) and other 20min with 5.5mM iodoacetamide. Denaturated proteins were then digested first with 1µg of LysC solution/50µg of protein for 3 hours at RT and then with 1µg of Trypsin/50µg protein overnight. Once protein digestion was complete, peptides were purified with C18 Pipette Tips (Pierce, Thermo Scientific), brought near dryness with a speed vacuum concentrator and stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0 using default settings and Label Free Quantification (LFQ).

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome profiling, or Ribo-seq, is based on large-scale sequencing of RNA fragments protected from nuclease digestion by ribosomes. Thanks to its unique ability to provide positional information about ribosomes flowing along transcripts, this method can be used to shed light on mechanistic aspects of translation. However, current Ribo-seq approaches lack the ability to distinguish between fragments protected by either ribosomes in active translation or inactive ribosomes. To overcome this possible limitation, we developed RiboLace, a method based on an original puromycin-containing molecule capable of isolating active ribosomes by means of an antibody-free and tag-free pull-down approach. RiboLace is fast, works reliably with low amounts of input material, and can be easily and rapidly applied both in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo, thereby generating a global snapshot of active ribosome footprints at single nucleotide resolution.

### Keywords
Translation, Mcf7, Ribolace, Rna-seq, Polysome profiling, Pol-seq

### Affiliations
Yale University
Institute of Biophysics, CNR Unit at Trento, Via Sommarive 18, 38123 Povo (Trento), Italy

### Submitter
Toma Tebaldi

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriella Viero
Institute of Biophysics, CNR Unit at Trento, Via Sommarive 18, 38123 Povo (Trento), Italy


