### Accession
PXD028902

### Title
Temporal and site-specific ADP-ribosylation dynamics upon different genotoxic stresses

### Description
The DNA damage response revolves around transmission of information via post-translational modifications, including reversible protein ADP-ribosylation. Here, we applied a mass spectrometry-based Af1521 enrichment technology for the identification and quantification of ADP-ribosylation sites as a function of various DNA damage stimuli and time. In total, we detected 1,681 ADP-ribosylation sites residing on 716 proteins in U2OS cells, and determined their temporal dynamics after exposure to the genotoxins H2O2 and MMS. Intriguingly, we observed a widespread but low-abundant serine ADP-ribosylation response at the earliest time point, with later time points centered on increased modification of the same sites. This suggests that early serine ADP-ribosylation events may serve as a platform for an integrated signal response. While treatment with H2O2 and MMS induced homogenous ADP-ribosylation responses, we observed temporal differences in the ADP-ribosylation site abundancies. Exposure to MMS-induced alkylating stress induced the strongest ADP-ribosylome response after 30 minutes prominently modifying proteins involved in RNA processing, whereas in response to H2O2-induced oxidative stress ADP-ribosylation peaked after 60 minutes, while mainly modifying proteins involved in DNA damage pathways. Collectively, the dynamic ADP-ribosylome presented here provides valuable insight into the temporal cellular regulation of ADP-ribosylation in response to DNA damage.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells were treated with 5 mM H2O2 or 5 mM MMS for 1, 10, 30, and 60 minutes. Untreated cells were used as control. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and collected by gentle scraping at 4°C. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 4°C, for 3 minutes at 500g. PBS was decanted, and the cell pellets were directly lysed in 10 pellet volumes of lysis buffer (6 M guanidine-HCl, 50 mM TRIS, pH 8.5) followed by vigorous vortexing and shaking of the samples. Following lysis, samples were reduced and alkylated, and subsequently digested with Lys-C and trypsin. ADP-ribosylated peptides were enriched using the Af1521 macrodomain. Samples were high-pH fractionated on StageTip. All MS experiments were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo) connected to a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo). Each sample was separated on a 15 cm analytical column, with an internal diameter of 75 μm, packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 beads (ReproSil-Pur-AQ, Dr. Maisch), and heated to 40°C using a column oven. Peptide separation was performed using a 60 min gradient at a flow rate of 250 nL/min, utilizing Buffer A consisting of 0.1% FA, and buffer B consisting of 80% ACN in 0.1% FA. The primary gradient ranged from 3% buffer B to 24% buffer B over 37 minutes, followed by an increase to 40% buffer B over 9 minutes to ensure elution of all peptides, followed by a washing block of 14 minutes. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, capillary temperature to 275°C, and RF level to 30%. The Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, with full scans performed at a resolution of 120,000, a scan range of 300 to 1,750 m/z, a maximum injection time of 250 ms, and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 600,000 charges. Precursors were isolated with a width of 1.3 m/z, with an AGC target of 200,000 charges, and precursor fragmentation was accomplished using electron transfer disassociation with supplemental higher-collisional disassociation (EThcD), with supplemental activation energy of 20. Precursors with charge state 3-5 were included, and prioritized from charge 3 (highest) to charge 5 (lowest), using the decision tree algorithm. Selected precursors were excluded from repeated sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. MS/MS spectra were measured in the Orbitrap, with a loop count setting of 3, a maximum precursor injection time of 500 ms, and a scan resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software suite version 1.5.3.30, and searched against the human proteome in FASTA file format, as downloaded from UniProt on the 24th of May 2019. Default MaxQuant settings were used except from the following; protein N-terminal acetylation (default), methionine oxidation (default), cysteine carbamidomethylation, and ADP-ribosylation on cysteine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, histidine, lysine, arginine, serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were included as variable modifications. A maximum of 4 variable modifications, and 6 missed cleavages were allowed. Matching between runs was enabled with a match time of 1 minute and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. The Andromeda delta score was set to minimum 20 for modified peptides. The data was automatically filtered by MaxQuant to obtain a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% at the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) level (default), the protein assignment level (default), and the site-specific level (default).

### Publication Abstract
The DNA damage response revolves around transmission of information via post-translational modifications, including reversible protein ADP-ribosylation. Here, we applied a mass-spectrometry-based Af1521 enrichment technology for the identification and quantification of ADP-ribosylation sites as a function of various DNA damage stimuli and time. In total, we detected 1681 ADP-ribosylation sites residing on 716 proteins in U2OS cells and determined their temporal dynamics after exposure to the genotoxins H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and MMS. Intriguingly, we observed a widespread but low-abundance serine ADP-ribosylation response at the earliest time point, with later time points centered on increased modification of the same sites. This suggests that early serine ADP-ribosylation events may serve as a platform for an integrated signal response. While treatment with H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> and MMS induced homogenous ADP-ribosylation responses, we observed temporal differences in the ADP-ribosylation site abundances. Exposure to MMS-induced alkylating stress induced the strongest ADP-ribosylome response after 30 min, prominently modifying proteins involved in RNA processing, whereas in response to H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-induced oxidative stress ADP-ribosylation peaked after 60 min, mainly modifying proteins involved in DNA damage pathways. Collectively, the dynamic ADP-ribosylome presented here provides a valuable insight into the temporal cellular regulation of ADP-ribosylation in response to DNA damage.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Adp-ribosylation, Proteomics, Af1521, Dna damage, Parp, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
NNF Center for Protein Research

### Submitter
Sara Larsen

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


