### Accession
PXD010090

### Title
Pulldown GST-SH3 domains of Endophilin and rat brain lysates

### Description
Pulldown experiments using GST-SH3 domains from hman Endophilin A1, A2 and A3 and rat brain lysates

### Sample Protocol
Pulldown samples were ran on SDS-PAGE gels and stained with coomassie. 12 gel bands were cut for each experiments using Endophilin A1, A2 and A3, respectively. Proteins were digested in gel using trypsin. Peptides were identified using LC-MS-MS (Orbitrap, Thermo)

### Data Protocol
Data was processed in Biotools(Bruker) searched against NCBI using Mascot (Matrix Science, UK), with a precursor tolerance of 1.7 Da and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da.  Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed along with variable modifications for oxidized methionine and carbamidomethyl cysteine. No PTMs are included in the dataset

### Publication Abstract
Endocytosis mediates the cellular uptake of micronutrients and the turnover of plasma membrane proteins. Clathrin-mediated endocytosis is the major uptake pathway in resting cells<sup>1</sup>, but several clathrin-independent endocytic routes exist in parallel<sup>2,3</sup>. One such pathway, fast endophilin-mediated endocytosis (FEME), is not constitutive but triggered upon activation of certain receptors, including the &#x3b2;<sub>1</sub> adrenergic receptor<sup>4</sup>. FEME activates promptly following stimulation as endophilin is pre-enriched by the phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate-binding protein lamellipodin<sup>4,5</sup>. However, in the absence of stimulation, endophilin foci abort and disassemble after a few seconds. Looking for additional proteins involved in FEME, we found that 20 out of 65 BAR domain-containing proteins tested colocalized with endophilin spots. Among them, FBP17 and CIP4 prime the membrane of resting cells for FEME by recruiting the 5'-lipid phosphatase SHIP2 and lamellipodin to mediate the local production of phosphatidylinositol-3,4-bisphosphate and endophilin pre-enrichment. Membrane-bound GTP-loaded Cdc42 recruits FBP17 and CIP4, before being locally deactivated by RICH1 and SH3BP1 GTPase-activating proteins. This generates the transient assembly and disassembly of endophilin spots, which lasts 5-10&#x2009;seconds. This mechanism periodically primes patches of the membrane for prompt responses upon FEME activation.

### Keywords
Endophilin, Pulldown, Rat brain lysates

### Affiliations
University College London

### Submitter
Emmanuel Boucrot

### Lab Head
Dr Emmanuel Boucrot
University College London


