### Accession
PXD016828

### Title
Proteogenomics analysis unveils a novel TFG-RET gene fusion and druggable targets in papillary thyroid carcinomas

### Description
Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is the most common type of endocrine malignancy. From a set of PTC patients whose tumor did not harbour any BRAF or RAS mutations, a 35 years old male patient’s normal, primary tumor and lymph node (LN) metastatic tissues were subjected to genomics and proteomics analysis. By RNA-seq analysis, we identified a novel RET rearrangement involving exons 1-4 from the 5’ end of the Trk fused Gene (TFG) fused to the 3’ end of RET tyrosine kinase leading to a TFG-RET fusion which transforms immortalized human thyroid cells in a kinase-dependent manner. Further, TFG-RET oncogene oligomerises in a PB1 domain-dependent manner and consistently, mutation of the oligomerisation interface led to the inhibition of RET-mediated oncogenic transformation. Quantitative proteomic analysis of the same samples revealed the upregulation of proteins involved in the ubiquitination machinery including E3 Ubiquitin ligase HUWE1 and DUBs like USP9X and UBP7 in both tumor and LN metastatic lesions. We further identified that expression of TFG-RET led to the upregulation of HUWE1. Further, in a cohort of PTC patients, we observed higher expression of HUWE1, USP9X and USP7 in the tumor and metastatic lesions, when compared to the matched normal tissue. Transient knockdown of HUWE1, USP9X and USP7 affected viability and proliferation of TFG-RET transformed cells. Consistently, inhibition of RET, HUWE1 and DUBs by small molecule inhibitors significantly reduced RET-mediated oncogenesis. Apart from unveiling a novel oncogenic RET fusion in PTCs, our data may open a novel avenue of targeting ubiquitin signaling machinery in human PTCs.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion Four volumes of ice-cold acetone were added to the protein lysates (prepared as mentioned in previoussection ‘Isolation of protein, DNA and RNA from patient tissue’), vortexed and precipitated at -20°Covernight. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 20 minutes at 4°C and the supernatant wasdiscarded. Proteins were re-dissolved in 50 μl 6 M urea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8. Forreduction and alkylation of cysteines, 2.5 μl of 200 mM DTT in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8 was added and thesamples were incubated at 37°C for 1 h followed by addition of 7.5 μl 200 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h atroom temperature in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding 10 μl 200 mM DTT at 37°Cfor 1 h. Subsequently, the proteins were digested with 10 μg trypsin GOLD (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C.The digestion was stopped by adding 5 μl 50 % formic acid and the generated peptides were purified usingOMIX C18, 10 μl (Agilent, Santa Clara), and dried using a Speed Vac concentrator (Concentrator Plus,Eppendorf). Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 10 μl 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile and 5 μl analyzed using anUltimate 3000 RSLCnano-UHPLC system connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo FisherScientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source. For liquid chromatography separation, anAcclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 μm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter, 50 cm length) (Dionex,Sunnyvale CA, USA) was used. A flow rate of 300 nL/min was employed with a solvent gradient of 4-35%B in 180 min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/90% acetonitrile. Themass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS andMS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 400 to 2,000) were acquired with the resolutionR = 70,000 at m/z 200, after accumulation to a target of 1e6. The maximum allowed ion accumulationtimes were 60 ms. The method used allowed sequential isolation of up to the ten most intense ions,depending on signal intensity (intensity threshold 1.7e4), for fragmentation using higher-energy collisionalinduced dissociation (HCD) at a target value of 1e5 charges, NCE 28, and a resolution 511 R = 17,500. Targetions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 sec. The isolation window was m/z = 2without offset. For accurate mass measurements, the lock mass option was enabled in MS mode.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification analysis, raw data were imported into PEAKS v8.5 (Bioinfomatics SolutionsInc, Toronto, CA). Processed raw data were searched in PEAKS against the UniProt SwissProt database(Human, 20,279 proteins) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin, at maximum two missed cleavage sites,parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteinesas fixed modification, and oxidation of methionines, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues asvariable modifications. Label-free quantification was performed in the PEAKS software using a maximummass difference of 15 ppm and a maximum retention time difference of 1.5 min for clustering and a 0.1%FDR threshold for peak annotation. For relative quantification, the data were normalized based on total ioncurrent (TIC) in the PEAKS software to correct for unequal sample loading.

### Publication Abstract
Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is the most common type of endocrine malignancy. By RNA-seq analysis, we identify a RET rearrangement in the tumour material of a patient who does not harbour any known RAS or BRAF mutations. This new gene fusion involves exons 1-4 from the 5' end of the Trk fused Gene (TFG) fused to the 3' end of RET tyrosine kinase leading to a TFG-RET fusion which transforms immortalized human thyroid cells in a kinase-dependent manner. TFG-RET oligomerises in a PB1 domain-dependent manner and oligomerisation of TFG-RET is required for oncogenic transformation. Quantitative proteomic analysis reveals the upregulation of E3 Ubiquitin ligase HUWE1 and DUBs like USP9X and UBP7 in both tumor and metastatic lesions, which is further confirmed in additional patients. Expression of TFG-RET leads to the upregulation of HUWE1 and inhibition of HUWE1 significantly reduces RET-mediated oncogenesis.

### Keywords
Ptc/ ret/ huwe1/ usp7/ usp9x / precision medicine/ tfg-ret

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Proteomics Core facility, Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Bernd Thiede

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Thiede
Proteomics Core facility, Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, Norway


