### Accession
PXD002779

### Title
Rescuing discarded spectra: Full comprehensive analysis of a minimal proteome.

### Description
A common problem encountered when performing large-scale mass spectrometry proteome analysis is the loss of information due to the high percentage of unassigned spectra. To determine the causes behind this loss we have analyzed the proteome of one of the smallest living bacteria that can be grown axenically, Mycoplasma pneumoniae (729 ORFs). M. pneumoniae cultures were grown in defined media, and their proteomes were analyzed by mass spectrometry. An initial database search with a curated M. pneumoniae protein database left around 78% of the acquired spectra without an assignment. After re-analysis of the data with the PEAKS software and a larger protein database, the percentage of non-assigned spectra was reduced to 27%, thereby increasing the proteome coverage of M. pneumoniae from the initial 60% to over 76%. Nonetheless, 33413 of spectra with assigned amino acid sequences, could not be mapped in any NCBInr database protein sequence. Approximately, 1% of these unassigned peptides corresponded to post-translational modifications and 4% to protein variants. We found that deamidation of Asn affected preferentially to integral membrane proteins and that about 1% of the peptides had repetitions of the same aromatic/hydrophobic amino acid at the N-terminus, or Arg/Lys at the C-terminus. Thus, in an ideal system, we maximized the level of assignment to 73% of the spectra (51453 out of 70040 initial acquired spectra).

### Sample Protocol
M. pneumoniae was grown in 75-cm2 tissue culture flasks with 50 mL of defined medium at 37ºC as previously described [26]. For protein extract preparation, M. pneumoniae strain M129 was grown for 96 h at 37°C cells and then, once cells were in exponential phase, they were collected and re-grown during 6h at 37ºC. The medium was then removed, and cells were washed twice with PBS. Total protein lysates from M. pneumoniae were obtained by breaking the cells with 200 µl of lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT and 0.1M Hepes). Total protein extracts of two biological replicates were digested with trypsin and subsequently analyzed by mass spectrometry. Briefly, samples were dissolved in 6 M urea, reduced with DTT (10 mM, 37 ºC, 60 min), and alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM, 25ºC, 30 min). Samples were diluted 10-fold with 0.2 M NH4HCO3 before being digested at 37 ºC overnight with trypsin (with a protein:enzyme ratio of 10:1). Peptides generated in the digestion were desalted, evaporated to dryness, and dissolved in 300 µl of 0.1% formic acid. An aliquot of 2.5 µl of each fraction (amounts ranging from 0.17 to 4 µg) was run on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher) fitted with a nanospray source (Thermofisher) after a nanoLC separation in an EasyLC system (Proxeon). Peptides were separated in a reverse phase column, 75 μm x 150 mm (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd.) with a gradient of 5 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 60 min at a flow of 0.3 mL/min. The Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 325 °C. The instrument was externally calibrated using Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer and the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 was used as lock mass. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full-MS scans were acquired in all experiments over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer set at a resolution setting of 60 000. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. In each cycle of data-dependent analysis, the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35% following each survey scan. All data were acquired with Xcalibur 2.1 software. Total extract (20 µg) was also digested and desalted, and 1 µg of the resulting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Velos Pro in the same conditions as the fractions but with a longer gradient (120 min).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed by Proteome Discoverer software v.1.3 (ThermoFisher) using Mascot search engine (v2.4.01, Matrix Science) [28]. MS/MS spectra were searched against a species-specific database containing all M. pneumoniae proteins of NCBInr (7996 entries), and a list of the common contaminants (599 entries). We set a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. Up to three missed cleavages for trypsin digestion were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and protein acetylation at the N-terminus were defined as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rates (FDR) in peptide identification were evaluated using a decoy database set to a maximum of 5%.  To increase the percentage of assigned spectra, peptide de novo sequencing coupled with database search was used as implemented in the PEAKS software suite (v7) [25]. After importing the raw files, bad quality spectra were filtered out using a quality cutoff of 0.05. Search parameters were the same as for the previous Mascot search but with the entire NCBInr database (version of January 2014). The decoy-fusion database method was used to calculate the FDR, and matched spectra were filtered for 5% FDRs, and only proteins with at least one unique peptide were considered. A de novo average local confidence (ALC) score of 50 was used as cutoff for de novo peptides. ALC is the average of TLC (total local confidence) divided by the number of amino acids in the peptide sequence. TLC is the sum of the local confidence scores from each amino acid in the peptide sequence. The PEAKS PTM [29] search module was used to identify peptides with unspecified modifications and translation inaccuracies; the modifications set are listed in Table 1. Finally, the SPIDER module [29] was used for finding novel peptides that are homologous to peptides in a given protein database. The spectra associated to peptides after SPIDER analysis but not assigned to any protein in NCBInr database search were analyzed by Blast [30, 31]. Only peptides showing no gaps and a percentage of identity higher than 87% in the alignment were assigned to the identified protein. When one peptide was assigned with these parameters to more than one protein, it was discarded for the protein identification, so that the studied peptides were unique.

### Publication Abstract
A common problem encountered when performing large-scale MS proteome analysis is the loss of information due to the high percentage of unassigned spectra. To determine the causes behind this loss we have analyzed the proteome of one of the smallest living bacteria that can be grown axenically, Mycoplasma pneumoniae (729 ORFs). The proteome of M. pneumoniae cells, grown in defined media, was analyzed by MS. An initial search with both Mascot and a species-specific NCBInr database with common contaminants (NCBImpn), resulted in around 79% of the acquired spectra not having an assignment. The percentage of non-assigned spectra was reduced to 27% after re-analysis of the data with the PEAKS software, thereby increasing the proteome coverage of M. pneumoniae from the initial 60% to over 76%. Nonetheless, 33,413 spectra with assigned amino acid sequences could not be mapped to any NCBInr database protein sequence. Approximately, 1% of these unassigned peptides corresponded to PTMs and 4% to M. pneumoniae protein variants (deamidation and translation inaccuracies). The most abundant peptide sequence variants (Phe-Tyr and Ala-Ser) could be explained by alterations in the editing capacity of the corresponding tRNA synthases. About another 1% of the peptides not associated to any protein had repetitions of the same aromatic/hydrophobic amino acid at the N-terminus, or had Arg/Lys at the C-terminus. Thus, in a model system, we have maximized the number of assigned spectra to 73% (51,453 out of the 70,040 initial acquired spectra). All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002779 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002779).

### Keywords
Protein identification, : mass spectroscopy, Post-translational modifications (ptms), Translation errors, Proteome coverage, Unassigned spectra

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
CRG/UPF Proteomics Unit

### Submitter
Francesco Mattia Mancuso

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidò
Proteomics Unit, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain


