### Accession
PXD035557

### Title
The Skp1-Cullin1-FBXO1 complex is a pleiotropic regulator required for the formation of gametes and zoites in Plasmodium berghei

### Description
Malaria-causing parasites of the Plasmodium genus undergo multiple developmental phases in the human and the mosquito hosts regulated by various post-translational modifications. While ubiquitination by multi-component E3 ligases is key to regulate a wide range of cellular processes in eukaryotes, little is known about its role in Plasmodium. Here we show that Plasmodium berghei expresses a conserved SKP1/Cullin1/FBXO1 complex showing tightly regulated expression and localisation across multiple developmental stages. It regulates cell division by controlling nucleus segregation during schizogony and centrosome partitioning during microgametogenesis. It additionally controls parasite-specific processes including gamete egress from the host erythrocyte, as well as formation of the merozoite apical complex and the ookinete inner membrane complex (IMC), two structures essential for Plasmodium dissemination, moreover it is critical for zygote to ookinete conversation. Ubiquitinomic surveys reveal a large set of proteins ubiquitinated in an FBXO1-dependent manner including proteins important for egress and IMC organisation. We additionally demonstrate bidirectional interplay between ubiquitination and phosphorylation via calcium-dependent protein kinase 1. Altogether we show that Plasmodium SCFFBXO1 plays conserved roles in cell division and additionally controls parasite-specific processes in the mammalian and mosquito hosts.

### Sample Protocol
The PTM-Scan ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ɛ-GG) kit (Cell Signaling Technology, Kit #5562) was used and instructions described by the manufacturer were followed. For each ubiquitin remnant peptide enrichment immunoprecipitation, approximately 8-10 mg of total protein from purified gametocytes were used. Gametocytes were harvested from about 8-10 ml of P. berghei infected blood in suspended animation and treated with 1 µm MG132 for 1 hour at 37C. Ubiquitin remnant peptide enrichment was performed as described in "Bakos G et Nat Commun. 2018". LC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 60,000 (FWHM) followed by 30 DIA MS2 scan with fix windows. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 1 x 106, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 400 to 1240 m/z. DIA MS2 was performed in the Orbitrap using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30%. Isolation windows was set to 28 m/z.

### Data Protocol
DIA raw files for IP samples and Supernatant samples were loaded separately on Spectronaut v.15 (Biognosys) and analysed by directDIA using default settings. Both peptide precursor and protein FDR were controlled at 1% (Q value < 0.01). Single Hit Proteins were excluded for supernatant samples.  For quantitation, Top 3 precursor area per peptides were used, “only protein group specific” was selected as proteotypicity filter and normalization was set to “automatic”. A paired t-test was applied for differential abundance testing.  The following parameters were used: Quantity at the MS2 level, quantity type = area, data filtering by Qvalue, and cross run normalization selected. Proteins and peptides were considered to have significantly changed in abundance with a Qvalue ≤ 0.05 and an absolute fold change FC≥ |1.5| (log2FC ≥ |0.58|).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium berghei, Lc-msms, Malarai, Ubiquitome, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, CMU, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
University of Geneva

### Submitter
alexandre Hainard

### Lab Head
Dr Mathieu Brochet
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Medicine, CMU, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland


