### Accession
PXD013135

### Title
Multiomics Analyses of Vesicular Transport Pathway-Specific Transcripts and Proteins in Ovine Amnion: Responses to Altered Intramembranous Transport

### Description
Amniotic fluid volume (AFV) is determined primarily by the rate of intramembranous (IM) transport of AF cross the amnion. Intramembranous transport is characterized as vesicular endocytotic and transcytotic processes regulated by fetal urine-derived stimulators and AF inhibitors. Our objectives were to utilize a large-scale multiomics approach to decipher the vesicular transport pathways in the amnion and to identify potential transport regulators in AF and fetal urine. We utilized fetal sheep to experimentally induce alterations in IM transport rate and analyze the expression profiles of transcripts and proteins in amnion, AF and fetal urine. Four experimental groups were studied: control (C), urine drainage with reduced IM transport rate and AFV (UD), urine drainage and fluid replacement with decreased IM transport rate but increased AFV (UDR), and intra-amniotic fluid infusion with increased IM transport rate and AFV (IA). Amnion and fluid samples were subjected to transcriptomics (RNA-Seq) and isobaric labeling proteomics studies followed by bioinformatics analyses using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. The analyses revealed 9 functional transport pathways and a panel of differentially expressed transcripts and proteins that are known mediators of vesicular transport and cellular trafficking. During UD, expression of transport and trafficking mediators were reduced as compared to controls. With UDR, expression of energy metabolism activators increased while trafficking mediators decreased. During IA, expression of vesicular uptake molecules increased while trafficking mediators decreased. Co-expression of the motor protein, cytoplasmic dynein light chain-1, in both AF and fetal urine suggest that this molecule may function as a urine-derived stimulator of IM transport.

### Sample Protocol
Ovine tissue samples for multiomics analysis were obtained from 16 late-gestation chronically catheterized ovine fetuses randomly assigned to 1 of 4 experimental conditions: control (C, n=4), urine drainage without fluid replacement (UD, n=4), urine drainage and isovolumic replacement with lactated Ringer's solution (UDR, n=4), and continuous intra-amniotic fluid infusion of lactated Ringer's solution at 2 liters/day (IA, n=4). The experimental protocols were approved by the Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Samples of amnion and AF for proteomics studies were quick frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 C until analysis.     Amniotic fluid and fetal urine samples were centrifuged at 1800 x g for 15 minutes to remove particulates. Amnion tissues and fluids were extracted for total protein and submitted to OHSU Proteomics Shared Resource core facility for quantitative proteomics using isobaric labeling with 10-plex tandem mass tags (TMT).  The protein samples were quantified by the bicinchoninic acid protein assay (BCA assay, Thermo Fisher Scientific), trypsin digested, and TMT labeled for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS, Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC and Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS methods were similar to those used in {Plubell, D.L., Wilmarth, P.A., Zhao, Y., Fenton, A.M., Minnier, J., Reddy, A.P., Klimek, J., Yang, X., David, L.L. and Pamir, N., 2017. Extended multiplexing of tandem mass tags (TMT) labeling reveals age and high fat diet specific proteome changes in mouse epididymal adipose tissue. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, 16(5), pp.873-890}.  Data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans used the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 120000), and data-dependent MS2 scans used the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35). Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 60000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation of the top 10 ions, and higher-energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy = 65).

### Data Protocol
Four replicates in each of four conditions (16 samples) exceeds the capacity of one 10-plex TMT kit. We used the Internal Reference Scaling (IRS) experimental design from Plubell et al., 2017 where pooled amnion protein samples from all 4 experimental groups were used as internal references, analyzed in parallel with experimental samples, and used to normalize TMT plexes to each other.  The instrument binary files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 1.4) for extraction of reporter ion signals, peptide identification using SEQUEST, and statistical validation using Percolator. SEQUEST parameters were an Ensembl sheep database (Ovis_aries.Oar_v3.1.pep.all.fixed.fasta, release 79, 22823 sequences, with protein descriptions added from BioMart), tryptic enzymatic cleavages with up to two missed cleavages, 1.25 Da parent ion mass tolerance, 1.0005 Da fragment ion tolerance, monoisotopic masses, y- and b-ion series, variable oxidation of methionine, fixed alkylation of cysteine, and fixed TMT modifications at peptide N-terminus and lysine. Identified peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and parsimonious protein identification results files were exported as tab-delimited text files.  Python scripts (available at https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline.git) were used to filter peptide-spectrum-matches (PSMs) by FDR (less than 5%), accurate mass (better than 20 PPM), and determine if PSMs uniquely matched single proteins. PSMs passing requirements were summed into protein-level total reporter ion quantities that were used for statistical testing. The statistical testing was performed with the Bioconductor R package edgeR. After IRS scaling between TMT experiments using the pooled reference channels, the resulting intensities were corrected for composition bias using the trimmed mean of M-values method and conditions compared using an exact test.

### Publication Abstract
Amniotic fluid volume (AFV) is determined by the rate of intramembranous (IM) transport of amniotic fluid (AF) across the amnion. This transport is regulated by fetal urine-derived stimulators and AF inhibitors. Our objective was to utilize a multiomics approach to determine the IM transport pathways and identify the regulators. Four groups of fetal sheep with experimentally induced alterations in IM transport rate were studied: control, urine drainage (UD), urine drainage with fluid replacement (UDR), and intra-amniotic fluid infusion (IA). Amnion, AF, and fetal urine were subjected to transcriptomics (RNA-Seq) and proteomics studies followed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. The analysis uncovered nine transport-associated pathways and four groups of differentially expressed transcripts and proteins. These can be categorized into mediators of vesicular uptake and endocytosis, intracellular trafficking, pathway activation and signaling, and energy metabolism. UD decreased IM transport rate and AFV in conjunction with enhanced expression of vesicular endocytosis regulators but reduced expression of intracellular trafficking mediators. With UDR, IM transport rate decreased and AFV increased. Energy metabolism activators increased while trafficking mediators decreased in expression. IA increased IM transport rate and AFV together with enhanced expressions of vesicular endocytosis and trafficking mediators. We conclude that IM transport across the amnion is regulated by multiple vesicular transcytotic and signaling pathways and that the mediators of intracellular trafficking most likely play an important role in determining the rate of IM transport. Furthermore, the motor protein cytoplasmic dynein light chain-1, which coexpressed in AF and fetal urine, may function as a urine-derived IM transport stimulator.

### Keywords
Amniotic fluid volume, Internal reference scaling, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Isobaric labeling, Vesicular transport, Intramembranous absorption

### Affiliations
OHSU
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology  Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Cecilia Y. Cheung
Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology  Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA


