### Accession
PXD037861

### Title
Physiological profile of the coronary artery and internal thoracic artery endothelial cells as a basis for the structural and functional congrunce of the arterio-arterial continuum

### Description
Currently, it is well established that human endothelial cells (ECs) are characterised by a significant heterogeneity between distinct blood vessels, e.g., arteries, veins, capillaries, and lymphatic vessels. Further, even ECs belonging to the same lineage but grown under different flow patterns (e.g., laminar and oscillatory or turbulent flow) ostensibly have distinct molecular profiles defining their physiological behaviour. Human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAEC) and human internal thoracic artery endothelial cells (HITAEC) represent two cell lines inhabiting atheroprone and atheroresistant blood vessels (coronary artery and internal thoracic artery, respectively). Resistance of the internal mammary artery to atherosclerosis has been largely attributed to the protective phenotype of HITAEC which reportedly produce higher amounts of vasodilators including nitric oxide (NO) through the respective signaling pathways. However, this hypothesis has not been adequately addressed hitherto as proteomic profiling of HCAEC and HITAEC in a head-to-head comparison setting has not been performed.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture Primary cultures of human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAEC, 300K-05a, Cell Applications, San Diego, CA, USA) and human internal thoracic artery endothelial cells (HITAEC, 308K-05a, Cell Applications, San Diego, CA, USA) were grown in T-25, T-75, or T-150 flasks (90026, 90076, and 90552 respectively, Techno Plastic Products, Trasadingen, Switzerland) according to the manufacturer’s protocols using MesoEndo Growth Medium (212-500, Cell Applications, San Diego, CA, USA) and subculture reagent kit (090K, Cell Applications, San Diego, CA, USA). Immediately before all experiments, we replaced MesoEndo Growth Medium with MesoEndo Growth Medium without FBS (212F-500, Cell Applications, San Diego, CA, USA). During such replacement, we washed cells twice with warm (≈ 37°C) PBS to remove the residual serum components which could affect further proteomic profiling or contaminate serum-free medium with serum-derived extracellular vesicles. The rationale behind the use of these two EC lines was that coronary artery is atheroprone and internal thoracic artery is atheroresistant.  Sample collection For the proteomic profiling experiments, HCAEC and HITAEC were cultured in 6-well plates (92406, Techno Plastic Products, Trasadingen, Switzerland) to ≈ 90% confluence (≈ 0.5 × 106 cells per well, n = 3 wells per group) in a serum-free medium (212F-500, Cell Applications, San Diego, CA, USA) for 24 hours. Then, cell cultures were washed with ice-cold (4°C) PBS (pH = 7.4, 2.1.1, BioLot, St. Petersburg, Russia) and lysed in RIPA buffer (89901, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (78444, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Quantification of total protein was conducted using BCA Protein Assay Kit (23227, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and Multiskan Sky microplate spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol.  Proteomic profiling Upon the removal of RIPA buffer by acetone precipitation (650501, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), protein pellet was resuspended in 8 mol/L urea (U5128, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) diluted in 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate (09830, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The protein concentration was measured by Qubit 4 fluorometer (Q33238, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with QuDye Protein Quantification Kit (25102, Lumiprobe, Cockeysville, MD, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein samples (15 μg) were then incubated in 5 mmol/L dithiothreitol (D0632, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 1 hour at 37°C with the subsequent incubation in 15 mmol/L iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature (I1149, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Next, the samples were diluted with 7 volumes of 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 hours at 37°C with 200 ng of trypsin (1:50 trypsin:protein ratio; VA9000, Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The peptides were then frozen at -80°C for 1 hour and desalted with stage tips (Tips-RPS-M.T2.200.96, Affinisep, Le Houlme, France) according to the manufacturer’s protocol using methanol (1880092500, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), acetonitrile (1000291000, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and 0.1% formic acid (33015, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Desalted peptides were dried in centrifuge concentrator (Concentrator plus, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) for 3 hours and finally dissolved in 20 μL 0.1% formic acid for the further shotgun proteomics analysis. Shotgun proteomics analysis was performed by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) with ion mobility in TimsToF Pro mass spectrometer with nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics) using ≈ 500 ng of peptides. UHPLC was performed in the two-column separation mode with Acclaim PepMap 5 mm Trap Cartridge (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Bruker Fifteen separation column (C18 ReproSil AQ, 150 mm × 0.75 mm, 1.9 µm, 120 A; Bruker Daltonics) in a gradient mode with 400 nL/min flow rate and 40°C. Phase A was water/0.1% formic acid, phase B was acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (1000291000, Sigma-Aldrich). The gradient was from 2% to 30% phase B for 42 min, then to 95% phase B for 6 min with subsequent washing with 95% phase B for 6 min. Before each sample, trap and separation columns were equilibrated with 10 and 4 column volumes, respectively. CaptiveSpray ion source was used for electrospray ionization with 1600 V of capillary voltage, 3 L/min N2 flow, and 180°C source temperature. The mass spectrometry acquisition was performed in DDA-PASEF mode with 0.5 s cycle in positive polarity with the fragmentation of ions with at least two charges in m/z range from 100 to 1700 and ion mobility range from 0.85 to 1.30 1/K0.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in PEAKS Studio Xpro software (a license granted to St. Petersburg State University; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) using human protein SwissProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/; accessed on 20 July 2022; organism: Human [9606]; uploaded on 2 March 2021; 20,394 sequences) and protein contaminants database CRAP (version of 4 March 2019). The search parameters were: parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance 0.05 ppm, protein and peptide FDR < 1% and 0.1% respectively, two possible missed cleavage sites, proteins with ≥ 2 unique peptides. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Major adverse cardiovascular events occurring upon coronary artery bypass graft surgery are typically accompanied by endothelial dysfunction. Total arterial revascularisation, which employs both left and right internal thoracic arteries instead of the saphenous vein to create a bypass, is associated with better mid- and long-term outcomes. We suggested that molecular profiles of human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAECs) and human internal mammary artery endothelial cells (HITAECs) are coherent in terms of transcriptomic and proteomic signatures, which were then investigated by RNA sequencing and ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, respectively. Both HCAECs and HITAECs overexpressed molecules responsible for the synthesis of extracellular matrix (ECM) components, basement membrane assembly, cell-ECM adhesion, organisation of intercellular junctions, and secretion of extracellular vesicles. HCAECs were characterised by higher enrichment with molecular signatures of basement membrane construction, collagen biosynthesis and folding, and formation of intercellular junctions, whilst HITAECs were notable for augmented pro-inflammatory signaling, intensive synthesis of proteins and nitrogen compounds, and enhanced ribosome biogenesis. Despite HCAECs and HITAECs showing a certain degree of molecular heterogeneity, no specific markers at the protein level have been identified. Coherence of differentially expressed molecular categories in HCAECs and HITAECs suggests synergistic interactions between these ECs in a bypass surgery scenario.

### Keywords
Pasef, Tims tof pro, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Head of the Laboratory for Vascular Biology, Department of Experimental Medicine, Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases Kemerovo, Russian Federation
Emmanuel Levy Lab, Dept. of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Arseniy Lobov

### Lab Head
Dr Anton G. Kutikhin
Head of the Laboratory for Vascular Biology, Department of Experimental Medicine, Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases Kemerovo, Russian Federation


