### Accession
PXD010220

### Title
A combined N-terminomics and shotgun proteomics approach to investigate the responses of human cells to rapamycin and zinc at the mitochondrial level

### Description
This study aims at investigating the impact of rapamycin and zinc at subtoxic doses on the human mitochondrial proteome. Experiments were performed on U397 monocytic cells. A dN-TOP strategy, combining shotgun proteomics and N-terminomics, was applied to study both internal and N-terminal peptides of the mitochondrial proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC device (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Shotgun data was processed using MaxQuant(version 1.6.0.16). Raw data-derived peak lists were searched using the Andromeda search engine against an in-house database containing all Homo sapiens entries extracted from UniProtKB-SwissProt (release of 01/2016, 20 175 entries), common contaminants (119 entries) and the corresponding 20,294  reverse entries. The database was generated using the database toolbox from MSDA (publicly available from https://msda.unistra.fr). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. Fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Trypsin was chosen as digestion enzyme and one missed cleavage was tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. A maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set at both the peptide and protein levels. Quantification, normalization and protein abundance estimation were performed using the MaxLFQ method implemented in MaxQuant. The option “match between runs” was enabled. Both modified and unmodified peptides (oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini) were excluded from protein quantification. All other parameters were set as default.

### Publication Abstract
All but thirteen mammalian mitochondrial proteins are encoded by the nuclear genome, translated in the cytosol and then imported into the mitochondria. For a significant proportion of the mitochondrial proteins, import is coupled with the cleavage of a presequence called the transit peptide, and the formation of a new N-terminus. Determination of the neo N-termini has been investigated by proteomic approaches in several systems, but generally in a static way to compile as many N-termini as possible. In the present study, we have investigated how the mitochondrial proteome and N-terminome react to chemical stimuli that alter mitochondrial metabolism, namely zinc ions and rapamycin. To this end, we have used a strategy that analyzes both internal and N-terminal peptides in a single run, the dN-TOP approach. We used these two very different stressors to sort out what could be a generic response to stress and what is specific to each of these stressors. Rapamycin and zinc induced different changes in the mitochondrial proteome. However, convergent changes to key mitochondrial enzymatic activities such as pyruvate dehydrogenase, succinate dehydrogenase and citrate synthase were observed for both treatments. Other convergent changes were seen in components of the N-terminal processing system and mitochondrial proteases. Investigations into the generation of neo-N-termini in mitochondria showed that the processing system is robust, as indicated by the lack of change in neo N-termini under the conditions tested. Detailed analysis of the data revealed that zinc caused a slight reduction in the efficiency of the N-terminal trimming system and that both treatments increased the degradation of mitochondrial proteins. In conclusion, the use of this combined strategy allowed a detailed analysis of the dynamics of the mitochondrial N-terminome in response to treatments which impact the mitochondria.

### Keywords
N-terminome analysis, Mitochondria, Nanolc-ms/ms, Dn-top strategy, Differential analysis

### Affiliations
LSMBO - IPHC
IPHC (LSMBO - Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique), UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS

### Submitter
Joanna Bons

### Lab Head
Dr Christine CARAPITO
IPHC (LSMBO - Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique), UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS


