### Accession
PXD021782

### Title
Identification of N-linked glycosylated peptides in the open ocean diatom Thalassiosira oceanica

### Description
N-linked glycosylation is a posttranslational modification affecting protein folding and protein function. The N-linked glycosylation pathway in algae is poorly characterized, and further knowledge is needed to understand the cell biology of algae and the evolution of N-linked glycosylation. This study investigated the N-linked glycosylation pathway in the open ocean diatom Thalassiosira oceanica and identified N-linked glycosylated peptides through solid-phase extraction of N-linked glycosylated peptides (SPEG). We characterized 118 N-linked glycosylated peptides from samples of cells grown in high- and low-iron conditions. The identified peptides had 81% NXT-type motifs, with X being any amino acids except proline. The presence of N-linked glycosylation sites in the iron starvation-induced protein 1a (ISIP1a) confirmed its predicted topology, contributing to the biochemical characterization of ISIP1 proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Sample volumes of 850 ml for low-iron cultures and 500 ml for high-iron samples were filtered onto 2 µm polycarbonate filters, rinsed off, and subsequently pelleted. The protocol by Tian et al (Tian et al., 2007) was followed for the capturing of the N-linked glycosylated peptides with minor modifications. After protein lysis, 500 µg of each sample was combined and reduced for 60 min at 60°C using 10 mM DTT. It followed an alkylation step with 12 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature (RT). A 100 mM (pH8) potassium phosphate buffer was used to dilute urea concentration, and 20 µg trypsin was added for overnight digestion. The sample was acidified (pH<3) with formic acid and washed in HLB cartridges. Columns were conditioned with 1x1 ml 50% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 2x1 ml 0.1% TFA. The sample was loaded, and the column was washed 5x with 0.1% TFA. Two elution steps followed with 600 µl 50% ACN – 0.1% TFA. The peptides were oxidized with a final concentration of 10 mM sodium periodate for 1h at 4 °C in the dark, followed by a dilution step to reach an ACN percentage of under 5% and acidified with formic acid (pH<3). A final column-wash followed as described above. Hydrazine beads (75 µl) were used to bind oxidized beads in an overnight reaction. Three µl PNGase F was used to release the peptides for 3 h at 37 °C. Peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20 °C for further processing. Peptides were further processed based on techniques used on previously published data 60 with some modifications. Briefly, the samples were dried to a pellet in a vacuum centrifuge and subsequently resuspended in 20 µL of a 3% ACN, 0.5% formic acid solution. The samples were transferred to a 300 µL HPLC vial and subject to analysis by LC-MS/MS on a VelosPRO orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) equipped with an UltiMate 3000 Nano-LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). Chromatographic separation of the digests was performed on PicoFRIT C18 self-packed 75 µm x 60 cm capillary column (New Objective, Woburn, Massachusetts, USA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using a data-dependent acquisition method in which a full scan was obtained at a resolution of 30,000, followed by ten consecutive MS/MS spectra in both higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and collision-induced dissociation (CID) mode (normalized collision energy 36%). Internal calibration was performed using the ion signal of polysiloxane at m/z 445.120025 as a lock mass. Raw MS data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). Peak lists were searched against the T. oceanica protein (txid159749) database as well as the cRAP database of common contaminants (Global Proteome Machine Organization). Two separate database searches were performed on each LC-MSMS datafile to identify both light and heavy 15N labeled proteins. For both searches, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while asparagine to aspartic deamidation (N to D to account for PNGase F hydrolysis), methionine (Met) oxidation, N-terminal Met loss, and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine were included as variable modifications. Additionally, for the 15N labeled search, all nitrogen atoms were set as 15N fixed modifications. A custom asparagine to aspartic deamidation variable modification was created to contemplate the loss of a 15N isotope instead of the standard 14N. A mass accuracy tolerance of 5 ppm was used for precursor ions, while 0.02 Da for HCD fragmentation or 0.6 Da for CID fragmentation was used for productions. Percolator was used to determine confident peptide identifications using a 0.1% false discovery rate (FDR). For semi-quantitative purposes, peptides and proteins were classified as +Fe and/or No Fe based on the evidence of a peptide to spectrum (MS/MS) match identification (PSM) for each experimental group.

### Publication Abstract
N-linked glycosylation is a posttranslational modification affecting protein folding and function. The N-linked glycosylation pathway in algae is poorly characterized, and further knowledge is needed to understand the cell biology of algae and the evolution of N-linked glycosylation. This study investigated the N-linked glycosylation pathway in Thalassiosira oceanica, an open ocean diatom adapted to survive at growth-limiting iron concentrations. Here we identified and annotated the genes coding for the essential enzymes involved in the N-linked glycosylation pathway of T. oceanica. Transcript levels for genes coding for calreticulin, oligosaccharyltransferase (OST), N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GnT1), and UDP-glucose glucosyltransferase (UGGT) under high- and low-iron growth conditions revealed diel transcription patterns with a significant decrease of calreticulin and OST transcripts under iron-limitation. Solid-phase extraction of N-linked glycosylated peptides (SPEG) revealed 118&#xa0;N-linked glycosylated peptides from cells grown in high- and low-iron growth conditions. The identified peptides had 81% NXT-type motifs, with X being any amino acids except proline. The presence of N-linked glycosylation sites in the iron starvation-induced protein 1a (ISIP1a) confirmed its predicted topology, contributing to the biochemical characterization of ISIP1 proteins. Analysis of extensive oceanic gene databases showed a global distribution of calreticulin, OST, and UGGT, reinforcing the importance of glycosylation in microalgae.

### Keywords
Diatom, Solid-phase extraction of n-linked glycosylated peptides, N-linked glycosylation

### Affiliations
Dalhousie University. Biological Mass Spectrometry Core Facility
Professor. Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Marine Microbial Genomics and Biogeochemistry. Department of Biology, Dalhousie University

### Submitter
Alejandro Cohen

### Lab Head
Dr Julie LaRoche
Professor. Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Marine Microbial Genomics and Biogeochemistry. Department of Biology, Dalhousie University


