### Accession
PXD013857

### Title
A CRISPR/Cas9 engineered Von Willebrand factor deficient endothelial cell model shows alternative trafficking of Weibel-Palade body proteins

### Description
Synthesis of the hemostatic protein Von Willebrand factor (VWF) drives formation of endothelial storage organelles called Weibel-Palade bodies (WPBs). In the absence of VWF, angiogenic and inflammatory mediators that are co-stored in WPBs are subject to alternative trafficking routes. In Von Willebrand disease (VWD) patients, the partial or complete absence of VWF/WPBs may lead to additional bleeding complications, such as angiodysplasia. Studies addressing the role of VWF using VWD patient-derived blood outgrowth endothelial cells (BOECs) have reported conflicting results due to the intrinsic heterogeneity of patient-derived BOECs.  To study the role of WPBs in endothelial cells using CRISPR-mediated knockout of VWF in BOECs. We used CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing in single donor cord blood-derived BOECs (cbBOECs) to generate clonal VWF-/- cbBOECs. Clones were selected using high-throughput screening, VWF mutations were validated by sequencing and cells were phenotypically characterized.  Two VWF-/- BOEC clones were obtained and were entirely devoid of WPBs, while overall cell morphology was unaltered. Several WPB proteins, including CD63, syntaxin-3 and the cargo proteins Ang-2, IL-6 and IL-8 showed alternative trafficking and secretion in absence of VWF. Interestingly, Ang-2 changed localization to the cell periphery and colocalized with Tie-2.  CRISPR editing of VWF provides a robust method to create VWF deficient BOECs that can be directly compared to their wild-type counterparts. Results obtained with our model system confirmed alternative trafficking of several WPB proteins in the absence of VWF and support the theory that increased Ang-2/Tie-2 interaction contributes to angiogenic abnormalities in VWD patients.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 75 μl 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris.HCl pH 7.5 and processed into tryptic peptides using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation method.[Wísniewski et al, Nat Methods 2009; 6: 359–62.] Peptide recovery was checked by measuring the A280 and 10μg of peptides were desalted and concentrated using Empore-C18 StageTips and eluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2 % acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA to a final volume of 4.5 μl. 3 μl of each sample was injected for MS analysis. Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse phase chromatography coupled in line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific) as described previously.[Salerno et al, Nat Immunol 2018; 19: 828–37]

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, version 1.5.2.8. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (downloaded February 2015). Standard settings with the additional options match between runs, Label Free Quantification (LFQ), and only unique peptides for quantification were selected. The generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ table was filtered for potential contaminants, reverse hits and ‘only identified by site’ using Perseus 1.5.1.6. The LFQ values were transformed in log2 scale and proteins were filtered for at least three valid values in one of the experimental groups. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width = 0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. A volcanoplot was made using a t-test with false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 and S0 of 1, resulting in 17 significantly different proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gene knockout techniques, Secretory vesicles, Von willebrand factor, Protein transport, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
ErasmusMC
Department of Hematology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Ruben Bierings

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.Ir. Ruben Bierings
Department of Hematology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands


