### Accession
PXD015845

### Title
Phosphoproteomic Characterization of Signaling Networks Resulting from Activation of Chemokine Receptor CCR2

### Description
Leukocyte recruitment, a universal feature of tissue inflammation, is regulated by the interactions of chemokines with their G protein-coupled receptors. Activation of CC chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) by its cognate chemokine ligands, including CCL2, plays a central role in recruitment of monocytes in several inflammatory diseases. In this study, we used phosphoproteomics to enable unbiased characterization of the signaling network resulting from CCL2 activation of CCR2. Using data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry, both the proteome and phosphoproteome were quantified for FlpIn-HEK293T cells stably expressing CCR2, at six time points after activation with CCL2, in comparison with untreated cells. Differential expression analysis identified 699 significantly regulated phosphorylation sites located on 441 proteins. As expected, many of these proteins participate in canonical signal transduction pathways and the regulation of actin cytoskeleton dynamics, including numerous guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) and GTPase activating proteins (GAPs). In addition, we identified regulated phosphorylation sites in numerous proteins that exert functions in the nucleus, including several constituents of the nuclear pore complex. This study provides an unprecedented level of detail about CCR2 signalling and identifies potential novel targets for regulation of CCR2 function.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lysed in 1% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0, sonicated with a probe sonicator (Soniprep 150, MSE), reduced (10mM TCEP) and alkylated (40mM CAA). Protein concentration was determined with BCA assay (Pierce). Protein was digested with trypsin and SDC was removed. Phosphopeptide was enriched with TiO2.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was the software package used for library generation. The parameter for MaxQuant search was kept as default, except phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine was added as the variable modification and the human protein sequence database was downloaded from Uniprot/SwissProt, containing 20,244 proteins. Proteome and phosphoproteome libraries were generated in Spectronaut 10 (Biognosys) based on MaxQuant results using default parameters. Spectral libraries for proteome and phosphoproteome were generated identically, but separately. All the parameters for proteome or phosphoproteome quantification were kept as default. In addition, for proteome quantification only non-modified peptides and the sum of peptide or precursor peak area was used for quantification. In contrast, only modified peptides were used for phosphoproteome quantification. For proteome quantification, a report containing normalized peak areas was exported as an Excel spreadsheet, while for phosphoproteome quantification, a report containing normalized peak areas for modified peptides was exported to an Excel spreadsheet. Only peptides falling below a q-value of 0.01 and only phosphorylated peptides were retained for further processing. Coefficient of variation and Pearson correlation was used to access the quality of the data.

### Publication Abstract
Leukocyte recruitment is a universal feature of tissue inflammation and regulated by the interactions of chemokines with their G protein-coupled receptors. Activation of CC chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) by its cognate chemokine ligands, including CC chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2), plays a central role in recruitment of monocytes in several inflammatory diseases. In this study, we used phosphoproteomics to conduct an unbiased characterization of the signaling network resulting from CCL2 activation of CCR2. Using data-independent acquisition MS analysis, we quantified both the proteome and phosphoproteome in FlpIn-HEK293T cells stably expressing CCR2 at six time points after activation with CCL2. Differential expression analysis identified 699 significantly regulated phosphorylation sites on 441 proteins. As expected, many of these proteins are known to participate in canonical signal transduction pathways and in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton dynamics, including numerous guanine nucleotide exchange factors and GTPase-activating proteins. Moreover, we identified regulated phosphorylation sites in numerous proteins that function in the nucleus, including several constituents of the nuclear pore complex. The results of this study provide an unprecedented level of detail of CCR2 signaling and identify potential targets for regulation of CCR2 function.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Signalling, Dia, Ccr2

### Affiliations
Monash University
1Infection and Immunity Program and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Cheng Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Martin J Stone
1Infection and Immunity Program and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton 3800, Victoria, Australia


