### Accession
PXD048116

### Title
Ubiquitin or NEDD8-modified protein catalysed  by UBE2E1_LC-MS/MS

### Description
Use of mass spectrometry to investigate the sites of ubiquitin or NEDD8 modification of substrates (EGFP containing KEGYES sequences, EGFP/p53/Alpha-synuclein containing KEGYEE sequences) catalysed by the E2 enzyme UBE2E1.

### Sample Protocol
The gel bands of interest were separated from the gel and then subjected to an in-gel digestion at 37 °C overnight. The peptides were then extracted twice with buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 50% aqueous acetonitrile) and dried using a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific). 0.1% aqueous trifluoroacetic acid was used to redissolve the peptides and analyzed by Thermo orbitrap fusion. For LC-MS/MS analyses, a gradient elution (0.30 µl/min) was performed for 60 min to separate the peptides using an EASY-nLC 1000 system connected directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 3.0 software. A single full scan mass spectrum (350-1550 m/z, 120,000 resolution) was acquired, followed by top-speed MS/MS scans in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
An in-house Proteome Discoverer (Version PD1.4, Thermo-Fisher) was used to search the MS/MS spectra from each LC-MS/MS run based on the target protein sequence. The search settings were as follows: mass tolerance of the precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for all MS; mass tolerance of the fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da for all acquired MS2 spectra; Using the fixed value PSM validator to calculate the peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and a peptide spectrum match (PSM) is considered correct if the q value is less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination, catalyzed usually by a three-enzyme cascade (E1, E2, E3), regulates various eukaryotic cellular processes. E3 ligases are the most critical components of this catalytic cascade, determining both substrate specificity and polyubiquitination linkage specificity. Here, we reveal the mechanism of a naturally occurring E3-independent ubiquitination reaction of a unique human E2 enzyme UBE2E1 by solving the structure of UBE2E1 in complex with substrate SETDB1-derived peptide. Guided by this peptide sequence-dependent ubiquitination mechanism, we developed an E3-free enzymatic strategy SUE1 (sequence-dependent ubiquitination using UBE2E1) to efficiently generate ubiquitinated proteins with customized ubiquitinated sites, ubiquitin chain linkages and lengths. Notably, this strategy can also be used to generate site-specific branched ubiquitin chains or even NEDD8-modified proteins. Our work not only deepens the understanding of how an E3-free substrate ubiquitination reaction occurs in human cells, but also provides a practical approach for obtaining ubiquitinated proteins to dissect the biochemical functions of ubiquitination.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Lc-ms/ms, Ube2e1, Nedd8

### Affiliations
New Cornerstone Science Laboratory, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, MOE Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Center for Synthetic and Systems Biology, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.

### Submitter
Xiangwei Wu

### Lab Head
Mr Xiangwei Wu
New Cornerstone Science Laboratory, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for Life Sciences, MOE Key Laboratory of Bioorganic Phosphorus Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Center for Synthetic and Systems Biology, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.


