### Accession
PXD008660

### Title
Proteome-wide diet-independent adipose tissue alterations link dendritic cells to 2-aminoadipoate associated insulin sensitivity.

### Description
Adipose tissue dysfunction in obese humans is associated with disrupted metabolic homeostasis, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). In a mouse model that has preserved insulin sensitivity despite increased adiposity, we used unbiased three-dimensional integration of proteome profiles, metabolic profiles, and gene regulatory networks to understand adipose tissue proteome-wide changes and their metabolic implications. Multiple-dimensional liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry and extended multiplexing TMT labeling (24 biological samples) was used to analyze proteomes of epididymal adipose tissues isolated from wildtype (Csf2+/+) and GM-CSF driven dendritic cell deficient (Csf2-/-) mice that were fed low fat, high fat, or high fat plus cholesterol diets for 8 weeks. The peripheral metabolic health (as measured by body weight, adiposity, plasma fasting glucose, insulin, triglycerides, phospholipids, total cholesterol levels, and glucose and insulin tolerance tests) deteriorated with diet for both genotypes, while mice lacking Csf2 were protected from insulin resistance. Regardless of diet, 30, mostly mitochondrial metabolism proteins participating in amino acid and branched chain amino acid pathways were altered, between Csf2-/- and Csf2+/+ mice. Tissue DHTKD1 levels were >4-fold upregulated and plasma 2-aminoadipoate (2-AA) levels were >2 fold reduced in Csf2-/- mice. GM-CSF driven dendritic cells play a detrimental role in insulin sensitivity via lysine metabolism involving Dhtkd1/2-AA axis.

### Sample Protocol
MICE Wild-type (Csf+/+) male mice (Jackson Labs, #000664) and knock-out (Csf-/-) male mice (a kind gift from Randy Seeley) (both in a C57BL/6 background) were housed in a pathogen-free facility in a temperature-controlled room (22C) with a 12-h light/dark cycle, and given free access to food and water (3−5 mice per cage). At 8 weeks of age, the mice were fed either a low-fat (4%) regular chow diet (Wayne Rodent BLOX 8604; Harlan Teklad Laboratory, Madison, WI), a high-fat diet (HF diet; 60% fat calories, D12492 Research Diets) or a HF diet supplemented with cholesterol (HF+C diet; 0.15% cholesterol w/w, 60% fat calories, F4997 Bio-Serv) and were analyzed at 16 weeks age. Before necropsy, mice were fasted for 4 h in the morning, bled from the retro-orbital sinus into tubes containing 1 mM EDTA, and euthanized by isofluorane inhalation. Epididymal adipose tissue (EAT) depots were collected, weighed, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80C until analysis.  ADIPOSE TISSUE PROTEIN ISOLATION Under sterile conditions, EAT was extracted and separated into stromal vascular cell and adipocyte fractions. Minced tissue in digestion buffer (Dulbecco’s PBS supplemented by calcium and magnesium, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) was incubated with 2 mg/ml type I collagenase (Worthington Biochemical, Lakewood, NJ) for 45 min at 37C on an orbital shaker, filtered through 250 µm nylon mesh, and centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 min. The pellet was resuspended in erythrocyte lysis buffer (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA), incubated at room temperature (RT) for 5 min, and then filtered through a 70 µm nylon mesh and washed by centrifugation as above.   100 – 300 mg of epididymal adipose tissue (EAT) from individual mice was homogenized on ice in 1 ml homogenization buffer (150mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 1x GBiosciences ProteaseArrest) using a polytron tissue homogenizer. Homogenized samples were spun at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4C and the top lipid layer removed. Supernatant and pellet were lysed by addition of 2.5% SDS and sonicated 3 times at 2 watts for 5 seconds each with 30 second rests between. Chloroform-methanol precipitation was performed to further eliminate lipids. In brief, 4 parts methanol, 2 parts chloroform, and 3 parts water were added to each sample, mixed, and spun down. The top fraction was removed and the protein layer was washed four times with 100% methanol. Proteins were dried and stored at -80C. Protein samples were reconstituted in 50 mM HEPES and protein concentration determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay with a BSA standard (Thermo Scientific).   TRYPTIC DIGEST 110ug reconstituted protein of each sample was digested in 0.1% Rapigest (Waters). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 5mM TCEP for 30 min at 37C. Cysteines were alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at RT in the dark. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 5mM DTT for 15 min at RT in the dark. Protein was digested with LysC and Trypsin (Cat # V5071, Promega) at a 1:100 w/w protease:protein ratio for 3h at 37C, then at a 1:50 w/w ratio overnight at 37C. Digestion was terminated with TFA to 0.5%. Particulates were removed by spinning at 12,000g for 15m, and peptides solid phase extracted using Waters Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges, dried, and stored at -80C.  TMT LABELING Peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and their concentration determined by the BCA assay described above. A pooled sample for internal reference scaling (IRS) normalization between runs was prepared by combining an equal ratio of peptide from each individual sample. Samples were randomly distributed between 3 sets of TMT 10-plexes, with 2 tags from each set reserved for a pooled internal standard for IRS normalization. 25 ug from each sample was labeled. Equal volumes from each sample within a set were combined and analyzed through LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) in order to determine labelling efficiency.  LC ANALYSIS Multiplexed TMT-labeled samples were reconstituted in 5% formic acid and separated by 2D reverse-phase LC. A 20 ul sample (40 ug) was injected onto a NanoEase 5 μm XBridge BEH130 C18 300 um x 50 mm column (Waters) at 3 ul/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9). Peptides were eluted by injection of 20 ul volumes of 14, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 40, and 90% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9) at 3 ul/min flow rate. Eluted peptides were diluted with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 24 ul/min flow rate and delivered to an Acclaim PepMap 100 um x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5 um trap on a switching valve. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched on-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 um, 75 um x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated at low pH in the 2nd dimension using a 7.5–30% ACN gradient over 90 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 300 nl/min flow rate.

### Data Protocol
MASS SPECTROMETRY Data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 120,000), and data-dependent MS2 scans performed in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35) following isolation with the instrument’s quadrupole. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 60,000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation of the top 10 ions in the linear ion trap, and higher-energy collisional dissociation in the ion-routing multipole (normalized collision energy = 65).  TMT DATA ANALYSIS RAW instrument files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific). For each of the TMT experiments, raw files from the 9 fractions were merged and searched with the SEQUEST HT search engine with a Mus musculus Swiss-Prot protein database downloaded July 2015 (16,716 entries). Searches were configured with static modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysines and N-termini, carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteines, dynamic modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), parent ion tolerance of 1.25 Da, fragment mass tolerance of 1.0005 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). The large parent ion tolerance was used to increase the number of peptides being scored to improve discrimination of true versus false identifications. Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator software. Only peptides with q scores < 0.05 were accepted, and one or more unique peptides were required for matching a protein entry for its identification.    Search results and TMT reporter ion intensities were exported as text files and processed with in-house scripts. A median reporter ion intensity peak height cutoff of 150 was used, and all reporter ion intensities for unique peptides matched to each respective protein were summed to create total protein intensities. We employed two normalization procedures to handle the 30-plex experiment (3 TMT experiments with 10 channels each). The first was applied within each 10-plex experiment. The grand total reporter ion intensity for each channel was multiplied by a global scaling factor to adjust its total intensity to the average total intensity across the 10 channels. This corrects for small sample loading and labeling reaction efficiency differences.    MS2 scans are selected stochastically by the mass spectrometer for each peptide. Two identical peptides in two different TMT experiments having identical concentrations would be extremely unlikely to have similar reporter ion signals, since their sampled intensities would depend on the peptide concentration at the time when the MS2 spectrum was acquired. Therefore, common, pooled internal standards were used to normalize reporter ion intensities of proteins between different TMT experiments. This allowed preservation of individual intensity-scale measurements and avoided calculation of relative intensity measures such as ratios or percentages within each TMT experiment. To accomplish this, the duplicate summed reporter ion measurements for each protein in the common pool channels within each TMT experiment were averaged and used to create reference values for each protein. The three reference values for each protein in each TMT experiment were then averaged (geometric mean), and scaling factors calculated for each protein to adjust its reference value to the geometric mean value.  These scaling factors were then used to adjust the summed reporter ion intensities for each protein in the remaining 8 experimental samples in each TMT experiment. We call this procedure internal reference scaling (IRS). Quantifiable proteins were restricted to proteins identified in all three experiments and should have a low protein false discovery rate.  Differential protein abundance between groups was then determined by comparing the IRS-normalized total reporter ion intensities between groups using the Bioconductor package edgeR. Additional data normalizations, multiple testing corrections, and calculation of false discovery rates were performed within edgeR.

### Publication Abstract
In a GM-CSF driven myeloid cell deficient mouse model (Csf2<sup>-/-</sup>) that has preserved insulin sensitivity despite increased adiposity, we used unbiased three-dimensional integration of proteome profiles, metabolic profiles, and gene regulatory networks to understand adipose tissue proteome-wide changes and their metabolic implications. Multi-dimensional liquid chromatography mass spectrometry and extended multiplex mass labeling was used to analyze proteomes of epididymal adipose tissues isolated from Csf2<sup>+/+</sup> and Csf2<sup>-/-</sup> mice that were fed low fat, high fat, or high fat plus cholesterol diets for 8 weeks. The metabolic health (as measured by body weight, adiposity, plasma fasting glucose, insulin, triglycerides, phospholipids, total cholesterol levels, and glucose and insulin tolerance tests) deteriorated with diet for both genotypes, while mice lacking Csf2 were protected from insulin resistance. Regardless of diet, 30 mostly mitochondrial, branch chain amino acids (BCAA), and lysine metabolism proteins were altered between Csf2<sup>-/-</sup> and Csf2<sup>+/+</sup> mice (FDR&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). Lack of GM-CSF driven myeloid cells lead to reduced adipose tissue 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (DHTKD1) levels and subsequent increase in plasma 2-aminoadipate (2-AA) levels, both of which are reported to correlate with insulin resistance. Tissue DHTKD1 levels were &gt;4-fold upregulated and plasma 2-AA levels were &gt;2 fold reduced in Csf2<sup>-/-</sup> mice (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). GM-CSF driven myeloid cells link peripheral insulin sensitivity to adiposity via lysine metabolism involving DHTKD1/2-AA axis in a diet independent manner.

### Keywords
Obesity, Branched chain amino acid metabolism, Quantitative proteomics, Extended multiplexing, Insulin resistance, Isobaric labeling, Inflammation, Adipose tissue biology

### Affiliations
OHSU
Knight Cardiovascular Institute Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Pamir
Knight Cardiovascular Institute Oregon Health & Science University 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road Portland, Oregon 97239, USA


