### Accession
PXD007873

### Title
TDP-43 in ALS/FTLD studied by a novel aggregate extraction method

### Description
Accumulation of abnormally phosphorylated TDP-43 (pTDP-43) is the main pathological finding characterizing affected neurons in most patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). At least four different subtypes of FTLD-TDP have been described, based on the morphology and neuroanatomical distribution of pathological TDP-43 accumulations. To understand the molecular basis of this heterogeneity that correlates with clinical presentations, we developed SarkoSpin, a new method for the biochemical isolation of pathological TDP-43 from complex tissues. Using postmortem samples of 79 patients and controls, we show that SarkoSpin allows the physical separation of pTDP-43 from ~99.8% of total proteins, including the extreme bulk of physiological TDP-43. Pathological TDP-43 extracted from different disease subtypes forms large and buoyant assemblies of distinct densities and 3-dimentional shapes that correlate with specific neuropathological classifications.

### Sample Protocol
See "Distinct TDP-43 quaternary structures in ALS/FTLD revealed by a novel aggregate extraction method" by Laferriere et al. After clean-up with C18 cartridges, the peptide samples were measured on a TripleTOF 5600 instrument (AB Sciex, Concord ON) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source and an Eksigent 1D-plus liquid chromatography system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) or a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher). For the TripleTOF measurements, peptides were loaded onto a 20-cm long, 75 µm i.d. PicoFrit Column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed in-house with Magic C18 AQ 3 µm beads (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA) and separated with a linear gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 90 min at a flowrate of 300 nL/min. Survey scans were acquired in 300 ms and up to 20 product ion scans were collected in 75 ms if exceeding a threshold 150 counts per second with a charge state from 2+ to 5+. For the Q Exactive Plus measurements, peptides were loaded on a 40 cm long, 75 µm i.d. column packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted for 50 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 40% acetonitrile at a flow-rate of 300 nL/min. Survey full-scan mass spectra were acquired with mass range 350-1500 m/z, at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z and the 20 most intense ions above an intensity of 3.6e4 were sequentially isolated, fragmented (HCD at 25 NCE) and measured at a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z. Peptides with a charge of +1 or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s was applied. Ions were accumulated to a target value of 3e6 for MS1 and of 1e5 for MS2.

### Data Protocol
MGF-peak lists generated from the acquired spectra by ProteinPilot from the TripleTOF runs and .RAW files from the Q Exactive Plus runs were searched against a human Uniprot protein database (68978 sequence) by Sequest HT in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) with enzymatic specificity trypsin, precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm and fragment tolerance 0.1 Da and 0.02 Da for TripleTOF and Q Exactive Plus, respectively. Methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylation of cysteines were set as respectively variable and static modifications. Percolator was used to filter the results to a 1% peptide false discovery rate. Spectral counting was used for quantifying protein differences between samples.

### Publication Abstract
Accumulation of abnormally phosphorylated TDP-43 (pTDP-43) is the main pathology in affected neurons of people with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). Morphological diversity and neuroanatomical distribution of pTDP-43 accumulations allowed classification of FTLD cases into at least four subtypes, which are correlated with clinical presentations and genetic causes. To understand the molecular basis of this heterogeneity, we developed SarkoSpin, a new method for biochemical isolation of pathological TDP-43. By combining SarkoSpin with mass spectrometry, we revealed proteins beyond TDP-43 that become abnormally insoluble in a disease subtype-specific manner. We show that pTDP-43 extracted from brain forms stable assemblies of distinct densities and morphologies that are associated with disease subtypes. Importantly, biochemically extracted pTDP-43 assemblies showed differential neurotoxicity and seeding that were correlated with disease duration of FTLD subjects. Our data are consistent with the notion that disease heterogeneity could originate from alternate pathological TDP-43 conformations, which are reminiscent of prion strains.

### Keywords
Ftld, Tdp-43, Als

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
ETH Zurich, Inst. of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Paul Boersema

### Lab Head
Dr Paola Picotti
ETH Zurich


