### Accession
PXD020105

### Title
APOBEC3C, a perinucleolar protein induced by genotoxins, is recruited to DNA damage sites

### Description
The human genome contains 11 APOBEC (Apolipoprotein B mRNA Editing Catalytic Polypeptide-like) cytidine deaminases classified into four families. These proteins function mainly in innate antiviral immunity and can also restrict endogenous retrotransposable element multiplication. The present study focuses on APOBEC3C (A3C), a member of the APOBEC3 sub-family. Some APOBEC3 proteins use their enzymatic activity on genomic DNA, inducing mutations and DNA damage, while other members facilitate DNA repair. Our results show that A3C is highly expressed in cells treated with DNA damaging agents. Its expression is regulated by p53. In addition, we provide the A3C interactome in both normal conditions and in cells exposed to the genotoxin etoposide. Most A3C interacting partners are proteins involved in RNA metabolism and some in DNA repair. Our data also indicate that A3C overexpression is detrimental to mammalian cells and we show that this protein is located around the nucleolus and at laser-damaged DNA sites.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells were seeded in 4 individual 10-cm plates at a 1∙106 cells/plate density and left to adhere overnight. The next day two plates were transfected with 10 μg empty pcDNA3 plasmid and the remaining plates with the same amount of hApobec3c-V5.dn3. Sixteen hours post transfection, the media was changed and one set of plates was treated with 25 μM etoposide and the other set was left untreated. Fourty-eight hours later, the cells were harvested by trypsinization and washed in ice cold PBS. Lysis was performed in 1.5 ml of IP-lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, 10 μM MgCl2, supplemented with c0mplete protease inhibitor (1 pill per 50 ml), and with PhosStop (1 pill per 10 ml) for 30 minutes on ice. The samples were centrifuged at 15’000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The supernatants were moved to new tubes and the protein concentration was determined using a BCA kit (Pierce 23225). A tenth of the lysates were saved as “input” samples. Lysate containing 1 mg of protein were moved to new tubes and 1.5 μg anti-V5 antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific, R960) was added to each tube. The tubes were incubated at 4°C overnight with gently rotation. The next day, 10 μl of pre-washed protein G Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 10004D) were added to each tube. The samples were incubated one hour at 4°C with slow rotation. The beads were gently washed 5 times with cold IP-lysis buffer. After the last wash, the beads were resuspended in 40 μl Laemmli buffer and incubated for 10 minutes at 95°C. One 40th of the immunoprecipitated samples, along with the input samples were run on a SDS-PAGE as a quality control. The rest of the immunoprecipitated samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry at the University of Lausanne Protein Analysis Facility (https://www.unil.ch/paf/en/home.html). Three independent experiments were performed.  Protein samples were loaded on a 12 % mini polyacrylamide gel and migrated about 2 cm After Coomassie staining, gel lanes between 15-300 kDa were excised into 5 pieces, and digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for mass spectrometry analyses. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected on a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced via an EasySpray source to a high-resolution mass spectrometer QExactive Plus (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Dionex) before separation on an Easy Spray C18 PepMap column (50 cm x 75µm ID, 2µm, 100Å, Dionex). A gradient from 4 to 76 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid was used for peptide separation of each fraction (total time: 65min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 70,000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher), the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy NCE=27 %) and analysis in the orbitrap at 17’500 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.5 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 60s from further analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra of raw files were converted by ProteWizard 3.0 (http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net) to mgf format (= text file) and data were analyzed using Mascot 2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK) as search engine. Mascot was set up to search the Homo sapiens reference proteome database (http://www.uniprot.org, October 2017 version: 71’785 sequences), and a  custom database including usual contaminants (keratins, digestion enzymes, etc.). Trypsin (cleavage at K,R) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Mascot was searched with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold software (version 4.8, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications, and to perform dataset alignment. Peptide identifications established at lower than 90.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm were filtered out. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Approximately 1’500 proteins were identified, and the MS/MS spectra detected as unique for each protein (exclusive spectral counts) were used for statistical and GO analyses. Individual t-tests were performed between the control pulldown and the A3C-V5 pulldown in untreated conditions (UP vs UA), and in etoposide treated cells (EP vs EA). The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg method corrected for multiple comparisons. Only proteins with a FDR < 0.05 (n=190) were included in the gene ontology(GO) analysis. This analysis was performed with the PANTHER software using the overrepresentation test with Bonferroni correction for multiple testing.

### Publication Abstract
The human genome contains 11 APOBEC (apolipoprotein B mRNA editing catalytic polypeptide-like) cytidine deaminases classified into four families. These proteins function mainly in innate antiviral immunity and can also restrict endogenous retrotransposable element multiplication. The present study focuses on APOBEC3C (A3C), a member of the APOBEC3 subfamily. Some APOBEC3 proteins use their enzymatic activity on genomic DNA, inducing mutations and DNA damage, while other members facilitate DNA repair. Our results show that A3C is highly expressed in cells treated with DNA-damaging agents. Its expression is regulated by p53. Depletion of A3C slightly decreases proliferation and does not affect DNA repair via homologous recombination or nonhomologous end joining. The A3C interactomes obtained from control cells and cells exposed to the genotoxin etoposide indicated that A3C is a nucleolar protein. This was confirmed by the detection of either endogenous or ectopic A3C in nucleoli. Interestingly, we show that A3C is excluded from areas of DNA breaks in live cells. Our data also indicate that the C-terminal part of A3C is responsible for its nucleolar localization and exclusion from DNA damage sites.

### Keywords
Apobec3c, Dna damage, Genotoxins, Human cells, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Biomedical Sciences Rue du Bugnon 7 1005 Lausanne Switzerland

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Widmann
Department of Biomedical Sciences Rue du Bugnon 7 1005 Lausanne Switzerland


