### Accession
PXD017254

### Title
Plasma Biomarkers for VX exposure in guinea pigs

### Description
Biomarker discovery using plasma obtained from exposed guinea pigs (N=6) exposed to VX.

### Sample Protocol
Following BCA quantitation of all samples, equal quantities (150ug) were digested with trypsin/lysC.  Digestions were desalted and resuspended to approximately 2 mg/mL.  Peptide quantitation was performed and 30ug of peptides were labeled with TMT tags (10plex).  After labeling each animal with its own 10 plex, all timepoints were pooled into a single sample.  Six total samples, one for each animal.  These samples were then fractionated via basic reverse phase and concatenated into 14 samples plus a start and end fraction.  All samples were analyzed on a QE+ Orbitrap using a 75cm EasySpray column.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using PEAKS X, normalizing all animal to the MASTERMIX fraction.  The MASTERMIX fraction was a pooled sample from all samples in the study.  It was bulk labeled with the 131 channel and then aliquoted and mixed as the tenth channel to complete all six TMT 10plexes.

### Publication Abstract
The inhibition of acetylcholinesterase is regarded as the primary toxic mechanism of action for chemical warfare agents. Recently, there have been numerous reports suggesting that metabolic processes could significantly contribute to toxicity. As such, we applied a multi-omics pipeline to generate a detailed cascade of molecular events temporally occurring in guinea pigs exposed to VX. Proteomic and metabolomic profiling resulted in the identification of several enzymes and metabolic precursors involved in glycolysis and the TCA cycle. All lines of experimental evidence indicated that there was a blockade of the TCA cycle at isocitrate dehydrogenase 2, which converts isocitrate to &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate. Using a primary beating cardiomyocyte cell model, we were able to determine that the supplementation of &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate subsequently rescued cells from the acute effects of VX poisoning. This study highlights the broad impacts that VX has and how understanding these mechanisms could result in new therapeutics such as &#x3b1;-ketoglutarate.

### Keywords
Vx, Biomarker, Guinea pig, Cwa

### Affiliations
CCDC CBC

### Submitter
Trevor Glaros

### Lab Head
Dr Trevor Glaros
CCDC CBC


