### Accession
PXD018017

### Title
Identification and analysis of histone lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in Arabidopsis

### Description
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is a novel type of histone acylation in eukaryotes, but its prevalence and genomic function in higher plants remain unclear. Using mass spectrometry, we identified histone lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in Arabidopsis

### Sample Protocol
The Arabidopsis ecotype Columbia-0 (Col-0) was used as wild type in all experiments. Arabidopsis seeds were surface sterilized with 30% bleach before sowing on soil or growth medium and then vernalized at 4°C for 2 days. The seeds were grown on ½ MS with 8 g/l plant agar (Duchefa, Harlem, The Netherlands) and a pH of 5.8 in the Snijders Climate Chamber (Micro Clima) in a 12 hr light/12 hr dark regime with day temperatures 22°C and night temperatures 20°C and a light intensity of 120 μmol/m2s for 12 days unless specified otherwise.

### Data Protocol
Arabidopsis seedlings were grinded by liquid nitrogen; core histones were extracted by H2SO4 and digested by trypsin. Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) peptides were enriched by pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Bio-labs, Hangzhou). The eluted peptides were cleaned withC18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by analysis with LC–MS/MS. The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuantwith integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tan-dem mass spectra were searched against UniProt_Oryzasativa database (https://www.uniprot.org/) concatenated with reverse decoy database. False discovery rate thresh-olds for protein, peptide, and modification site were speci-fied as 1%; minimum peptide length was set at 7; and thesite localization probability was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation; chromartin; histone acylation; arabidopsis

### Affiliations
School of Basic Medicine, Biomedical Research Institute, Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan 442000, China
Hubei University of Medicine

### Submitter
Yonghong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yonghong Zhang
School of Basic Medicine, Biomedical Research Institute, Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan 442000, China


