### Accession
PXD016917

### Title
Protein identification in mouse liver by LC-MSMS

### Description
To identify TJP1-interacting proteins in primary hepatocytes cultured in collagen sandwich configuration (SD+) in vitro

### Sample Protocol
We identified TJP1-interacting proteins by immunoprecipitation of endogenous TJP1 in SD+ cultured hepatocytes. We prepared the protein gel treated with Coomassie blue staining.Gel bands of proteins were excised for ingel digestion,and proteins were identified by LC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against the selected database using Proteome Discovery searching algorithm (version 1.4).The search criteria were as follows: full tryptic specificity was required; two missed cleavage was allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) were set as the fixed modifications; the oxidation (M) was set as the variable modification; precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm; and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 20 mmu .

### Publication Abstract
Circadian clocks in the suprachiasmatic nucleus and peripheral tissues orchestrate behavioral and physiological activities of mammals in response to environmental cues. In the liver, the circadian clock is also modulated by feeding. However, the molecular mechanisms involved are unclear. Here, we show that TJP1 (tight junction protein 1) functions as a mediator of mTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin) to modulate the hepatic circadian clock. TJP1 interacts with PER1 (period circadian regulator 1) and prevents its nuclear translocation. During feeding, mTOR phosphorylates TJP1 and attenuates its association with PER1, thereby enhancing nuclear shuttling of PER1 to dampen circadian oscillation. Therefore, our results provide a previously uncharacterized mechanistic insight into how feeding modulates the hepatic circadian clock.

### Keywords
Mouse, Hepatocytes, Lc-msms, Liver

### Affiliations
Life Sciences of Tsinghua University
Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Yiguo Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yiguo Wang
Life Sciences of Tsinghua University


