### Accession
PXD021753

### Title
Reshaping of the Arabidopsis thaliana proteome landscape and co-regulation of proteins in development and immunity

### Description
Proteome remodeling is a fundamental adaptive response and proteins in complex and functionally related proteins are often co-expressed. Using a deep sampling strategy we define Arabidopsis thaliana tissue core proteomes at around 10,000 proteins per tissue and absolutely quantify (copy numbers per cell) nearly 16,000 proteins throughout the plant lifecycle. A proteome wide survey of global post translational modification revealed amino acid exchanges pointing to potential conservation of translational infidelity in eukaryotes. The deep proteome data is available from PRIDE submission PXD019330. Those results were complemented in this submission with parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) targeted proteomics over 1, 3 and 16 hours of flg22 exposure. The extensive coverage of the Arabidopsis proteome in various biological scenarios presents a rich resource to plant biologists that we make available to the community.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 accession was used for all experiments. Seedlings were grown in liquid culture for 10 days. Flg-22 was added to a final concentration of 1umol in medium and plants were harvested 1,3 and 16 hours after treatment. Following harvest plants were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, ground to a fine powder and stored at -80°C. Proteins were extracted from suspension cultures or soil grown plants. For parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) proteins were extracted with 4% SDS, digested with an optimized FASP protocol and peptides measured on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Up to three proteotypic peptide m/z per protein were targeted, peptides and proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine and data analysis and AUC quantification of 6 fragment ions was done using the Skyline software (Pino et al., 2020). Statistical significance of protein fold changes was inferred at a threshold of 0.05 if one of the quantified peptides tested significant.

### Publication Abstract
Proteome remodeling is a fundamental adaptive response, and proteins in complexes and functionally related proteins are often co-expressed. Using a deep sampling strategy we define core proteomes of Arabidopsis thaliana tissues with around 10&#xa0;000 proteins per tissue, and absolutely quantify (copy numbers per cell) nearly 16&#xa0;000 proteins throughout the plant lifecycle. A proteome-wide survey of global post-translational modification revealed amino acid exchanges pointing to potential conservation of translational infidelity in eukaryotes. Correlation analysis of protein abundance uncovered potentially new tissue- and age-specific roles of entire signaling modules regulating transcription in photosynthesis, seed development, and senescence and abscission. Among others, the data suggest a potential function of RD26 and other NAC transcription factors in seed development related to desiccation tolerance as well as a possible function of cysteine-rich receptor-like kinases (CRKs) as ROS sensors in senescence. All of the components of ribosome biogenesis factor (RBF) complexes were found to be co-expressed in a tissue- and age-specific manner, indicating functional promiscuity in the assembly of these less-studied protein complexes in Arabidopsis.Furthermore, we characterized detailed proteome remodeling in basal immunity by treating Arabidopsis seeldings with flg22. Through simultaneously monitoring phytohormone&#xa0;and transcript changes upon flg22 treatment, we obtained strong evidence of suppression of jasmonate (JA) and JA-isoleucine (JA-Ile) levels by deconjugation and hydroxylation by IAA-ALA RESISTANT3 (IAR3) and JASMONATE-INDUCED OXYGENASE 2 (JOX2), respectively, under the control of JASMONATE INSENSITIVE 1 (MYC2), suggesting an unrecognized role of a new JA regulatory switch in pattern-triggered immunity. Taken together, the datasets generated in this study present extensive coverage of the Arabidopsis proteome in various biological scenarios, providing a rich resource available to the whole plant science community.

### Keywords
Senescence, Ribosome, Deep proteomics, Jasmonate, Arabidopsis, Plant immunity, Seed proteome, Photosynthesis, Protein co-expression. proteome

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Research Group Head Proteome Biology of Plant Interactions
IPB Halle

### Submitter
Steffen Neumann

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Hoehenwarter
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Research Group Head Proteome Biology of Plant Interactions


