### Accession
PXD021331

### Title
The trade-off hypothesis of oocyte quantity and quality in gonadotropin-stimulated ovarian regime: proteome profile of superovulated vs naturally ovulated mouse oocytes

### Description
In order to clarify if there is a tradeoff between quantity and quality of oocytes retrieved after ovarian stimulation, we compared the protein expression of mouse oocytes and embryos with vs without a background of ovarian stimulation using gonadotropins, administered according to the standard protocol in use since more than 50 years (PMID 13185277; PMID 13475597). The data we gathered contribute to a more complete understanding of embryonic gene expression, by taking into account the effect of the commonly used superovulation.

### Sample Protocol
For the aims of this study we made use of already published datasets that we had generated previously (Wang et al., J Proteome Res. 2016;15(8): 2407–21, PXD003093; Schwarzer et al., Reproduction. 2014;148(1):55–7, PXD000512; Israel et al., Sci Rep. 2019; 16;9(1):13356, PXD007082) as well as unpublished datasets (see below), all based on the ‘stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture’ (SILAC) pipeline. The oocyte samples had been spiked with a standard prepared from F9 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells (Bernstine et al., Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1973;70(12):3899–903; Alonso et al., Int J Dev Biol. 1991;35(4):389–97). F9 EC cells build tumors (teratomata) that are considered as caricatures of embryogenesis, because they can differentiate into almost every tissue (Pierce. Am J Pathol. 1974; 77(1):103–18), therefore F9 EC cells afford an ample coverage of the proteins expressed in early embryos. Spiked-in samples had been prepared using either the FASP protocol (exp0313, exp0335) or offline high pH reversed-phase chromatography of tryptic peptides with concatenated fractionation (exp0616, exp0672). These datasets were supplemented now in this study with further experiments unpublished so far, which followed the same sample preparation procedures as above to render the samples comparable (spike in SILAC strategy; high-pH RP-chromatography: exp 0746; exp 0860; exp 0911). Briefly, oocytes and embryos had been deprived of the zona pellucida by pipetting in warm acidic Tyrode solution for 30–60 s and then rinsing in protein-free Hepes-buffered CZB medium (BSA replaced through polyvinylpyrrolidone 40 kDa). To produce each individual sample 200–300 oocytes or embryos were lysed in 15–20 μl of SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5) and stored at − 80 °C until further processing. Each oocyte or embryo lysate was supplemented with an equal amount of protein lysate from isotopically labeled (Lys8 and Arg10) F9 EC cells as SILAC spike-in standard (> 98% labeling efficiency). These 1:1 mixtures were then digested with Lysyl endopeptidase and trypsin, desalted, and fractionated by offline high-pH reversed-phase chromatography. Lastly, all samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a QExactive or QExactive HF mass spectrometer as described in our previous work.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed for identification and quantification by MaxQuant Software (version 1.6.4.0, Cox & Mann. Nat Biotechnol. 2008;26(12):1367–72) with the ‘iBAQ’ option also enabled. For identification, the search was performed against the UniProt mouse database (UP000000589_10090.fasta; release date 12/2015) concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries and supplemented with common lab contaminants. Parameters defined for the search were trypsin as digesting enzyme, allowing two missed cleavages, a minimum length of 6 amino acids, carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues as fixed modification, and oxidation at methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for the MS and 0.5 Da for the MS/ MS scans. Protein groups were regarded as identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% for all peptide and protein identifications; in addition, at least two matching peptides were required and at least one of these peptides had to be unique to the protein group.  In this study we focused on the iBAQ values of the ‘light’ peptide versions only (= peptides derived from oocyte and also embryo proteins but not from the F9 spike-in standard). The iBAQ algorithm allows to calculate the abundance of proteins within one sample by summing all peptide peak intensities detected for a given protein and normalizing it by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides for this protein. Thus, a mass-related measure (intensity) is transformed into a measure that is proportional to molar amounts (iBAQ). iBAQ values for each protein were then divided by the sum of all iBAQ values for a given experiment to determine the molar fractional content of each protein P (riBAQP) in a sample according to Shin et al. (Nat Neurosci. 2013;16(3):365–74). Last, the riBAQ values were averaged within each developmental stage.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ovarian stimulation, Lc-msms, Proteomics, Gonadotropin, Oocyte

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster  Germany
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster  Germany


