### Accession
PXD024158

### Title
Hepatic cytochrome P450 abundance and activity in the developing and adult Göttingen Minipig: pivotal data for PBPK modeling

### Description
The Göttingen Minipig is gaining ground as nonrodent species in safety testing of drugs for pediatric indications. Due to developmental changes in pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD), physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models are built to better predict drug exposure in children and to aid species selection for nonclinical safety studies. These PBPK models require high quality physiological and PK/PD data such as protein abundance of drug metabolizing enzymes. These data are available for man and rat, but scarce for the Göttingen Minipig. The aim of this study was to assess hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) protein abundance in the developing Göttingen Minipig by using mass spectrometry. In addition, sex-related differences in CYP protein abundance and correlation of CYP enzyme activity with CYP protein abundance were assessed. The following age groups were included: gestational day (GD) 84 - 86 (n = 8), GD 108 (n = 6), postnatal day (PND) 1 (n = 8), PND 3 (n = 8), PND 7 (n = 8), PND 28 (n = 8) and adult (n = 8). Liver microsomes were extracted and protein abundance was compared to that in adult animals. Next, the CYP protein abundance was correlated to CYP enzyme activity in the same biological samples. In general, CYP protein abundance gradually increased during development. However, we observed a stable protein expression over time for CYP4A24 and CYP20A1 and for CYP51A1, a high protein expression during the fetal stages was followed by a decrease during the first month of life and an increase towards adulthood. Sex-related differences were observed for CYP4V2_2a and CYP20A1 at PND 1 with highest expression in females for both isoforms. In the adult samples, sex-related differences were detected for CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2A19, CYP2E1_2, CYP3A22, CYP4V2_2a and CYP4V2_2b with higher values in female compared to male Göttingen Minipigs. The correlation analysis between CYP protein abundance and CYP enzyme activity showed that CYP3A22 protein abundance correlated clearly with the metabolism of midazolam at PND 7. These data are remarkably comparable to human data and provide a valuable step forward in the construction of a neonatal and juvenile Göttingen Minipig PBPK model.

### Sample Protocol
microsomal proteins (20 µg) of each individual pig were reduced, alkylated, and digested using trypsin prior to MS-analysis. Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Four hundred nanograms sample was spiked with 50 fmol beta-galactosidase and 50 fmol Hi3 E. coli standards before injection. The peptides were separated using a nanoscale UPLC system (nanoACQUITY UPLC, Waters, Milford, MA, United States) coupled to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters). The Q-TOF Synapt G2-Si instrument was set-up for HD-DDA analysis, acquiring full scan MS and MS/MS spectra (m/z at 50–5,000) in resolution mode.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of the raw files obtained from the Synapt G2-Si was performed in Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) version 2.3 (Waters). Peptides with charge C1 were discarded. For relative quantitation, data was normalized to all proteins. For absolute quantitation, data was normalized to Hi3 E. coli peptides. Peptide identification was performed with Mascot 2.5 by searching a compiled database of reviewed Sus scrofa entries (SwissProt), supplemented with unreviewed CYP proteins and fragments of interest, the cRAP database (laboratory proteins and dust/contact proteins1) and sequences of spiked standard proteins. For relative quantitation, the top three peptides were used and only proteins with at least one unique peptide were further considered. For absolute quantitation, proteins were quantified using the top three unique peptides against Hi3 E. coli peptides, and only proteins with at least one unique peptide were further considered. Protein data was exported from ProgenesisQI for further statistical analysis. All unique peptides were validated in Mascot and detection of the proteins was performed in Uniprot and NCBI.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein abundance, Pediatrics, Göttingen minipig, Ontogeny, Cyp, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Antwerp
Comparative Perinatal Development - Department of Veterinary Sciences - Faculty of Pharmaceutical, Biomedical and Veterinary Sciences - University of Antwerp

### Submitter
Laura Buyssens

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Jan Van Cruchten
Comparative Perinatal Development - Department of Veterinary Sciences - Faculty of Pharmaceutical, Biomedical and Veterinary Sciences - University of Antwerp


