### Accession
PXD037117

### Title
TORC1 phosphorylates and inhibits the ribosome preservation factor Stm1 to activate dormant ribosomes

### Description
Target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) promotes biogenesis and inhibits degradation of ribosomes in response to nutrient availability. To ensure a basal supply of ribosomes, cells preserve a small pool of dormant ribosomes under nutrient-limited conditions. The regulation of dormant ribosomes is poorly characterized. Here, we show that upon inhibition of TORC1 by rapamycin or nitrogen starvation, Stm1 (suppressor of target of Myb protein 1) forms non-translating, dormant 80S ribosomes. Furthermore, Stm1-bound 80S ribosomes are protected from proteasomal degradation. Upon re-feeding, TORC1 directly phosphorylates and inhibits Stm1, thereby reactivating translation. Finally, SERBP1 (SERPINE1 mRNA binding protein), a mammalian ortholog of Stm1, forms dormant 80S ribosomes upon mTORC1 inhibition in mammalian cells. Thus, TORC1 regulates ribosomal dormancy in an evolutionarily conserved manner via a ribosome preservation factor.

### Sample Protocol
Polysomes Polysome fractions were TCA precipitated, resuspended in 1% Sodium deoxycholate, 10mM TCEP, 100mM Tris, pH=8.5 by sonication, incubated for 10 min at 95°C, alkylated using chloroacetamide, digested using trypsin and peptides were desalted using iST cartridges, dried under vacuum and stored at -20°C. Samples were analysed on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1200 and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 36cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.2 μLmin-1. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 5% B to 12% B over 5 min to 35% B over 40 min to 50% B over 15 min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 240,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a scan range from 375 to 1500 m/z followed by MS2 scans of the most intense precursors in the linear ion trap at “Rapid” scan rate with isolation width of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50ms (MS1) and 35 ms (MS2) with an AGC target set to 4e5 and 1e4, respectively. Only peptides with charge state 2 – 5 were included in the analysis. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide, and the Intensity Threshold was set to 5e3. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s.  PO4 analysis Cells were lysed in 2M Guanidine HCl, 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate, 5 mM TCEP, phosphatase inhibitors by sonication. Lysates were incubated for 10 min at 95°alkylated using chloroacetamide, diluted to a final Guanidine-HCl concentration of 0.4M and digested by incubation with trypsin. Peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns, dried under vacuum and stored at -20°C. Peptide samples were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges on an AssayMAP Bravo platform as recently described (PMID: 28107008). Phospho-enriched peptides were subjected to LC–MS/MS analysis using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer fitted with an EASY-nLC 1200 and a custom-made column heater set to 60°C. Peptides were resolved using a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 36cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 0.2 μLmin-1. The following gradient was used for peptide separation: from 5% B to 8% B over 5 min to 20% B over 45 min to 25% B over 15 min to 30% B over 10 min to 35% B over 7 min to 42% B over 5 min to 50% B over 3min to 95% B over 2 min followed by 18 min at 95% B. Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds between master scans. Each master scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) and a scan range from 375 to 1600 m/z followed by MS2 scans of the most intense precursors in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z) with isolation width of the quadrupole set to 1.4 m/z. Maximum ion injection time was set to 50ms (MS1) and 54 ms (MS2) with an AGC target set to 1e6 and 5e4, respectively. Only peptides with charge state 2 – 5 were included in the analysis. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide, and the Intensity Threshold was set to 2.5e4. Peptides were fragmented by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) with collision energy set to 30%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30s.

### Data Protocol
Polysomes Peptide precursor ion intensities were extracted across all samples using Progenesis QI and the resulting mgf-file was searched using MASCOT against a Saccharomyces Cerevisiae database using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.6 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered to 1% FDR on the peptide and protein level. Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were processed using the SafeQuant R package to obtain peptide relative abundances. This analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak/reporter areas across all LC-MS runs, data imputation using the knn algorithm, summation of peak areas per protein and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of protein abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. To meet additional assumptions (normality and homoscedasticity) underlying the use of linear regression models and t-Tests, MS-intensity signals were transformed from the linear to the log-scale. The summarized peptide expression values were used for statistical testing of between condition differentially abundant peptides. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-Tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package. The resulting per protein and condition comparison p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.  PO4 analysis Peptide precursor ion intensities were extracted across all samples using Progenesis QI and the resulting mgf-files were searched using MASCOT against a human database or a Saccharomyces Cerevisiae database using the following search criteria: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were applied as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). The database search results were filtered to 1% FDR on the peptide and protein level. Quantitative analysis results from label-free quantification were processed using the SafeQuant R package to obtain peptide relative abundances. This analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total peak/reporter areas across all LC-MS runs, data imputation using the knn algorithm, summation of peak areas per protein and LC-MS/MS run, followed by calculation of peptide abundance ratios. Only isoform specific peptide ion signals were considered for quantification. To meet additional assumptions (normality and homoscedasticity) underlying the use of linear regression models and t-Tests, MS-intensity signals were transformed from the linear to the log-scale. The summarized peptide expression values were used for statistical testing of between condition differentially abundant peptides. Here, empirical Bayes moderated t-Tests were applied, as implemented in the R/Bioconductor limma package. The resulting per protein and condition comparison p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Target of rapamycin complex 1 (TORC1) promotes biogenesis and inhibits the degradation of ribosomes in response to nutrient availability. To ensure a basal supply of ribosomes, cells are known to preserve a small pool of dormant ribosomes under nutrient-limited conditions. However, the regulation of these dormant ribosomes is poorly characterized. Here, we show that upon inhibition of yeast TORC1 by rapamycin or nitrogen starvation, the ribosome preservation factor Stm1 mediates the formation of nontranslating, dormant 80S ribosomes. Furthermore, Stm1-bound 80S ribosomes are protected from proteasomal degradation. Upon nutrient replenishment, TORC1 directly phosphorylates and inhibits Stm1 to reactivate translation. Finally, we find that SERBP1, a mammalian ortholog of Stm1, is likewise required for the formation of dormant 80S ribosomes upon mTORC1 inhibition in mammalian cells. These data suggest that TORC1 regulates ribosomal dormancy in an evolutionarily conserved manner by directly targeting a ribosome preservation factor.

### Keywords
Ribosome preservation factor, Protein synthesis, Torc1, Ribophagy, Dormant ribosome, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility 
Biozentrum, University of Basel
Klingelbergstrasse 50/70
CH-4056 Basel / Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility Biozentrum, Universität Basel Spitalstrasse 41 CH - 4056 Basel Schweiz

### Submitter
Danilo Ritz

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility Biozentrum, Universität Basel Spitalstrasse 41 CH - 4056 Basel Schweiz


