### Accession
PXD036592

### Title
Palaeoproteomics (COL1) of Chelonia mydas and Caretta caretta

### Description
We applied nanoscale liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) in four Caretta caretta reference specimens in order to resolve missing positions in the existing Type I collagen (COL1) sequence. We also found seven additional biomarkers that distinguished between C. mydas and C. caretta.

### Sample Protocol
To extract proteins from the bone samples we followed a procedure similar to that outlined in. In short, 10mg of bone was demineralised in 1.2M HCl  and placed on a rotating rack at 4°C until demineralisation was complete. Then the proteins were extracted using a GuHCL extraction buffer, quantified using a BCA assay and digested by adding Trypsin. Finally peptides were de-salted by ZIPtipping. Samples for ZooMS analysis were spotted out onto a 384-spot MALDI plate and analysed by MALDI-TOF spectrometry at Cambridge University Bioarchaeology facilities. Additionally, we obtained shotgun proteomic data from the 6 museum reference specimens. These were analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were mapped against the complete C. mydas COL1 sequence using the pFind software. Amino acid substitutions indicated by this step were verified using MaxQuant version 2.0.3.0. We ran both specific and unspecific searches, with the maximum length of peptides in unspecific searches restricted to 40 amino acids. Peptides with good coverage of Y and B ions, especially on the differing amino acid position, were considered reliable. After MaxQuant analysis, we compared the final generated C. caretta COL1 sequence with the complete C. mydas COL1 sequence. MALDI spectra were observed in the software mMass, using established processing criteria. In particular, we observed the collagen peaks (Table 1.) that should discriminate between C. mydas and C. caretta according to Harvey et al. (2019). We solely used the collagen peptide COL1α1 586-618 (COL1A1T55/56) for species differentiation, due to difficulties with the other two biomarkers (Supplementary Information). After peptide mass differences were observed in MaxQuant in the reference specimen LC-MS/MS, we observed MALDI spectra for modern and archaeological specimens. If the corresponding m/z peaks were visible in a significant amount of samples, we classified them as a ZooMS biomarker capable of distinguishing between the two species.

### Publication Abstract
<i>"Protect and restore ecosystems and biodiversity"</i> is the second official aim of the current UN Ocean Decade (2021 to 2030) calling for the identification and protection of critical marine habitats. However, data to inform policy are often lacking altogether or confined to recent times, preventing the establishment of long-term baselines. The unique insights gained from combining bioarchaeology (palaeoproteomics, stable isotope analysis) with contemporary data (from satellite tracking) identified habitats which sea turtles have been using in the Eastern Mediterranean over five millennia. Specifically, our analysis of archaeological green turtle (<i>Chelonia mydas</i>) bones revealed that they likely foraged on the same North African seagrass meadows as their modern-day counterparts. Here, millennia-long foraging habitat fidelity has been directly demonstrated, highlighting the significance (and long-term dividends) of protecting these critical coastal habitats that are especially vulnerable to global warming. We highlight the potential for historical ecology to inform policy in safeguarding critical marine habitats.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Zooms, Sea turtle

### Affiliations
University of Groningen
Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Willemien de Kock

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew J. Collins
Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen


