### Accession
PXD033538

### Title
Protein dataset of immortalized HaCaT cells p53 knock down HaCaT keratinocytes

### Description
The p53 protein is encoded by TP53 gene and plays the key role in significant number of cellular processes including proliferation, apoptosis and regulation of many stress response pathways. P53 acts like a direct transcription activator of numerous genes regulating cell cycle arrest, DNA repair, growth inhibition and many others (Mollereau and Ma, 2014). The canonical biological function of p53 is maintaining genome integrity via elimination of damaged or exposed to genotoxic stress cells. Immortalized HaCaT cells are widely used for keratinocyte research, since they maintain stable keratinocyte phenotype, have nearly unlimited proliferative potential, do not require specific growth and differentiation factors (Colombo et al., 2017). Also, HaCaT cells produce typical differentiation markers such as cytokeratins K14 and K10, involucrin (Colombo et al., 2017) and respond to keratinocyte differentiation stimuli. Taking together, HaCaT cells have similar to normal human keratinocytes (NHK) properties, however, as many of spontaneously immortalized cell lines HaCaT cells bear two mutant p53 alleles - R282Q and H179Y (Lehman et al., 1993). Mutp53 in HaCaT has an increased affinity to other p53 family members (p63, p73), which significantly expands p53 properties. Moreover, mutp53 indirectly affects specific target genes via protein-protein interactions with other transcription factors (NF-Y, E2F1, NF-KB) or by tethering p63 to new promotor locations. For more detailed investigation of mutp53 impact on various processes in HaCaT cells we performed a shRNA mediated knockdown of mutp53. For generation of stable TP53 knockdown we employed plasmid vector pLKO-p53-shRNA-941 (Addgene # #25637) followed by puromycin selection of transduced cells. Here we present proteomic dataset obtained from wild type HaCaT cells and p53 knock down HaCaT keratinocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentration was determined with BCA assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit) following the manufacturer's instructions. Aliquots of each sample containing 50 μg of protein extracts were dissolved in 20 μL denaturation buffer (5 M urea, 1% TCA, 15% acetonitrile, 50 mM phosphate buffer pH 6.3, 300 mM sodium chloride). Protein reduction was performed by adding 5 μL of 25 mM TCEP in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate followed by 45 min incubation at room temperature, then 5 μL of 300 mM IAA in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate was added. The reaction mixtures were incubated in the dark for 30 min. Remaining IAA was quenched by adding 5 μL of 300 mM DTT in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. Subsequently, the reaction mixtures were diluted up to 200 μL with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. In-solution digestion was performed by adding trypsin in enzyme:protein ratio 1:50. Samples were digested overnight while shaking at 37 °C. Then samples were centrifuged at 10 °C and 12.000 × g for 10 min, after which the supernatant was collected and cleaned up with C18 ZipTip according to manufacturer's instructions [3]. In brief, Zip-Tip column was washed with 0.1% trifluroacetic acid (TFA) in acetonitrile and equilibrated twice with 0.1% TFA in ddH2O, then the samples were passed through the Zip-Tips repeatedly by pipetting. The columns were washed three times with 0.1% TFA and 5% methanol in ddH2O. The peptides were eluted by 70% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4) was used for MS/MS spectra identification. Proteins were identified against a concatenated target/decoy version of the Homo sapiens Complement of the UniProtKB (July 2021).using Homo sapiens reference proteome UP000005640, contained 20 361 reviewed and 58 691 unreviewed entries. The database was downloaded in July, 2021.    Following identification parameters were used for the database search: enzyme specificity - Trypsin, maximum cleavages allowed – 2, MS1 and MS2 tolerances – 5.0 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively, fixed modification - carbamidomethylation (Cys), variable modifications - N-terminal proteins acetylation and methionine oxidation (Met), false discovery rate estimated using the decoy hit distribution for Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins identification – 1.0%. The sample description is uploaded as a separate txt document - sample_description.txt.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Keratinocyte; p53; proteome; lc-ms/ms; shrna; knockdown

### Affiliations
IBMC
IBMC, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Daniil Romashin

### Lab Head
Dr Natalia Luzgina
IBMC, Moscow, Russia


