### Accession
PXD026056

### Title
Investigation of xylan degradation in Thermococcus sp. 2319x1E

### Description
Thermococcus sp. 2319x1E is able to grow on different mono- or polysaccharides as carbon source, including xylan. To investigate xylan degradation in Thermococcus sp. 2319x1E, cells were grown on 4 different carbon sources for 12 h (mid-exponential phase) and harvested by centrifugation. Using a label-free quantification approach the whole proteomes were analyzed. In another experiment a glycosidase specific activity-based probe (JJB384) was used to isolate specific Thermococcus glycosidases activated during growth on xylan or xylose.

### Sample Protocol
Sample clean-up for LC–MS: Peptides were desalted on home-made C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al. 2007) containing two layers of an octadecyl silica membrane (3M). All centrifugation steps were carried out at room temperature. The StageTips were first activated and equilibrated by passing 50 µL of methanol (600 × g, 2 min), 80% (v/v) ACN with 0.5% (v/v) FA (600 × g, 2 min) and 0.5% (v/v) FA (800 × g, 3 min) over the tips. Next, the tryptic digests were passed over the tips (800 × g, 3-4 min). The flow through was collected and applied a second time (same settings). The immobilized peptides were then washed with 50 µL and 25 µL 0.5% (v/v) FA (800 × g, 3 min). Bound peptides were eluted from the StageTips by an application of two rounds of 25 µL 80% (v/v) ACN with 0.5% (v/v) FA (600 × g, 2 min). After elution from the StageTips, the peptide samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and the peptides were dissolved in 15 µl 0.1% (v/v) FA prior to analysis by MS. LC-MS/MS analysis: Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) that were coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 or 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fischer scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). The LCs were operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (inner diameter 75 μm × 36 or 46 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective, Woburn, USA) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation, Biberach an der Riß, Germany) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fischer scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C or 50 °C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (nLC 1000: 0.1 % FA in acetonitrile, ACN; nLC 1200: 0.1 % FA, 20% H2O, in ACN). All solvents were of UHPLC (ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography) grade (Honeywell, Seelze, Germany). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.5 – 0.8 µL/min). Peptide solutions were subsequently separated on the analytical column using different gradients (for details see Sample_Legend_and_LC-MS_Settings_01.docx). The mass spectrometers were operated using Xcalibur software (Elite: v2.2 SP1.48; Lumos: v4.3.7.3.11). The mass spectrometers were set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning (MS1) was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen et al., 2005). MS2 Product ion spectra were recorded only from ions with a charge higher than +1 and in a data dependent fashion in the ITMS. All relevant MS settings (Resolution, scan range, AGC, ion acquisition time, charge states isolation window, fragmentation type and details, cycle time, number of scans performed, and various other settings) for the individual experiments can be found in Sample_Legend_and_LC-MS_Settings_02.docx.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and Protein identification using MaxQuant and Perseus: RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011) search in MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.6) using the default settings (Cox et al. 2008). Label-free quantification (LFQ) (Cox et al. 2014) and match between runs was activated. MS/MS spectra data were searched against the TspE_proteome_AA_new.fasta file (2182 entries). All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 246 sequences). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57 Da, alkylation with IAM) was selected as static modification. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±20 ppm. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification, unique and razor peptides were allowed. In addition to unmodified peptides, modified peptides with dynamic modifications were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40. Further data analysis and filtering of the MaxQuant output was done in Perseus (version 1.6.2.1) (Tyanova et al. 2016). Label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities were loaded into the matrix from the proteinGroups.txt file and potential contaminants as well as reverse hits from the reverse database and hits only identified based on peptides with a modification site were removed. For all MS-based proteomics experiments, biological replicates were combined into categorical groups to allow comparison of the different treatment groups and the data was transformed to the log2-scale. For the full proteome analysis, the data was filtered to keep only hits with a valid LFQ intensity for at least three out of four replicates for at least one of the tested carbon sources. For the identification of glycoside hydrolases enriched with JJB384, the data was separately filtered for the two sugar substrates under investigation. Only hits with a valid LFQ intensity for a minimum of two out of three of the probe-labelled sample replicates were retained for further analysis. Prior to quantification, missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift 1.8). Comparison of normalized protein group quantities (relative quantification) between different MS runs was solely based on the LFQ intensities as calculated by MaxQuant (MaxLFQ algorithm) (Cox et al. 2014). Briefly, label-free protein quantification was switched on and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “Match between runs” option in which the match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window to 20 min. The quantification was based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein. The log2-fold enrichment of protein groups for samples from cells grown on xylan was calculated based on the mean LFQ intensity compared to the samples from cells grown on any of the other sugars. Statistical significance was calculated based on a two-sided Student’s t-test (permutation-based FDR: 0.05, S0: 0). The results were reported in Fig. 5A-C. The log2-fold enrichment of protein groups with JJB384 was calculated based on the mean LFQ intensity compared to the DMSO control. Protein groups with a negative fold enrichment were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) has so far scarcely been applied in Archaea in general and, especially, in extremophilic organisms. We herein isolated a novel <i>Thermococcus</i> strain designated sp. strain 2319x1E derived from the same enrichment culture as the recently reported <i>Thermococcus</i> sp. strain 2319x1. Both strains are able to grow with xylan as the sole carbon and energy source, and for <i>Thermococcus</i> sp. strain 2319x1E (optimal growth at 85&#xb0;C, pH 6-7), the induction of xylanolytic activity in the presence of xylan was demonstrated. Since the solely sequence-based identification of xylanolytic enzymes is hardly possible, we established a complementary approach by conducting comparative full proteome analysis in combination with ABPP using &#x3b1;- or &#x3b2;-glycosidase selective probes and subsequent mass spectrometry (MS)-based analysis. This complementary proteomics approach in combination with recombinant protein expression and classical enzyme characterization enabled the identification of a novel bifunctional maltose-forming &#x3b1;-amylase and deacetylase (EGDIFPOO_00674) belonging to the GH57 family and a promiscuous &#x3b2;-glycosidase (EGIDFPOO_00532) with &#x3b2;-xylosidase activity. We thereby further substantiated the general applicability of ABPP in archaea and expanded the ABPP repertoire for the identification of glycoside hydrolases in hyperthermophiles.

### Keywords
Fluorophosphonate, Thermococcus sp 2319x1e, Fp, Abpp

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


