### Accession
PXD045971

### Title
A chromatin-regulated biphasic circuit coordinates IL1B-mediated inflammation

### Description
Inflammation is characterized by a biphasic cycle consisting initially of a pro-inflammatory phase which is subsequently resolved by anti-inflammatory processes. The coordination of these two disparate states needs to be highly controlled, suggesting that the regulation of the cytokines that drive these processes are intimately linked. Interleukin-1 beta (IL1B) is a master regulator of pro-inflammation and is encoded within the same topologically associated domain (TAD) as interleukin-37 (IL37). IL37 has recently emerged as a powerful anti-inflammatory cytokine which diametrically opposes the function of IL1B. Within this TAD, we identified a novel long non-coding RNA called AMANZI which negatively regulates IL1B expression and trained immunity through the induction of IL37 transcription. We found that the activation of IL37 occurs through the formation of a dynamic long-range chromatin contact that leads to the temporal delay of anti-inflammatory responses. The common variant rs16944 present in AMANZI augments this regulatory circuit, predisposing individuals to enhanced pro-inflammation or immunosuppression. Our work illuminates a chromatin-mediated biphasic circuit coordinating expression of IL1B and IL37, thereby regulating two functionally opposed states of inflammation from within a single TAD.

### Sample Protocol
RNA oligonucleotides baits with 5’ biotinylation were costume ordered from IDT. RNA pulldowns were performed in triplicate. 20 ul Streptavidin-Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) were prepared by washing with RNA Binding buffer (50 mM HEPES-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40 and 10 mM MgCl2) ten times. The beads were then incubated with RNA Binding buffer with RNAse inhibitor (2 µl RNAsin plus per 100 µl RNA binding buffer) for 15 minutes on ice. The supernatant was then removed by centrifugation and the beads were pre-blocked with yeast tRNA (100 µg/ml) for 1 hour at 4˚C with rotation. Beads were washed in RNA Binding buffer and RNA bait was added and incubated for 30 minutes at 4˚C. The beads were washed twice with RNA Binding buffer and 500 µg of nuclear extract was added and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature and then transferred to 4˚C for 90 minutes with rotation for the pulldown. The beads were then washed with Protein incubation buffer (10mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.1% NP-40, 0.5 mM DTT and a cocktail of protease inhibitors) three times, followed by PBS twice. Captured proteins were eluted by adding 50 µl of Elution buffer (2 M Urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 10 mM DTT) and shaking at 1250 rpm at room temperature. Disulphide bonds were alkylated with the addition of 50 mM IAA and incubating for 10 minutes in the dark while shaking at 1250 rpm. Proteins were subsequently digested with with 0.25 ug of trypsin for 2 hours, followed by elution from beads. Additonal 0.1 ug of trypsin were added and proteins were allowed to further digest overnight. The next day, samples were stagetipped and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were separated on a reverse-phase EASY-nLC and analysed on an Orbitrap Exploris (Thermo) mass spectrometer with acquisition settings described by Gräwe et al. 2023 (PMID: 37466164).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analysed with 1.6.0.1 by searching against the UniProt curated human proteome (released June 2017) with standard setting and LFQ enabled. The obtained data were further processed using Perseus. Proteins that were identified with at least 2 peptides, 1 razor or unique peptide, not marked as reverse or contaminant, and identified in 3/3 replicates were included in downstream analysis. A two-sample t-test was performed to identify proteins that are significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Long non-coding rnas (lncrnas), Topologically associated domains (tads), Rna epigenetics, Inflammation, Trained immunity

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Epigenomics & Single Cell Biophysics Group, Department of Cell Biology FNWI, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Nijmegen, 6525 HP, the Netherlands Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525 HP, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Cathrin Graewe

### Lab Head
Dr Musa M. Mhlanga
Epigenomics & Single Cell Biophysics Group, Department of Cell Biology FNWI, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Nijmegen, 6525 HP, the Netherlands Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525 HP, the Netherlands


