### Accession
PXD015750

### Title
Genome-centric resolution of novel microbial lineages in a Centrosaurus fossil bone from the Late Cretaceous of North America

### Description
Exceptional preservation of endogenous organics such as collagens and osteocytes has been frequently reported in Mesozoic dinosaur fossils. The persistence of soft tissue in Mesozoic fossil bones has been challenged because of the susceptibility of proteins to degradation and because bone porosity allows microorganisms to colonize the inner microenvironments through geological time. Although protein lability has been studied extensively, the genomic diversity of microbiomes in dinosaur fossil bones and their potential roles in bone diagenesis remain underexplored. Genome-resolved metagenomics and metaproteomics were performed, therefore, on the microbiomes recovered from a Late Cretaceous Centrosaurus bone and its encompassing mudstone that were aseptically excavated in Dinosaur Provincial Park, Alberta, Canada, in order  to provide insight into the genomic potential for bone alteration.

### Sample Protocol
The protein pellets were dissolved in 6 M guanidine-HCl and sonicated 5 times for 30 sec with 1min rest on ice in between each cycle. Tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) was added to 5mM final concentration and incubated at 60oC for 10 min.  Chloroacetamide was added (15mM) and then incubated in the dark at room temperature for further 30min.  Samples were diluted 1:10 with digestion buffer (10% Acetonitrile, 25mM Trish pH 8.5) and 2 µg of Trypsin Gold (Promega) was added to each sample and incubated end-over-end at 37oC for 16 hours.  Samples were acidified by adding trifluoroacetic acid  (0.2% final concentration) and were further desalted using SDB stage-tips [61]. Samples were dried completely in a SpeedVac and resuspended with 20 µl of 0.1% formic acid (pH 3).  A 5µl aliquot of the sample was injected per run using an Easy-nLC 1200 UPLC system.  Samples were loaded directly onto a 45cm long 75µm inner diameter nano capillary column packed with 1.9µm C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch, Germany) mated to metal emitter in-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific, USA).  The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode with the 120,000 resolution MS1 scan (AGC 4e5, Max IT 50ms, 400-1500 m/z) in the Orbitrap followed by up to 20 MS/MS scans with CID fragmentation in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion list was invoked to exclude previously sequenced peptides for 60s if sequenced within the last 30s and maximum cycle time of 3s was used.  Ion-trap was operated in Rapid mode with AGC target 2e3, maximum IT of 300ms and minimum of 5000 ions.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from all metaproteomes was performed against various databases with the open-source software MaxQuant (v. 1.6.0.1) [62]. To identify collagen peptides potentially preserved in the fossil bone, a database was built using all protein sequences from the Uniprot Vertebrates database and collagen peptides discovered from Mesozoic dinosaur fossils [8, 10]. The proteome (all CDSs) from all MAGs were predicted by Prodigal [63] and then merged to create another database for identifying expressed proteins from the microbial populations residing in the fossil bone. The cleavage enzyme was selected as Trypsin/P and two missed cleavages were allowed. Contaminant sequences such as human keratins, chicken collagens, and bovine serum albumin were automatically included during the search with MaxQuant (v. 1.6.0.1) [62]. The maximum false-discovery rate was set to 0.05 for both the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins using the target-decoy strategy.

### Publication Abstract
The anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-10 (IL10) is essential for attenuating inflammatory responses, which includes reducing the expression of pro-inflammatory microRNA-155 (miR155) in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) activated macrophages. miR155 enhances the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF&#x3b1; and suppresses expression of anti-inflammatory molecules such as SHIP1 and SOCS1. We previously found that IL10 interfered with the maturation of pre-miR155 to miR155. To understand the mechanism by which IL10 interferes with pre-miR155 maturation we isolated proteins that associate with pre-miR155 in response to IL10 in macrophages. We identified CELF2, a member of the CUGBP, ELAV-Like Family (CELF) family of RNA binding proteins, as protein whose association with pre-miR155 increased in IL10 treated cells. CRISPR-Cas9 mediated knockdown of CELF2 impaired IL10's ability to inhibit both miR155 expression and TNF&#x3b1; expression.

### Keywords
Uncultured microbial lineages, Centrosaurus fossil bone

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Geosciences, Princeton University, Princeton, USA, 09544

### Submitter
Renxing Liang

### Lab Head
Dr Tullis Onstott
Department of Geosciences, Princeton University, Princeton, USA, 09544


