### Accession
PXD015270

### Title
comparative proteomics of non-small cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer

### Description
We aimed to identify the differences between these two subtypes of lung cancers and their differentially clinical treatment. Through functional analysis, we obtained differentially expressed proteins which might be assossciated with lung cancer treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Here, we comparatively analysed the protein expressions of the NSCLC cell lines (A549 and H1975) and the SCLC cell lines (H446 and H69) using quantitative proteomics to identify DEPs between these two subtypes of lung cancers. Various bioinformatic approaches, such as Gene Ontology enrichment, KEGG pathway analysis, and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network integration were applied for the investigation of the differentially expressed proteins (and genes).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric data were searched against the UniProt/Swiss-Prot human proteome database using MaxQuant. (11) The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was allowed. The false discovery rates (FDR) of both peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. For the calculation of the protein abundances, label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with an LFQ minimum ratio count of two. Normalized LFQ intensities were used for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-mc/mc, Lung cancer, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Shisheng Sun, College of Life Science, Northwest University, 229 Taibai North Road, Life Science Building, Room 221, Xi’an, Shaanxi Province 710069, P.R. China. Phone: +86-029-88302411
Northwest University

### Submitter
Jingyu Wu

### Lab Head
Dr proteomics laboratory
Shisheng Sun, College of Life Science, Northwest University, 229 Taibai North Road, Life Science Building, Room 221, Xi’an, Shaanxi Province 710069, P.R. China. Phone: +86-029-88302411


