### Accession
PXD025223

### Title
Comparative proteomic and metabolomic analysis of human osteoblasts differentiated from dental pulp stem cells

### Description
The current global situation points to the trend of the aging population. Along with the growth of population diseases, the pressure to develop new cell-based or drug-based therapies is increasing. One from main challenges in the field of regenerative medicine is large bones healing and osteoporosis, mainly postmenopausal women, treatment. To understand molecular processes which underlying bone development and turnover, osteogenic differentiation using specific media was applied. Differentiation process imitating real osteogenesis is associated with proteome and metabolome changes resulting in various signaling pathways activation. Proteome was profiled by ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography and comprehensively quantified by ion mobility enhanced mass spectrometry. From 2267 reproducibly quantified proteins, 432 were differentially abundant by strict statistic and effect size criteria. Metabolome profiling was carried out nuclear magnetic resonance in resulting 27 reproducibly quantified metabolites. From them, 8 were statistically significant and differentially abundant. KEGG and MetaboAnalyst analysis indicated several metabolic pathways involved in osteogenic process. Enrichment analysis of differentialy abundant proteins reported PPAR, FoxO, IL-7 signaling pathways, thyroid hormones and steroid biosynthesis, mineral absorption, JAK-STAT and fatty acid degradation pathways as cascades with prominent impact to osteoinduction. Among them, enrichment analysis of significant metabolites showed Aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis as well as Valine, leucine, isoleucine metabolism together with phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophane metabolism as pathways which promotes osteodifferentiation. Moreover, we also selected few identified pathways which do not reported enrichment score, but have been described in the literature as majority. These cascades underline the complexity of the whole potential osteogenic mechanism. We also proposed promising targets for next validation in patient samples, what is step forward to influence of bone and/or oral defects.

### Sample Protocol
The human commercial DPSC cell line (Lonza) was used. Cells were precultured in basal growth medium consisted from α-MEM (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 2 mmol/l GlutaMAX (Thermo Fischer), 0.2 mmol/l ascorbic acid 2-phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich), 10% fetal bovine serum (Biosera), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin (Biosera). Next basal medium was replaced to osteoinductive medium OsteoMax (Sigma/Merck) for osteogenic differentiation and mineralization. The cells were grown in this specific medium for period 24 days. In parallel, non-differentiated DPSCs cells (control) were cultured in basal growth medium. Cells were washed with ice-cold DPBS (Gibco) and scraped-off from 3x25 cm2 flasks using 600 µL of SDS buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M Tris-Cl pH 7.6, 100 mM DTT) supplemented with protease (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma/Merck). Then, lysed cells were transferred to the tubes, incubated at 6°C 15 min and sonicated (3x10s, 20% pulse) followed by 20 min centrifugation (14 000 x g) at 12°C. Total protein extracts (50 µg) adjusted to 200 µL with urea buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) were digested with trypsin using filter-aided sample preparation on Microcon Ultracel YM-10 centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore). Samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C with trypsin gold (Promega) in the proportion 1:75 to total proteins and slightly acidified by 10% trifluoroacetic acid. Consequently, the peptide mixtures were purified on SEP PAK C18 light columns (Waters) and vacuum-concentrated. Complex peptide mixtures (400 ng) were separated using Acquity M-Class UHPLC (Waters). Peptides were comprehensively profiled on the nanoEase HSS T3 C18 analytical column: 250 mm length, 75 μm diameter, 1.8 μm particle size (Waters) using a 118 min gradient of 5-35% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL·min-1. Next, samples were nanosprayed by 2.9 kV applied to PicoTip emitter (New Objective) to the quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer Synapt G2-Si (Waters). The instrument operated in resolution mode with enabled ion mobility. Spectra were recorded in a data-independent mode referred as high definition MSE. Ions with 50-2000 m/z were detected in both low energy and high energy channels. The external standard Glu1-Fibrinopeptide B was infused for mass correction.

### Data Protocol
Compression and Archival Tool 1.0 (Waters) reduced noise, removing ion counts below 15. Subsequent processing was done in Progenesis QI 4.1 (Waters). Peaks were modeled with low energy threshold 400 counts and high energy threshold 40 counts. Chromatographic elution profiles in low and high energy traces were correlated to assign fragment ions to appropriate precursor ions. Retention times of peaks were aligned to automatically selected reference chromatogram. Next, peak intensities were normalized to the median distribution of all ions. The label-free quantification relied on the integration of peak areas of the three most intense precursor peptides. Arcsinh transformation of data was done before statistics. We used Ion Accounting 4.0 (Waters) search algorithm for protein identification. Spectra were searched against human proteome sequences downloaded from UniProt in September 2019 (74,823 entries, uniprot.org). Search parameters were: (i) one trypsin miscleavage, (ii) fixed carbamidomethyl cysteine, (iii) variable oxidized methionine and deamidated asparagine/glutamine (iv) automatic mass tolerance, (v) 4% false discovery rate against the randomized database. Protein hits having unique peptides were accepted if at least two reliable peptides (score ≥ 5.93, mass accuracy ≤ 20 ppm) matched the sequence. Only those proteins as differentially abundant, which reached at least 1-fold of log2 transformed ratio and ANOVA p≤ 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Population aging has been a global trend for the last decades, which increases the pressure to develop new cell-based or drug-based therapies, including those that may cure bone diseases. To understand molecular processes that underlie bone development and turnover, we followed osteogenic differentiation of human dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) using a specific induction medium. The differentiation process imitating in vivo osteogenesis is triggered by various signaling pathways and is associated with massive proteome and metabolome changes. Proteome was profiled by ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography and comprehensively quantified by ion mobility-enhanced mass spectrometry. From 2667 reproducibly quantified and identified proteins, 432 were differentially abundant by strict statistic criteria. Metabolome profiling was carried out by nuclear magnetic resonance. From 27 detected metabolites, 8 were differentially accumulated. KEGG and MetaboAnalyst hinted metabolic pathways that may be involved in the osteogenic process. Enrichment analysis of differentially abundant proteins highlighted PPAR, FoxO, JAK-STAT, IL-17 signaling pathways, biosynthesis of thyroid hormones and steroids, mineral absorption, and fatty acid metabolism as processes with prominent impact on osteoinduction. In parallel, metabolomic data showed that aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis, as well as specific amino acids, likely promote osteodifferentiation. Targeted immunoassays validated and complemented omic results. Our data underlined the complexity of the osteogenic mechanism. Finally, we proposed promising targets for future validation in patient samples, a step toward the treatment of bone defects.

### Keywords
Signaling pathways, Nmr, Osteodifferentiation, Late osteoblast, Homo sapiens, Mineralization phase, Bone metabolism, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Institute of Neuroimmunology of Slovak Academy of Sciences
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Andrej Kováč
Institute of Neuroimmunology of Slovak Academy of Sciences


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: dental pulp
- cell type: stem cells
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: synapt g2-si

