### Accession
PXD039384

### Title
CINC-2 and miR-199a-5p in exosomes secreted by transplanted Thy1+ cells activate hepatocytic progenitor cell growth in rat liver regeneration

### Description
Small hepatocyte-like progenitor cells (SHPCs) are hepatocytic progenitor cells that transiently form clusters in rat livers treated with retrorsine and with 70% partial hepatectomy (PH). We previously reported that transplantation of Thy1+ cells derived from D-galactosamine-treated livers promotes SHPC expansion, resulting in the acceleration of liver regeneration. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) produced by Thy1+ cells act on sinusoidal endothelial cells (SECs) and Kupffer cells to secrete IL17B and IL25, respectively, resulting in SHPC activation through IL17 receptor B (RB) signaling. Our aim is to identify factors in Thy1-EVs that activate IL17RB signaling. Thy1+ cells isolated from rats with D-galactosamine-induced liver injury were cultured for one week. Although some liver stem/progenitor cells proliferated into colonies, others maintained as mesenchymal cells (MCs). Thy1-MCs or Thy1-liver stem/progenitor cells were transplanted into retrorsine/PHtreated livers to examine their effects on SHPCs. SHs isolated from adult rat livers were used to validate factors regulating growth induction. The number and size of SHPCs remarkably increased in livers transplanted with Thy1-MCs. Comprehensive analysis of Thy1-MC-EVs revealed that miR-199a-5p, CINC-2, and MCP-1 are candidates for stimulating SHPC growth. Administration of the miR-199a-5p mimic, and not CINC-2, promoted SH growth. SECs treated with CINC-2 induced IL17b expression and their conditioned medium promoted SH growth. Thy1-MC transplantation may accelerate liver regeneration due to SHPCs expansion, which is stimulated by CINC-2/IL17RB signaling and miR-199a-5p.

### Sample Protocol
Thy1+ cells derived from GalN-D3 were plated onto 10-cm culture dishes and cultured for 7 d. The proliferated cells consisted of epithelial cells and MCs. The epithelial cells form colonies resembling normal SHs and possess characteristics of LSPCs. These colonies were detached from the dish using the cell dissociation buffer at day 7 and collected. The MCs remaining on the dish were detached using 2% Trypsin/0.02 % EDTA/PBS. Then, the number of viable cells was counted and epithelial cells and MCs (5 × 105 cells/mL) were transplanted to the Ret/PH model rat liver through the spleen. For isolating EVs, separated epithelial cells and MCs (1 × 106 cells) were seeded on 10-cm dishes and cultured in serum-free medium for 2 d. EVs were isolated from conditioned medium (CM). Thy1+ cells were cultured for 5 d and washed with PBS and the medium was replaced with serum-free DMEM (Sigma-Aldrich Co.). After 48 h, CM was collected and centrifuged at 2,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was filtered through a 0.22-μm filter (Millipore, Billerica, USA) to remove cellular debris. To prepare EVs, CM was ultracentrifuged at 110,000 × g for 70 min at 4°C [30,31]. The supernatant was used as CM without EVs (CM-EVs) and the precipitate was re-suspended in 200 μL saline. The concentration of EVs was measured using the NanoDrop 1000 spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc, Waltham, MA), and protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.).

### Data Protocol
To evaluate the characterization of EVs, proteome analysis was performed by mass spectrometry. Aliquots containing 15 μg of total protein extracted from EVs were reductively alkylated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (Fujifilm Wako, Japan) followed by treatment with 20 mM iodoacetamide (Fujifilm Wako). The reductively alkylated proteins were digested with 0.75 μg of sequence grade trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, WI, USA) for 16 h at 37°C. The resultant peptides were desalted with a styrene divinylbenzene polymer tip column (GL Science, Tokyo, Japan). The desalted peptides were completely evaporated on a centrifugal evaporator. Finally, the obtained peptides were redissolved with 10 μL of ultrapure water containing 0.1% formic acid. This sample solution was subjected to Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) through the EASY-nLC system equipped with an C18 column (0.075 mm × 125 mm, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan). The sample was eluted with acetonitrile gradient from 0% to 30% in 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. All data were acquired in datadependent mode and tandem MS (MS/MS) was performed by higher energy collision-induced dissociation. The MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant software 1.6.3.3. Peptide searches were performed with reference to the proteomic data of Rattus norvegicus obtained from UniProtKB.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Il17rb, Kupffer cells, Lc-ms/ms, Shpcs, Sinusoidal endothelial cells, Thy1

### Affiliations
Department of Tissue Development and Regeneration, Research Institute for Frontier Medicine, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine
Sapporo Medical University

### Submitter
Naoki Fujitani

### Lab Head
Dr Norihisa Ichinohe
Department of Tissue Development and Regeneration, Research Institute for Frontier Medicine, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine


