### Accession
PXD030072

### Title
Time-resolved proximity labeling of protein networks associated with ligand-activated EGFR

### Description
Ligand binding to the EGF receptor (EGFR) initiates signal transduction and endocytosis of the receptor. The mechanisms of endocytosis and regulation of signaling by endocytosis are poorly understood. Here, we combined peroxidase-catalyzed proximity labeling, isobaric peptide tagging and quantitative mass-spectrometry to define the dynamics of the proximity proteome of EGFR in response to ligand activation. Using this approach, we identified a network of signaling proteins, which remain associated with the receptor during its endocytosis and trafficking through the endosomal system. We showed that Trk-fused gene (TFG), a protein known to function at the endoplasmic reticulum exit sites, was enriched early/sorting endosome proximity proteome of EGFR and localized in early an sorting endosomes, and demonstrated that TFG regulates endosomal sorting of EGFR. This study provides a large-scale resource of time-dependent nanoscale environment of activated EGFR, thus opening avenues to discovering new regulatory mechanisms of membrane trafficking of receptor tyrosine kinases. EGFR-APEX2 Experiment Datasets: TMT 1-3: HEK293T cells (0, 1, 10, 30 and 60 minutes EGF treatment) TMT 4: HCT116 cells (0, 2, 4, 6 , 8 and 10 minutes EGF treatment) TMT 5: HEK293T cells (0, 2, 4, 6 , 8 and 10 minutes EGF treatment) TMT 6: HEK293T cells (0 and 10 minutes EGF treatment) TMT 7: HCT116 cells (0 and 10 minutes EGF treatment)

### Sample Protocol
Detailed protocol is described in detail in Method section.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based software pipeline and searched against the human UniProt database (Downloaded in 2014-02-14). Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.9 Da ion tolerance. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified, quantified and filtered to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR). In APEX protein quantitation, peptides were collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. Briefly, a 0.003 Da (3 millidalton) window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned and the maximum intensity nearest the theoretical m/z was used. For each protein, signal-to-noise (S:N) measurements of the peptides were summed, and these values were normalized to the EGFR level in each channel. Proteins with summed signal-to-noise greater than 100 were used for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endocytosis, Tfg, Tmt, Proteomics analysis, Egfr, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Department,  Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Cell Biology Department,  Harvard Medical School


