### Accession
PXD012008

### Title
Pentatricopeptide repeat poly(A) binding protein from mitochondria of trypanosomes

### Description
In Trypanosoma brucei, most mitochondrial mRNAs undergo U-insertion/deletion editing, and 3′ adenylation and uridylation. The internal sequence changes and terminal extensions are coordinated: Pre-editing addition of the short (A) tail protects the edited transcript against 3′-5′ degradation, while post-editing A/U-tailing renders mRNA competent for ribosome recruitment. Participation of a poly(A) binding protein (PABP) in coupling of editing and 3′ modification processes has been inferred, but its identity and mechanism of action remained elusive. We report identification of KPAF4, a pentatricopeptide repeat-containing PABP which sequesters the A-tail and impedes exonucleolytic degradation. Conversely, KPAF4 inhibits uridylation of A-tailed transcripts and, therefore, premature A/U-tailing of partially-edited mRNAs. This quality check point prevents translation of incompletely edited mRNAs. Our findings also implicate the RNA editing substrate binding complex (RESC) in mediating the interaction between the 5′-end bound pyrophosphohydrolase MERS1 and 3′-end associated KPAF4 to enable mRNA circularization. This event is critical for transcript stability during the editing process.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity-purified complexes were sequentially digested with LysC peptidase and trypsin. LC-MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reversed phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) (Eksigent, CA) coupled on-line to a Linear Ion Trap (LTQ)-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo-Electron Corp). A cycle of full FT scan mass spectrum (m/z 350-1800, resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400) was followed by 10 MS/MS spectra acquired in the linear ion trap with normalized collision energy (setting of 35%).

### Data Protocol
Following automated data extraction, resultant peak lists for each LC-MS/MS experiment were submitted to Protein Prospector (UCSF) for database searching similarly as described41.  Each project was searched against a normal form concatenated with the random form of the T. brucei database (http://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/). The Search Compare program in Protein Prospector was used for summarizing, validating and comparing results. Protein identification is based on at least three unique peptides with expectation value ≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
In Trypanosoma brucei, most mitochondrial mRNAs undergo editing, and 3' adenylation and uridylation. The internal sequence changes and terminal extensions are coordinated: pre-editing addition of the short (A) tail protects the edited transcript against 3'-5' degradation, while post-editing A/U-tailing renders mRNA competent for translation. Participation of a poly(A) binding protein (PABP) in coupling of editing and 3' modification processes has been inferred, but its identity and mechanism of action remained elusive. We report identification of KPAF4, a pentatricopeptide repeat-containing PABP which sequesters the A-tail and impedes mRNA degradation. Conversely, KPAF4 inhibits uridylation of A-tailed transcripts and, therefore, premature A/U-tailing of partially-edited mRNAs. This quality check point likely prevents translation of incompletely edited mRNAs. We also find that RNA editing substrate binding complex (RESC) mediates the interaction between the 5' end-bound pyrophosphohydrolase MERS1 and 3' end-associated KPAF4 to enable mRNA circularization. This event appears to be critical for edited mRNA stability.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Trypanosoma, Rna stability, Rna editing, Polyadenylation, Ppr protein

### Affiliations
University of California, Irvine

### Submitter
Clinton Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Lan Huang
University of California, Irvine


