### Accession
PXD002847

### Title
Profiling of Native and Protease_Generated Protein Amino Termini from Formalin-Fixed, Paraffin-Embedded Tissues

### Description
Dysregulated proteolysis represents a hallmark of numerous diseases. In recent years, increasing number of studies has begun looking at the protein termini in hope to unveil the physiological and pathological functions of proteases in clinical research. However, the availability of cryopreserved tissue specimens is often limited. Alternatively, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues offer an invaluable resource for clinical research. Pathologically relevant tissues are often stored as FFPE, which represent the most abundant resource of archived human specimens. In this study, we established a robust workflow to investigate native and protease-generated protein N-termini from FFPE specimens. We demonstrate a comparable N-terminomes of cryopreserved and formalin fixed tissue, thereby showing that formalin fixation / paraffin embedment does not proteolytically damage proteins. Accordingly, FFPE specimens are fully amenable to N-terminal analysis. Moreover, we demonstrate feasibility of FFPE-degradomics in a quantitative N-terminomic study of FFPE liver specimens from cathepsin L deficient or wild-type mice. Using a machine learning approach in combination with the previously determined cathepsin L specificity, we successfully identified a number of potential cathepsin L cleavage sites. Our study establishes FFPE specimens as a valuable alternative to cryopreserved tissues for degradomic studies.

### Sample Protocol
N-Terminal amino isotopic labeling of substrates - Extracted proteins from deparaffinized FFPE tissues and cryopreserved tissues were dimethylated using 40 mM 12COH2 formaldehyde +28.03 Da or 40 mM 13COD2 formaldehyde in the presence of 40 mM sodium cyanoborohydride at 37 ⁰C for 16 h. Excess formaldehyde was quenched by the addition of 50 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (TRIS). Following the amine protection step, proteins were precipitated using nine volume of ice cold acetone and one volume of ice cold methanol at -80⁰C for 2 h. Precipitated proteins were harvested using centrifugation at 4,500 x g for 2 h at 4⁰C. Resulting protein pellets were washed four times with ice cold methanol and then redissolved in ice-cold 100 mM NaOH by water-bath ultrasonication at 4⁰C. The solution was brought to pH 7.5 – 8.0 by the addition of 200 mM HEPES free acid and. Protein concentration was determined using bicinchoninic acid protein assay.  Proteins were digested using sequencing-grade trypsin (Worthington) in a 100:1 (w/w) ratio at 37⁰C pH 7.0 for 16 h.  Resulting free neo-N-termini generated from the tryptic digestion were captured by HPG-ALD hyperbranched polymers in the presence of 40 mM sodium cyanoborohydride at 37⁰C for 16 h. Following capture, HPG-ALD hyperbranced polymers were saturated using 50 mM glycine for 1 h at room temperature and subsequently removed by ultracentrifugation using 10 kDa MWCO Microcon spin filters (Milipore). Collected flow-through fractions containing N-terminal peptides were desalted using C-18 Sep Pak (Waters) and fractionated on high performance liquid chromatography (SCX-HPLC) coupled to a strong cation exchange column (PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA). Buffer A consisted of 5 mM KH2PO4 and 25 % (v/v) acetonitrile (pH 2.7), and buffer B consisted of 5 mM KH2PO, 1 M KCl, and 25 % acetonitrile (pH 2.7). Peptides were eluted in a linear gradient with increasing concentration of buffer B. Resulting fractions were collected, desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (Empore, St. Paul, MN, USA), and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  Mass spectrometry - Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) or an Orbitrap Q-Exactive plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer. The Orbitrap XL was coupled to an Ultimate3000 micro pump (Thermo Scientific). Buffer A was 0.5 % (v/v) acetic acid, buffer B 0.5 % (v/v) acetic acid in 80 % acetonitrile (HPLC grade). Liquid phases were applied at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with an increasing gradient of organic solvent for peptide separation. Reprosil-Pur 120 ODS-3 (Dr. Maisch) was used to pack column tips of 75 µm inner diameter and 11 cm length. The MS was operated in data dependent mode and each MS scan was followed by a maximum of five MS/MS scans. The Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer was coupled to an Easy nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl / min. Buffer A was 0.5 % formic acid, and buffer B was 0.5 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (water and acetonitrile were at least HPLC gradient grade quality). A gradient of increasing organic proportion was used for peptide separation (5 – 40 % (v/v) acetonitrile in 80 min). The analytical column was an Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Scientific), 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, length 150 mm, inner diameter 50 μm. The mass spectrometer operated in data dependent acquisition mode with a top 10 MS/MS method at a mass range of 300 – 2000 Da.

### Data Protocol
MS data were converted to mzML format using ProteoWizard. The complete data analysis was performed with a fully automated workflow within the OpenMS framework. Peptide sequences were identified by MS-GF+ peptide search engine with decoy search strategy. A complete mouse proteome sequence file was downloaded from UniProt on October 16th 2011, comprising 44,819 protein sequences. It was appended to an equal number of randomized sequences, derived from the original mouse proteome entries. Semi Arg-C specificity was used as search parameters with mass tolerance set at 20 ppm for precursor ions. Static modifications applied include cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02 Da), lysine and N-terminal dimethylation 12COH2 formaldehyde +28.03 Da or 13COD2 formaldehyde +34.06 Da, if applicable), N-terminal monomethylation 12COH2 formaldehyde +14.02 Da or 13COD2 formaldehyde +17.03 Da, if applicable), and N-terminal acetylation (+42.01 Da). The MS-GF+ results were further validated by OpenMS at a confidence level greater than 95 %. The relative quantification for each peptide was calculated using the FeatureFinderMultiplex tool (28) (as part of OpenMS). The mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (29) the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD002847. For cleavage events in which peptides were only present in wild-type or Ctsl-/- condition, a ratio of 2-10 or 210 were assigned, respectively. A list of potential cathepsin L substrates has been predicted on the basis of a dataset for cathepsin L cleavage specificity from the MEROPS peptidase database. The method is based on an efficient string kernel implemented in the Explicit Decomposition with Neighbourhood (EDeN) library (DOI:10.5281/zenodo.27945). The method uses the notion of k-mers with gaps to enumerate all possible substrings of increasing orders (starting from monomers up to 8-mers) which are used as features in a linear binary classification estimator. The full computational pipeline, which allows a good estimate of the likelihood of cleavage target sites, is available under the Galaxy open, web-based platform for data intensive biomedical research (https://toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu)

### Publication Abstract
Dysregulated proteolysis represents a hallmark of numerous diseases. In recent years, increasing number of studies has begun looking at the protein termini in hope to unveil the physiological and pathological functions of proteases in clinical research. However, the availability of cryopreserved tissue specimens is often limited. Alternatively, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues offer an invaluable resource for clinical research. Pathologically relevant tissues are often stored as FFPE, which represent the most abundant resource of archived human specimens. In this study, we established a robust workflow to investigate native and protease-generated protein N termini from FFPE specimens. We demonstrate comparable N-terminomes of cryopreserved and formalin-fixed tissue, thereby showing that formalin fixation/paraffin embedment does not proteolytically damage proteins. Accordingly, FFPE specimens are fully amenable to N-terminal analysis. Moreover, we demonstrate feasibility of FFPE-degradomics in a quantitative N-terminomic study of FFPE liver specimens from cathepsin L deficient or wild-type mice. Using a machine learning approach in combination with the previously determined cathepsin L specificity, we successfully identify a number of potential cathepsin L cleavage sites. Our study establishes FFPE specimens as a valuable alternative to cryopreserved tissues for degradomic studies.

### Keywords
Ffpe, Protease, Proteolysis, N-terminomics, Degradome, Tails

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg, Germany
University of Freiburg

### Submitter
Zon Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research, University of Freiburg, Germany


