### Accession
PXD008182

### Title
Adaptation of CysPAT technique to characterize endogenous S-nitrosylation in RAW264.7 cells

### Description
The aim of the study was to adapt the CysPAT technique to efficiently identify and characterize endogenous S-nitrosylation in cells under physiological conditions of an experiment from a small amount of sample. Using a macrophage cell line RAW 264.7 we compared the efficacy of the method in the identification of total endogenous S-nitrosylation and the corresponding modification of the samples treated with exogenous SNO donor (GSNO) or with DTT. We identified 999 unique formerly S-nitrosylated peptides (SIA peptides) and 965 unique SNO sites from untreated RAW cells which belong to 569 endogenous nitrosylated proteins. We discovered 579 novel S-nitrosylation sites and identified 232 proteins as new S-nitrosylation targets. A total of 1450 S-nitrosylated peptides belonging to 795 proteins were identified in samples treated with GSNO (n = 3). Interestingly, we found a large overlap (>53%) of S-nitrosylated peptides in both subsets of samples, demonstrating a high sensitivity of the method to analyze endogenous S-nitrosylation. The large number of identified endogenous S-nitrosylated peptides allowed the identification of two nitrosylation consensus sites, and to highlight protein translation and redox processes as key S-nitrosylation targets in macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
The protocol is based on the selectively labeling of reduced S-nitrosopeptides with a cysteine specific phosphonate adaptable tag (CysPAT) before enrichment with TiO2 and subsequent nLC-MS/MS analysis using a Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer. Briefly, RAW 264.7 cells were lysed and lysates were incubated with GSNO/DTT or kept untreated. Afterwards, all free Cys were alkylated and the proteins were digested to improve the accessibility of the phospho-tag to the S-nitrosylated sites. A dephosphorylation and deglycosylation step was performed before labelling. Subsequently, S-nitrosylated peptides were treated with sodium ascorbate to selectively reduce SNOs and discriminate from other cysteine oxidative modifications. Then the reduced S-nitrosylated peptides were labelled with freshly synthesized CysPAT ((2-(2-iodoacetamido)ethyl) phosphonic acid), attaching the thiol group of reduced S-nitrosylated peptides to a stable phosphonate group through a iodoacetamide moiety. Finally after reduction and alkylation of disulphide bridges and the rest of oxidative cysteines, CysPAT labeled peptides were enriched by TiO2 chromatography and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw MS data was converted to .mgf files with ProteinPilot™ (version 5.0, AB Sciex), and they were processed by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81) against SwissProt v3.53 Mus musculus reference database by using Mascot (v2.3, Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK).

### Publication Abstract
Protein S-nitrosylation is a cysteine post-translational modification mediated by nitric oxide. An increasing number of studies highlight S-nitrosylation as an important regulator of signaling involved in numerous cellular processes. Despite the significant progress in the development of redox proteomic methods, identification and quantification of endogeneous S-nitrosylation using high-throughput mass-spectrometry-based methods is a technical challenge because this modification is highly labile. To overcome this drawback, most methods induce S-nitrosylation chemically in proteins using nitrosylating compounds before analysis, with the risk of introducing nonphysiological S-nitrosylation. Here we present a novel method to efficiently identify endogenous S-nitrosopeptides in the macrophage total proteome. Our approach is based on the labeling of S-nitrosopeptides reduced by ascorbate with a cysteine specific phosphonate adaptable tag (CysPAT), followed by titanium dioxide (TiO<sub>2</sub>) chromatography enrichment prior to nLC-MS/MS analysis. To test our procedure, we performed a large-scale analysis of this low-abundant modification in a murine macrophage cell line. We identified 569 endogeneous S-nitrosylated proteins compared with 795 following exogenous chemically induced S-nitrosylation. Importantly, we discovered 579 novel S-nitrosylation sites. The large number of identified endogenous S-nitrosylated peptides allowed the definition of two S-nitrosylation consensus sites, highlighting protein translation and redox processes as key S-nitrosylation targets in macrophages.

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications (ptms), S-nitrosylation, Proteomics, Macrophages, Immune system

### Affiliations
Navarrabiomed Biomedical Research Center
Immunomodulation Group, Navarrabiomed Biomedical Research Center, Institute of Health Carlos III (ISCIII), Navarra Institute for Health Research (IdiSNA), Spain

### Submitter
Maria Ibañez-Vea

### Lab Head
Dr David Escors
Immunomodulation Group, Navarrabiomed Biomedical Research Center, Institute of Health Carlos III (ISCIII), Navarra Institute for Health Research (IdiSNA), Spain


