### Accession
PXD025997

### Title
Genome-wide identification and characterization of small peptides in maize

### Description
Small peptides (sPeptides), a class of biological molecules of less than 100 amio acids encoded by small open reading frames (sORFs), play important roles in multiple biological process. Here, we conducted a comprehensive study using mRNA-seq, Ribo-seq, and Mass Spectrometry (MS) on six tissues (each with at least two replicates) of maize, set up a bioinformatic pipeline, and performed a genome-wide scan of sORFs and sPeptides in maize. Our study sets up a guildline for the genome-wide scan of sORFs and sPeptides in plants by integrating Ribo-seq, and MS data, provides a more comprehensive resource of functional sPeptides in maize, and sheds light on the complex biological system of plants in a new perspective.

### Sample Protocol
The tissue from maize was grinded using liquid nitrogen, and then transferring the powder into a 5 mL centrifuge tube with suitable volume of lysis buffer (1% TritonX-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 50 μM PR-619，3 μM TSA，50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA). The mixture was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) and an equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added and further vortexed for 5 min. The upper phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube after centrifugation. Adding at least four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol to precipitate the proteins at -20 °C for at least 6 h. After centrifugation, the precipitation with proteins was collected and washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the concentration was determined using BCA kit based on the manufacturer’s instructions.  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C 39 / 42 and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.     After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried, followed with labeling. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Thermo Scientific Q Exactive platform coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against uniprot_Zea_mays database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.  GO Annotation Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www.http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function.  Domain Annotation Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) is a database that integrates diverse information about protein families, domains and functional sites, and makes it freely available to the public via Web-based interfaces and services. Central to the database are diagnostic models, known as signatures, against which protein sequences can be searched to determine their potential function. InterPro has utility in the large-scale analysis of whole genomes and meta-genomes, as well as in characterizing individual protein sequences.  KEGG Pathway Annotation Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper.  Subcellular Localization There, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. Special for protokaryon species , Subcellular localization prediction soft CELLO was used.  Enrichment of Gene Ontology analysis Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant.  Enrichment of pathway analysis Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website.  Enrichment of protein domain analysis For each category proteins, InterPro (a resource that provides functional analysis of protein sequences by classifying them into families and predicting the presence of domains and important sites) database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Protein domains with a p-value < 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maize; small open reading frame (sorf); small peptide (speptide); ribo-seq; mass spectrometry (ms)

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agriculture University
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Wanchao Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Lin Li
Huazhong Agricultural University


