### Accession
PXD029638

### Title
Proteomic comparisons of autophagy mutant, salicylic acid defiscient mutant and wild type plants grown in ideal nutrition and in low nitrate and low sulfate conditions.

### Description
Genotypes used are Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Col-0 wild-type,  atg5.3 mutant (SALK_020601),  sid2.2 (Dewdney  et al., 2000) and the atg5.3/sid2.2 double mutant that has been previously characterized by Yoshimoto et al. Plant Cell (2009). Plants were cultivated under control conditions (ideal nutrition N+S+; 10mM NO3- and 0.266mM SO42-), low nitrate (N-; 2 mM NO3- and 0.266mM SO42-), or low sulfate (S-; 10mM NO3- and 0.016mM SO42-) conditions, under in short days (160 micromol.m-2.s-1; 8 h light, 16 h dark) in growth chamber as described by Havé et al. 2019 New Phytologist. Rosettes were harvested at vegetative stage 60 days after sowing, 2-3 hours after the beginning of the photoperiod. Two consecutive cultures (C1 and C2) were performed at several month interval. For each culture, three plant repeats (R1-R3) were collected, each repeat was a mix of >6 rosettes. Details can be found in Havé et al. (2019) New Phytologist (doi: 10.1111/nph.15913). Associated publications are Havé et al. (2018) JXB (doi:10.1093/jxb/erx482), Havé et al. (2019) New Phytologist (doi: 10.1111/nph.15913) and Luo et al 2020 JXB (doi:10.1093/jxb/eraa337)

### Sample Protocol
Rosette leaves were ground and reduced to a fine powder using liquid nitrogen in a mortar. Three biological replicates from each genotype and nutrition treatment were prepared for the shotgun LC-MS/MS analysis. Leaf total proteins were extracted using a TCA-acetone method (Méchin et al., 2007). Briefly, 100 mg of finely grinded leaf powder were homogenized in 1.4 ml of cold precipitating solution (10% TCA, 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol in acetone) and incubated at -20°C for 90 min. After centrifugation (20 000 x g at 40°C, 15 min), the pellets were washed three times with cold acetone containing 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol and dried using a speedvacuum system. Pellets were solubilized in 100 µl of ZUT buffer containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM DTT, 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8 and 0.1% ZALS (zwitterionic acid labile surfactant, Proteabio, Morgantown, WV, USA) and homogenized for 3 min with a vortex. After centrifugation (14 000 x g at 25°C, 30 min), protein concentrations in the supernatant were assayed using the 2D Quant kit (GE healthcare) using BSA as a standard and following supplier’s instructions. For each sample, 10 µl of a 4 µg.µl-1 protein solution was equilibrated for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were alkylated by incubation in darkness for 1 h at room temperature after addition of 2 µl of 330 mM Iodoacetamide (in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Proteins were then diluted ten times by addition of 90 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested by addition of 4 µl of a trypsin solution (0.2 g.µl-1 in 50 mM acetic acid) at a 50:1 ratio (soluble proteins/trypsin) and incubation overnight at 37°C. Digestion was stopped by addition of 6 µl of 18.6% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, final concentration of 1%). Digested proteins were desalted using a StrataTM-XL polymeric reversed phase column (100 µm, Phenomex, Le Pecq, France) according to Duruflé et al., (2017) and solubilized with 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.8% formic acid (FA). LC-MS/MS analysis HPLC was performed on a Nano-HPLC (Eksigent). Buffers A and B were prepared with 0.1% FA in water, and with 0.1% FA in ACN, respectively. A 4 μL sample of the peptide solution was loaded at 7.5 μL min−1 for 1 min on a Biosphere C18 trap-column (particle size: 5 μm, pore size: 12 nm, inner/outer diameters: 360/100 μm, length: 20 mm; NanoSeparations) and desalted with 0.1% FA, 2% ACN in water. Then peptides were separated on a biosphere C18 column (particle size: 3 µm, pore size: 12 nm, inner/outer diameters: 360/75 µm, length: 300 mm; NanoSeparations). The peptide separation was achieved at 300 nl min−1 with the following steps: equilibration in 95% buffer A for 9 min, separation with a linear gradient from 5 to 30% of buffer B for 110 min, linear gradient from 35 to 95% buffer B for 3 min and regeneration with 95% buffer B for 10 min. Eluted peptides were on-line analyzed with a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a nanoelectrospray interface. Ionization (1.5 kV ionization potential) was performed with a glass needle (non-coated capillary silica tips, 360/20-10, New Objective). Peptide ions were analyzed using Xcalibur 2.07 with the following data-dependent acquisition steps: (1) full MS scan (mass-to-charge ratio [m/ z], 400 to 1 400; profile mode) with a resolution of 70 000 and (2) MS/MS (isolation window = 3 m/z, AGC target = 5e4, max Ion Time = 120 ms, collision energy = 27%; profile mode, resolution = 17 500). Step 2 was repeated for the eight major ions detected in step 1. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. Only the doubly and triply charged precursor ions were subjected to MS/MS fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur raw data were transformed to mzXML open source format and centroided using the msconvert software in the ProteoWizard 3.0.3706 package (Kessner et al,. 2008). Protein identification was performed using the X!Tandem Piledriver (version 2015.04.01; www.thegpm.org<http://www.thegpm.org>) by querying MS/MS data against the TAIR10 protein library together with a custom contaminant database (trypsin, keratins). Following parameters were used: one missed trypsin cleavage allowed, alkylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were set to static and possible modification, respectively. Precursor mass tolerance was set to10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. A refinement search was added with similar parameters except that the missed cleavage was set to three and possible N-terminal acetylation with peptide signal cleavage were searched. Identified proteins were filtered and grouped using X!Tandem Pipeline (3.4.1) (pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/xtandempipeline/) (Langella et al., 2017) according to: (1) A minimum of two different peptides required with an E value smaller than 0.01, (2) a protein E value (calculated as the product of unique peptide E values) smaller than 10−5. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at peptide and protein level were 0.03% and 0.0%, respectively. Relative quantification was performed using the MassChroQ software (pappso.inra.fr/bioinfo/masschroq/) (Valot et al., 2011) by peak area integration on extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) within a 10 ppm window, after LC-MS/MS chromatogram alignment and spike filtering. Data were than filtered for shared, unreproducible and uncorrelated peptides. The peptides shared by two or more proteins were removed. Peptides which were quantified in less than 5% of the sample were considered unreproducible and removed. Finally, peptides whose intensity profile deviate from the average profile of the peptides belonging to the same protein (with a coefficient of correlation inferior to 0.7) were removed. Relative protein abundance was thus calculated and defined as the sum of XICs intensities of (1) reproducible peptides, (2) specific peptides and (3) correlated peptides belonging to a same protein. When the peptides of a protein were not present or not reproducibly observed in one or several conditions, spectral counting (SC) was used in place of XICs analysis.  Subsetting of data were performed after protein inference and quantification xpip file can be open with w!Tandem Pipeline

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sid2, Nitrate, Sulfate, Autophagy, Atg5

### Affiliations
Plateforme d'Analyse Proteomique Paris Sud-Ouest Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, CNRS, AgroParisTech, GQE - Le Moulon, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
INRAE - Institut Jean-Pierre Bourgin UMR1318 Team SATURNE: Senescence, AuTophagy, nUtrient Recycling and Nitrogen use Efficiency France

### Submitter
Thierry Balliau

### Lab Head
Dr Céline MASCLAUX-DAUBRESSE
INRAE - Institut Jean-Pierre Bourgin UMR1318 Team SATURNE: Senescence, AuTophagy, nUtrient Recycling and Nitrogen use Efficiency France


