### Accession
PXD031258

### Title
human, gastric cancer line, LC-MSMS

### Description
We also tested the downstream differentiation of protein expression between BGC823 Ctrl and BGC823 MIR137HG by IP target FUS following LC-MS/MS. And we selected several proteins related to tumor growth and metastasis to analyze further. String data showed that they might have more contact with each other. Western blot data showed that MET, CTNNB1 and RHOC were also co-expressed with the over-expression MIR137HG.

### Sample Protocol
About 2×107 BGC823 MIR137HG cell strain was washed with pre-chilled phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysed by RIPA (R0010-20, Solarbio, China). Cell lysates were scratched and centrifuged at 14000g for 15 min at 4℃ to separate the supernatant. The supernatant was incubated with 100μl protein A/G beads for 10mins at 4℃ and centrifuged 14000g for 15mins at 4℃ to get the supernatant. The supernatant was tested the protein concentration by BCA Kit (C503021, Sangon Biotech, China). Protein was diluted by 1*PBS to 2μg/ul, and separately incubated with rabbit anti-FUS (5μg, Ab70381,Abcam, UK) and rabbit anti-IgG (PP64B, Millipore, USA) antibody overnight at 4℃. Subsequently, 100ul protein A/G was incubated with the complex overnight at 4℃. Collecting the complex and performed the SDS-PAGE and stained by Coomassie Blue Staining Solution (P1305-1, Solarbio, China). Protein strip around 75KD ( location of FUS ) was then sent to Sangon Biotech for LC-MS/MS analysis.  3.1 operation steps of enzymatic hydrolysis and mass spectrometry identification Protein enzymolysis is carried out according to the method of [Katayama H., Nagasu T., ODA Y., improvement of in gel digestion protocol for peptide mass fingerprinting by matrix assisted laser destruction / ionization time of flight mass spectroscopy, rapid communications in mass spectroscopy, 15, 1416 - 1421]. Cut the strips stained with Coomassie brilliant blue and put them into the EP tube. After washing with double distilled water for 2 times, add 100 μ L decolorizing solution: 50% acetonitrile, 25mmol / L NH4HCO3 (15mm K3Fe (CN) 6 and 50mm Na2S2O3 in the case of silver staining strip decolorizing solution) shall be placed at room temperature for decolorization overnight until the rubber block becomes colorless and transparent. Wash the rubber block with water, add an appropriate amount of 10mmdtt solution, 56 ℃ water bath for 50min, absorb the liquid, add an equal volume of 55mm iodoacetamide solution, and react at room temperature without light for 15min, Suck away the remaining reaction liquid, add 50 / 50 acetonitrile / water respectively, dehydrate 100% acetonitrile until the rubber block turns white, add 10ul of 0.01ug/ul proteomic grade trypsin (Promega) to an appropriate amount, fully absorb and become transparent on ice, then cover it with 25mmol / L NH4HCO3 solution containing 10% ACN, and digest in 37 ℃ water bath overnight; After enzymatic hydrolysis, the supernatant was transferred to another new EP tube and added with 50 μ L extract (67% acetonitrile, containing 5% TFA) was put into the remaining rubber block, kept at 37 ℃ for 10min, then sonicated for 15min, centrifuged, combined with supernatant, centrifuged, concentrated and dried for mass spectrometry analysis. 3.2 mass spectrometry operation and database retrieval The centrifugally concentrated and dried trypsin digested polypeptide samples were re dissolved in nano RPLC mobile phase a (0.1% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile / water), bottled and loaded for on-line LCMS analysis. Dissolve the sample in 2 μ Load the sample to C18 precolumn at the flow rate of L / min (100 μ m × 3cm，C18, 3 μ m. 150 Å), and then maintain the flow rate for flushing and desalination for 8min. The liquid phase is eksigentnanolc Ultra ™ Nanoliter liquid phase system (AB SCIEX), The sample is desalted and retained on the pre column, and then separated by the analytical column. The specification of the analytical column is C18 reversed-phase chromatographic column (75 μ m x 15 cm C18- 3 μ M 120 Å, chromxpeksigent), the gradient used in the experiment was 10min, and the mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid, 95% acetonitrile / water) increased from 5% to 40% in LCMS. The TripleTOF 5600+ system (AB SCIEX) was combined with the Nano Spray III ion source (AB SCIEX, USA), the spray voltage was 2.3kV, the air curtain pressure was 30PSI, the atomization pressure was 14PSI, the heating temperature was 150 C, the mass spectrometry scanning mode was the information dependent mode of collection (2.3kV, PFM), and the first scan time was 1. At most 26 secondary maps with charge of 2 + to 5 + and single second count greater than 200cps are collected under each IDA cycle, and the cumulative time of each secondary map is 80ms. The time of each cycle is fixed at 2.5 seconds, the energy setting of the collision chamber is applicable to all precursor ion collision induced dissociation (CID), and the dynamic exclusion is set to 3 seconds. The original wiff spectrum file of mass spectrometry was imported into proteowizard software for data processing and conversion into MGF format file, and then the MGF file was imported into mascot (v2.3.02) search engine for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
The search parameters are as follows: the species protein database or theoretical amino acid sequence information provided by the database for customers; The enzyme is trypsin; The maximum allowable missing cutting site is 1 (the specific items may be slightly different. You can check the parameter settings of search parameters Max missed cleavages in the search results); Fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (c); Variable modifications are: acetyl (protein N-term), determined (NQ), Gln - > pyro Glu (N-term q), Glu - > pyro Glu (N-term E) and oxidation (m) (specific items may be slightly different, you can view the parameter settings of search parameters variable modifications in the search results); MS tolerance is 20 ppm and MS / MS tolerance is 0.05da If the protein score C.I.% is greater than 95%, the identification is successful.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Gastric cancer line

### Affiliations
The Affiliated Hospital of Medical School of Ningbo University

### Submitter
Yantao Du

### Lab Head
Dr Yantao Du
The Affiliated Hospital of Medical School of Ningbo University


