### Accession
PXD034054

### Title
Crosslinks Analysis of Cryptochrome and Timeless Proteins

### Description
Mass spectrometry was used to investigate the crosslinks between proteins cryptochrome and tieless.

### Sample Protocol
SEC-purified crosslinked product was mixed with 4x Laemmli Sample Buffer (Cat# 1610747, BioRad) and 2.5% 2-mercaptoethanol (BME, Cat# 1610710, BioRad) and then boiled for 6 min. The sample was then loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel and stained with QC Colloidal Coomassie Stain (Cat #1610803, BioRad). The band of the complex (~ 20 ug protein sample) was cut out and prepared for MS-MS analysis of crosslinked peptides as previously reported.  The gel slice was digested with trypsin and LysC or with trysin, LysC and GluC. The digested product was characterized by NanoLC-MS/MS analysis at the Proteomics and Metabolomics facility of Cornell Biotechnology Resource Center.

### Data Protocol
All MS, MS2 and MS3 raw spectra from each sample were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) with XlinkX algorism algorithm for identification of crosslinked peptides. The search parameters were as follow: two missed cleavage for doublel digestion or triple digestion with fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine, variable modifications of methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, protein N-terminal acetylation. The peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and MS2 and MS3 fragment mass tolerance was 20 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The Drosophila database with added targeted protein sequences was used for PD 2.4 database search with 1% FDR for report of crosslink results. Identified crosslinked peptides were filtered for Max. XlinkX Score >40 containing at least two identified MS3 spectra for each pair of crosslinked peptides. Results of the search with were exported by the software as a spreadsheet.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Timeless, Lc-ms/ms, Cryptochrome, Crosslink

### Affiliations
Proteomics and metabolomics facility, Department of Biotechnology, Cornell University
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Proteomics and metabolomics facility, Department of Biotechnology, Cornell University


