### Accession
PXD006084

### Title
Genes essential for phototrophic growth by a purple alphaproteobacterium

### Description
We identified 171 genes required for growth in this condition, 35 of which are annotated as photosynthesis genes. As a complement to the genetic data, we carried out proteomics experiments in which we found that 429 proteins were present in significantly higher amounts in cells grown anaerobically in light compared to aerobically. Among these were proteins encoded by subset of the phototrophic growth-essential genes.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Tn-seq was used to identify genes essential for phototrophic growth by the purple bacterium Rhodopseudomonas palustris. About 167 genes required for anaerobic growth on acetate in light were identified, 35 of which are annotated as photosynthesis genes. The essentiality of many of these genes by analysing the phenotypes of independently generated mutants that had altered pigmentation was verified. Three genes were identified, two possibly involved in biogenesis of the membrane-bound photosynthetic apparatus and one for phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis, that were not known to be essential for phototrophic growth. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to show that the NADH:quinone oxidoreductase complex I<sub>E</sub> was essential for phototrophic growth under strictly anaerobic conditions and appeared to play a role in reverse electron transport to generate NADH. A homologous NADH:quinone oxidoreductase complex I<sub>A</sub> likely operates in the opposite direction to oxidize NADH. The operation of the two enzymes in opposition would allow R.&#xa0;palustris to maintain redox balance. As a complement to the genetic data, proteomics experiments were carried out in which it was found that 408 proteins were present in significantly higher amounts in cells grown anaerobically in light compared with aerobically. Among these were proteins encoded by subset of the phototrophic growth-essential genes.

### Keywords
Essential genes, Bacteria, Photosynthesis

### Affiliations
University of Washington, USA
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Carrie Harwood
University of Washington, USA


