### Accession
PXD013432

### Title
Evolutionary compaction and adaptation visualized by the structure of the dormant microsporidian ribosome

### Description
Microsporidia are eukaryotic parasites that infect essentially all animal species, including many of agricultural importance, and are significant opportunistic parasites of humans. They are characterized by having a specialized infection apparatus, an obligate intracellular lifestyle, rudimentary mitochondria and the smallest eukaryotic genomes. Extreme genome compaction has led to minimal gene sizes affecting even conserved ancient complexes such as the ribosome. Here we present the high-resolution cryo-EM structure of the microsporidian ribosome which illustrates how genome compaction has resulted in the smallest eukaryotic cytoplasmic ribosome. Selection pressure has led to the loss of two ribosomal proteins and removal of essentially all eukaryote-specific rRNA expansion segments reducing the ribosomal RNA to a functionally conserved core. The structure also highlights how one microsporidia-specific and several repurposed existing ribosomal proteins compensate for the extensive reduction of the rRNA. The microsporidian ribosome is kept in an inactive state by two previously uncharacterized dormancy factors that specifically target the functionally important E-site, P-site and polypeptide exit tunnel. This study visualizes the distinct effects of evolutionary pressure on RNA and protein coding genes, provides a new mechanism for ribosome inhibition and can serve as a structural basis for the development of small molecule inhibitors against microsporidian parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was dried and re-suspended in 8M urea/10 mM DTT/0.1M ammonium bicarbonate. Cysteines were alkylated (30mM Iodacetimide) and digested first using LysC in <4M Urea secondly using trypsin in <2M urea. Following solid phase extraction (1), peptides was analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS (LC1200 coupled to a Fusion Lumos, Thermo Scientific operated in High/High mode). LC-MS separation and acquisition parameters were as described previously. In brief, peptides were separated using a 12 cm x 75µm C18 column (3 µm particles, Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, with a 2-35% gradient over 70 minutes (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, buffer B:80% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid).       1. Rappsilber, J., Mann, M., and Ishihama, Y. (2007) Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips, Nat Protoc 2, 1896-1906.

### Data Protocol
Using ProtomeDiscoverer (v1.4) the data were searched against an in-house Vairimorpha necatrix database (4913 entries) concatenated with common contaminants.  Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethyl were set as a fixed modification and two missed cleavages were allowed. Area (2) was used to rank different proteins abundance in the sample.   2. Silva, J. C., Gorenstein, M. V., Li, G. Z., Vissers, J. P., and Geromanos, S. J. (2006) Absolute quantification of proteins by LCMSE: a virtue of parallel MS acquisition, Mol Cell Proteomics 5, 144-156.

### Publication Abstract
Microsporidia are eukaryotic parasites that infect essentially all animal species, including many of agricultural importance<sup>1-3</sup>, and are significant opportunistic parasites of humans<sup>4</sup>. They are characterized by having a specialized infection apparatus, an obligate intracellular lifestyle<sup>5</sup>, rudimentary mitochondria and the smallest known eukaryotic genomes<sup>5-7</sup>. Extreme genome compaction led to minimal gene sizes affecting even conserved ancient complexes such as the ribosome<sup>8-10</sup>. In the present study, the cryo-electron microscopy structure of the ribosome from the microsporidium Vairimorpha necatrix is presented, which illustrates how genome compaction has resulted in the smallest known eukaryotic cytoplasmic ribosome. Selection pressure led to the loss of two ribosomal proteins and removal of essentially all eukaryote-specific ribosomal RNA (rRNA) expansion segments, reducing the rRNA to a functionally conserved core. The structure highlights how one microsporidia-specific and several repurposed existing ribosomal proteins compensate for the extensive rRNA reduction. The microsporidian ribosome is kept in an inactive state by two previously uncharacterized dormancy factors that specifically target the functionally important E-site, P-site and polypeptide exit tunnel. The present study illustrates the distinct effects of evolutionary pressure on RNA and protein-coding genes, provides a mechanism for ribosome inhibition and can serve as a structural basis for the development of inhibitors against microsporidian parasites.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Vairimorpha necatrix, Cryo-em, Mass spectrometry, Microsporidia

### Affiliations
THE ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY
The Rockefeller University

### Submitter
henrik molina

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Klinge
The Rockefeller University


