### Accession
PXD010555

### Title
Impact of oligoarginine peptides in ribosome composition and chromatin proteomes

### Description
Expanded intronic GGGGCC repeats in C9ORF72 produce several dipeptides, from which the two that contain arginine, (PR)n and (GR)n, accumulate at nucleoli and kill cells. While this toxicity plays an important role in ALS pathogenesis, its mechanism remains unknown. We here show that PR dipeptides bind avidly to DNA and RNA, so that any cellular reaction involving nucleic acids is impaired by the dipeptides. Consistently, PR-induced cell death can be rescued by addition of non-coding oligonucleotides. Interestingly, the effects of PR dipeptides are to a large extent mimicked by protamine, a sperm-specific Arg-rich protein, and the toxicity of either protamine or PR dipeptides is rescued by the anticoagulant heparin. We propose that the generalized coating of nucleic acids by Arg-rich peptides accounts for the toxicity of C9ORF72 mutations in ALS.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for IP proteomic analysis  Proteins were eluted from the magnetic beads in two consecutive steps by shaking for 10 min at 1250 rpm in an Eppendorf Thermomixer in 2 bead volumes (aprox 100ul) of elution buffer (8M Urea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH=8.0). The beads were separated using a magnetic stand. The supernatant obtained was digested by means of standard FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced (15 mM TCEP, 30 min, RT), alkylated (50 mM CAA, 20 min in the dark, RT) and sequentially digested with Lys-C (Wako) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, o/n at RT) and trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 6 h at 37 °C). Resulting peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). Mass spectrometry (IP) LC-MS/MS was done by coupling a nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ system (Eksigent) to an Impact mass spectrometer (Bruker) via a Captivespray source (Bruker) supplemented with a nanoBooster operated at 0.2 bar/min with isopropanol as dopant. Peptides were loaded into a trap column (NS-MP-10 BioSphere C18 5 µm, 20 mm length, Nanoseparations) for 10 min at a flow rate of 2 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Pur C18-AQ 2.4 µm, 500 mm length and 0.075 mm ID) and separated using a 100 min effective curved gradient (buffer A: 2% ACN, 0.1%FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 250nL/min from 2% to 35% of buffer B. The MS survey scan was performed at a spectra rate of 2.5 Hz in the TOF analyzer scanning a window between 150 and 1850 m/z. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to a normalized threshold of 500 counts. The 20 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥2 and m/z > 350 from the survey scan were sequentially isolated with an isolation window of 2 m/z and fragmented in the collision cell by collision induced dissociation (CID) using a collision energy of 23 – 56 eV as function of the m/z value. MS/MS accumulation times were corrected in function of the measured precursor MS intensities. The m/z values triggering MS/MS with a repeat count of 1 were put on an exclusion list for 60 s using the rethinking option. Two replicates were performed  Sample preparation for TMT proteomic analysis  Cells were lysed using 5% SDS 50 mM TEAB pH 7.55. Protein concentration was determined using the Thermo Scientific™ NanoDrop™. Then, samples (100 µg) were digested by means of the Protifi™ S-Trap™ Mini Spin Column Digestion Protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced (15 mM TCEP, 30 min, RT), alkylated (50 mM CAA, 20 min in the dark, RT) and digested with trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 1 h at 47 °C). Resulting peptides were desalted using C18 stage-tips. Samples (100 µg) were labeled using Thermo Scientific TMT11plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set following manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were mixed in 1:1 ratios based on total peptide amount. The final mixture was finally desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried prior high pH reverse phase HPLC pre-fractionation. High pH reverse phase chromatography (TMT) Peptides were pre-fractionated offline by means of high pH reverse phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with a sample collector. Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 100 µL of phase A (10 mM NH4OH) and loaded onto a XBridge BEH130 C18 column (3.5 µm, 150 mm length and 1 mm ID) (Waters). Phase B was 10 mM NH4OH in 90% CH3CN. The following gradient (flow rate of 100 µL/min) was used: 0-50 min 0-25% B, 50-56 min 25-60% B, 56-57 min 60-90% B. 50 fractions were collected and concatenated into 15 fractions. Mass spectrometry (TMT) LC-MS/MS was done by coupling an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded into a trap column Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Columns 5 µm, 20 mm length) for 3 min at a flow rate of 10 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18 2 µm, 75 µm x 50 cm) and separated using a 158 min effective curved gradient (buffer A: 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min from 2% to 35% of buffer B. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS (350-1500 m/z) and MS/MS scans using a top 15 method (intensity threshold signal ≥ 3.3e4, z ≥2). An active exclusion of 40 sec was used. Peptides were isolated using a 1.4 Th window and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 33.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis (IP) Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.5.0.2) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, 20,187 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Label-free quantification was done with match between runs (match window of 0.7 min and alignment window of 20 min). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Afterwards, the “proteinGroup.txt” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.5.5.2) for further statistical analysis. A minimum of four LFQ valid values per group was required for quantification. Missing values were imputed from the observed normal distribution of intensities. Then, a two-sample Student’s T-Test with a permutation-based FDR was performed. For the Bait vs Ctrl comparison, only proteins with a q-value<0.05 and log2 ratio >2.36 were considered as interactors. For the PR20 treatment comparison, only interactors with a q-value<0.05 and log2 ratio >1 or >-1 were considered as regulated. Data analysis (TMT) Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.0.16) using the standard settings for TMT labeling against a mouse or human UniprotKB protein databases  supplemented with contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Afterwards, the “proteinGroup.txt” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.5.5.2), or alternatively in ProStar (Wieczorek S. et al, Bioinformatics 2017) for further differential statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptides, Proteomics, Als, Repeats

### Affiliations
Genomic Instability Group,Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas

### Submitter
Eduardo Zarzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Oscar Fernández Capetillo
Genomic Instability Group,Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)


