### Accession
PXD015637

### Title
Transcriptome and Proteome Mapping in the Sheep Atria Reveal Molecular Features of Atrial Fibrillation Progression

### Description
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is often a progressive cardiac arrhythmia that increases the risk of hospitalization and adverse cardiovascular events. There is a clear demand for more inclusive and large-scale approaches to understand the molecular drivers responsible for AF, as well as the fundamental mechanisms governing the transition from paroxysmal to persistent and permanent forms. We aimed to create a molecular map of AF and find the distinct genetic programs underlying cell type-specific atrial remodeling and AF progression.  We used a sheep model of long-standing, tachypacing-induced AF, sampled right and left atrial tissue and isolated cardiomyocytes from control, intermediate (transition) and late time points during AF progression, and performed transcriptomic and proteome profiling. We have merged all these layers of information into a meaningful 3-component space in which we explored the genes and proteins detected and their common patterns of expression. Our data-driven analysis points at extracellular matrix remodeling, inflammation, ion channel, myofibril structure, mitochondrial complexes and chromatin remodeling as hallmarks of AF progression. Most important, we prove that these changes occur at early transitional stages of the disease, but not at later stages, and that the left atrium undergoes significantly more profound changes than the right atrium in its expression program. The pattern of dynamic changes in gene and protein expression correspond closely with the electrical and structural remodeling demonstrated previously in the sheep and in humans. The results provide novel insight into the dynamics of gene and protein expression changes that underlie AF-induced atrial remodeling and that make the arrhythmia become more stable and long lasting.

### Sample Protocol
Atrial Fibrillation was induced using atrial tachypacing. Three groups of three animals each were used for each analysis: transition (13.75±4.50 days of self-sustained AF without reversal to sinus rhythm), chronic or long-standing persistent AF (289.25±50.29 days of self-sustained AF without reversal to sinus rhythm) and control group (two sham operated animals and one not operated animal, always in sinus rhythm). Cardiomyocyte isolation from both left (LAA) and right (RAA) atrial appendages was performed, and pellets of frozen cardiomyocytes were resuspended and homogenized in lysis buffer (10mM Tris-HCL pH7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 0.32 M Sucrose, 2% SDS, 50 mM DTT) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche), boiled for 5 min and cleared by centrifugation. Protein extracts were treated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) and digested with trypsin (FASP digestion kit, Expedeon). Peptides were labeled with 10 plex-TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific), desalted on OASIS HLB extraction cartridges (Waters Corp.), fractioned (High pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and dried. Each fraction of the labeled peptide samples was analyzed using an Easy nano-flow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). C18-based reverse phase separation was used with a 2-cm trap column and a 50-cm analytical column (EASY column, Thermo). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a 240 min linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 200 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS using a top 15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 400–1500 m/z and 60,000 resolution. HCD fragmentation was performed at 27 of normalized collision energy and MS/MS spectra were analyzed at 60,000 resolution in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
The SEQUEST HT algorithm integrated in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) was used to perform protein identification. MS/MS scans were searched against the Ovis aries database ( Ovis aries v75 Ensembl) and peptides were identified from MS/MS data using the probability ratio method.  False discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identifications was calculated by the refined method. Quantitative information was extracted as Zq values from the MS/MS spectra of TMT10-plex labeled peptides using the in-house program QuiXoT.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcriptomics, Data integration, Atrial fibrillation, Proteomics, Cardiovascular disease

### Affiliations
CNIC
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III (CNIC), Madrid, Spain; Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain.

### Submitter
Alba  Alvarez Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel Manzanares
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III (CNIC), Madrid, Spain; Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain.


