### Accession
PXD001662

### Title
Acetylome and succinylome of Corynebacterium glutamicum

### Description
Profiles of two major acyl-modifications, lysine acetylation and succinylation, under L-glutamate-producting and non-producing conditions in Corynebacterium glutamicum, which is industrially utilized for amino acid fermentation, was analyzed. During glutamate overproduction induced by Tween 40, global lysine acetylation was decreased, while lysine succinylation was increased. A label-free semi-quantitative proteomic analysis identified 591 acetylated proteins with 1,509 unique acetylation sites and 297 succinylated proteins with 790 unique succinylation sites. Lysine acetylation and succinylation targeted most enzymes in the central carbon metabolic pathways that are directly related to glutamate production, including the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (ODHC), a key enzyme for glutamate overproduction.

### Sample Protocol
Lysate containing 2 mg protein was reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin, and acetylated or succinylated peptides were enriched by anti-acetyllysine or succinyllysine antibodies. For acetylome analysis, acetyllysine peptide standard (1 fmole; m/z 1225.7; FKAcAEVYVLSK corresponding to the residues 307 to 316 of B. subtilis TufA) was added to the proteolytic peptides before immunoprecipitation. To analyse proteome in each glutamate-producing and non-producing condition, lysate containing 25 μg of protein was reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin, and subjected to HPLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by reverse-phase nano HPLC-MS/MS using the EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometric data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer (ver. 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched against C. glutamicum ATCC13032 sequences (NC_003450, 2959 entries) in the database using with the MASCOT search engine (ver. 2.4.1). The search parameters in MASCOT included trypsin digestion with six missed cleavages allowed. Variable modifications included lysine acetylation, lysine succinylation, and methionine oxidation, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterium Corynebacterium glutamicum is utilized during industrial fermentation to produce amino acids such as L-glutamate. During L-glutamate fermentation, C. glutamicum changes the flux of central carbon metabolism to favor L-glutamate production, but the molecular mechanisms that explain these flux changes remain largely unknown. Here, we found that the profiles of two major lysine acyl modifications were significantly altered upon glutamate overproduction in C. glutamicum; acetylation decreased, whereas succinylation increased. A label-free semi-quantitative proteomic analysis identified 604 acetylated proteins with 1328 unique acetylation sites and 288 succinylated proteins with 651 unique succinylation sites. Acetylation and succinylation targeted enzymes in central carbon metabolic pathways that are directly related to glutamate production, including the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (ODHC), a key enzyme regulating glutamate overproduction. Structural mapping revealed that several critical lysine residues in the ODHC components were susceptible to acetylation and succinylation. Furthermore, induction of glutamate production was associated with changes in the extent of acetylation and succinylation of lysine, suggesting that these modifications may affect the activity of enzymes involved in glutamate production. Deletion of phosphotransacetylase decreased the extent of protein acetylation in nonproducing condition, suggesting that acetyl phosphate-dependent acetylation is active in C. glutamicum. However, no effect was observed on the profiles of acetylation and succinylation in glutamate-producing condition upon disruption of acetyl phosphate metabolism or deacetylase homologs. It was considered likely that the reduced acetylation in glutamate-producing condition may reflect metabolic states where the flux through acid-producing pathways is very low, and substrates for acetylation do not accumulate in the cell. Succinylation would occur more easily than acetylation in such conditions where the substrates for both acetylation and succinylation are limited. This is the first study investigating the acetylome and succinylome of C. glutamicum, and it provides new insight into the roles of acyl modifications in C. glutamicum biology.

### Keywords
Acetylome, Corynebacterium glutamicum, Lc-ms/ms, Succinylome, Glutamate production

### Affiliations
Biotechnology Research Center, the University of Tokyo, Japan
UTokyo

### Submitter
Saori Kosono

### Lab Head
Dr Saori Kosono
Biotechnology Research Center, the University of Tokyo, Japan


