### Accession
PXD012960

### Title
• Clinical proteomics profiling for biomarker identification  among patients suffering with Indian Post Kala Azar Dermal Leishmaniasis

### Description
Post Kala Azar Dermal Leishmaniasis (PKDL) is a non-fatal dermal sequel of Visceral Leishmaniasis (VL), caused by protozoan parasite Leishmania donovani. On the global scenario, PKDL in mainly restricted to distinct zones of South Asia (India, Nepal and Bangladesh) and East Africa, mainly Sudan. In India, the most prominent fatal form of leishmaniasis present is VL, affecting entirely the eastern region of the country. The clinical presentation of VL and PKDL differ substantially; where VL patients suffer from sustained fever, hepatospleenomegaly, weight loss and anemia, PKDL patients manifest dermal lesions in the form of macular, nodular and polymorphic.  Although, compared to VL, the mortality rate of PKDL is significantly lower, yet it is observed as a stigmatizing disease that brings a substantial socioeconomic burden, further intensified by a hesitancy of patients, to obtain treatment, or due to noncompliance. Lesions, especially the polymorphic forms, are parasite-rich, concluding that PKDL plays a crucial role in the anthroponotic transmission of VL. PKDL patients with Macular lesions, having comparatively lower parasitic load, and thus lacks detection sensitivity with standard techniques like rK39 (73% sensitivity), Leishmanin skin test (54% sensitivity) and Histopathological studies with patients’ skin biopsy sample (7-33% sensitivity) and is often misdiagnosed as Vitiligo cases. In order to completely eliminate Kala-azar in Southeast Asia, proper identification of various routes of the disease is essential, which could efficiently distinguish between cured PKDL and active PKDL as well as active PKDL from other cross disease like Leprosy and Vitiligo. Till now very less work has been done towards biomarker identification for PKDL from patients’ plasma. Most of the methods for disease identification are based on highly invasive tissue biopsy followed by PCR/qPCR. Recently investigations from our group have demonstrated the presence of novel glycoproteins in the circulating immune complexes (CICs) from serum, as biomarkers for early identification of PKDL patients. An Immune complex (IC), sometimes called an antigen-antibody complex, is a molecule formed from the integral binding of an antibody to a soluble antigen. After an antigen-antibody reaction, the immune complexes can be subject to any number of responses, including complement deposition, opsonisation, phagocytosis, or processing by proteases. Accumulation of ICs leads to a broad spectrum of pro-inflammatory effects, including activation of the complement cascade and induction of cytokine secretion. These complexes may also be deposited in tissues and vessel walls, leading to inflammation, tissue damage and, ultimately, disease manifestations. Immune complexes also affect disease progression and outcome in various disorders through the induction of pro-inflammatory or anti-inflammatory cytokines. In the present study we hypothesize that the CICs’ proteome is altered among PKDL patients with different dermal manifestations (Macular and Polymorphic) as compared to Cured individuals (CR) and Healthy controls (HI). The aim of this current study is to identify differentially expressed CIC proteomic profile among different forms PKDL patients as compared to HI. The differential protein expression of specific unique peptide fragments, representing specific proteins, could be used as diagnostic biomarkers in early detection of both Macular and Polymorphic PKDL cases. In this prospective study, we included PKDL patients with Macular and/or Polymorphic lesion, Cured individuals and HI. Among the enrolled patients, blood samples were collected from 20 primarily confirmed PKDL patients with Macular lesions, 20 primarily confirmed PKDL patients with Polymorphic lesions, 12 Cured individuals previously suffering from PKDL and 12 Healthy individuals; collected during the period of 2015-2016, stored at -80°C. Next the CICs were purified from PKDL patients’ plasma and LC MS/MS analysis was performed using Q-ExactivePlusOrbitrap mass spectrometer. This work for the first time revealed the differential CICs proteome profile among different forms of PKDL patients as compared to their Cured and Healthy counterparts.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were dried by speed-vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µL of 0.1% formic acid. Zip-tipping was performed using C18 tips. Peptides bound with the C18 tips were eluted with acetonitrile and then dried. Samples were reconstituted in 15 µL of 0.1% formic acid. Prior to MS, different peptides present in polypeptide solution were separated with nano LC. Peptides were analyzed by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry using the Easy nano LC 1200 system [Thermo Scientific] coupled to a Q-ExactivePlusOrbitrap mass spectrometer [Thermo Scientific].  Briefly, tryptic digested peptides (6µl injection volume) were loaded onto a nano-precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific Acclaim) PepMap 100µm x 2cm, nanoviper C18, 5µm, 100A.  Peptides were separated by a nano HPLC column ES 803 PepMap RSLC C18 2um, 100A, 75um x 50cm, and separated with a linear gradient of water/ 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v) and ion-sprayed into MS with a spray voltage of 1.90KV, capillary temperature 300°C.  Further, raw files were analyzed to identify proteins of interest using Proteome Discoverer Software 2.2 (Thermo Scientific); with the following parameters: database; SequestHTUniprot Homo sapiens database and with UniprotLeish PR database, Type of search; MS/MS Ion Search, Enzyme; Trypsin, Variable modifications; Oxidation (M), Mass values; Monoisotopic, Protein Mass; Unrestricted, Precursor Mass Tolerance; 10ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance;0.05Da , Max Missed Cleavages; 2 and Instrument type; default

### Data Protocol
The raw data acquired were converted into a single “.mgf” format file containing the peaklist by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using default parameter. Independent “.mgf” files for each sample were searched against a merged database composed of reviewed entries of Human Uniprot database and Leishmania donovani reference.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Post Kala Azar Dermal Leishmaniasis (PKDL) is a non-fatal dermal sequel of Visceral Leishmaniasis (VL), affecting individuals worldwide. Available diagnostic tools lack sensitivity and specificity toward identifying macular (MAC) PKDL patients, due to low parasite load in patients' sample. Confirmatory test like punch biopsy are invasive and painful. Considering the rural nature of this disease and the prevailing situation of diagnostic scenario, PKDL patients mostly remains unattended from receiving proper medical care. They in turn act as "mobile parasite reservoir," responsible for VL transmission among healthy individuals (HI). This study aims to identify PKDL disease specific glycated protein biomarkers, utilizing the powerful LC-MS/MS technology, which is the tool of choice to efficiently identify and quantify disease specific protein biomarkers. These identified PKDL disease specific novel glycoproteins could be developed in future as immunochromatographic based assay for efficient case detection. <b>Methodology:</b> Previously our lab had identified importance of glycated (Circulating Immune Complexes) CICs, among PKDL patients. This study aims to further characterize disease specific glycated protein biomarkers, among MAC PKDL patients for both diagnostic and prognostic evaluation of the disease. LC-MS/MS based comparative spectral count analysis of MAC PKDL to polymorphic (POLY) PKDL, HI, and Cured (CR) individuals were performed. Proteins level alterations among all study groups were confirmed by Western blot and enzyme-linked immunosorbant Assay (ELISA). <b>Results:</b> Among MAC PKDL patients 43, 60, 90 proteins were altered compared to POLY PKDL, HI, and CR groups, respectively. Filtering for the most significant proteins, Plasminogen (PLG) and Vitronectin (VTN) were identified which promisingly identified MAC PKDL cases. Active surveillance results from endemic districts of West Bengal revealed drastic rise of MAC PKDL cases, alarming the urgency for field adaptive efficient biomarker. <b>Conclusion:</b> This current study aims to establish PLG and VTN as novel diagnostic and prognostic protein biomarker for MAC and POLY PKDL cases management.

### Keywords
Polymorphic (p3), Biomarker, Post kala azar dermal leishmaniasis, Healthy (p1), Macular (p2), Proteomics, Cured (p4), Circulating immune complexes

### Affiliations
DEPARTMENT OF TROPICAL MEDICINE,SCHOOL OF TROPICAL MEDICINE, KOLKATA, WEST BENGAL, INDIA
DEPARTMENT OF LABORATORY MEDICINE, SCHOOL OF TROPICAL MEDICINE, KOLKATA

### Submitter
SUMI MUKHOPADHYAY

### Lab Head
Dr SUMI MUKHOPADHYAY
DEPARTMENT OF TROPICAL MEDICINE,SCHOOL OF TROPICAL MEDICINE, KOLKATA, WEST BENGAL, INDIA


