### Accession
PXD041376

### Title
Profiling of purified autophagic vesicle content and degradome in the maturing and aging brain - Part II

### Description
In this second part of the project “Profiling of purified autophagic vesicle content and degradome in the maturing and aging brain” four label-free proteomics studies were performed to characterize stabilization of potential autophagy targets upon lysosomal and/or autophagy inhibition.

### Sample Protocol
Per expression proteomics experiment of mixed mouse forebrain cultures (whole cell lysates) 5 biological replicates were analyzed by DDA, LFQ. Samples were left untreated (1. Ctrl), or treated with bafilomycin A1 (2. BafA1; inhibiting V-ATPase), SBI-0206569 and SAR405 (3. SBISAR; blocking ULK1 and Vps34 kinases, respectively), or a combination of BafA1 and SBISAR (4. SSBafA1).

### Data Protocol
Label free quantification measurements were obtained for all samples, LFQ values were used for whole proteome analyses. A minimum of two out of three valid values per experiment were required for further analyses. Statistical significance was calculated using student T-test with p values. MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10)(Cox and Mann, 2008) was used for analyzing the MS raw files for peak detection, peptide quantification and identification using a full length Uniprot mouse database (version April 2016). Carbamidomethylcysteine was used as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as well as N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm and four missed cleavages were allowed for Trypsin/P as enzyme specificity. Based on a forward-reverse database, protein and peptide FDR were set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to seven, and at least one unique peptide had to be identified. The match-between run option was set to 0.7 minutes.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy disorders prominently affect the brain, entailing neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative phenotypes in adolescence or aging, respectively. Synaptic and behavioral deficits are largely recapitulated in mouse models with ablation of autophagy genes in brain cells. Yet, the nature and temporal dynamics of brain autophagic substrates remain insufficiently characterized. Here, we immunopurified LC3-positive autophagic vesicles (LC3-pAVs) from the mouse brain and proteomically profiled their content. Moreover, we characterized the LC3-pAV content that accumulates after macroautophagy impairment, validating a brain autophagic degradome. We reveal selective pathways for aggrephagy, mitophagy, and ER-phagy via selective autophagy receptors, and the turnover of numerous synaptic substrates, under basal conditions. To gain insight into the temporal dynamics of autophagic protein turnover, we quantitatively compared adolescent, adult, and aged brains, revealing critical periods of enhanced mitophagy or degradation of synaptic substrates. Overall, this resource unbiasedly characterizes the contribution of autophagy to proteostasis in the maturing, adult, and aged brain.

### Keywords
Brain, Lc-msms, Mouse, Stabilization, Autophagosome, Degradome

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biology University of Fribourg Chemin du Musee 10 CH-1700 Fribourg Switzerland
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dept. of Biology University of Fribourg Chemin du Musee 10 CH-1700 Fribourg Switzerland


