### Accession
PXD014830

### Title
Translational control in pluripotent cells by SBDS-dependent ribosome destabilization

### Description
Unique traits of pluripotent stem cells are not fully known. Using thermal proteome profiling, we identified reduced stability of ribosomes in induced pluripotent cells (iPSCs) compared to that in somatic cells. Also, iPSCs exhibited lower protein synthesis rate and lower expression of a ribosome maturation factor, the Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond Syndrome protein (SBDS). Differentiation of iPSCs led to upregulation of SBDS and knock-down of SBDS slowed the differentiation while increasing expression of master pluripotency markers NANOG and Oct-4. Mutations in the SBDS gene have been shown to impair ribosome assembly and to inhibit differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells causing the Shwachman- Diamond syndrome. Physiological SBDS-dependent destabilization of ribosomes appears to be a tool for translational control providing robustness to the state of pluripotency.

### Sample Protocol
For all experiments, 50 µg of proteins were used for proteomics samples preparation. All samples except for TPP samples were lyzed into 8M urea, 1% SDS and 50 mM Tris pH 8.5 then sonicated using a Branson probe sonicator for 45s (3s pulse and 30% amplitude). Then for all samples, reduction was performed using 5 mM DTT at RT for 1h followed by alkylation using 15 mM IAA at RT in the dark for 1h. The reaction was quenched by adding 10 mM DTT. Then methanol/chloroform precipitation was performed. Protein pellets were resuspended in 8M urea, 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5. The samples were diluted once with by adding 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5 (4M urea) and lysyl endopeptidase digestion was carried out at a 1 :100 ratio (LysC/protein, w/w) overnight at RT. The following day, samples were diluted 4 times (1M urea) with 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5 then tryptic digestion was performed for 6h at RT using a 1 :100 ratio (Trypsin/protein, w/w). After that, TMT10 labeling was performed according to Table S1 and S2 during 2h at RT by adding 0.2 mg of reagent dissolved in dry ACN according to manufacturer’s instructions and a final ACN concentration of 20%. The reaction was then quenched by adding triethylamine to a final 0.5% concentration and incubated 15 min at RT. The samples were combined resulting in one pooled sample per replicate containing each temperature. After that, the samples were desalted using Sep Pack (Waters) and vacuum dried overnight using miVac DNA (Genevac). For experiments 1-4 and 9 (Table S1) 70 µg of proteins were resuspended into 300 µl of 0.1% TFA and fractionated using Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) according to manufacturer’s protocol. For experiments 6-8 and 10 (Table S1), 150 µg of proteins were resuspended into 20 mM NH4OH. Then, samples were off-line high-pH reversed-phase fractionated using an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) equipped with a XBridge Peptide BEH 25 cm column of 2.1 mm internal diameter, packed with 3.5 µm C18 beads having 300 Å pores (Waters). The mobile phase consisted of buffer A (20 mM NH4OH) and buffer B (100% ACN). The gradient started from 1% B to 23.5% in 42 min, then to 54% B in 9 min, 63% B in 2 min and stayed at 63% B for 5 min and finally back to 1% B and stayed at 1% B for 7 min.   Prior to Mass spectrometry analysis, all samples were resuspended into 2% ACN and 0.1% FA at a concentration of 0.2 µg/µl and 1 µg were injected into the respective LC systems (Table S1). Mass spectra were acquired according to Table S3. Table S1.  Experiment number Experiment  description Number of replicates Total number of TMT sets Mass spectrometer LC-system Fractionation system Number of fractions per sample 1  TPP hi12 against hFF  2 4 Fusion Orbitrap  EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific) 8 2 TPP hi12 against RKO  2 4 Elite Orbitrap  - Same than above - 3 TPP hi11 and hi13 against hFF 2 6 Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap  - Same than above - 4 TPP hi12 against hFF in lysate 2 4 Fusion Orbitrap  - Same than above - 5 Density gradient fractions 3 3 Elite Orbitrap  UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fischer Scientific) / / 6 Expression of hi12 against hFF and EBs 3 1 - - UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) 24 7 Expression of hi12 against RKO and HT29 3 1 - - Same than above - 8 Expression of hi12 against neurons 3 1 - - Same than above - 9 SBDS siRNA KD 2 days treatment and 4 days treatment in hFF 3 2 Q-Exactive Orbitrap  EASY-nLC 1000  Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit  8 10 Time-serie of EBs induction and SBDS siRNA KD 3 3 Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap  UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System  UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System  24 Table S2.  Experiment 126 127N 127C 128N 128C 129N 129C 130N 130C 131 1 (hFF1-2) 37◦C 41◦C 44◦C 47◦C 50◦C 53◦C 56◦C 59◦C 63◦C 67◦C 1 (iPSC1-2) -          2 (RKO1-2) -          2 (iPSC1-2) -          3 (hFF1-2) -          3 (hi11-1-2) -          3 (hi13-1-2) -          4 (hFF1-2) -          4 (iPSC1-2) -          5 (Set1-3) Hi12 soluble fraction Hi12 40S+60S Hi12 80S Hi12 light polysomes Hi12 heavy polysomes RKO soluble fraction RKO 40S + 60S RKO 80S RKO light polysomes RKO heavy polysomes 6 (Set1) Hi12 Hi12 Hi12 hFF hFF hFF EB EB EB / 7 (Set2) Hi12 Hi12 Hi12 RKO RKO RKO HT-29 HT-29 HT-29 / 8 (Set3) Hi12 Hi12 Hi12 RKO RKO RKO HT-29 HT-29 HT-29 / 9 (EB) EB_2D_water  EB_2D_water EB_2D_water EB_2D_SBDS_siRNA EB_2D_SBDS_siRNA EB_2D_SBDS_siRNA EB_2D_All_star_siRNA EB_2D_All_star_siRNA EB_2D_All_star_siRNA / 9 (hFF_D2) Same than above          9 (hFF_D4) hFF_4D_water  hFF_4D_water hFF_4D_water hFF_4D_SBDS_siRNA hFF_4D_SBDS_siRNA hFF_4D_SBDS_siRNA hFF_4D_All_star_siRNA hFF_4D_All_star_siRNA hFF_4D_All_star_siRNA / 10 (Set1-3) hi12_D0 EB_D3 EB_D6 EB_D9 EB_D9_All_star_siRNA EB_D9_SBDS_siRNA hi12_D0_All_star_siRNA hi12_D0_SBDS_siRNA EB_D3_All_star_siRNA EB_D3_SBDS_siRNA

### Data Protocol
TMT-10 labeling quantification Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3). MS2 was selected as the quantification mode with TMT10 as the modification. Acetylation of N-terminal, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of the cysteine was selected as fixed modification. The Andromeda search engine was using the UniProt human database 2019_05 excluding protein isoforms (73 910 entries) with the precursor mass tolerance for the first searches and the main search set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively.  Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with up to two missed cleavages allowed; the peptide minimal length was set to seven amino acid.  Default parameters were used for the instrument setting. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides and proteins. “Match between runs” option was used with a time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thermal proteom profiling, Translation, Ribosome, Sbds, Pluripotent stem cells

### Affiliations
Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet SE 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. Department of Pharmacological & Technological Chemistry, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, 119146, Russia.
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Pierre Sabatier

### Lab Head
Dr Roman A. Zubarev
Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet SE 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. Department of Pharmacological & Technological Chemistry, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, 119146, Russia.


