### Accession
PXD013659

### Title
Mrj1HA AP-MS in Cryptococcus neoformans

### Description
The opportunistic fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans must adapt to the mammalian environment to establish an infection. Proteins facilitating adaptation to novel environments, such as chaperones, may be required for virulence. In this study, we identified a novel mitochondrial co-chaperone, Mrj1, necessary for virulence in C. neoformans. The mrj1∆ and J-domain inactivated mutants had general growth defects, and were deficient in two major virulence factors, thermotolerance and capsule elaboration. The latter phenotype was associated with cell wall changes and increased capsular polysaccharide shedding. Accordingly, the mrj1∆ mutant was avirulent in a murine model of cryptococcosis. Mrj1 has a mitochondrial localization and co-immunoprecipitated with Qcr2, a core component of complex III of the ETC (Electron Transport Chain). The mrj1 mutants were deficient in mitochondrial functions including growth on alternative carbon sources, growth without iron, and mitochondrial polarization. They were also insensitive to complex III inhibitors and hypersensitive to an alternative oxidase (AOX) inhibitor suggesting that Mrj1 functions in respiration. In support of this conclusion, mrj1 mutants also had elevated basal oxygen consumption rates which were completely abolished by the addition of the AOX inhibitor, confirming that Mrj1 is required for mitochondrial respiration through complexes III and IV. Furthermore, inhibition of complex III phenocopied the capsule and cell wall defects of the mrj1 mutants. Taken together, these results indicate that Mrj1 is required for normal mitochondrial respiration, a key aspect of adaptation to the host environment and virulence.

### Sample Protocol
Three overnight cultures per group were diluted 1 in 10 in fresh YPD and grown in a final volume of 50 ml for 6 hours at 30°C with shaking and increased to 37°C for the last 30 min to induce expression of Mrj1-HA. Protein extracts were obtained by grinding in liquid nitrogen, resuspending in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, and 1X EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), vortexing, and water bath sonication of 5 X 30 s cycles with 1 min in between cycles at 4°C using a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode). Protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay kit following manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher). 1.5 mg of protein lysate were added to 25 μL of Pierce anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher). Immunoprecipitation was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions using a basic elution. Eluted proteins were chloroform methanol precipitated for further processing and eventual MS analysis. Precipitated proteins were digested in RapiGest (Waters) following the manufacturer’s in-solution digest protocol using 0.1% RapiGest. The solution containing the peptides was acidified to pH < 2 using trifluoroacetic acid and the Rapigest surfactant was precipitated out prior to desalting using STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips with C18 medium. The resulting peptides were resuspended in sample buffer containing 98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid. All solvents for STAGE tipping were prepared using Optima LC-MS quality reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 2 µL of each sample were subjected to reverse phase liquid chromatography for peptide separation using an RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column (100 µm x 2 cm, C18, 3 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 20 µL/min for 3 min. Analytical separation of peptides was performed on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 µm x 50 cm, C18, 3 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The solvent composition was gradually changed within 94 min from 96 % solvent A (0.1 % formic acid) and 4 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) to 10 % solvent B within 2 minutes, to 30 % solvent B within the next 58 min, to 45% solvent B within the following 22 min, and to 90 % solvent B within the last 12 min of the gradient. All solvents and acids were Optima grade for LC-MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluting peptides were on-line ionized by nano-electrospray (nESI) using the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific) at 1.5 kV (liquid junction) and transferred into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full scans in a mass range of 300 to 1650 m/z were recorded at a resolution of 30,000 followed by data-dependent top 10 HCD fragmentation at a resolution of 15,000 (dynamic exclusion enabled). LC-MS method programming and data acquisition was performed with the XCalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.016 was used for protein identification and label-free quantification by searching MS/MS2 data against the Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii H99 protein database (UP000010091, downloaded October 19, 2018). Default settings of MaxQuant were used with the addition of label free quantification selected in group specific parameters. The results of the MaxQuant analysis were further processed and statistically analyzed using Perseus 1.6.0.7. Two groups were used for analysis, the first was the wild type (LH_Q_29, L_Q_30, LH_Q_32) and the second was the Mrj1-HA (LH_Q_33, LH_Q_34, LH_Q_36). Statistical significance of the enriched proteins in the tagged strain was evaluated using a two-sided t-test with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
The opportunistic fungal pathogen <i>Cryptococcus neoformans</i> must adapt to the mammalian environment to establish an infection. Proteins facilitating adaptation to novel environments, such as chaperones, may be required for virulence. In this study, we identified a novel mitochondrial co-chaperone, Mrj1 (<u>m</u>itochondrial <u>r</u>espiration <u>J</u>-domain protein <u>1</u>), necessary for virulence in <i>C. neoformans</i> The <i>mrj1&#x394;</i> and J-domain-inactivated mutants had general growth defects at both routine laboratory and human body temperatures and were deficient in the major virulence factor of capsule elaboration. The latter phenotype was associated with cell wall changes and increased capsular polysaccharide shedding. Accordingly, the <i>mrj1&#x394;</i> mutant was avirulent in a murine model of cryptococcosis. Mrj1 has a mitochondrial localization and co-immunoprecipitated with Qcr2, a core component of complex III of the electron transport chain. The <i>mrj1</i> mutants were deficient in mitochondrial functions, including growth on alternative carbon sources, growth without iron, and mitochondrial polarization. They were also insensitive to complex III inhibitors and hypersensitive to an alternative oxidase (AOX) inhibitor, suggesting that Mrj1 functions in respiration. In support of this conclusion, <i>mrj1</i> mutants also had elevated basal oxygen consumption rates which were completely abolished by the addition of the AOX inhibitor, confirming that Mrj1 is required for mitochondrial respiration through complexes III and IV. Furthermore, inhibition of complex III phenocopied the capsule and cell wall defects of the <i>mrj1</i> mutants. Taken together, these results indicate that Mrj1 is required for normal mitochondrial respiration, a key aspect of adaptation to the host environment and virulence.<b>IMPORTANCE</b><i>Cryptococcus neoformans</i> is the causative agent of cryptococcal meningitis, a disease responsible for &#x223c;15% of all HIV-related deaths. Unfortunately, development of antifungal drugs is challenging because potential targets are conserved between humans and <i>C. neoformans</i> In this context, we characterized a unique J-domain protein, Mrj1, which lacks orthologs in humans. We showed that Mrj1 was required for normal mitochondrial respiration and that mutants lacking Mrj1 were deficient in growth, capsule elaboration, and virulence. Furthermore, we were able to phenocopy the defects in growth and capsule elaboration by inhibiting respiration. This result suggests that the role of Mrj1 in mitochondrial function was responsible for the observed virulence defects and reinforces the importance of mitochondria to fungal pathogenesis. Mitochondria are difficult to target, as their function is also key to human cells; however, Mrj1 presents an opportunity to target a unique fungal protein required for mitochondrial function and virulence in <i>C. neoformans</i>.

### Keywords
Cryptococcus neoformans

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Canada

### Submitter
Linda Horianopoulos

### Lab Head
Dr James W. Kronstad
Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Canada


