### Accession
PXD028275

### Title
Multiomic Profiling of Iron Deficient Infant Monkeys Reveals Alterations in Neurologically Important Biochemicals in Serum and CSF Prior to the Onset of Anemia

### Description
Background: The effects of iron deficiency anemia (IDA) during infancy extend beyond the hematologic compartment and include short- and long-term adverse effects on many tissues including the brain. However, biomarkers of iron-dependent brain health are lacking in humans. Prior analyses in rhesus infants indicated abnormal serum and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) multiomic profiles both prior to and during IDA, characterized by alterations suggestive of hepatic and brain metabolic dysfunction, and impaired energy metabolism. Objective: To determine whether serum and CSF biomarkers of iron deficiency (ID)-induced metabolic dysfunction are concordant in the pre/early anemic stage of ID in a nonhuman primate model of infantile IDA. Methods: Paired serum and CSF specimens were collected from iron-sufficient (IS; n = 12) and ID (n = 7) rhesus infants at 4-months (preanemic period) and 6-months (anemic period) of age. Hematological, metabolomic, and proteomic profiles were generated via HPLC/MS at both timepoints to discover serum biomarkers of ID-induced brain metabolic dysfunction. Results: We identified and quantified 227 metabolites and 205 proteins in serum. Abnormalities indicating altered liver function, lipid dysregulation, and increased acute phase proteins were present in ID. In CSF, we measured 210 metabolites and 1,560 proteins with ID infants displaying metabolomic and proteomic changes indicating disrupted synaptogenesis. Concurrent systemic and CSF proteomic and metabolomic changes were present in the preanemic and anemic periods. Conclusions: Multiomic serum and CSF profiling uncovered pathways disrupted by ID in both the preanemic and anemic stages of infantile IDA, including evidence for liver metabolic dysfunction and acute phase responses. Parallel changes observed in serum and CSF potentially provide measurable serum biomarkers that reflect at-risk brain processes early during ID.

### Sample Protocol
The Tandem Mass Tag™ isobaric labeled sample was resuspended in Buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 in 98:2 water:acetonitrile) and fractionated offline by high pH C18 reversed-phase (RP) chromatography as previously described (28) with the following changes. A Shimadzu Prominence HPLC (Shimadzu, Columbia, MD) with a Hot Sleeve-25L Column Heater (Analytical Sales & Products, Inc., Pompton Plains, NJ) was used with a Security Guard precolumn housing a Gemini NX C18 cartridge (Phenomemex, Torrance, CA) attached to a C18 XBridge column, 150 mm x 2.1 mm internal diameter, 5 µm particle size (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Buffer A was 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 in 98:2 water:acetonitrile and Buffer B was 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 in 10:90 water:acetonitrile. The flow rate was 200 µl/min with a gradient from 2-7% buffer B over 0.5 min, 7-15% buffer B over 7.5 min, 15-35% buffer B over 45 min, and 35-60% buffer B over 15 min. Fractions were collected every 2 min and UV absorbances were monitored at 215 nm and 280 nm. Peptide containing fractions were divided into two equal numbered groups, “early” and “late”. A volume equal to 15 milli-absorbance unit of the first “early” fraction was concatenated with the first “late” fraction, and so on. Concatenated samples were dried in vacuo, resuspended in load solvent (98:2:0.01, water:acetonitrile:formic acid) and run on the Thermo Fusion. LC-MS data was acquired for each concatenated fraction using an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) in tandem with a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA). Peptides were loaded directly onto a 75 cm x 100-µm internal diameter fused silica PicoTip Emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ (1.9 µm particle, 120 Å pore; Dr. Maish GmbH Ammerbuch, Germany). The column was heated to 55 °C and a flow rate of 300 µL/minute was applied during the gradient. The gradient was as follows: 5-22% Buffer B (A: 0.1% formic acid in water, B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 45 min, 22-35% B for 25 min, and 35-95% B over 10 min. The column was mounted in a nanospray source directly in line with an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Spray voltage was 2.1 kV in positive mode, and the heated capillary was maintained at 275 °C. The orbital trap was set to acquire survey mass spectra (380–1580 m/z) with a resolution of 60,000 at 100 m/z with automatic gain control (AGC) 1.0E6, 250-ms min injection. EASY-IC was selected for internal mass calibration. The 12 most intense ions (2-7 charged state) from the full scan were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energy 35%, and detector settings of 60k resolution, AGC 5E4 ions, 250 ms maximum injection time and FT first mass mode fixed at 110 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40s with a 10-ppm high and low mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Sample data was searched through MASCOT using the UniProt Rhesus Macaque database appeneded with cRAP. Proteins with at least two peptides with >95% confidence were used for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The effects of iron deficiency (ID) during infancy extend beyond the hematologic compartment and include short- and long-term adverse effects on many tissues including the brain. However, sensitive biomarkers of iron-dependent brain health are lacking in humans. To determine whether serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers of ID-induced metabolic dysfunction are concordant in the pre/early anemic stage of ID before anemia in a nonhuman primate model of infantile iron deficiency anemia (IDA). ID (<i>n</i> = 7), rhesus infants at 4 mo (pre-anemic period) and 6 mo of age (anemic) were examined. Hematological, metabolomic, and proteomic profiles were generated via HPLC/MS at both time points to discriminate serum biomarkers of ID-induced brain metabolic dysfunction. We identified 227 metabolites and 205 proteins in serum. Abnormalities indicating altered liver function, lipid dysregulation, and increased acute phase reactants were present in ID. In CSF, we measured 210 metabolites and 1,560 proteins with changes in ID infants indicative of metabolomic and proteomic differences indexing disrupted synaptogenesis. Systemic and CSF proteomic and metabolomic changes were present and concurrent in the pre-anemic and anemic periods. Multiomic serum and CSF profiling uncovered pathways disrupted by ID in both the pre-anemic and anemic stages of infantile IDA, including evidence for hepatic dysfunction and activation of acute phase response. Parallel changes observed in serum and CSF potentially provide measurable serum biomarkers of ID that reflect at-risk brain processes prior to progression to clinical anemia.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Neurological function, Infancy, Lc-msms, Synaptogenesis, Iron deficiency anemia, Proteomics, Monkey, Csf, Serum, Tmt, Acute phase

### Affiliations
Director, Division of Neonatology Department of Pediatrics Center for Neurobehavioral Development University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Brian Sandri

### Lab Head
Dr Raghavendra Rao
Director, Division of Neonatology Department of Pediatrics Center for Neurobehavioral Development University of Minnesota


