### Accession
PXD005804

### Title
Comparative glycoproteomics of embryonic stem cells identifies new players in ricin toxicity

### Description
Rapid advances in the fields of DNA-, RNA-, polypeptide-sequencing and metabolomics have markedly enhanced our understanding of fundamental biological processes. In contrast to other post-translational modifications (PTMs), the most abundant PTM, glycosylation, remains largely unexplored at the proteome scale because of a scarcity of technologies for profiling the immensely complex glycoproteome. We developed a novel quantitative approach for the identification of intact glycopeptides from comparative proteomic data-sets, allowing us to not only identify complex sugar structures but also to directly map them to the corresponding glycosylation sites in the associated proteins at the proteome scale. Applying this method to human and murine embryonic stem cells, we were able to nearly double the number of all experimentally confirmed glycoproteins, including the identification of completely unknown glycosylation sites, multiple glycosylated stemness factors and the elucidation of evolutionary conserved core as well as species-specific glycoproteins in embryonic stem cells. Specificity of our method was confirmed in sister stem cells carrying repairable mutations in enzymes required for fucosylation, Fut9 and Slc35c1. Since ablation of fucosylation confers cellular resistance towards the bioweapon ricin (see accompanying paper), our method also allowed us to directly identify the proteins that carry the terminal fucosylation code for ricin toxicity; genetic mutations in these proteins functionally confirmed their role in ricin killing. This novel comparative and high-throughput glycoproteomics platform should allow for entirely novel insights in protein glycosylation and sugar modifications involved in nearly all biological systems.

### Sample Protocol
ESC cultures were washed 3 times with PBS, then incubated for 5 min with PBS containing 1mM EDTA and sedimented by centrifugation at 900 x g. The supernatant was removed and the cell pellets were immediately lysed by the addition of freshly prepared 10M Urea in 120 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, Sigma) to a final concentration of 8M Urea in 100mM TEAB and brief ultra-sonication (ultrasonic processor UP100H, Hielscher, Germany). The samples were reduced (final concentration 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride, 30 min) and alkylated (final concentration 10 mM methyl-methanethiosulfonate, 30 min). Protein concentrations were measured (BCA Protein Assay Kit, Pierce) and 1 mg protein per sample were digested with 10 μg endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) for 8 hours at 37°C. Subsequently, the samples were diluted with water to 6M Urea in 75 mM TEAB and incubated with 1 U Benzonase endonuclease (Merck KGaA) for 1 hour at 37°C. The samples were further diluted to 4M Urea in 50 mM TEAB and incubated with 10 μg modified porcine trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) for 12 hours at 37°C. After TMT-6plex-labelling (performed according to the suppliers manual, Thermo), the pH of the individual samples was adjusted to approx. 2 by the addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were pooled in equal amounts, desalted using reversed phase solid-phase extraction cartridges (SPE, Sep-Pak C-18, Waters) and completely dried under vacuum. Prior to glycopeptide enrichment, the samples were digested with 1 U alkaline phosphatase (from calf intestine, Roche), desalted using reversed phase solid-phase extraction cartridges (SPE, Sep-Pak C-18, Waters) and completely dried under vacuum. Glycopeptides were enriched using ion-pairing hydrophilic interaction chromatography (IP-HILIC). The dry samples were taken up in 100 μL 75% acetonitrile containing 0.1 % TFA, and were subjected to chromatographic separation on a TSKgel Amide-80 column (4.6 mm ID x 25 cm, particle size 5μ) using a linear gradient from 0.1% TFA in 80% acetonitrile to 0.1% TFA in 40% acetonitrile over 35 minutes (Ultimate 3000, Dionex – Thermo Fischer Scientific). The collected fractions were dried in a speed-vac concentrator. For validation experiments of intact N-glycopeptide identifications, aliquots of these fractions were re-suspended in 100 mM Tris buffer, pH 8.0 and incubated with 1U PNGaseF, each, for 12 hours at 37°C. prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, the PNGaseF reaction was quenched by adjusting the pH of the individual samples to approx. 2 by the addition of 10% TFA. IP-HILIC fractions were individually analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The samples were separated by reversed-phase chromatography (x 250mm PepMap C18, particle size 5μ, Thermo Fisher Scientific), developing a linear gradient from 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA to 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, within 3hours (RSLC nano, Dionex – Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed by MS/MS, using electrospray-ionization quadrupole-Fourier transformed tandem mass-spectrometry (ESI-Q-FT-MS/MS, qExactive, Thermo) and higher collsion-induced dissociation (HCD). The instrument was operated in positive mode and set to the following acquisition parameters: MS1 resolution = 70000, MS1 AGC-target = 1E6, MS1 maximum inject time = 60 ms, MS1 scan range = 350-2000 m/z, MS2 resolution = 70000, MS2 AGC-target = 1E6, maximum inject time = 256 ms, TopN = 10, isolation window = 1.2 m/z, fixed first mass = 120 m/z, normalized collision energy = 35, underfill ratio = 2.5 %, peptide match = ON, exclude isotopes = ON, dynamic exclusion = 10 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted from the .raw-file format using the generic Spectrum Exporter Node of PD 1.4 (settings: min. precursor mass = 350 Da, max. precursor mass = 10000 Da, minimum peak count = 5, S/N Threshold 1.5), charge-deconvoluted and de-isotoped (“MS2 Spectrum Processor”, in-house implementation of the algorithm described in (3) , available as PD 1.4 Node at http://ms.imp.ac.at/), and were then scored with respect to the abundance of glycosylation-related reporter-ions (i.e. G-Score). As a general indicator for the presence of glycan-specific reporter ions within a given MS/MS spectrum, the G-Score was calculated as the reciprocal value of the negative logarithm of the summed fractions of the normalized intensities of the reporter ions (i.e. 126.05496, 138.05496, 144.06552, 163.06007, 168.06552, 186.07608, 204.08665, 274.09270, 292.10267 amu, mass-precision 10 ppm) and their respective rank in the spectrum. We empirically determined that MS/MS spectra with a G-Score of greater than 0.4 were derived from glycopeptides. After G-scoring, the glycosylation-related reporter-ions were removed from the spectrum with a mass-precision of 10 ppm (“Reporter Ion Filter”, in-house developed and available as PD 1.4 Node at http://ms.imp.ac.at/). The glycopeptide-spectra were then analysed for the presence of potential [peptide + HexNAc]+ fragment-ions (PD 1.4 Node “Kassonade”, developed in-house). For this, the mass of the respective precursor-ion was iteratively reduced by the masses represented in our glycan-structure database (table S1), minus 203.0794 amu. For the peak-matching, only fragment-ion charge-state 1 was taken into account. In cases where a corresponding potential [peptide + HexNAc]+ fragment-ion was detected (with a fragment mass-tolerance of 10 ppm) the spectrum was duplicated, with the original precursor ion-mass being set to the mass of the potential [peptide + HexNAc]+ fragment ion. For peptide sequence identification, the pre-processed MS/MS data were then searched against the Uniprot mouse reference proteome set (uniprot.org, 47435 entries; as concatenated forward and reverse data-base), using MASCOT (Matrix Science Ltd., version 2.2.07), SEQUEST-HT (built-in version of PD 1.4) and X!Tandem (Sledgehammer, version 2013.09.01). The parameters for all MS/MS search engines were set to trypsin as protease, allowing for maximally two missed cleavage site, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 25 mmu, the fixed modification of methylthiolated cysteine, the variable modifications of oxidation (methionine), deamidation (asparagine and glutamine) and hexosamine (asparagine, serine and threonine) and TMT-sixplex (N-terminus and lysine). The resulting PSMs were manually filtered (search-engine rank 1, peptide length greater than 6, and at least one HexNAc-modified residue) and adjusted to 1% FDR, using the target-decoy approach (4). Site-localization of N-Glycan structures was performed using phosphoRS (in-house developed (5) and available as PD 1.4 Node at http://ms.imp.ac.at/), scoring the characteristic loss of 120.042259 Da from glycosylated asparagine as diagnostic ion.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylation, the covalent attachment of carbohydrate structures onto proteins, is the most abundant post-translational modification. Over 50% of human proteins are glycosylated, which alters their activities in diverse fundamental biological processes. Despite the importance of glycosylation in biology, the identification and functional validation of complex glycoproteins has remained largely unexplored. Here we develop a novel quantitative approach to identify intact glycopeptides from comparative proteomic data sets, allowing us not only to infer complex glycan structures but also to directly map them to sites within the associated proteins at the proteome scale. We apply this method to human and mouse embryonic stem cells to illuminate the stem cell glycoproteome. This analysis nearly doubles the number of experimentally confirmed glycoproteins, identifies previously unknown glycosylation sites and multiple glycosylated stemness factors, and uncovers evolutionarily conserved as well as species-specific glycoproteins in embryonic stem cells. The specificity of our method is confirmed using sister stem cells carrying repairable mutations in enzymes required for fucosylation, Fut9 and Slc35c1. Ablation of fucosylation confers resistance to the bioweapon ricin, and we discover proteins that carry a fucosylation-dependent sugar code for ricin toxicity. Mutations disrupting a subset of these proteins render cells ricin resistant, revealing new players that orchestrate ricin toxicity. Our comparative glycoproteomics platform, SugarQb, enables genome-wide insights into protein glycosylation and glycan modifications in complex biological systems.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Stem cells, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
GMI/IMP/IMBA
IMBA, Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

### Submitter
Gerhard Dürnberger

### Lab Head
Dr Josef Penninger
IMBA, Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.


