### Accession
PXD034196

### Title
Quantitative proteomics explores the potential targets and action mechanisms of hydroxychloroquine

### Description
Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) is an autophagy inhibitor that has been used for the treatment of many diseases, such as malaria, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, cancer, and so on. Despite the therapeutic advances in these diseases, the underlying mechanisms have not been well determined and hinder the rational use of this drug in the future. Here, we explored the possible mechanisms and identified the potential binding targets of HCQ by performing quantitative proteomics and thermal proteome profiling on MIA PaCa-2 cells. This study revealed that HCQ may exert its functions by targeting or regulating the expression of some autophagy-related proteins, such as galectin-8 (LGALS8), mitogen-activated protein kinase 8 (MAPK8), Ribosyldihydronicotinamide dehydrogenase (NQO2), Transport protein Sec23A (SEC23A), and so on. Furthermore, HCQ may prevent the progression of pancreatic cancer by regulating the expression of Nesprin-2 (SYNE2), Protein-S-isoprenylcysteine O-methyltransferase (ICMT) and Cotranscriptional regulator FAM172A (FAM172A). Therefore, these findings not only identify potential binding targets for HCQ but also revealed the non-canonical mechanisms of HCQ that may contribute to pancreatic cancer treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Gel lanes were cut into slices and acetonitrile (ACN) was added. After dehydration, ACN was removed and the samples were digested by trypsin in 5 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8.0) at 37oC overnight. Then, the digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to adjust the pH to 2. The peptides were eluted with 50% ACN/1% formic acid (FA) and desalted with a C18-tip. The TMT labeling reaction was performed in 20 μL of 50 mM HEPES at pH 8.5. TMT (50 μg) solution was added to the peptides and the mixture was incubated at 25oC for 1 h. After the incubation, hydroxylamine was added to a final concentration of 3% to stop the reaction. Subsequently, samples were acidified using 10% FA/10% ACN and evaporated to dryness.

### Data Protocol
The mass data were searched against the UniProt Human protein database (20376 entries, https://www.uniprot.org) by MaxQuant (v1.6.15.0) with quantifying by TMT 10plex labeling. Maximum missed cleavages sites were set as 2. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as the fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) is an autophagy inhibitor that has been used for the treatment of many diseases, such as malaria, rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and cancer. Despite the therapeutic advances in these diseases, the underlying mechanisms have not been well determined and hinder the rational use of this drug in the future. Here, we explored the possible mechanisms and identified the potential binding targets of HCQ by performing quantitative proteomics and thermal proteome profiling on MIA PaCa-2 cells. This study revealed that HCQ may exert its functions by targeting some autophagy-related proteins such as ribosyldihydronicotinamide dehydrogenase (NQO2) and transport protein Sec23A (SEC23A), or regulating the expression of galectin-8 (LGALS8), mitogen-activated protein kinase 8 (MAPK8), and so on. Furthermore, HCQ may prevent the progression of pancreatic cancer by regulating the expression of nesprin-2 (SYNE2), protein-S-isoprenylcysteine O-methyltransferase (ICMT), and cotranscriptional regulator FAM172A (FAM172A). Together, these findings not only identified potential binding targets for HCQ but also revealed the non-canonical mechanisms of HCQ that may contribute to pancreatic cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Hydroxychloroquine, Binding targets, Thermal proteome profiling

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica
Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica

### Submitter
He Huang

### Lab Head
Dr He Huang
Chinese Academy of Sciences Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica


