### Accession
PXD027345

### Title
Arabidopsis seed LC-MS proteomic analysis

### Description
The project is aiming at identify proteomic changes during five unique physiological time points during seed germination. Total proteomic analysis with LC-MS was performed.

### Sample Protocol
For the isolation of total protein, freeze-dried tissue was extracted with extraction buffer (0.25 M sucrose, 400 mM Tris, pH 9.0, 200 mM KCl, 35 mM MgCl2, 5 mM EGTA 50 μg/mL Cycloheximide, 50 μg/mL Chloramphenicol). Chloroform/methanol was applied in the lysate for protein precipitation.The tryptic digested protein peptides were cleaned by reverse phase SPE (solid phase extraction) on an Oasis HLB Elution Plate (Water)and analyzed by a nanoAcquity 2-D UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The raw QEX LC-MS/MS data were processed with the work flow described for plant proteomics using the Maxquant against the an in-house TAIR protein sequence database based on The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR10, http://www.Arabidopsis.org),The proteinGroups.txt file generated from Maxquant was used for quantitative analysis. Intensity determination and normalization was performed by algorithm MaxLFQ (Cox et al., 2014). The LFQ value generated was used for further statistics analysis by package Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016). A protein was identified as present if Log2 transformed LFQ value is above background for at least in the three biological replicates of at least one sample. An imputation is used to simulate the missing values based on the normal distribution with simulation with of 0.3 and shift of 1.8.

### Publication Abstract
Over the past decade, ample transcriptome data have been generated at different stages during seed germination; however, far less is known about protein synthesis during this important physiological process. Generally, the correlation between transcript levels and protein abundance is low, which strongly limits the use of transcriptome data to accurately estimate protein expression. Polysomal profiling has emerged as a tool to identify mRNAs that are actively translated. The association of the mRNA to the polysome, also referred to as translatome, provides a proxy for mRNA translation. In this study, the correlation between the changes in total mRNA, polysome-associated mRNA, and protein levels across seed germination was investigated. The direct correlation between polysomal mRNA and protein abundance at a single time-point during seed germination is low. However, once the polysomal mRNA of a time-point is compared to the proteome of the next time-point, the correlation is much higher. 35% of the investigated proteome has delayed changes at the protein level. Genes have been classified based on their delayed protein changes, and specific motifs in these genes have been identified. Moreover, mRNA and protein stability and mRNA length have been found as important predictors for changes in protein abundance. In conclusion, polysome association and/or dissociation predicts future changes in protein abundance in germinating seeds.

### Keywords
Seeds, Arabidopsis, Total proteome

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Wageningen University and Research

### Submitter
Bing Bai

### Lab Head
Dr Leónie Bentsink
Laboratory of Plant Physiology, Wageningen University and Research


