### Accession
PXD036306

### Title
Global microRNA and protein expression in human term placenta

### Description
Description of the global expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) and proteins in healthy human term placentas may increase our knowledge of molecular biological pathways that are important for normal fetal growth and development in term pregnancy. The aim of this study was to explore the global expression of miRNAs and proteins, and to point out functions of importance in healthy term placentas. Placental samples (n = 19) were identified in a local biobank. All samples were from uncomplicated term pregnancies with vaginal births and healthy, normal weight newborns. Next-generation sequencing and nano-scale liquid chromatographic tandem mass spectrometry were used to analyse miRNA and protein expression, respectively. A total of 895 mature miRNAs and 6,523 proteins were detected in the placentas, of which 123 miRNAs and 346 proteins were highly abundant. The miRNAs were in high degree mapped to chromosomes 19, 14 and X. Analysis of the highly abundant miRNAs and proteins showed several significantly predicted functions in common, including immune and inflammatory response, lipid metabolism and development of the nervous system. The predicted function inflammatory response may reflect normal vaginal delivery, while lipid metabolism and neurodevelopment may be important processes for the term fetus. The data presented in this study, including supplementary information with complete miRNA and protein findings, will enhance the knowledge base for future research in the field of placental function and pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Human placenta tissues from woman smoking during pregnancy as well as those giving birth to small infants, each compared to a group of control placenta tissues were taken and prepared and analysed as described in described in Truvé et al., 2020. Shortly, tissues were homogenized by bead-beating, proteins were extracted and digested using trypsin. A reference pool representing tissue from each sample group was prepared, and used during analyses to normalize peptide abundances across different TMT sets. All samples were labeled using TMT, and each TMT set was combined containing one reference pool. After purification by reverse-phase chromatography using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific), peptides were fractionated by basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) and subsequently analysed by nano LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Identification and relative quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The database search was performed using the Mascot search engine v. 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) matching with the SwissProt H. sapiens database (September 2019). For quantification, TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra, and the TMT reporter intensity values within each study for each sample were normalized within Proteome Discoverer on the total peptide amount. Only the unique identified peptides were taken into account for the relative quantification. Data of proteins passing a protein false-discovery rate of 5% were exported for further processing in Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fetal growth, Microrna, Placenta, Term pregnancy, Proteomics, Inflammatory response, Rna-sequencing

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Evelin Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Carina Sihlbom
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg, Sweden


