### Accession
PXD022601

### Title
Evolution of Modularity, Interactome and Functions of GIV/Girdin (CCDC88A) from Invertebrates to Vertebrates

### Description
PDZ domains are one of the most abundant protein domains in eukaryotes and frequently found on junction-localized scaffold proteins. Various signaling molecules bind to PDZ proteins via PDZ-binding motifs (PBM) and finetune cellular signaling. Here we describe the presence of a PBM on GIV/Girdin (CCDC88A) that is conserved throughout evolution, from invertebrates to vertebrates, and is generated as a long isoform-variant in humans, which we named GIV-L. Unlike GIV, which lacks PBM and is cytosolic, GIV-L localizes to the cell junctions, and has a unique PDZ-interactome, which impacts GIV-L’s ability to bind and activate trimeric G-protein, Gi through its guanine-nucleotide exchange modulator (GEM) module; the GEM module is found exclusively in vertebrates. Thus, the two functional modules in GIV evolved sequentially: the ability to bind PDZ proteins via the PBM evolved earlier in invertebrates, whereas G-protein binding and activation may have evolved later only among vertebrates. Phenotypic studies in Caco-2 cells revealed that GIV and GIV-L may have antagonistic effects on cell growth, proliferation (cell cycle), and survival. Immunohistochemical analyses in human colon tissues showed that GIV expression increases with a concomitant decrease in GIV-L during cancer initiation. Taken together, these findings reveal how GIV/CCDC88A in humans displays evolutionary flexibility in modularity, which allows the resultant isoforms to play opposing roles either as a tumor suppressor (GIV-L) or as an oncogene (GIV).

### Sample Protocol
In Vitro GST-Pulldown and In-cellulo Co-immunoprecipitation (CoIP) Assays Purified GST-tagged proteins from E. coli were immobilized onto glutathione-Sepharose beads and incubated with binding buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 100 mM NaCl, 0.4% (v:v) Nonidet P-40, 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT) for 60 mins at room temperature. For the pulldown of protein-protein complexes from cell lysates, cells were first lysed in cell lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.2, 5 mM Mg-acetate, 125 mM K-acetate, 0.4% Triton X-100, 1 mM DTT, 500 μM sodium orthovanadate, phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) using a 28G needle and syringe, followed by centrifugation at 10,000Xg for 10 mins. Cleared supernatant was then used in binding reaction with immobilized GST-proteins for 4 hours at 4C. After binding, bound complexes were washed four times with 1 ml phosphate wash buffer (4.3 mM Na2HPO4, 1.4 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.4, 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 0.1% (v:v) Tween 20, 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT, 0.5 mM sodium orthovanadate). Bound proteins were then eluted through boiling at 100C in sample buffer.   For CoIP assays, cells lysates (as prepared above) was incubated with capture antibodies for 3 hours at 4C, followed by the addition of Protein A or Protein G beads to capture antibody bound protein-protein complexes. Bound proteins were then eluted through boiling at 100C in sample buffer. In Gel Digest Protein digest and mass spectrometry was perform as previously described [58]. Briefly, the gel slices were cut into 1mm X 1 mm cubes, destained 3 times by first washing with 100 ul of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15 minutes, followed by the addition of equal volume acetonitrile (ACN) for 15 minutes.  The supernatant was collected, and samples were dried using a speedvac. Samples were then reduced by mixing with 200 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate-10 mM DTT and incubated at 56C for 30 minutes. The liquid was removed and 200 ul of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate-55mM iodoacetamide was added to gel pieces and incubated covered at room temperature for 20 minutes. After the removal of the supernatant and one wash with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15 minutes, equal volume of ACN was added to dehydrate the gel pieces. The solution was then removed, and samples were dried in a SpeedVac. For digestion, enough solution of ice-cold trypsin (0.01 ug/ul) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to cover the gel pieces and set on ice for 30 min. After complete rehydration, the excess trypsin solution was removed, replaced with fresh 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and left overnight at 37°C. The peptides were extracted twice by the addition of 50 µl of 0.2% formic acid and 5 % ACN and vortex mixing at room temperature for 30 min. The supernatant was removed and saved. A total of 50 µl of 50% ACN-0.2% formic acid was added to the sample, and vortexed again at room temperature for 30 min. The supernatant was removed and combined with the supernatant from the first extraction. The combined extractions are analyzed directly by liquid chromatography (LC) in combination with tandem mass spectroscopy (MS/MS) using electrospray ionization.   LC-MS analysis Trypsin-digested peptides were analyzed by ultra-high-pressure liquid chromatography (UPLC) coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) using nano-spray ionization. The nanospray ionization experiments were performed using a Orbitrap fusion Lumos hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) interfaced with nano-scale reversed-phase UPLC (Thermo Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC nano System) using a 25 cm, 75-micron ID glass capillary packed with 1.7-µm C18 (130) BEHTM beads (Waters corporation).  Peptides were eluted from the C18 column into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient (5–80%) of ACN (Acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 375 μl/min for 1h. The buffers used to create the ACN gradient were: Buffer A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid). Mass spectrometer parameters are as follows;  an MS1 survey scan using the orbitrap detector (mass range (m/z): 400-1500  (using quadrupole isolation), 120000 resolution setting, spray voltage of 2200 V, Ion transfer tube temperature of 275 C, AGC target of 400000, and maximum injection time of 50 ms) was followed by data dependent scans (top speed for most intense ions, with charge state set to only include +2-5 ions, and 5 second exclusion time, while selecting ions with minimal intensities of 50000 at in which the collision event was carried out in the high energy collision cell (HCD Collision Energy of 30%), and the fragment masses where analyzed in the ion trap mass analyzer (With ion trap scan rate of turbo, first mass m/z was 100, AGC Target 5000 and maximum injection time of 35ms).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label free quantification was carried out using Peaks Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics solutions Inc.)

### Publication Abstract
PDZ domains are one of the most abundant protein domains in eukaryotes and are frequently found on junction-localized scaffold proteins. Various signaling molecules bind to PDZ proteins via PDZ-binding motifs (PBM) and fine-tune cellular signaling. However, how such interaction affects protein function is difficult to predict and must be solved empirically. Here we describe a long isoform of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor GIV/Girdin (CCDC88A) that we named GIV-L, which is conserved throughout evolution, from invertebrates to vertebrates, and contains a PBM. Unlike GIV, which lacks PBM and is cytosolic, GIV-L localizes onto cell junctions and has a PDZ interactome (as shown through annotating Human Cell Map and BioID-proximity labeling studies), which impacts GIV-L's ability to bind and activate trimeric G-protein, G&#x3b1;i, through its guanine-nucleotide exchange modulator (GEM) module. This GEM module is found exclusively in vertebrates. We propose that the two functional modules in GIV may have evolved sequentially: the ability to bind PDZ proteins via the PBM evolved earlier in invertebrates, whereas G-protein binding and activation may have evolved later only among vertebrates. Phenotypic studies in Caco-2 cells revealed that GIV and GIV-L may have antagonistic effects on cell growth, proliferation (cell cycle), and survival. Immunohistochemical analysis in human colon tissues showed that GIV expression increases with a concomitant decrease in GIV-L during cancer initiation. Taken together, these findings reveal how regulation in GIV/CCDC88A transcript helps to achieve protein modularity, which allows the protein to play opposing roles either as a tumor suppressor (GIV-L) or as an oncogene (GIV).

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093
Scientist

### Submitter
Majid Ghassemian

### Lab Head
Dr Pradipta Ghosh
Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093


