### Accession
PXD018097

### Title
YME1L1 KnockOut MEF Cells Whole Proteomics

### Description
Cytosolic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) elicits a type I interferon response, but signals triggering the release of mtDNA from mitochondria remained enigmatic. We found that mtDNA-dependent immune signaling via the cGAS-STING pathway is under metabolic control and induced by cellular nucleotide deficiency. The mitochondrial protease YME1L preserves nucleotide pools by supporting de novo nucleotide synthesis and by proteolysis of the pyrimidine nucleotide carrier SLC25A33, limiting mitochondrial nucleotide import and accumulation of mtDNA. Deficiency of YME1L or the mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) drives an mtDNA-dependent inflammatory response, which depends on SLC25A33 and is suppressed upon replenishment of cellular nucleotide pools. Metabolic insults that deplete cytosolic nucleotides trigger mtDNA-dependent immune responses. Our results thus identify mtDNA release and innate immune signaling as a metabolic response, offering new therapeutic opportunities in disease.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Digestion MEF cells were lysed in 1% Sodium Laurate (SL) by sonication and heating to 70°C for 20 min.  50 µg protein lysate were used for digestion. Proteins were reduced and alkylated using 10 mM TCEP and 55mM CAA (45 min, room temperature in the dark), respectively. Lys-C (Wako) was added in a 1 to 100 enzyme:protein ratio and incubated for 2h at room temperature. Then, the SL concentration was diluted to 0.1% using 10 mM HEPES pH=8.5 and trypsin was added in a 1 to 100 enzyme:protein ratio. Digestion was stopped after overnight incubation at 37°C using TFA at a final concentration of 0.1 %. SL was removed by phase transfer method from samples after acidification and generated peptides were desalted using the SDB StageTip technique. (PMID : 12585499)  Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS)  LC-MS/MS instrumentation consisted out of a nano-LC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to a quadrupole based QExactive HF-x instrument.  Peptides were separated on in-house packed 50cm columns (1.8 µm C18 ReproSil Dr.Maisch) within a total gradient length of 90 min. The column temperature was controlled by an in-house designed column oven at 50 °C. The flow rate was 250 nL/min. The spray settings were: 2.4 kV, capillary temperature: 275°C, no auxiliary gas applied. The mass spectrometer operated in a data-dependent mode targeting the top22 intense peaks for fragmentation and MS/MS spectra acquisition. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 17,500 resolution (200 m/z) using an isolation window of 1.4 Th. The maximum injection time was set to 22ms. The normalized collision energy was set to 29 and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 20s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 and the implemented Andromeda search engine.(PMID: 19029910). MS/MS spectra were compared to the Uniprot Mus Musculus reference proteome database containing isoforms. Default settings for mass accuracy and search parameters were applied. The match-between-runs and maxLFQ algorithms were enabled (PMC4159666). Data were further analyzed and visualized using Instant Clue (PMC6107636). Differentially expressed proteins were identified by a two-sided t-test followed by a permutation based FDR estimation (FDR < 5%, s0 = 0.1)  (PMC33173).  A file containing information about Raw file names and sample naming matching is also uploaded. Please note that a phosphopeptide enrichment was also performed with the samples, but was not anlysed within the linked publication.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yme1l, Yme1l1, Mef cells, Isg

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Langer
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing Department of Mitochondrial Proteostasis Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b 50931 Cologne


