### Accession
PXD033865

### Title
29-Plex Tandem Mass Tag Mass Spectrometry Enabling Accurate Quantification by Interference Correction

### Description
Tandem mass tag (TMT) mass spectrometry is a mainstream isobaric chemical labeling strategy for profiling proteomes. Here we present a 29-plex TMT method to combine the 11-plex and 18-plex labeling strategies. The 29-plex method was examined with a pooled sample composed of 1x, 3x and 10x E. coli peptides with 100x human background peptides, which generated two E. coli datasets (TMT11 and TMT18), displaying the distorted ratios of 1.0:1.7:4.2 and 1.0:1.8:4.9, respectively. This ratio compression from the expected 1:3:10 ratios was caused by co-isolated TMT-labeled ions (i.e., noise). Interestingly, the mixture of two TMT sets produced MS/MS spectra with unique features for the noise detection: (i) in TMT11-labeled spectra, TMT18-specific reporter ions (e.g., 135N) were shown as the noise; (ii) in TMT18-labeled spectra, the TMT11/TMT18-shared reporter ions (e.g., 131C) typically exhibited higher intensities than TMT18-specific reporter ions, due to contaminated TMT11-labeled ions in these shared channels. We further estimated the noise levels contributed by both TMT11- and TMT18-labeled peptides, and corrected reporter ion intensities in every spectrum. Finally, the anticipated 1:3:10 ratios were largely restored. This strategy was also validated using another 29-plex sample with 1:5 ratios. Thus the 29-plex method expands the TMT throughput and enhances the quantitative accuracy.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli and human brain protein samples were extracted and prepared for 11/18-plex tandem-mass-tag (TMT) labeling. The E. coli and human peptide samples were resuspended in 50mM HEPEs, pH 8.5 (~1 ug/uL), respectively. Two aliquots were taken for E. coli and human peptides, one labeled with TMT 11 the other with TMT 18 (peptide: TMT reagent = 1:1.5 w/w), followed by incubation for 30 min at 21°C. After peptides were fully labeled with TMT reagents, 5% hydroxylamine was used to quench the TMT reaction and the samples were incubated for 15 min at room temperature33. The TMT-labeled E. coli peptides were added in ratios of 1×, 3×, and 10× to 100x more of the labeled human peptides which served as a background (the first 3 channels of the TMT11 and TMT18 series did not include the human peptide background to serve as controls without interference). The TMT 11 pool and TMT 18 pool were then mixed in a 1:1 ratio based on the total amount of peptides in each channel for further 29-plex analysis.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification were performed by utilizing the JUMP software suite which combines pattern matching with de novo sequencing during database search to improve sensitivity and specificity 35, 36. Raw files were directly converted to mzXML format and searched against E. coli and human Uniprot target-decoy database for estimation of the false discovery rate (FDR) 37, 38. Search parameters consist of precursor and product ion mass tolerance (10 ppm), fully tryptic restriction, two maximal missed cleavages, static TMT modification (+229.16293 for TMT11 or +304.20715 for TMT18), dynamic Met oxidation (+15.99491) and static modifications of Cys carbamidomethylation (+57.02146). Only b and y ions were considered in the search step. Following the database search for the identification of significant PSMs, the TMT reporter ion intensities for each peptide-to-spectrum match (PSMs) were determined by the strongest signal within ±6 ppm mass window surrounding the theoretical m/z for each peptide. To account for systematic error caused by a consistent shift in reporter ion masses surrounding the theoretical m/z, m/z values were calibrated according to their mean and standard deviation and subsequently filtered using this narrower window and minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids to achieve an accuracy level of 1% FDR. After accurate identification of peptides, TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted from each PSM for more robust interference correction and quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Tandem mass tag (TMT) mass spectrometry is a mainstream isobaric chemical labeling strategy for profiling proteomes. Here we present a 29-plex TMT method to combine the 11-plex and 18-plex labeling strategies. The 29-plex method was examined with a pooled sample composed of 1&#xd7;, 3&#xd7;, and 10&#xd7; Escherichia coli peptides with 100&#xd7; human background peptides, which generated two E. coli datasets (TMT11 and TMT18), displaying the distorted ratios of 1.0:1.7:4.2 and 1.0:1.8:4.9, respectively. This ratio compression from the expected 1:3:10 ratios was caused by co-isolated TMT-labeled ions (i.e., noise). Interestingly, the mixture of two TMT sets produced MS/MS spectra with unique features for the noise detection: (i) in TMT11-labeled spectra, TMT18-specific reporter ions (e.g., 135N) were shown as the noise; (ii) in TMT18-labeled spectra, the TMT11/TMT18-shared reporter ions (e.g., 131C) typically exhibited higher intensities than TMT18-specific reporter ions, due to contaminated TMT11-labeled ions in these shared channels. We further estimated the noise levels contributed by both TMT11- and TMT18-labeled peptides, and corrected reporter ion intensities in every spectrum. Finally, the anticipated 1:3:10 ratios were largely restored. This strategy was also validated using another 29-plex sample with 1:5 ratios. Thus the 29-plex method expands the TMT throughput and enhances the quantitative accuracy.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; liquid chromatography; proteomics; proteome; tandem mass tag; ratio compression; interference; data processing

### Affiliations
St.Jude Children's Research Hospital
St.jude children's research hospital

### Submitter
huan sun

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St.jude children's research hospital


