### Accession
PXD016555

### Title
Tumor-associated macrophages promote ovarian cancer cell migration by secreting transforming growth factor beta induced (TGFBI) and tenascin C

### Description
A central and unique aspect of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSC) is the extensive transcoelomic spreading of tumor cell via the peritoneal fluid or malignant ascites. We and others identified tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) in the ascites as promoters of metastasis-associated processes like extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, tumor cell migration, adhesion and invasion. The precise mechanisms and mediators involved in these functions of TAM are, however, largely unknown. By comparing monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) differentiated in ascites to TAM-like asc-MDM, by LPS/IFN to inflammatory m1-MDM and by IL-10 to alternatively activated m2c-MDM, we found that conditioned media from both, asc-MDM and m2c-MDM, stimulated migration of patient-derived tumor cells, while m1-MDM failed to do so. Secretome analysis by mass spectrometry identified an overlapping set of 9 proteins secreted by both asc-MDM and m2c-MDM, but not by m1-MDM, in all tested donors. Of these, three proteins, namely transforming growth factor beta induced protein (TGFBI), tenascin C (TNC) and fibronectin (FN1), have been associated with migration-related functions. Intriguingly, increased ascites concentrations of TGFBI, TNC and fibronectin were associated with short progression-free survival. Furthermore, transcriptome and secretome analyses point to TAM as major producers of these proteins, further supporting an essential role for TAM in promoting HGSC progression. Consistent with this hypothesis, we were able to demonstrate that the migration-inducing potential of asc-MDM and m2c-MDM secretomes may be inhibited, at least partially, by neutralizing antibodies against TGFBI and TNC or siRNA-mediated silencing of TGFBI expression. In conclusion, the present study provides the first experimental evidence that TAM-derived TGFBI and TNC in ascites promote HGSC progression.

### Sample Protocol
Up to 40 µg of proteins were loaded on a gradient gel (NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, Invitrogen), separated by SDS-PAGE prior to in-gel digestion 33 and analyzed by LC-MS/MS as previously reported [1].  [1] Worzfeld T, Finkernagel F, Reinartz S, Konzer A, Adhikary T, Nist A, Stiewe T, Wagner U, Looso M, Graumann J, Müller R. Proteotranscriptomics Reveal Signaling Networks in the Ovarian Cancer Microenvironment. Mol Cell Proteomics 2018;17:270–89.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed as described [1] using the human uniprot database (canonical and isoforms, downloaded on 02/09/2018, 183579 entries). Relevant parameters for instrumentation extracted using MARMoSET  and are, along with MaxQuant  (v. 1.6.1.0) parameters, included in the supplementary material.  [1] Worzfeld T, Finkernagel F, Reinartz S, Konzer A, Adhikary T, Nist A, Stiewe T, Wagner U, Looso M, Graumann J, Müller R. Proteotranscriptomics Reveal Signaling Networks in the Ovarian Cancer Microenvironment. Mol Cell Proteomics 2018;17:270–89.

### Publication Abstract
A central and unique aspect of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSC) is the extensive transcoelomic spreading of tumor cell via the peritoneal fluid or malignant ascites. We and others identified tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) in the ascites as promoters of metastasis-associated processes like extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, tumor cell migration, adhesion, and invasion. The precise mechanisms and mediators involved in these functions of TAM are, however, largely unknown. We observed that HGSC migration is promoted by soluble mediators from ascites-derived TAM, which can be emulated by conditioned medium from monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) differentiated in ascites to TAM-like asc-MDM. A similar effect was observed with IL-10-induced alternatively activated m2c-MDM but not with LPS/IFN&#x3b3;-induced inflammatory m1-MDM. These observations provided the basis for deconvolution of the complex TAM secretome by performing comparative secretome analysis of matched triplets of different MDM phenotypes with different pro-migratory properties (asc-MDM, m2c-MDM, m1-MDM). Mass spectrometric analysis identified an overlapping set of nine proteins secreted by both asc-MDM and m2c-MDM, but not by m1-MDM. Of these, three proteins, i.e., transforming growth factor beta-induced (TGFBI) protein, tenascin C (TNC), and fibronectin (FN1), have been associated with migration-related functions. Intriguingly, increased ascites concentrations of TGFBI, TNC, and fibronectin were associated with short progression-free survival. Furthermore, transcriptome and secretome analyses point to TAM as major producers of these proteins, further supporting an essential role for TAM in promoting HGSC progression. Consistent with this hypothesis, we were able to demonstrate that the migration-inducing potential of asc-MDM and m2c-MDM secretomes is inhibited, at least partially, by neutralizing antibodies against TGFBI and TNC or siRNA-mediated silencing of TGFBI expression. In conclusion, the present study provides the first experimental evidence that TAM-derived TGFBI and TNC in ascites promote HGSC progression.

### Keywords
Tumor microenvironment, High-grade serous ovarian carcinoma, Ascites, Tumor-associated macrophages, Cancer

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research
Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT) Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology (ZTI) Philipps-Universität Marburg

### Submitter
Johannes Graumann

### Lab Head
Dr Rolf Müller
Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT) Center for Tumor Biology and Immunology (ZTI) Philipps-Universität Marburg


