### Accession
PXD022891

### Title
Automated 16plex plasma proteomics with real-time search and ion mobility mass spectrometry enables large scale profiling in naked mole-rats and mice.

### Description
Performing large-scale plasma proteome profiling is challenging due to limitations imposed by lengthy preparation and instrument time.  We present a fully Automated Multiplexed Proteome Profiling Platform (AutoMP3) using the Hamilton VantageTM liquid handling robot capable of preparing hundreds to thousands of samples.  To maximize protein depth in single shot runs we combined 16plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMTpro) with high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS Pro) and real-time search (RTS).  We quantified over 40 proteins / min / sample, doubling the previously published rates.  We applied AutoMP3 to investigate the naked mole-rat plasma proteome both as a function of circadian cycle and in response to ultraviolet (UV) treatment.  In keeping with the lack of synchronized circadian rhythms in naked mole-rats, we find few circadian patterns in plasma proteins over the course of 48hr.  Furthermore, we quantify many disparate changes between mice and naked mole-rats at both 48hr and one week after UV exposure.  These species differences in plasma protein temporal responses could contribute to the pronounced cancer resistance observed in naked mole-rats.

### Sample Protocol
Using an automated liquid handler platform by Hamilton Vantage, 100 ug protein plasma samples were reduced with DTT for 30 minutes at room temperature followed by alkylation with IAA for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark followed again by addition of DTT to quench the reaction.  Samples were then cleaned up by an optimized method of SP3, followed by overnight digestion at 25C with LysC, and additional digestion with Trypsin for 6 hrs at 37C.  Samples were then again quantified in preparation for TMT labeling procedure.  Samples were TMT labeled, checked for labeling efficiency, quenched, combined and desalted by combining each sample per plex, mixing the plex, splitting back out into portions and cleaning up using SP3 peptide cleanup method, for the elutions to be combined and dried down prior to analysis on ThermoFisher Eclipse coupled to Field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) Pro and run using Real Time Search (RTS).  With Orbitrap Eclipse we combined, DDA with RTS and FAIMS Pro.  We setup a method with four experiments, where each experiment utilized a different FAIMS Pro compensation voltage: -40, -50, -60, and -70 Volts.  Each of the four experiments had a 1.25 seconds cycle time.  A high resolution MS1 scan in the Orbitrap (m/z range 400-1,600, 120k resolution, AGC 4 x 105, “Auto” max injection time, ion funnel RF of 30%) was collected, from which the top 10 precursors were selected for MS2 followed by SPS MS3 analysis.  For MS2 spectra, ions were isolated with the quadrupole mass filter using a 0.7 m/z isolation window.  The MS2 product ion population was analyzed in the quadrupole ion trap (CID, AGC 1 x 104, normalized collision energy 35%, “Auto” max injection time) and the MS3 scan was analyzed in the Orbitrap (HCD, 50k resolution, AGC 1 x 105, max injection time 200 ms, normalized collision energy 45%).  Up to ten fragment ions from each MS2 spectrum were selected for MS3 analysis using SPS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were processed using an in-house software pipeline. Raw files were converted to mzXML files and searched against either a composite human, mouse, human + yeast* Uniprot/SGD* databases (downloaded on 29th March 2017, 9th May 2017, 11th June 2018, respectively), or naked mole-rat proteome containing sequences in forward and reverse orientations using the Sequest algorithm.  Naked mole-rat proteome databases from Uniprot (including all “glaber” search entries) and NCBI (downloaded 20th September, 2018) were combined using 95% sequence match in 5-mer repeats through the protein sequence resulting in 64,147 entries with gene symbol mappings to either mouse or human identifiers which are based on how the protein was annotated.  Database searching matched MS/MS spectra with fully tryptic peptides from this composite dataset with a precursor ion tolerance of 20 p.p.m and a product ion tolerance of 0.6 Da.  For label-free experiments, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02 Da) was set as static modification, and for TMT-based experiments, TMT / TMTpro tags of peptide N-termini (+229.16 Da / +304.20 Da) were set as static modifications as well.  Oxidation of methionine (+15.99 Da) was set as a variable modification. Linear discriminant analysis was used to filter peptide spectral matches to a 1 % FDR (false discovery rate) as described previously.  Non-unique peptides that matched to multiple proteins were assigned to proteins that contained the largest number of matched redundant peptides sequences using the principle of Occam’s razor.  Quantification of TMT reporter ion intensities was performed by extracting the most intense ion within a 0.003 m/z window at the predicted m/z value for each reporter ion.  TMT spectra were used for quantification when the sum of the signal-to-noise for all the reporter ions was greater than 200.

### Publication Abstract
Performing large-scale plasma proteome profiling is challenging due to limitations imposed by lengthy preparation and instrument time. We present a fully automated multiplexed proteome profiling platform (AutoMP3) using the Hamilton Vantage liquid handling robot capable of preparing hundreds to thousands of samples. To maximize protein depth in single-shot runs, we combined 16-plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMTpro) with high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS Pro) and real-time search (RTS). We quantified over 40 proteins/min/sample, doubling the previously published rates. We applied AutoMP3 to investigate the naked mole-rat plasma proteome both as a function of the circadian cycle and in response to ultraviolet (UV) treatment. In keeping with the lack of synchronized circadian rhythms in naked mole-rats, we find few circadian patterns in plasma proteins over the course of 48 h. Furthermore, we quantify many disparate changes between mice and naked mole-rats at both 48 h and one week after UV exposure. These species differences in plasma protein temporal responses could contribute to the pronounced cancer resistance observed in naked mole-rats. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE [1] partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD022891.

### Keywords
Mouse and naked-mole rat plasma

### Affiliations
Calico Labs, United States
Calico Labs

### Submitter
Sasha Gaun

### Lab Head
Dr Fiona E. McAllister
Calico Labs, United States


