### Accession
PXD001110

### Title
The role of PRDX1 in chemoresistance

### Description
The role of peroxiredoxin 1 in confering chemoresistance in glioma was analysed in a cell culture system. Cells with a lower level of peroxiredoxin 1 showed a higher level of reacitve oxigen species upon treatment with BCNU. In line with this, in a 2D DIGE based redox proteomics approach, proteins were identified showing (1) differences in their thiol state upon knockdown of PRDX1 and (2) proteins showing differences in reduded and unreduced samples.

### Sample Protocol
Excised spots from 2D gels were in-gel digested with trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 7.8) at 37°C overnight. For nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses, the obtained tryptic peptides were extracted twice with 10 µl of acetonitrile / 5 % TFA (50:50, v/v). Acetonitrile was removed and samples were acidified by addition of 5 % TFA to a final volume of 17 µl. For the identification of protein spots from two dimensional gels, online reversed-phase capillary HPLC separations were performed using an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex / Thermo Scientific, Idstein, Germany). After injection, peptides were pre-concentrated on an Acclaim PepMap100 trap column (3 µm C18 particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 2 cm length, Dionex / Thermo Scientific, Idstein, Germany) at a flow rate of 7 µl / min using 0.1 % (v/v) TFA as mobile phase. After 5.1 min, peptides were separated on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 3 µm C18 particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 25 cm length, Dionex / Thermo Scientific, Idstein, Germany) at 25°C using a 39 min linear gradient from 5 to 35 % solvent B (solvent A: 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, 84 % (v/v) acetonitrile in water) at a flow rate of 300 nl / min. The amount of solvent B was further increased to 95 % during the next 5 minutes and held at 95 % for additional 10 minutes.  ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on a HCT plus ion trap instrument (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Bruker Daltonics) and distal coated SilicaTips (FS360–20–10-D; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) in positive mode. The instrument was externally calibrated with standard compounds. The general mass spectrometric parameters were as follows: capillary voltage, 1,400 V; end plate offset, 500 V; dry gas, 8 l/min; dry temperature, 160°C; aimed ion charge control (ICC) 150,000; maximal fill-time 500 ms. For MS/MS analyses, data-dependent acquisition software (Compass 1.3 for esquire/HCT Build 581.4, esquireControl version 6.2 Build 62.25, Bruker Daltonics) was employed. To generate fragment ions, low-energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) was performed on isolated multiply charged peptide ions with a fragmentation amplitude of 0.6 V. Exclusion limits were automatically placed on previously selected mass-to-charge ratios for 1.2 min. MS spectra were a sum of three individual scans ranging from m/z 300-1,500 with a scanning speed of 8,100  (m/z)/s, while MS/MS spectra were a sum of four scans ranging from m/z 100-2,200 at a scan rate of 26,000 (m/z)/s.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists of MS/MS spectra acquired on the HCT ion trap (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) were generated using the software tool Data Analysis (version 4 SP4 Build 281, Bruker Daltonics) with default parameters. For peptide and protein identification using MASCOT 2.4.1 27, peak lists were correlated with the Swiss-Prot part of the UniProtKB release 06/2014 including a shuffled decoy version of all entries resulting in a total of 40428 homo sapiens sequences.  All searches were performed for peptides with charge states 2+, 3+ and 4+ with tryptic specificity allowing one missed cleavage. No fixed modification was set, oxidation of methionine, propionamide at cysteines and acetyl at protein N-termini were considered as variable modifications. Mass tolerances of 0.4 Da were applied for MS and MS/MS experiments. Taxonomy was restricted to homo sapiens as only protein of this species should occur in the analyzed cells. Peptide identifications from ion trap MS/MS spectra were accepted with a minimum Mascot ion score of 30 and proteins with at least 2 different peptides (length > 6 amino acids) matching these criteria were considered to be identified. Using these parameters no decoy entry was identified from the database; in five protein spots more than one protein (or protein isoform) was identified. In the result section only the proteins with the highest MASCOT score is reported, data of all identified proteins including peptide identification data can be found in Supplemental Table 2.

### Publication Abstract
The combined deletion of chromosomal arms 1p and 19q has been described as a prognostic marker for oligodendroglial tumors. These tumors show a better response to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Recently, we found a lower abundance of peroxiredoxin 1 (PRDX1) in oligodendroglial tumors with 1p/19q deletion, suggesting a potential role of this enzyme in the clearance of therapy induced reactive oxygen species (ROS). Here, we confirmed the importance of PRDX1 in tumor cell survival by PRDX1 knockdown and overexpression in A-172 cells treated with the alkylating agent bis-chloroethyl nitrosourea (BCNU). Overexpression of PRDX1 resulted in a higher resistance of cells to BCNU treatment. In addition, BCNU challenged cells showed higher levels of ROS in PRDX1 knockdown cells. We applied a modified version of the redox two dimensional difference gel electrophoresis approach to analyze ROS mediated effects on protein thiols after BCNU treatment by labeling protein thiols with fluorescent dyes. Altogether eleven proteins were identified showing PRDX1 dependent altered labeling, many of them have been previously linked to stress response processes. Furthermore, 30 additional potentially redox active proteins were identified. The majority of them is involved in therapy associated processes like cellular stress response, DNA damage and regulation of cell death and therewith suggests that tumor cells maintain a network of redox sensitive proteins to escape chemotherapy. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Medical Proteomics.

### Keywords
Redox proteomics, Glioma, Prdx1, Chemoresistance

### Affiliations
Heinrich Heine Universität Düsseldorf
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Düsseldorf, HHU

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory, Düsseldorf, HHU


