### Accession
PXD030406

### Title
Comparative analysis of MS sample preparation methods

### Description
We compare the most commonly used proteomic sample preparation strategies such as classical in solution digest protocols, SPEED, FASP, STrap, SP3, as well as the commercially available kits iST (PreOmics) and EasyPep (Thermo Scientific) in their efficacy to extract proteomes from HeLa cells. We find a remarkably good performance of the majority of the protocols with high reproducibility, little method dependencies and low levels of artifact formation. Despite these similarities we observe significant differences in the recovery of specific sets of proteins in a k-means cluster analysis.

### Sample Protocol
In solution digests: HeLa cells were resolved in denaturation buffer 0.1M Tris/HCl, pH 8.6, containing either 8M urea (U), 6M guanidine-HCl (GnHCl), or 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), incubated for 10 min at room temperature (U) or at 60°C (GnHCl, SDC), and subsequently disrupted in a BioRuptor (Diagenode). Protein fractions were precipitated using either acetone, chloroform-methanol or ethanol or were left untreated. Soluble proteins were reduced using DTT and alkylated using IAA. Buffers were diluted to: 1 M (urea) and 0.5 M (GnHCl). Proteins were digested using trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega). Digests were stopped with TFA. SDC precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Peptide samples were desalted on C18 StageTips. SPEED (Doellinger et al., 2020). HeLa cells were resuspended in TFA (1:4 v/v), incubated at room temperature for 5 min, and neutralized with 2 M Tris Base (8 x volume of TFA used for lysis). Reduction and alkylation was achieved by incubation in 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA) at 95°C for 5 min. Samples were diluted with ddH2O, digested and desalted as described above. FASP (Wísniewsky et al., 2009): HeLa cells were resuspended in SDT-lysis buffer, incubated at 95°C for 5 min and sonicated in a BioRuptor (Diagenode). Samples were clarified by centrifugation, diluted with urea buffer (8M urea, 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5) to 0.5% SDS and further processed in a Microcon-30kDa Centrifugal Filter Units (Merck) in a tempered centrifuge at 24°C according to Wísniewsky et al., 2009. Proteins were digested and desalted as described above. iST: Samples were prepared according to manufacturer’s instructions (PreOmics).  EasyPep: Samples were prepared according to manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher Scientific) . STrap (Zougman et al., 2014): HeLa cells were resuspended in lysis buffer LB (10% SDS (w/v) SDS, 0.1 M Tris-H3PO4, pH 7.55), sonicated in a BioRuptor, cleared by centrifugation, reduced with DTT and subsequently alkylated using IAA. Samples were acidified with phosphoric acid (1.2%), mixed with STrap binding buffer (90% MeOH in 0.1M Tris-H3PO4, pH 7.1), and loaded onto STrap columns that were placed in low binding tubes. Solvent was removed by centrifugation, proteins were washed and subsequently digested (3 h) by addition of 500 mM ABC and trypsin. Peptides were eluted in three consecutive steps using 50 mM ABC, 40 µl 0.2% FA and 35 µl 50% ACN, 0.2% FA. Eluates were pooled, concentrated and desalted.  SP3: Hela cells were resolved in reconstitution buffer or 1% SDC, lysed and alkylated as described above. For protein cleanup and digestion, samples mixed with SP3 beads in a 10:1 (w/w) ratio, homogenized by adding 1 x v of 100% EtOH, incubated for 5 min at 24°C shaking at 1000 rpm, and washed 4 x with 80% EtOH. On-bead digestion was achieved using trypsin. After digestion, beads were pelleted by centrifugation (20.000 x g, 1 min, 24°C) and supernatants containing peptides were transferred.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant Settings: Raw MS data was analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.14.0, using default parameters with the following modifications. MS2 spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens uniprot database, concatenated with a database of common laboratory contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”, the minimal peptide length was set to 7 and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. A maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification. “Acetyl (Protein N-term)” and “Oxidation (M)” were set as variable modifications. LFQ was activated. Fragpipe analysis: Screening for protein modifications in an unbiased manner was performed using the open search option of MSFragger 3.3 in FragPipe (v16.0). All RAW files were converted to mzML format. mzML files were assigned according to sample preparation methods and replicates in the Experiments/Group tab. Default open search parameters were used, with trypsin specificity, -150 to +500 Da precursor mass window, and oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as variable modifications. PTM-Shepherd was activated at default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Robust, efficient, and reproducible protein extraction and sample processing is a key step for bottom-up proteomics analyses. While many sample preparation protocols for mass spectrometry have been described, selecting an appropriate method remains challenging since some protein classes may require specialized solubilization, precipitation, and digestion procedures. Here, we present a comprehensive comparison of the 16 most widely used sample preparation methods, covering in-solution digests, device-based methods, and commercially available kits. We find a remarkably good performance of the majority of the protocols with high reproducibility, little method dependency, and low levels of artifact formation. However, we revealed method-dependent differences in the recovery of specific protein features, which we summarized in a descriptive guide matrix. Our work thereby provides a solid basis for the selection of MS sample preparation strategies for a given proteomics project.

### Keywords
Hela, Human, Sample preparation, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter, Vienna, Austria
MAX F. PERUTZ LABORATORIES - University of Vienna

### Submitter
Wolfgang Reiter

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hartl
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs, University of Vienna, Vienna BioCenter, Vienna, Austria


