### Accession
PXD007100

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of the X-ray induced DNA damage response in dividing cells from wild type and atm mutants using LC-MSMS

### Description
Rapid and effective DNA damage responses are required for plant growth and maintenance of active meristems under conditions of genotoxic stress. Here, analysis of the post-translational signalling network in mitotically dividing cells revealed a wide network of highly dynamic changes in the phosphoprotein profile of genotoxin treated cells, mediated in part by the ATAXIA TELANGIECTASIA MUTATED (ATM) protein kinase

### Sample Protocol
Protein preparation and in Solution Digestion Plant tissue grown in culture was irradiated with 100 Gy using a 320 kV X-ray irradiation system (NDT Equipment Services) at a dose rate of 1 Gy.min-1 and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen tissue was ground to a fine power and proteins were solubilized in 10M urea, 50mM Tris pH 8. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 10,000g for 10min. The supernatant was diluted to 2M urea with dH2O and extracted with three volumes of methanol, one volume of chloroform and four volumes of dH2O. The sample was centrifuged for 1 minute at 10,000g and the aqueous phase removed. Protein was precipitated by addition of four volumes of methanol and incubation at - 20°C for 1h. The precipitate was recovered by centrifugation at 10,000g for 10min and allowed to dry at room temperature. Protein was solubilised in 1% sodium deoxycholate, 20mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 at 90°C for 10 min. Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; 1 h, 56°C) followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAM; 45 min, RT).  DTT was then added at 5 mM (45 min, RT) to quench any remaining IAM.  Trypsin was added and samples left to digest overnight at 37 C.    Sample desalting and Phosphopeptide Enrichment Digested samples were desalted using Oasis HLB sample extraction columns (Waters, Manchester, UK) followed by their elution in phosphopeptide binding solution (65% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), 2% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), saturated with glutamic acid, pH 2-3).  Samples were incubated with titanium dioxide beads (Glygen, Columbia, MD, USA) for 60 min at RT.  The beads were then washed with binding solution, followed by wash solution 1 (65% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) TFA), followed by wash solution 2 (65% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) TFA).  Enriched phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads by incubating with elution solution (300 mM ammonium hydroxide, 5% (v/v) ACN) for 5-10 min at RT (Robertson et al, 2015).  Eluted phosphopeptides were then acidified to pH 2-3 using TFA, and desalted again using an in-house 96-well plate format for solid phase extraction (SPE).  Phosphopeptide Desalting Using In-house 96-well format SPE Desalting plates were generated by the addition of 1 mg OLIGO R3 beads (Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) to each well of a Corning 96-well plate containing a 0.2 µm PVDF membrane (Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, UK).  Beads were firstly wet by the addition of 50% (v/v) ACN, which was removed by centrifugation (1 min, 1400 RPM).  Beads were equilibrated by the addition of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA), the sample applied, and then washed twice with 0.1% (v/v) FA.  Following each step the liquid was removed by centrifugation (1 min, 1400 RPM).  Samples were eluted in 50% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA, collected via centrifugation (1 min, 1400 RPM) and dried down to completion by vacuum centrifugation.  For LC-MS/MS analyses samples were resuspended in 0.1 % (v/v) FA.  Mass Spectrometry Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer.  Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% FA in water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 44 min at 300 nL min-1, using a 250 mm x 75 μm i.d. 1.7 µm BEH C18, analytical column (Waters).  Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis, with multistage activation enabled for fragmentation of product ions resulting from the neutral loss of phosphoric acid (Schroeder et al, 2004).

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis Tandem mass spectra were extracted using the extract_msn script (Thermo Fisher Scientific) executed in Mascot Daemon (version 2.2.2.; Matrix Science, London, UK).  Peak lists were searched against the UniProt Arabidopsis thaliana database (version ARATH, 2013-05).  Trypsin was included as the cleavage enzyme and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed.  A peptide mass tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da was included.  Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was included as a fixed modification, with oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues included as variable modifications. Data were validated using Scaffold (version 4.0.5, Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA).  Phosphopeptide identifications were accepted if established with at least 95% probability at the peptide level and at least 50% probability at the protein level.    Label-free quantification The acquired data was analysed using Progenesis (v4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). The retention times for each sample were automatically aligned to a reference sample that was automatically selected using the software's algorithms. Features were automatically selected using all software defaults, and any features with ≥ 5+ charge state or less than 3 isotopic peaks were masked from further analysis. The software was used to generate a peak list that was searched against UniProt Arabidopsis thaliana (version ARATH, 2013-05) using Mascot (v2.4, Matrix Science). The search parameters included a precursor tolerance of 5 ppm; a fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da; enzyme specificity for Trypsin; one missed cleavage allowed; Carbamidomethyl of cysteine as a fixed modification, Oxidation of methionine, and Phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues as variable modifications. The results were imported into Progenesis to annotate the features, and Progenesis' standard pipeline for protein quantitation followed.

### Publication Abstract
DNA damage responses are crucial for plant growth under genotoxic stress. Accumulating evidence indicates that DNA damage responses differ between plant cell types. Here, quantitative shotgun phosphoproteomics provided high-throughput analysis of the DNA damage response network in callus cells. MS analysis revealed a wide network of highly dynamic changes in the phosphoprotein profile of genotoxin-treated cells, largely mediated by the ATAXIA TELANGIECTASIA MUTATED (ATM) protein kinase, representing candidate factors that modulate plant growth, development and DNA repair. A C-terminal dual serine target motif unique to H2AX in the plant lineage showed 171-fold phosphorylation that was absent in atm mutant lines. The physiological significance of post-translational DNA damage signalling to plant growth and survival was demonstrated using reverse genetics and complementation studies of h2ax mutants, establishing the functional role of ATM-mediated histone modification in plant growth under genotoxic stress. Our findings demonstrate the complexity and functional significance of post-translational DNA damage signalling responses in plants and establish the requirement of H2AX phosphorylation for plant survival under genotoxic stress.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Lc-msms, Atm, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
University of Leeds
Faculty of Biological Science University of Leeds UK

### Submitter
Chris West

### Lab Head
Dr Chris West
Faculty of Biological Science University of Leeds UK


