### Accession
PXD043217

### Title
Global and protein-specific analysis reveals Nt-acetylation-independent turnover of SQE1 by Arabidopsis DOA10-like E3 ligases

### Description
The Acetylation-dependent (Ac/) N-degron pathway degrades proteins through recognition of their acetylated N-termini (Nt) by specific E3-ligases (Ac/N-recognins). To date, no Ac/N-recognins have been defined in plants. Here we use molecular, genetic, and multi-omics approaches to characterise potential roles for Arabidopsis DOA10-like E3-ligases in the Nt-acetylation-(NTA-) dependent turnover of proteins at global and protein-specific scales. Arabidopsis has two ER-localised DOA10-like proteins. AtDOA10A, but not the Brassicaceae-specific AtDOA10B, can compensate for loss of yeast ScDOA10 function. Transcriptome and Nt-acetylome profiling of an Atdoa10a/b RNAi mutant revealed no significant differences in the global NTA profile compared to wildtype, suggesting that AtDOA10s do not regulate the bulk turnover of NTA substrates. Using protein steady-state and cycloheximide-chase degradation assays in yeast and Arabidopsis, we show that turnover of ER-localised squalene epoxidase 1 (AtSQE1), a critical sterol biosynthesis enzyme, is mediated by AtDOA10s. Degradation of AtSQE1 in planta does not depend on NTA, but Nt-acetyltransferases indirectly impact its turnover in yeast, indicating kingdom-specific differences in NTA and cellular proteostasis. Our work suggests that, in contrast to yeast and mammals, targeting of Nt-acetylated proteins is not a major function of DOA10-like E3 ligases in Arabidopsis, and provides further insight into plant ERAD and the conservation of regulatory mechanisms controlling sterol biosynthesis in eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
The plant samples were processed following the SILProNAQ protocol described by Bienvenut et al. in Methods Mol Biol. (2017). Briefly, it is based on the chemical acetylation of all the naturally non-acetylated protein N-termini, using a heavy labeled reagent. This allows then for a calculation of an N-terminal acetylation proportion for each protein by comparing the amount of natural acetylation to that of artificial acetylation.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry spectra were acquired usin an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer, and the data files of each sample were processed together using the Mascot Distiller software, searching against the curated Araport-11 database, for protein identification and quantification. The results obtained from Mascot Distiller were then parsed using the eNcounter script to ahcieve the final N-terminal acetylation results.

### Publication Abstract
The acetylation-dependent (Ac/)N-degron pathway degrades proteins through recognition of their acetylated N-termini (Nt) by E3 ligases called Ac/N-recognins. To date, specific Ac/N-recognins have not been defined in plants. Here we used molecular, genetic, and multiomics approaches to characterize potential roles for Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) DEGRADATION OF ALPHA2 10 (DOA10)-like E3 ligases in the Nt-acetylation-(NTA)-dependent turnover of proteins at global- and protein-specific scales. Arabidopsis has two endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized DOA10-like proteins. AtDOA10A, but not the Brassicaceae-specific AtDOA10B, can compensate for loss of yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) ScDOA10 function. Transcriptome and Nt-acetylome profiling of an Atdoa10a/b RNAi mutant revealed no obvious differences in the global NTA profile compared to wild type, suggesting that AtDOA10s do not regulate the bulk turnover of NTA substrates. Using protein steady-state and cycloheximide-chase degradation assays in yeast and Arabidopsis, we showed that turnover of ER-localized SQUALENE EPOXIDASE 1 (AtSQE1), a critical sterol biosynthesis enzyme, is mediated by AtDOA10s. Degradation of AtSQE1 in planta did not depend on NTA, but Nt-acetyltransferases indirectly impacted its turnover in yeast, indicating kingdom-specific differences in NTA and cellular proteostasis. Our work suggests that, in contrast to yeast and mammals, targeting of Nt-acetylated proteins is not a major function of DOA10-like E3 ligases in Arabidopsis and provides further insight into plant ERAD and the conservation of regulatory mechanisms controlling sterol biosynthesis in eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Erad, Sterol biosynthesis, Proteolysis, Ac/n-recognin, Nt-acetylation, N-terminomics, Ac/n-degron pathway

### Affiliations
Protein Maturation, Cell fate and Therapeutics, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CNRS UMR9198, Batiment 21, 1 Avenue de la Terrasse F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette CEDEX, France
Institut de Biologie Intégrative de la Cellule - CNRS

### Submitter
Jean Baptiste BOYER

### Lab Head
Dr Carmela GIGLIONE
Protein Maturation, Cell fate and Therapeutics, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CNRS UMR9198, Batiment 21, 1 Avenue de la Terrasse F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette CEDEX, France


