### Accession
PXD001675

### Title
Quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry reveals subtle protein conformational changes

### Description
We have developed quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry (QCLMS) to interrogate conformational rearrangements of proteins in solution. Our workflow was tested using a structurally well-described reference system, the human complement protein C3 and its activated cleavage product C3b. We found that small local conformational changes affect the yields of cross-linking residues that are near in space while larger conformational changes affect the detectability of cross-links. Distinguishing between minor and major changes required robust analysis based on replica analysis and a label-swapping procedure. By providing workflow, code of practice and a framework for semi-automated data processing, we lay the foundation for QCLMS as a tool to monitor the domain choreography that drives binary switching in many protein-protein interaction networks.

### Sample Protocol
Purified protein C3, C3b were each cross-linked with either bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] suberate (BS3) (Thermo Scientific) or its deuterated analogue bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] 2,2,7,7-suberate-d4 (BS3-d4), giving rise to four different protein-cross-linker combinations: C3+BS3, C3+BS3-d4, C3b+BS3 and C3b+BS3-d4. Cross-linked proteins were digested with Trypsin. For quantitation, equimolar quantities of the tryptic products from the four cross-linked protein samples were mixed pair-wise. This led to two combinations: C3+BS3 and C3b+BS3-d4; C3+BS3-d4 and C3b+BS3. Each of the two samples was fractionated using SCX-StageTips into two fractions for LC-MS/MS. A “high-high” acquisition strategy was applied for the analysis. Peptides were separated on an analytical column that was packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in a spray emitter (75-μm inner diameter, 8-μm opening, 250-mm length; New Objectives). The eluted peptides were directly introduced into a hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data were acquired in the data-dependent mode. For each acquisition cycle, the mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 100,000. The eight most intense ions with a precursor charge state 3+ or greater were fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision-induced disassociation (CID). The fragmentation spectra were then recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 7,500. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60-second exclusion duration. The analyses were repeated using QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Non-fractionated peptides were separated on a reverse-phase analytical column of the same type as described above. MS data were acquired in the data-dependent mode. For each acquisition cycle, the MS spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap at 70,000 resolution. The ten most intense ions in the MS spectrum, with a precursor change state 3+ or greater, were fragmented by Higher Energy Collision Induced Dissociation (HCD). The fragmentation spectra were thus recorded in the Orbitrap at 35,000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was enabled, with single-repeat count and a 60 second exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant version 1.2.2.5 with default parameters, except that “Top MS/MS Peaks per 100 Da” was set to 20. The peak lists were searched against C3 and a decoy C3 sequences using Xi software (ERI, Edinburgh) for identification of cross-linked peptides. Search parameters were as follows: MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; specificity, fully tryptic; allowed number of missed cleavages, four; cross-linker, BS3/BS3-d4; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine. The linkage specificity for BS3 was assumed to be for lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N-termini. Identified candidates for cross-linked peptides were validated manually in Xi, after applying an estimated FDR of 3% (based on decoy matches) for cross-linked peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The conceptually simple step from cross-linking/mass spectrometry (CLMS) to quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry (QCLMS) is compounded by technical challenges. Currently, quantitative proteomics software is tightly integrated with the protein identification workflow. This prevents automatically quantifying other m/z features in a targeted manner including those associated with cross-linked peptides. Here we present a new release of MaxQuant that permits starting the quantification process from an m/z feature list. Comparing the automated quantification to a carefully manually curated test set of cross-linked peptides obtained by cross-linking C3 and C3b with BS(3) and isotope-labeled BS(3)-d4 revealed a number of observations: (1) Fully automated process using MaxQuant can quantify cross-links in our reference data set with 68% recall rate and 88% accuracy. (2) Hidden quantification errors can be converted into exposed failures by label-swap replica, which makes label-swap replica an essential part of QCLMS. (3) Cross-links that failed during automated quantification can be recovered by semi-automated re-quantification. The integrated workflow of MaxQuant and semi-automated assessment provides the maximum of quantified cross-links. In contrast, work on larger data sets or by less experienced users will benefit from full automation in MaxQuant.

### Keywords
Quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry; conformation changes; human c3; activation of complement system

### Affiliations
1. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, UK 2. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
Technischen Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, UK 2. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany


