### Accession
PXD044343

### Title
Proteome analysis in the TcMAC21 mouse model of Down syndrome

### Description
Down syndrome (DS) results from trisomy of human chromosome 21 (HSA21), and DS research has been greatly advanced by the use of mouse models. We previously generated a humanized mouse model of DS, TcMAC21, which carries the long arm of HSA21. These mice exhibit learning and memory deficits, and may reproduce neurodevelopmental alterations observed in humans with DS. Here we performed histologic studies of the TcMAC21 forebrain from embryonic to adult stages. The TcMAC21 neocortex showed reduced proliferation of neural progenitors and delayed neurogenesis. These abnormalities were associated with a smaller number of projection neurons and interneurons. Further, (phospho-)proteomic analysis of adult TcMAC21 cortex revealed alterations in the phosphorylation levels of a series of synaptic proteins. The TcMAC21 mouse model shows similar brain development abnormalities as DS, and will be a valuable mode to investigate prenatal and postnatal causes of intellectual disability in humans with DS.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of phospho-peptides was performed as previously described with minor modifications (Imamura et al., 2018). The cerebral cortices of 12-week-old mice were harvested, frozen by liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C until use. Frozen cortices were sonicated in 220 μL of PTS buffer (100 mM NH4HCO3, 12 mM sodium deoxycholate, and 12 mM sodium N-lauroylsarcosinate) containing Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma-Aldrich) using an ultrasonic disruptor (UR-21P; TOMY; output power 2 for 30–45 s) and centrifuged at 21,600 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 60 °C for 30 min and then alkylated by incubation with 22 mM iodoacetamide at 37 °C for 30 min in the dark. The resultant protein samples were diluted with 100 mM NH4HCO3 solution up to 1 mL and digested with trypsin (Sigma- Aldrich) at 1:100 (wt/wt) by incubation at 37 °C for 18 h in the dark. After the digestion, an equal volume of ethyl acetate was added to the samples, and the mixtures were acidified with 0.5% TFA and then well mixed to transfer the detergents into the organic phase. After the samples were centrifuged at 15,700 × g for 2 min at room temperature, the aqueous phase containing peptides was collected. The samples were concentrated by a centrifugal evaporator (EYELA) and desalted using a MonoSpin C18 column (GL Sciences). After 10% of the eluates were dried by the evaporator, they were analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis as samples labeled “total peptides.” The remaining eluates were dried and applied to a highselect Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The enriched samples, labeled “phosphopeptides,” were dried before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw spectra were extracted using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the mouse SwissProt database (TaxID 10,090 and subtaxonomies, v2017-10-25) and human protein list of the long arm of HSA21 (Supplementary file 1) with following settings. The parameter of the cleavage was set to trypsin, and the missed cleavage was allowed up to 2. The mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.02 Da for the fragment ion. As for protein modifications, we set carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) at Cys as static (fixed) modifications for peptide, oxidation (+15.995 Da) at Met, phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) at Ser and Thr as dynamic (nonfixed) modifications for peptide and acetylation (+42.011 Da) at the amino-terminus as a dynamic modification for protein terminus. The amount of each peptide was semiquantified using peak area with Precursor Ions Quantifier in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. For downstream analysis, pseudovalue 2 was added to avoid zero value. For histological studies, all statistical analyses were performed using Prism 8/9 software. Direct comparisons were made using a two-tailed Student’s t-test, and all bar graphs were plotted as mean with SEM. The significance level was set at P < 0.05 for all tests. For proteomic experiments, statistical analysis was performed by Python 3.10.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Tcmac21, Down syndrome, Phospho-proteome

### Affiliations
Circadian Clock Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Kamikitazawa 2-1-6, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 156-8506, Japan.
Tokyo Metropoitan Instituite of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Hikari Yoshitane

### Lab Head
Dr Hikari Yoshitane
Circadian Clock Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Kamikitazawa 2-1-6, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 156-8506, Japan.


