### Accession
PXD020636

### Title
A structural mechanism for PP2A-B56alpha inhibition by CIP2A

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the structure of the oncoprotein CIP2A and its interaction with the B56alpha regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2A. Cross-linking was performed using disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS) or a combination of pimelic dihydrazide (PDH) and the coupling reagent DMTMM.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014; Leitner et al., PNAS, 2014). Samples were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite system.  Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants.  Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, initial MS mass tolerance = ± 15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used. All cross-linking identifications are compiled in a spreadsheet file in Microsoft Excel format. A separate spreadsheet connects the raw files, the sample composition and the SEC fractions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; pdh; dmtmm; structural proteomics; protein phosphatase 2a

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


