### Accession
PXD004326

### Title
Metabolic regulation of N-terminal acetylation in yeast

### Description
N-terminal (Nt) acetylation, catalyzed by N-terminal acetyltransferases (NATs), has emerged as an important co-translational modification in eukaryotes, and involves the transfer of the acetyl moiety from acetyl-CoA (Ac-CoA) to the α-amino group of a nascent polypeptide. Here, we report the first global study of Nt-acetylation in response to changes in nutrient availability in S. cerevisiae. Despite major fluctuations in Ac-CoA and histone acetylation levels, our study reveals that the steady-state levels of protein Nt-acetylation remains largely unaffected by changes in cellular metabolism. Accordingly, Ac-CoA does not appear to act as a master switch for protein Nt-acetylation. Interestingly however, we identified two distinct sets of N-termini that are differentially Nt-acetylated following nutrient starvation. The first set of proteins, enriched for annotated N-termini, generally displayed an increased Nt-acetylation in stationary phase compared to exponential growth phase, despite a significant reduction in Ac-CoA levels. In contrast, the second set of proteins, enriched for alternative non-annotated N-termini (i.e. N-terminal proteoforms), generally became less acetylated in stationary phase. In particular, the degree of Nt-acetylation of Pcl8, a negative regulator of glycogen biosynthesis and two components of the pre-ribosome complex (Rsa3 and Rpl7a) increased during starvation. Moreover, the levels of these proteins were regulated by both starvation and the presence of NatA activity. Overall, our data provide the first proteome-wide survey on metabolic regulation of Nt-acetylation, and propose Nt-acetylation-mediated steering of metabolism and ribosome biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of yeast cell extracts for N-terminal COFRADIC and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis and data processing was performed as previously described (1). The analyses were performed on whole cell lysates (BY4742) obtained at six different metabolic conditions: yeast cultures grown for 6 h, 3 days, 8 days, 9 days, 9 days + 2% glucose, and 9 days + 10% of glucose. All primary protein amines were blocked using an N-hydroxysuccinimide ester of (stable isotopic encoded) acetate at the protein level (i.e. an NHS ester of 13C2D3 acetate) to enable the assignment and the calculation of the degree of in vivo Nt-acetylation events. In each case, a methionine oxidation step was introduced between the primary and secondary RP-HPLC separations, thereby shifting all methionine-containing N-terminal peptides to earlier elution times, allowing their enrichment (2). The obtained peptide mixtures were introduced into an LC-MS/MS system, the Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously (3, 4).  References: 1. Van Damme, P., Stove, S. I., Glomnes, N., Gevaert, K., and Arnesen, T. (2014) A Saccharomyces cerevisiae model reveals in vivo functional impairment of the Ogden syndrome N-terminal acetyltransferase NAA10 Ser37Pro mutant. Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 13, 2031-2041 2. Van Damme, P., Van Damme, J., Demol, H., Staes, A., Vandekerckhove, J., and Gevaert, K. (2009) A review of COFRADIC techniques targeting protein N-terminal acetylation. BMC proceedings 3 Suppl 6, S6 3. Van Damme, P., Hole, K., Pimenta-Marques, A., Helsens, K., Vandekerckhove, J., Martinho, R. G., Gevaert, K., and Arnesen, T. (2011) NatF Contributes to an Evolutionary Shift in Protein N-Terminal Acetylation and Is Important for Normal Chromosome Segregation. Plos Genet 7 4. Arnesen, T., Van Damme, P., Polevoda, B., Helsens, K., Evjenth, R., Colaert, N., Varhaug, J. E., Vandekerckhove, J., Lillehaug, J. R., Sherman, F., and Gevaert, K. (2009) Proteomics analyses reveal the evolutionary conservation and divergence of N-terminal acetyltransferases from yeast and humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106, 8157-8162

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS peak lists were searched with Mascot using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.2.0, Matrix Science). Searches were performed in the Swiss-Prot database with taxonomy set to Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker’s yeast) (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database version 2016_01, containing 6,729 protein entries). 13C2D3-acetylation of lysine side-chains, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide were set as fixed modifications. Variable modifications were 13C2D3-acetylation and acetylation of protein N-termini. Pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine was additionally set as a variable modification. Mass tolerance on precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and on fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Endoproteinase semi-Arg-C/P (Arg-C specificity with arginine-proline cleavage allowed) was set as enzyme, not allowing for missed cleavages. The peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and the instrument setting was put to ESI-TRAP. Only peptides that were ranked one, had a minimum amino acid length of seven and scored above the threshold score, set at 95% confidence, were withheld. The estimated false discovery rate by searching decoy databases (a shuffled version of the yeast Swiss-Prot database made by the DBToolkit algorithm (1)) was below 1% on the spectrum level and below 2% at the peptide level. Quantification of the degree of Nt-acetylation was performed as described (2). All data management was done in ms_lims (3).  References: 1. Martens, L., Vandekerckhove, J., and Gevaert, K. (2005) DBToolkit: processing protein databases for peptide-centric proteomics. Bioinformatics 21, 3584-3585 2. Van Damme, P., Hole, K., Pimenta-Marques, A., Helsens, K., Vandekerckhove, J., Martinho, R. G., Gevaert, K., and Arnesen, T. (2011) NatF Contributes to an Evolutionary Shift in Protein N-Terminal Acetylation and Is Important for Normal Chromosome Segregation. Plos Genet 7 3. Helsens, K., Colaert, N., Barsnes, H., Muth, T., Flikka, K., Staes, A., Timmerman, E., Wortelkamp, S., Sickmann, A., Vandekerckhove, J., Gevaert, K., and Martens, L. (2010) ms_lims, a simple yet powerful open source laboratory information management system for MS-driven proteomics. Proteomics 10, 1261-1264

### Publication Abstract
N-terminal acetylation (Nt-acetylation) is a highly abundant protein modification in eukaryotes and impacts a wide range of cellular processes, including protein quality control and stress tolerance. Despite its prevalence, the mechanisms regulating Nt-acetylation are still nebulous. Here, we present the first global study of Nt-acetylation in yeast cells as they progress to stationary phase in response to nutrient starvation. Surprisingly, we found that yeast cells maintain their global Nt-acetylation levels upon nutrient depletion, despite a marked decrease in acetyl-CoA levels. We further observed two distinct sets of protein N termini that display differential and opposing Nt-acetylation behavior upon nutrient starvation, indicating a dynamic process. The first protein cluster was enriched for annotated N termini showing increased Nt-acetylation in stationary phase compared with exponential growth phase. The second protein cluster was conversely enriched for alternative nonannotated N termini (<i>i.e.</i> N termini indicative of shorter N-terminal proteoforms) and, like histones, showed reduced acetylation levels in stationary phase when acetyl-CoA levels were low. Notably, the degree of Nt-acetylation of Pcl8, a negative regulator of glycogen biosynthesis and two components of the pre-ribosome complex (Rsa3 and Rpl7a) increased during starvation. Moreover, the steady-state levels of these proteins were regulated both by starvation and NatA activity. In summary, this study represents the first comprehensive analysis of metabolic regulation of Nt-acetylation and reveals that specific, rather than global, Nt-acetylation events are subject to metabolic regulation.

### Keywords
N-terminal acetylation, N-terminomics, Acetyl coenzyme a, Metabolism, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Ghent
Medical Biotechnology Center, VIB, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium, Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.

### Submitter
Petra Van Damme

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
Medical Biotechnology Center, VIB, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium, Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.


