### Accession
PXD012755

### Title
Proteomic Explorations of Autism Brain - Part 1

### Description
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a group of common neurodevelopmental conditions with impairments in socialization, communication and restricted behaviors. Only a minority of ASD cases are determined to have a definitive etiology and the pathogenesis of most ASD remains poorly understood. In this study, we made use of the power of proteomics, heretofore little utilized in the study of the biology of ASD, and analyzed the proteomes of two brain regions, Brodmann area 19 (BA19) and posterior inferior cerebellum (CB), from 9 idiopathic ASD cases/9 matched controls by label-free HPLC-tandem mass spectrometry (MS) and validated the differentially expressed protein findings with selected-reaction monitoring MS. The data revealed marked differences between ASD and control brain proteomes for both brain regions, with numerous differentially expressed proteins, although the proteomic difference between brain regions was not attenuated in ASD brain. Bioinformatic analyses based on the differentially expressed proteins highlighted multiple canonical pathways and protein-protein interaction networks that are implicated in the differential biology of ASD vs. controls. Canonical pathways involving glutamate receptor signaling and RXR activation were enriched for both BA19 and CB; others such as cell-cell junction signaling and fatty acid oxidation were enriched for BA19 and CB, respectively. Network analysis revealed a protein interaction network related to synaptic biology in BA19 and another involving cytoskeletal/vesicular functions in CB. Upstream regulator analysis for both regions revealed multiple neurodegeneration-associated proteins. The finding of several shared canonical pathways and upstream regulators for both regions underscores likely common ASD pathophysiology that has distinctive regional expression.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were rinsed in 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, transferred to a Covaris cryobag and frozen in liquid nitrogen, pulverized, transferred to glass vials, and then lysed with 2% SDS and 0.1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Samples were then sonicated, followed by filter-aided sample preparation detergent clean-up. 10 mcg protein of each sample was digested with LysC for 1 hour and trypsin overnight at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data files for each sample were processed using Rosetta Elucidator (Rosetta Biosoftware, Seattle, WA) (Version 3.3.01 SP4 25). Automated differential quantification of peptides was performed as previously described. Briefly, LC-MS/MS raw data were imported, and for each MS spectrum profile of each LC-MS/MS run, chromatographic peaks and monoisotopic masses were extracted and aligned. Chromatographic peaks were first aligned by retention time and monoisotopic mass. Peak lists with the monoisotopic mass and corresponding MS/MS data were then generated for each sample and searched using  Mascot. Resultant peptide identifications were imported into Elucidator and monoisotopic masses annotated with peptide identifications. The false discovery rate for protein identifications was calculated to be 0.02%. The MS/MS peak lists were searched by Mascot (version 2.4.1) (Matrix Science, London, UK) using the human UniProt database. Search settings were as follows: trypsin enzyme specificity; mass accuracy window for precursor ion, 25 ppm; mass accuracy window for fragment ions, 0.8 Da; variable modifications including carbamidomethlylation of cysteines, one missed cleavage and oxidation of methionine.

### Publication Abstract
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a set of heterogeneous neurodevelopmental conditions defined by impairments in social communication and restricted, repetitive behaviors, interests or activities. Only a minority of ASD cases are determined to have a definitive etiology and the pathogenesis of most ASD is poorly understood. We hypothesized that a global analysis of the proteomes of human ASD vs. control brain, heretofore not done, would provide important data with which to better understand the underlying neurobiology of autism. In this study, we characterized the proteomes of two brain regions, Brodmann area 19 (BA19) and posterior inferior cerebellum (CB), from carefully selected idiopathic ASD cases and matched controls using label-free HPLC-tandem mass spectrometry. The data revealed marked differences between ASD and control brain proteomes for both brain regions. Unlike earlier transcriptomic analyses using frontal and temporal cortex, however, our proteomic analysis did not support ASD attenuating regional gene expression differences. Bioinformatic analyses of the differentially expressed proteins between cases and controls highlighted canonical pathways involving glutamate receptor signaling and glutathione-mediated detoxification in both BA19 and CB; other pathways such as Sertoli cell signaling and fatty acid oxidation were specifically enriched in BA19 or CB, respectively. Network analysis of both regions of ASD brain showed up-regulation of multiple pre- and post-synaptic membrane or scaffolding proteins including glutamatergic ion channels and related proteins, up-regulation of proteins involved in intracellular calcium signaling, and down-regulation of neurofilament proteins, with DLG4 and MAPT as major hub proteins in BA19 and CB protein interaction networks, respectively. Upstream regulator analysis suggests neurodegeneration-associated proteins drive the differential protein expression for ASD in both BA19 and CB. Overall, the proteomic data provide support for shared dysregulated pathways and upstream regulators for two brain regions in human ASD brain, suggesting a common ASD pathophysiology that has distinctive regional expression.

### Keywords
Autism, Asd, Proteomics, Neurodevelopment

### Affiliations
Case Western Reserve University
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Genomic Medicine, Neurological and Pediatrics Institutes, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland OH

### Submitter
Kathleen Lundberg

### Lab Head
Dr Marvin Natowicz
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Genomic Medicine, Neurological and Pediatrics Institutes, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland OH


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: Cerebellum CB, Cerebellum BA19
- disease: Control, Autism Spectrum Disorder
- cell type: not available
- label: label free sample
- instrument: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
- modification parameters: Oxidation
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- factor value[disease: Control, Autism Spectrum Disorder

