### Accession
PXD003516

### Title
Proteomic insight into the response of Arabidopsis chloroplasts to darkness

### Description
Chloroplast function in photosynthesis is essential for plant growth and development. It is well-known that chloroplasts respond to various light conditions, however, it remains poorly understood about how chloroplasts respond to darkness. In this study, we found 90 darkness-responsive proteins in Arabidopsis chloroplasts under 8 h darkness treatment. Most of the proteins are nucleus-encoded, indicating that chloroplast darkness response is closely regulated by the nucleus. Among them, 17 ribosome proteins were obviously reduced after darkness treatment. The protein expressional patterns and physiological characters revealed the mechanisms in chloroplasts in response to darkness, e.g., (1) inhibition of photosystem II resulted in preferential cyclic electron flow around PSI; (2) promotion of starch degradation; (3) inhibition of chloroplastic translation; and (4) regulation by redox and jasmonate signaling. The results have improved our understanding of molecular regulatory mechanisms in chloroplasts under darkness.

### Sample Protocol
Chloroplast extracts were pooled from three biological replicates and dissolved in 450 µl HM buffer (10mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 1M MgCl2). After incubation on ice for 10 min, chloroplast lysate was incubated in a buffer containing 4% CHAPS, 7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, Tris-HCl, pH 8.0-9.0, 5 mM MgCl2, 20% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma, USA), followed by sonication for 15s, three times, and then centrifuged at 1,400g for 10 min at 4 °C. Protein concentration in the supernatant was determined using a 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The clarified protein lysates was reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digested before subjected to labeling with TMT reagent (Thermo Scientific™, Rockford, USA) as previously described [35-36]. The peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Control samples were labelled with the tags TMT-126, TMT-127 and TMT-128, while dark-treated samples were labelled with the tags TMT-129, TMT-130 and TMT-131. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) was thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical，USA). The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. After labeling, two samples (control and dark-treated) were combined and lyophilized. The peptide was then fractionated by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). The peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 over 80 min into 80 fractions. The peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 25% solvent (0.1% FA in 98% acetonitrile) over 28 min, 25% to 35% in 6 min and climbing to 80% in 2 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 (UHPLC system). The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).  Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 2E4 in the MS survey scan with 10 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5 E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1600 Da. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Uniprot_Arabidopsis database concatenated with reverse decoy database. The searching criteria include:  trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, TMT-6 plex (N-term) and TMT-6 plex (K) were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to less than 1% and peptide ion score was set more than 20. For quantitative changes, the protein ratio dark-treated/control was computed according to the tagging design, i.e. TMT129+130+131/TMT126+127+128, ratios with p-values less than 0.05 present in all three technical replicates were considered significant. Only the significant ratios from all three replicates were used to calculate the average ratio for the protein. It should be noted that each p-value was generated based on quantitative information derived from at least three independent peptides in each replicate. The protein was determined as differentially expressed with a threshold of fold change (cutoff of 1.3 for increased expression and 0.77 for decreased expression).

### Data Protocol
Protein annotations were obtained from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), together with the InterProScan software analysis based on protein sequence alignment method. The gene numbers were derived from Arabidopsis TAIR database (http://www.arabidopsis.org/). The localizations of the proteins were determined through Swissprot database, AT-CHLORO database and PPDB database. The proteins were classified according to UniProt-GOA database, InterProScan software, and KEGG database.

### Publication Abstract
Chloroplast function in photosynthesis is essential for plant growth and development. It is well-known that chloroplasts respond to various light conditions. However, it remains poorly understood about how chloroplasts respond to darkness. In this study, we found 81 darkness-responsive proteins in Arabidopsis chloroplasts under 8 h darkness treatment. Most of the proteins are nucleus-encoded, indicating that chloroplast darkness response is closely regulated by the nucleus. Among them, 17 ribosome proteins were obviously reduced after darkness treatment. The protein expressional patterns and physiological changes revealed the mechanisms in chloroplasts in response to darkness, e.g., (1) inhibition of photosystem II resulted in preferential cyclic electron flow around PSI; (2) promotion of starch degradation; (3) inhibition of chloroplastic translation; and (4) regulation by redox and jasmonate signaling. The results have improved our understanding of molecular regulatory mechanisms in chloroplasts under darkness.

### Keywords
Chloroplast; darkness; proteomics; arabidopsis; molecular mechanisms

### Affiliations
NEFU
Shanghai Normal University

### Submitter
Shaojun Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Shaojun Dai
Shanghai Normal University


