### Accession
PXD020902

### Title
Fecal metaproteomics reveals reduced gut inflammation and changed microbial metabolism following lifestyle-induced weight loss

### Description
Aims Gut microbiota-mediated inflammation promotes obesity-associated low-grade inflammation, which represents a hallmark of the metabolic syndrome (MetS). Lifestyle-induced weight loss (WL) is regarded as an efficient therapy to reverse MetS and to prevent disease progression. The objective of this study was to investigate if lifestyle-induced WL modulates the gut microbiome and its interaction with the host.  Methods  We analyzed and compared the fecal metaproteome of 33 individuals with MetS in a longitudinal study before and after lifestyle-induced WL in a well-defined cohort (ICTRP Trial Number: U1111-1158-3672).   Results  The 6-month WL intervention resulted in reduced BMI (-13.9%), increased insulin sensitivity (HOMA-IR; -53.70%) and reduced levels of circulating CRP (-66.86%), indicating MetS reversal. The metaprotein spectra of the host revealed a decrease of human proteins associated with gut inflammation and reduced abundance of human pancreatic alpha-amylase. Surprisingly, taxonomic analysis of the fecal metaproteome revealed only minor changes in the bacterial composition with an increase of low-abundant families (Desulfovibrionaceae, Leptospiraceae, Syntrophomonadaceae, Thermotogaceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae). Yet, we detected increased abundance of microbial metaprotein spectra that correspond to enhanced hydrolysis of complex carbohydrates (endoglucanase A, β-1,4-mannooligosaccharide phosphorylase, galactokinase, 5-keto-D-gluconate 5-reductase), indicating functional changes of the gut microbiome.  Conclusions Our results indicate that lifestyle induced WL may improve interaction between the gut microbiome and the host in individuals with MetS, while bacterial composition remained almost stable. Metaproteome analysis of host proteins reveals reduced gut inflammation whereas microbial metaprotein spectra indicate functional changes towards degradation of complex carbohydrates. The filenames correspond to the ID of the patient (1-33), whereas “C” corresponds to baseline and “ABC” to weight loss.

### Sample Protocol
Taxonomic and functional characterization of the microbiomes was performed as described before using an Orbitrap Elite™ Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with an reversed phase LC and a 120 min gradient (13). For more details, please refer to Supplement Note 1.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out with the MetaProteomeAnalyzer, version 3.0 (13), the search engines X!Tandem, OMSSA and Mascot (17–19) using the following parameters: enzyme trypsin, one missed cleavage, monoisotopic mass, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) as fixed modification, oxidation (methionine) as variable modifications, ± 10ppm precursor and ± 0.5 Da MS/MS fragment tolerance, 113C, +2/+3 charged peptide ions and a false discovery rate adjustment to 1%. The protein database comprised the UniProtKB/SwissProt database (16/01/2019) and the gut metagenome published by Qin et al. (2010) (20). MS files are accessible in the PRIDE Archive proteome experiment database (21) under the accession number XXXX. For identified metaproteins lacking a taxonomic or functional annotation, a BLAST search was conducted against UniProtKB/SwissProt (22, 23). All BLAST hits sharing the best e-value below 10-4 were combined and used to annotate the metaprotein identifications based on the lowest common ancestor approach. Redundant homologous protein identifications were merged to a protein group (here after called metaprotein) if they shared at least one peptide identification. Finally, a matrix of all metaproteins over all samples containing the spectral count for each sample and also the annotation information e.g. NCBI taxonomy, enzyme commission numbers, KEGG

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Obesity, Metaproteomics, Weight loss, Metabolic syndrome, Microbiome, Gut inflammation

### Affiliations
OvGU
Otto von Guericke Universität Magdeburg

### Submitter
Robert Heyer

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Benndorf
Otto von Guericke Universität Magdeburg


