### Accession
PXD014618

### Title
Characterization of human sperm protamine proteoforms through a combination of top-down and bottom-up mass spectrometry approaches

### Description
Protamine 1 (P1) and protamine 2 family (P2) are the most abundant nuclear basic spermspecific proteins, packing 85-95% of the paternal DNA. P1 is synthesized as a mature form, whereas P2 components (HP2, HP3 and HP4) arise from the proteolysis of the precursor (pre-P2). Due to the particular protamine physical-chemical properties, their identification by standardized bottom-up mass spectrometry (MS) strategies are not straightforward. Therefore, the aim of this study was to identify the sperm protamine proteoforms profile including P1 and P2 members and their post-translational modifications in normozoospermic individuals using two complementary strategies, a top-down MS approach and a proteinase K-digestion based bottom-up MS approach. By top-down MS approach, both described and new truncated P1 and pre-P2 proteoforms were identified. Likewise, intact P1, pre-P2, and P2 mature forms and their phosphorylation pattern were detected, as well as a +61 Da modification in different proteoforms. Additionally, the bottom-up MS approach revealed phosphorylated residues for pre-P2 and the new P2 isoform 2, which is not annotated at UniProtKB database. Implementing these strategies in comparative studies of different infertile phenotypes would permit to determine alterations in the protamine proteoforms pattern and elucidate the role of phosphorylation/dephosphorylation dynamics in male fertility.

### Sample Protocol
Protamine enriched fraction from spermatozoa was purified as previously described in Soler-Ventura et al. 2018. Previous to liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS), samples were reconstituted in 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) 10 mM for 45 min at 56 ºC, alkylated for 30 min in the dark with iodoacetamide (IAA) 50 mM and further desalted using PolyLC C18 filter tips (PolyLC INC., Columbia, US). For the bottom-up approach, the protamine-enriched fraction was dried at room temperature and suspended with 20 µl of a solution containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5 mM CaCl2. Subsequently, protamines were digested with proteinase K (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, US) during 4 h at 37 ºC and the reaction was stopped with 5 mM PMSF. For both the top-down and the bottomup MS approaches, successful protamine purification was monitored in an acid-urea PAGE.  Top-down approach LC-MS/MS analysis of intact protamines were conducted on two different chromatographic systems (a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, US) or a NanoAcquity Ultra Performance system (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, US)) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Tribrid Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded to C18 trap columns (100 µm × 2 cm Acclaim PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å (Thermo Scientific) or a 180 µm × 20 cm Symmetry 100 Å 5 µm (Waters Corp.)) at a flow rate of 15 µl/min. Protein content was eluted and separated using C18 analytical columns (Acclaim PepMap® RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å (Thermo Scientific) or BEH300. C18 75 µm × 25 cm, 1.7 µm, (Waters Corp)) using a linear gradient from 3 to 55 % B in 60 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min (A= 0.1 % FA in water, B= 0.1 % FA in ACN). The Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) was used as the nanospray interface with a spray voltage of 1.60 kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120,000. The top N (most intense) ions per scan were fragmented by electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) and detected in the Orbitrap at 120k. The ion count target value was 400,000 for the survey scan and 1,000,000 for the MS/MS scan (ETD). Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s. RF Lens were tuned to 30 %. The minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 500,000.  Bottom-up approach After proteinase K digestion, protamine peptides were diluted in 3 % ACN / 1 % FA and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) chromatographic system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using an Advion nanosource. Sample loading was performed on 300 µm × 5 mm PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å, C18 µ-precolumn (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 µl/min and peptides separation on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å (Thermo Scientific)) at 250 nL/min flow rate. A linear gradient from 1 to 35 % B in 60 min was used (A= 0.1 % FA in water, B= 0.1 % FA in ACN). Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120,000. The top speed (most intense) ions per scan were fragmented by high collision dissociation (HCD) and detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution set to 30,000. The ion count target value was 400,000 and 10,000 for the survey scan and the MS/MS scan, respectively. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Top-down approach To perform the MS data analysis for proteoform identification and subsequent PTM location three different software/search nodes combinations were employed: BioPharma Finder, ProSight PD and TopPIC. The resulting search outputs were combined in a single harmonized dataset and the experimental deconvoluted masses were classified using the density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN) algorithm. Finally, we assigned to each mass cluster a common proteoform leading to the final proteoform characterization. BioPharma Finder v1.0 SP1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to extract averaged mass spectra from detected chromatographic peaks. Deconvolution was done using auto Xtract algorithm on resolved m/z charged species. Slice window option was set on with a target average spectrum width of 0.1 min. Protamine sequences were introduced to find a match between the experimental and theoretical masses. Proteome Discoverer v2.1.0.81 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with ProSightPD v1.1 node and TopPic Suite v1.1.1 were used for further protamine identification and PTM assignment. Database searches in ProSight were performed using an xml-annotated database from SwissProt, containing P1 and P2 entries. The annotated database was modified to include phosphorylation modification to all STY residues, acetylation in KS, methylation in KR and demethylation in KR. A 3-tier search (Absolute, Biomarker and Absolute) was performed with precursor mass tolerances of 2 Da / 10 ppm / 500 Da respectively and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm. Searches in TopPic were done using TopFD tool for top-down spectral deconvolution and a fasta format database, which contained P1 and P2 sequences. Common modifications were included (oxidations in M, phosphorylation in STY, acetylation in KS, methylation in KR and dimethylation in KR). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 15 ppm and maximum mass shift to 500 Da. Proteoform spectrum matches with FDR < 1% were considered for further data integration and clustering analysis. BioPharma Finder, ProSight and TopPic search outputs were integrated into a single dataset, which unified all main magnitudes provided by each software (retention time, deconvoluted mass, intensity, scan number, proteoform sequence, etc.). Then, the scale of experimental deconvoluted masses was standardized and the resulting samples were classified through a DBSCAN algorithm with 0.004 as maximum sample distance and 3 as sample minimum number (detailed interpretation of the two DBSCAN algorithm parameters provided in (54)). This clustering algorithm is particularly convenient for large top-down proteomics datasets with an arbitrary number of proteoforms because is fast and it handles datasets with arbitrary cluster number. After annotating the protein associated to each cluster, the difference between the mass of the corresponding unmodified protein and the average deconvoluted mass of each cluster was computed. The resulting delta mass finally allowed annotating the proteoform associated with each cluster. Additionally, some of the proteoform PTM sites were further validated using ProSight Lite.   Bottom-up MS approach Database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer software v2.3.0.480 (Thermo Scientific) with Sequest HT search engine and PEAKS Studio software v8.5 (Bioinformatic Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) using the UniProtKB database [human, release 2018_01 and contaminants]. Searches were run against targeted and decoy databases to determine the false discovery rate (FDR). Search parameters included no enzyme specificity. Oxidation in M, phosphorylation in STY, acetylation in protein N-terminus were considered as dynamic modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 0.02 Da. Peptides with a FDR < 1 % were considered as positive identifications with a high confidence level. Peptides were filtered using a 0.4 % FDR, ALC ` 50% and PTM A-score > 20.

### Publication Abstract
Protamine 1 (P1) and protamine 2 (P2) family are extremely basic, sperm-specific proteins, packing 85-95% of the paternal DNA. P1 is synthesized as a mature form, whereas P2 components (HP2, HP3, and HP4) arise from the proteolysis of the precursor (pre-P2). Due to the particular protamine physical-chemical properties, their identification by standardized bottom-up mass spectrometry (MS) strategies is not straightforward. Therefore, the aim of this study was to identify the sperm protamine proteoforms profile, including their post-translational modifications, in normozoospermic individuals using two complementary strategies, a top-down MS approach and a proteinase-K-digestion-based bottom-up MS approach. By top-down MS, described and novel truncated P1 and pre-P2 proteoforms were identified. Intact P1, pre-P2, and P2 mature proteoforms and their phosphorylation pattern were also detected. Additionally, a +61 Da modification in different proteoforms was observed. By the bottom-up MS approach, phosphorylated residues for pre-P2, as well as the new P2 isoform 2, which is not annotated in the UniProtKB database, were revealed. Implementing these strategies in comparative studies of different infertile phenotypes, together with the evaluation of P1/P2 and pre-P2/P2 MS-derived ratios, would permit determining specific alterations in the protamine proteoforms and elucidate the role of phosphorylation/dephosphorylation dynamics in male fertility.

### Keywords
Top-down proteomics; bottom-up proteomics; proteoforms; electron transfer dissociation, Protamines; sperm; post-translational modifications; phosphorylation; nonannotated proteins; male infertility.

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology of Reproduction and Development Research Group, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Fundació Clínic per a la Recerca Biomèdica (FCRB), Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Barcelona Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Service, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona
Institute for Research in Biomedicine

### Submitter
Marina Gay

### Lab Head
Dr Rafael Oliva
Molecular Biology of Reproduction and Development Research Group, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Fundació Clínic per a la Recerca Biomèdica (FCRB), Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Barcelona Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Service, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona


