### Accession
PXD005690

### Title
DONSON encodes a novel replication fork protection factor mutated in 2 microcephalic dwarfism.

### Description
To ensure efficient genome duplication, cells have evolved a multitude of factors that promote unperturbed DNA replication, and protect, repair and restart damaged forks. Here we identify DONSON as a novel fork protection factor, and report biallelic DONSON mutations in individuals with microcephalic dwarfism. We demonstrate that DONSON is a component of the replisome that stabilises forks during normal genome replication. Loss of DONSON leads to severe replication-associated DNA damage arising from nucleolytic cleavage of stalled replication forks. Furthermore, ATR-dependent ,signalling in response to replication stress is impaired in DONSON-deficient cells, resulting in decreased checkpoint activity, and potentiating chromosomal instability. Hypomorphic mutations substantially reduce DONSON protein levels and impair fork stability in patient cells, consistent with defective DNA replication underlying the disease phenotype In summary, we identify mutations in DONSON as a common cause of microcephalic dwarfism, and establish DONSON as a critical replication fork protein required for mammalian DNA replication and genome stability

### Sample Protocol
709 Immunoprecipitation and GFP-Trap 710 293FT cells transfected with plasmids encoding GFP-DONSON or GFP were untreated, or 711 exposed to 2 mM HU for 16 h and harvested. Cells were then incubated in lysis buffer (150 712 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris HCl pH7.5, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 % NP40, 90 U/ml Benzonase (Novagen) 713 and Protease Inhibitor Cocktail EDTA free (Roche)) for 30 min with rotation at 4 °C. The 714 resultant cell lysates were pre-cleared at 44,000 rpm at 4 °C for 30 min. 715 31 716 For immunoprecipitations, 3 mg of lysate was immunoprecipitated with 5 µg of antibody, 717 immune complexes collected with Protein A-Sepharose (Sigma-Aldrich). Complexes were 718 washed with wash buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 0.5 % NP40, and 719 Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)) and analysed by SDS-PAGE. 720 721 For GFP-Trap, 3 mg lysates were incubated with GFP-Trap agarose beads (ChromoTek) 722 at 4 °C for 5 h. The resulting GFP-Trap complexes were washed with wash buffer as 723 above and analysed by SDS-PAGE. 724 725 For mass spectrometry analysis, GFP or GFP-DONSON were isolated from tetracycline 726 induced, or uninduced, Flp-In T-REx HeLa cell extracts by incubation with GFP-trap 727 magnetic agarose beads (Chromotek) for 2 hours on a Kingfisher Duo robotic handling station (Thermo). On-bead digest and mass spectrometry was performed as described (Turriziani 2014)

### Data Protocol
729 Data represents three biological replicates for each condition, analysed by back-to-back 730 MS and quantified by Label free quantification (LFQ). Proteins were identified and 731 quantified with the MaxQuant 1.5 software suite by searching against the Uniprot human 732 database. M(ox) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable, and 733 carbamylation as a fixed modification, with a 1 % FDR. Contaminants and reverse data 734 base hits were deleted. Proteins enriched by GFP-DONSON were identified by Student t- 735 test and ratio cut-off against the respective negative control LFQ data as determined by 736 MaxQuant (p<0.05; 2-fold).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interaction proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
university of edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr alex von kriegsheim
university of edinburgh


