### Accession
PXD031278

### Title
Thrombo-Inflammation in Preeclampsia and Pregnancy Induced Hypertension: Proteomics And Metabolomics Profiling of Platelets and Plasma Mediators

### Description
Background: Platelets may be pivotal mediators of the thrombo-haemorrhagic complications of preeclampsia (PE), linking inflammation and thrombosis with endothelial and vascular dysfunction. While gestational hypertension (GH) falls within the spectrum of hypertensive complications of pregnancy and is a risk factor for preeclampsia, it is unclear what biomarkers distinguish PE from GH.  Aim: To identify specific plasma and platelet thrombo-inflammatory biomarkers indicative of preeclampsia and distinguish PE from GH.   Methods: We performed multiplex immunoassays, assessed platelet and plasma proteomics and metabolomics data of PE patients, and compared with non-pregnant (NP), healthy pregnant (PC) and GH participants.  Results: We report plasma proteins upregulated, enriched plasma metabolites and proteins distinctly overexpressed in platelets of PE and GH compared to NP and PC. Whilst procoagulation in PC may be fibrinogen driven, Inter-Alpha-Trypsin Inhibitors ITIH2 and ITIH3 were enriched in hypertensive complications of pregnancy (PE and GH), and fibronectin and S100A8/9 may be major procoagulant agonists in PE but not GH. In addition, platelet leucine-rich repeat-containing protein 27 and 42 (LRRC27/42) subunits of volume-regulated VRAC anion channels were markedly overexpressed in preeclampsia and may contribute to the heightened glucose sensitivity and the pro-thrombotic tendency of this disorder. Additionally, our multiplex immunoassays confirmed previous reports of increases in preeclampsia plasma cytokines, including SDF-1α, which can directly activate platelets; but also, i-309 and CTACK cytokines, whose effects on platelets we explored using STRING analysis.   Conclusion: We identified biomarkers that may be monitored for preeclampsia onset and progression, and distinguish PE from GH. Also, through protein-protein interactions analysis, we generated a new hypothesis for platelets’ contribution to the thrombo-inflammatory states of preeclampsia.

### Sample Protocol
QUANTITATIVE PROTEOMICS: The four groups of patients’ plasma and platelets were subjected to quantitative shotgun proteomics analysis, as previously described(Lozinski et al. 2021). Plasma analysis was performed on non-pregnant (n = 4), healthy pregnancy (n = 5), gestational hypertension (n = 3), and preeclampsia (n = 3). Platelet analysis was performed on non-pregnant (n = 3), healthy pregnancy (n = 4), gestational hypertension (n = 4), and preeclampsia (n = 4). A total of 100 µg per samples was analyzed. Plasma and platelets were lysed in a buffer containing 1% SDS, 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM EDTA and protease inhibitor cOmplete™ tablets (Roche, Mississauga, ON). Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Mississauga, ON) at 55 °C for 1 h and alkylated by 15 mM iodoacetamide (VWR, Mississauga, ON) for 25 min in the dark at room temperature. Protein precipitation was performed with 600 μL of ice-cold acetone, incubated at -20 °C overnight, and followed with centrifugation at 8,000 g for 10 min. Proteins were resuspended in 100 μL of 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate and trypsinized (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Mississauga, ON) overnight at a 1:10 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. TMTsixplex™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Mississauga, ON) labeling was performed according to the manufacturer's manual. In summary, 0.8 mg of TMT reagent was resuspended in 41 μL of acetonitrile, samples were spun down at 4,000 g for 10 sec and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. The reaction was quenched with 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for 15 min at 25 °C. Peptides with different labels were combined followed by 100% formic acid (FA) addition to each sample to reach a volumetric concentration of 1% FA. Samples were spun at 5,000 rpm for 10 min before desalting using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters, 130 mg WAT023501). Sep-Pak columns were conditioned with 1 × 3 mL 90% methanol/0.1% TFA, 1 × 2 mL 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was loaded onto a column, washed with 1 × 3 mL 0.1% TFA/5% methanol, and the peptides were eluted off the column with 1 × 1 mL 50% ACN/0.1% FA. Peptides lyophilized prior to resuspension in 1% FA and a Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Mississauga, ON) was used to determine the concentration in each sample. Samples were dried down and stored at −80 °C.  HIGH PERFORMANCE LIQUID CHROMATOGRAPHY (HPLC) AND MASS SPECTROMETRY (MS): Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses were carried out by the Southern Alberta Mass Spectrometry (SAMS) core facility at the University of Calgary, Canada. LC-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated with Xcalibur (version 4.0.21.10) and coupled to a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC (nanoflow Liquid Chromatography) 1,200 system. A total of 2 μg tryptic peptides per plex was loaded onto a C18 trap (75 um x 2 cm, Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Mississauga, ON) at a flow rate of 2 μl/min of solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water). Peptides were eluted using a 120 min gradient from 5 to 40% (5% to 28% in 105 min followed by an increase to 40% B in 15 min) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% LC-MS grade acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and separated on a C18 analytical column (75 um x 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Mississauga, ON). Peptides were electrosprayed using 2.3 kV voltage into the ion transfer tube (300°C) of the Orbitrap Lumos operating in positive mode. The Orbitrap first performed a full MS scan at 120,000 FWHM resolution to detect the precursor ion having a m/z between 375 and 1,575 and a +2 to +4 charge. The Orbitrap Auto Gain Control (AGC) and the maximum injection time were set to 4 x 105 and 50 ms, respectively. The Orbitrap was operated using the top speed mode with a 3 sec cycle time for precursor selection. The most intense precursor ions presenting a peptidic isotopic profile and having an intensity threshold of at least 2 x 104 were isolated using the quadrupole (isolation window of m/z 0.7) and fragmented with HCD (38% collision energy) in the ion routing multipole. The fragment ions (MS2) were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a 15,000 resolution. The AGC, the maximum injection time, and the first mass were set at 1 x 105, 105 ms, and 100, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 sec to avoid of the acquisition of same precursor ion having a similar m/z (plus or minus 10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data and bioinformatics analysis Spectral data obtained during mass-spectrometry were matched to peptide sequences in the human protein database obtained from UniProtKB, containing reviewed, unreviewed, canonical and isoforms. The analysis was performed on MaxQuant(Cox and Mann 2008) (v1.6.0.1) running the Andromeda algorithm(Cox et al. 2011) at a peptide-spectrum match FDR of < 0.05. Search parameters included a mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m. for the parent ion, 0.5 Da for the fragment ion, fixed modification for carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464 Da), variable N-terminal modification by acetylation (+42.010565 Da), and variable methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da). TMTsixplex™ labels 126 to 131 were defined as labels for relative quantification. The cleavage site specificity was set to Trypsin/P, with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Next, peptides and proteins from the evidence.txt and proteinGroups.txt files, respectively, were used for data analysis with MSstatsTMT (v1.8.2)(Huang et al. 2020) in R programming (v4.0.3)(R Core Team 2020). Default settings in MSstatsTMT were used for the analysis. For input conversion, “Gene.names” was used for protein ID, and “msstats” method was selected for protein summarization. Significant outlier cut-off values were determined by interquartile boxplot analysis for each group comparison using the values of log2 fold-change(Spitzer et al. 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Pathway analysis, Metabolomics, Preeclampsia, Gestational hypertension, Lrrc27/42, Proteomics, String bg

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada

### Submitter
Luiz Gustavo de Almeida

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Antoine Dufour
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada


