### Accession
PXD040339

### Title
Deletion of GSE1 and HDAC1 inactivation alters proteomic profiles and cell cycle control

### Description
The DNA damage response (DDR) is orchestrated by multiple, tightly regulated signalling events. We discovered that genetic suppressor element 1 (GSE1) forms a complex with the histone deacetylation 1 (HDAC1) / CoREST complex and that loss of GSE1 hampers DDR induction. To investigate how GSE1 and HDAC1 can regulate DDR and whether their mode of action might be overlapping, we performed a proteomic analysis using quantitative mass spectrometry based on the TMTpro 16-plex isobaric labelling technology (Li et al., 2020). We determined global acetylome and phosphorylome profiles in the nearly haploid human cell line HAP1 (Andersson et al, 1987) using WT, GSE1 KO and HDAC1 CI backgrounds and compared patterns between untreated and etoposide-treated (0.1 µM, 6 hrs) cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture: HAP1 cells were cultured in Iscove’s Modified Dulbecco Medium (Sigma Aldrich), 10% foetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 37°C, 5% CO2. Three biological replicates were prepared. Cells were treated with 0.1 µM etoposide (Sigma Aldrich) for 6 h, washed 2x in cold 1x PBS, 10 mM sodium butyrate, 3 mM nicotinamide (NAM), scraped and centrifuged (300 x g / 5 min, 4°C). Sample preparation: Cells were lysed in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM PMSF, 5 mM sodium butyrate, 10 ng/ml Nicotinamide (NAM), 10 ng/ml Trichostatin A (TSA), 1x complete protease inhibitor cocktail (+EDTA) and 250 U of benzonase (Merck) using ultrasonification in a Bioruptor. After acetone precipitation proteins were reduced with DTT and carbamidomethylated with iodoacetamide. Samples were predigested for 90 min at 37 °C with Lys-C (Wako Laboratories) (enzyme-to-substrate ratio 1:100) followed by o/n-digestion at 37 °C with sequencing grade trypsin (1:50) (Promega). Samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma-Aldrich), and desalted on a 50 mg tC18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters). 300 µg of peptides were used for each sample for isobaric labeling. 500 μg of peptides were dissolved in 20 µl 100 mM TEAB (Sigma). 60 µg of peptides in TEAB of each sample and replicate were mixed (final volume 60 µl) as reference sample (REF). Labels used: 126C: wildtype (wt) replicate (rep) 1; 127C: wt rep 2; 128C: wt rep 3; 129C: HDAC1 CI rep 1; 130C: HDAC1 CI rep 2; 127N: HDAC1 CI rep 3; 128N: GSE1-KO rep 1; 129N: GSE1-KO rep 2; 130N: GSE1-KO rep 3; 131N: REF. Untreated and etoposide treated samples were labelled using 2 separate TMT 10plex reagent kits. Samples were pooled, desalted with Sep-Pak tC-18 (200mg) cartridges (Waters), dried for 30 min in a SpeedVac vacuum centrifuge and lyophilized overnight. Neutral pH fractionation: Peptides were dissolved in ammonium formate, pH 6.8 and separated on a UltiMate 3000 Dual LC nano-HPLC System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a XBridge Peptide BEH preparative C18 (130Å, 3.5 µm, 4.6 mm x 250 mm) column (Waters). 45 fractions were collected and pooled in a non-contiguous manner into 8 pools. PTM enrichment: Acetylated peptides were enriched using the PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif Kit (Cell Signaling) according to manufacturer's protocol. Standard protocols were applied for phosphorylated peptide enrichment . Mass spectrometry: DDA-SPS-MS3 method with online real-time database search (RTS) (for proteome analysis) was performed on an UltiMate 3000 Dual LC nano-HPLC System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific), containing both a trapping column for peptide concentration (PepMap C18, 5x 0.3 mm, 5 μm particle size) and an analytical column (PepMap C18, 500 x 0.075 μm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to a Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) via a Proxeon nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher). The instruments were operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with dynamic exclusion enabled. For peptide separation on the HPLC, the concentration of organic solvent (acetonitrile, VWR, 83639.320) was increased from 1.6% to 32% in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 230 nl / min, using a 2 hours gradient time for proteome analysis. Peptides were ionised with a spray voltage of 2,4 kV. The instrument method included Orbitrap MS1 scans (resolution of 120,000; mass range 375−1,500 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 4e5, max injection time of 50 ms, FAIMS voltages on, FAIMS CV -40V, -55V and -70V, dynamic exclusion was set to 45 sec) and MS2 scans (CID collision energy of 30%; AGC target 1e4; rapid scan mode; max injection time of 50 ms). RTS was enabled and quantitative SPS-MS3 scans were run with the following settings: HCD, resolution of 50,000; AGC target 1.5e5; max injection time of 150 ms. DDA-MS2 method (acetylome and phosphorylome analysis) was performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) and similar HPLC and nanospray settings as described above, with the exception that 3 hours gradient time was applied. MS1 survey scans were recorded with the following parameters: resolution 60,000, scan range 375-1,500 m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) target = Custom, and maximum injection time (IT) mode = Auto, FAIMS voltages on, FAIMS CV -40V, -55V and -70V, dynamic exclusion was set to 45 sec. MS2 analysis (CID) was performed with the following parameters: resolution 45,000, normalised AGC Target 200%, AGC target = Custom, maximum IT mode = Custom, isolation window 0.7 m/z, and HCD collision energy 34%.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were split according to CVs (-40V, -55V, -70V) using FreeStyle 1.7 software (Thermo Scientific). All raw MS data were commonly analyzed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) software version 1.6.17.0, using default parameters with the following modifications. Proteome (MS3), acetylome and phosphorylome (MS2) raw data were included in the same search but in separate parameter groups. MS2 and MS3 spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens (human) Uniprot database (release 2020.01; with isoforms) and a database of common laboratory contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”, the minimal peptide length was set to 7 and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2 for proteome and phosphorylome data and to 4 for the acetylome data. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification. “Acetyl (Protein N-term)”, “Oxidation (M)” were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 5 variable modifications per peptide was allowed. For search groups containing acetylome and phorphorylome files “Acetyl (K)” and “Phospho (STY)” were, respectively, set as variable modification. The identification and quantification information of acetylated peptides, sites, and proteins was obtained from the MaxQuant “Acetyl (K) Sites”, “Phospho (STY) Sites”, “ModificationSpecificPeptides”, and “ProteinGroups” tables. Data was analysed in R (4.1.0) using custom scripts. The analysis procedure covered: correction for isotopic impurities of labels, within-plex median normalisation, between-plex IRS-normalisation (Plubell et al., 2017), and statistical between-group comparisons using LIMMA (3.50). To account for differences of protein abundance on lysine acetylation-site level, site intensities were normalised to protein intensities before group comparisons with LIMMA.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications of histones are important regulators of the DNA damage response (DDR). By using affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) we discovered that genetic suppressor element 1 (GSE1) forms a complex with the HDAC1/CoREST deacetylase/demethylase co-repressor complex. In-depth phosphorylome analysis revealed that loss of GSE1 results in impaired DDR, ATR signalling and &#x3b3;H2AX formation upon DNA damage induction. Altered profiles of ATR target serine-glutamine motifs (SQ) on DDR-related hallmark proteins point to a defect in DNA damage sensing. In addition, GSE1 knock-out cells show hampered DNA damage-induced phosphorylation on SQ motifs of regulators of histone post-translational modifications, suggesting altered histone modification. While loss of GSE1 does not affect the histone deacetylation activity of CoREST, GSE1 appears to be essential for binding of the deubiquitinase USP22 to CoREST and for the deubiquitination of H2B K120 in response to DNA damage. The combination of deacetylase, demethylase, and deubiquitinase activity makes the USP22-GSE1-CoREST subcomplex a multi-enzymatic eraser that seems to play an important role during DDR. Since GSE1 has been previously associated with cancer progression and survival our findings are potentially of high medical relevance.

### Keywords
Acetylome, Hdac1, Hap1, Gse1, Phosphorylome, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna

### Submitter
Wolfgang Reiter

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hartl
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs Vienna, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter, Dr.-Bohr-Gasse 7, 1030 Vienna


