### Accession
PXD020467

### Title
Proteomic approach for searching of universal, tissue-specific and line-specific markers of extracellular vesicles in lung and colorectal adenocarcinoma cell lines:extracellular vesicles only

### Description
The efficiency of anticancer therapy depends heavily on the molecular features of the tumor. Since tumor-derived extracellular vesicles, including exosomes, contain proteins that are characteristic for producer cells and could be detected in biological fluids, they are of great interest for screening of predictive biomarkers. We have performed label-free mass spectrometric profiling of extracellular vesicles originated from human colon cancer cell lines Caco-2, HT-26 and HCT-116, and from lung cancer cell lines NCI-H23 and A549.

### Sample Protocol
Lung adenocarcinoma cell lines A549, and NCI-H23 and colorectal cancer cell lines HT29, HCT-116, and CaCo-2 were obtained from the cell culture bank Institute of Biomedical Chemistry (IBMC), Moscow. For proteomic analysis of the lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (A549, and NCI-H23) and colorectal adenocarcinoma cell lines (HT29, HCT-116 and CaCo-2) were cultured in medium supplemented with exosome-depleted fetal bovine serum (PBS). Cell lines were cultured to a monolayer  in an atmosphere of 5% СО2 at 37° С, DMEM/F-12 medium without glutamine (PanEco), with the addition of 10% fetal bovine serum (in the case of Caco-2, the content of PBS was 20%) (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1% GlutaMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1% essential amino acids (NEAA, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1% antimycotic antibiotics (amphotericin B 0.25 μg/ml, penicillin G 100 units/ml, streptomycin 100 μg/ml.). When the cells reached the monolayer, they were washed twice with PBS and the culture medium was replaced with exosome-free medium (with the addition of serum previously purified from exosomes by ultracentrifugation at 100 000 g for 14 hours). For further analysis, the culture medium was collected after 24 hours. Сells were detached from the culture flasks by addition of 2 ml of 0,25% trypsin-EDTA (Gibco™) for 5-10 minutes at 37 ° C. The number of cells was measured using a cell counter and a cell viability analyzer - TC20 ™ Automated Cell Counter (BioRad) and a cell counting kit (BioRad). Isolation of exosomes from 18 ml of culture medium supplemented with fetal bovine serum (FBS) and their tryptic digestion were carried out as described previously (Shushkova et al. 2018). The protein concentration was determined by the colorimetric method using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (“Pierce”) in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. For each cell line exosome isolation was performed in three replicates. Tandem mass spectrometric analysis was performed for each sample in three technical replicates. The peptide mixture was loaded onto the trap column Zorbax 300SB-C18 (5 μm particle diameter, 5 mm×0.3 mm) (Agilent Technologies, USA) and washed with mobile phase C (5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid) at a flow rate of 3 μl/min for 5 minutes. The peptides were separated on an analytical column Zorbax 300SB-C18 (3.5 μm particle diameter, 150 mm×75 μm) in a mobile phase B gradient (80% solution of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The following parameters of the acetonitrile gradient were used: the analytical column was washed with a 2% mobile phase B for 3 min, then the concentration of mobile phase B was linearly increased to 40% for 67 min, then for 2 min the concentration of mobile phase B was increased to 100%, then the analytical column was washed for 9 min with 100% mobile phase B, then the concentration of mobile phase B was reduced to 2% for 2 min, and the analytical column was balanced with 2% mobile phase B for 7 min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using Q Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with Orbitrap mass analyzer. Mass spectra were acquired in the positive ion mode with a resolution of 60,000 (m/z = 400) for MS and 15,000 (m/z=400) for MS/MS scans. The AGC target was set at 3106 and 2105 with maximum ion injection time 25 and 150 ms for MS and MS/MS levels, respectively. Survey MS scan was followed by MS/MS spectra of the 20 most abundant precursors if the AGC target was greater than 104. The HCD fragmentation with a NCE (normalized collision energy) set to 28% was used. Dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s.

### Data Protocol
For identification and label-free quantification mass spectrometry data were loaded into MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16). Proteins were identified using the built-in Andromeda algorithm; identification was carried out using FASTA file (25-10-2019) and its inverted counterpart to calculate the frequency of false positive identifications (FDR). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were used as a variable modification. Tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 20 ppm. For proteins and peptides, the FDR threshold value was 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs), including exosomes, contain proteins that mirror the molecular landscape of producer cells. Being potentially detectible in biological fluids, EVs are of great interest for the screening of cancer biomarkers. To reveal universal, tissue-specific, and line-specific markers, we performed label-free mass spectrometric profiling of EVs originating from the human colon cancer cell lines Caco-2, HT29, and HCT-116, as well as from the lung cancer cell lines NCI-H23 and A549. A total of 651 proteins was identified in the EV samples using at least two peptides. These proteins were highly enriched in exosome markers. We found 11 universal, eight tissue-specific, and 29 line-specific markers, the levels of which were increased in EVs compared to the whole lysates. The EV proteins were involved in the EGFR, Rap1, integrin, and microRNA signaling associated with metastasis and cancer progression. An EV protein-based assay could be developed as a liquid biopsy tool.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles; exosomes; proteomics; mass-spectrometry; colon cancer; lung cancer; biomarkers

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Systems Biology, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow
Institute of Biomedical Bhemistry (IBMC), Moscow

### Submitter
Svetlana Novikova

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Zgoda
Laboratory of Systems Biology, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow


