### Accession
PXD038555

### Title
Magnetic Transferrin Assay (MTA) as a novel approach for discovering serum exosome derived protein biomarkers in neurological diseases

### Description
We developed TF-based MNPs (TF-MNPs) to isolate blood-derived exosome in this study and isolated the blood-derived exosomes of patients with neuroinflammatory diseases, such as dementia, Parkinson’s disease and multiple sclerosis via this strategy and then evaluated the proteomic profiling of these exosomes to screen for a potential candidate biomarker. Blood was collected from 10 patients in each of the three disease groups. Over 800 serum exosome proteins were identified by highly sensitive nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
1. Synthesis of Fe3O4@SiO2@TF nanoparticles For the synthesis of Fe3O4@SiO2 MNPs, 29 ml of Igepal® CO-520 (238643, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was ultrasonically dispersed in 71 ml of cyclohexane (179191, Sigma-Aldrich) for 10 min at room temperature (RT). Then, 100 mg of Fe3O4 (637106, Sigma-Aldrich) MNPs were added to the prepared solution. Ammonia solution (NH4OH; 28%) and tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS; 333859, Sigma-Aldrich) (98%) were added dropwise to the reaction mixture, which was then stirred for 24h at RT for hydrolysis and condensation of the silica precursor. Next, (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES; 440140, Sigma-Aldrich) (99%) was added dropwise to the mixture containing Fe3O4@SiO2 MNPs, after which was stirred for 24 h at RT. The Fe3O4@SiO2-NH2 MNPs were collected by magnetic separation and washed several times with ethanol, and re-dispersed in 100 mL of ethanol. For the synthesis of Fe3O4@SiO2@TF MNPs, 2 ml of glutaraldehyde (GA; G6257, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the solution containing Fe3O4@SiO2-NH2 MNPs, which was stirred for 1 h at RT. Then, 10mg of TF (T0665, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the solution, and it was stirred for 24 h at RT. After the supernatant was discarded, the modified TF-MNPs were collected by magnetic separation and were washed several times with ethanol. Finally, the synthesized TF-MNPs were dispersed in 10 ml of ethanol, and separated into 10 tubes (10 mg of particles in 1 ml for each reaction). The synthesized TF-MNPs were immediately used or stored at 4°C.  2. Clinical specimens for EV isolation Serum clinical specimens were collected from ten patients with multiple sclerosis, ten patients with Parkinson, and ten patients with dementia who agreed to participate and were admitted to the Asan Medical Center (AMC) in the Republic of Korea. This study was reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of the Institutional Review Board of the Asan Medical Center. All the experimental procedures were performed in accordance with the guidelines of the Institutional Review Board of the AMC (IRB No. 2020-0297). The clinical specimens were stored at −80 °C until further use.   3. EV isolation methods For EV isolation from clinical specimens using the TF-MNPs, 500 µl human serum samples were thoroughly mixed with TF-MNPs (10 mg per reaction) with a rotator at RT for 30 min. The serum and MNPs were separated using a magnet stand, the MNPs were washed twice with PBS. Then PBS was discarded, and the MNPs were added 200 µl of RIPA buffer. After incubation, the eluted EVs were collected in a new tube. The isolated EVs were immediately used for experiments or stored at -80 ˚C.   4. Peptide sample preparation. Exosome protein samples (1μg/μL concentration) were dissolved in 200 μL of 5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.5). After adding dithiothreitol to a final concentration of 20 mM to the denatured sample, it was reacted at 95 °C for 10 min. The reduced sample was then placed in iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 40 mM and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. With a final concentration of 1.2% phosphoric acid, samples were attached to S-Trap mini columns (ProtiFi, Farmingdale, NY, USA; Cat. No: CO2-mini-80). Following the manufacturer’s protocol, we performed suspension-trapping (S-trap) proteolysis by adding of 8 μg Lys-C/trypsin mixture and incubating at 37 °C for 16 h. The digested peptide mixture was freeze-dried with a cold trap (CentriVap Cold Traps; Labconco, Kansas City, MO, USA) and saved at −80 °C until use.  5. nanoLC-MS/MS Peptides were separated using the Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each dried sample was reconstituted with 25 µL 0.1% formic acid, a 5 µL aliquot of which was injected into a C18 Pepmap trap column (20 mm×100 µm i.d., 5 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated by an Acclaim™ Pepmap 100 C18 column (500 mm×75 µm i.d., 3 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) over 200 minutes (250 nL/min) using a 0% to 48% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO for 150 minutes at 50 C. The liquid chromatography column was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano-ESI source. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan and 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans. The target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The ion target for MS/MS was set to 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. Repeated peptides were dynamically excluded for 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS spectra were retrieved on the SequestHT on Proteome discoverer (version 2.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and compared with the SwissProt human protein sequence database (March 2021)19. Precursor mass tolerance was set to ±10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.02 Da. The search parameters were set to default parameters, including cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and phospho-serine, -threonine, and -tyrosine as variable modifications with two miscleavages. False discovery rates were set at 1% for each analysis using “Percolator”. From the Sequest search output, peptide filters that included peptide confidence, peptide rank, score versus charge state, and search engine rank were set at the default values for proteome discoverer. In global proteome analysis, proteins were quantified label free using the peak intensity for unique and razor peptides of each protein and excluded peptides that involved methionine oxidation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Multiple sclerosis, Lc-msms, Serum exosome, Neurological disease, Parkinson, Dementia

### Affiliations
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.
Asan Medical Center

### Submitter
Hee-Sung Ahn

### Lab Head
Dr Kyunggon Kim
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.


