### Accession
PXD017430

### Title
AtNAA50 behaviour in the core NatA complex

### Description
In eukaryotes, the N-terminal acetylation (NTA) is one of the most frequent protein modifications. In many organisms, and especially in plants, its biological function remains a mystery. In Arabidopsis thaliana, a large part of the proteome acetylation is catalyzed co-translationally by the action of the core NatA complex, which consitst of NAA10 and NAA15, respectively the catalytic and ribosome-anchoring subunits. This complex interacts with the NAA50 protein (NatE), which also has an N-acetyltransferase in organisms such as human and fruit fly. This project focuses on the effect of AtNAA50 knockouts on the activity of the essential NatA complex.

### Sample Protocol
Two different protocols where applied. The first one, a Global Acetylation Profiling (GAP) test, was performed in E. coli Rosetta competent cells to search for Nat activity. Then, a SILProNAQ protocol was performed using Arbaidopsis leaves, with the NAA50 knockouts compared to wild type conditions. In each case, the peptides obtained after trypsin digestion were fractionated using strong cation exchange chromatography, followed by mass spectrometry analysis using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos coupled to an HPLC.

### Data Protocol
Data obtained from LC-MS/MS analysis were processed using Mascot Distiller to perform databse interrogation on a Mascot server. Then, result files were exported and parsed using the in-house eNcounter script.

### Publication Abstract
N<sup>&#x3b1;</sup>-terminal acetylation (NTA) is a prevalent protein modification in eukaryotes. In plants, the biological function of NTA remains enigmatic. The dominant <i>N</i>-acetyltransferase (Nat) in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) is NatA, which cotranslationally catalyzes acetylation of &#x223c;40% of the proteome. The core NatA complex consists of the catalytic subunit NAA10 and the ribosome-anchoring subunit NAA15. In human (<i>Homo sapiens</i>), fruit fly (<i>Drosophila melanogaster</i>), and yeast (<i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>), this core NatA complex interacts with NAA50 to form the NatE complex. While in metazoa, NAA50 has <i>N</i>-acetyltransferase activity, yeast NAA50 is catalytically inactive and positions NatA at the ribosome tunnel exit. Here, we report the identification and characterization of Arabidopsis NAA50 (AT5G11340). Consistent with its putative function as a cotranslationally acting Nat, AtNAA50-EYFP localized to the cytosol and the endoplasmic reticulum but also to the nuclei. We demonstrate that purified AtNAA50 displays N<sup>&#x3b1;</sup>-terminal acetyltransferase and lysine-&#x3b5;-autoacetyltransferase activity in vitro. Global <i>N</i>-acetylome profiling of <i>Escherichia coli</i> cells expressing AtNAA50 revealed conservation of NatE substrate specificity between plants and humans. Unlike the embryo-lethal phenotype caused by the absence of AtNAA10 and AtNAA15, loss of NAA50 expression resulted in severe growth retardation and infertility in two Arabidopsis transfer DNA insertion lines (<i>naa50-1</i> and <i>naa50-2</i>). The phenotype of <i>naa50-2</i> was rescued by the expression of HsNAA50 or AtNAA50. In contrast, the inactive ScNAA50 failed to complement <i>naa50-2</i> Remarkably, loss of NAA50 expression did not affect NTA of known NatA substrates and caused the accumulation of proteins involved in stress responses. Overall, our results emphasize a relevant role of AtNAA50 in plant defense and development, which is independent of the essential NatA activity.

### Keywords
Naa50, N-ter, Nata, Arabidopsis, Gap, Ptm, Acetylation, N-acetyltransferase, Rosetta

### Affiliations
Institut de Biologie Intégrative de la Cellule - CNRS
Protein Maturation, Cell fate and Therapeutics Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC) CNRS UMR9198, Bâtiment 21, 1 avenue de la Terrasse F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France

### Submitter
Jean Baptiste BOYER

### Lab Head
Dr Carmela GIGLIONE
Protein Maturation, Cell fate and Therapeutics Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC) CNRS UMR9198, Bâtiment 21, 1 avenue de la Terrasse F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France


