### Accession
PXD015670

### Title
Identification of JARID2/PRC2 interactome in human embryonic stem cells

### Description
JARID2 is an integral subunit of the chromatin modifier PRC2 (Polycomb Repressive Complex 2). PRC2 methylates lysine 27 in histone H3 and is required for human development. Mutaitons of PRC2 subunits have been frequently found in a variety of adult and pediatric cancer, suggesting that PRC2 critically regulates normal and cancer development. The goal of this project is to identify new regulator or co-factors of PRC2 and study their molecular interactions and activities in order to better understand function and regulation of PRC2 in normal and cancer development.

### Sample Protocol
H9 Pluripotent stem cell (PSC) line was used. Cells were amplified and used to generate nuclear extract, to which negative control IgG and JARID2 IgG were used to purify associated proteins by immunoprecipitation. Eluates from immunoprecipitation are processed by LC-LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The SEQUEST searching engine and the UniProt human database were used.  Searches were performed using 25 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) of Cysteine was used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da). The assigned peptides were filtered to reduce protein FDR to below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Chromatin modifiers affect spatiotemporal gene expression programs that underlie organismal development. The Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a crucial chromatin modifier in executing neurodevelopmental programs. Here, we find that PRC2 interacts with the nucleic acid-binding protein Ybx1. In the mouse embryo in vivo, Ybx1 is required for forebrain specification and restricting mid-hindbrain growth. In neural progenitor cells (NPCs), Ybx1 controls self-renewal and neuronal differentiation. Mechanistically, Ybx1 highly overlaps PRC2 binding genome-wide, controls PRC2 distribution, and inhibits H3K27me3 levels. These functions are consistent with Ybx1-mediated promotion of genes involved in forebrain specification, cell proliferation, or neuronal differentiation. In Ybx1-knockout NPCs, H3K27me3 reduction by PRC2 enzymatic inhibitor or genetic depletion partially rescues gene expression and NPC functions. Our findings suggest that Ybx1 fine-tunes PRC2 activities to regulate spatiotemporal gene expression in embryonic neural development and uncover a crucial epigenetic mechanism balancing forebrain-hindbrain lineages and self-renewal-differentiation choices in NPCs.

### Keywords
Human embryonic stem cells; pluripotency; jarid2; prc2; proteomics; proteome

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Developmental Neurobiology

### Submitter
Vishwajeeth Pagala

### Lab Head
Dr Jamy Peng
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Developmental Neurobiology


