### Accession
PXD004896

### Title
N-terminomics Proteogenomics -  N-terminal proteomics assisted profiling of the unexplored translation initiation landscape in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Proteogenomics is a research field where proteome data is used to improve gene annotation. To achieve this, customized protein databases are constructed to match proteomic data. We perform a proteogenomic analysis using N-terminal COFRADIC data in order to identify novel translational initiation start sites. We use a multistage search strategy where spectra that remained unidentified after searching the Arabidopsis proteome are used for our proteogenomic analysis. Here, the unidentified spectra were searched against a customized N-terminal peptide library derived from a six-frame translation of the Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) genome as well as Augustus predicted gene models.

### Sample Protocol
For N-terminal COFRADIC analysis, 50 ml of cell suspensions at approx. 1-2% packed cell volume (PCV) were collected by filtration and washed with ice-cold PBS. Collected cells were subjected to snap freezing in liquid nitrogen and frozen cell pellets was ground into a fine powder using a liquid nitrogen cooled pestle and mortar. The frozen pellet was thawed in 10 ml ice-cold lysis buffer (50 mM Na.phosphate pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl and 1 × complete and EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)), left on ice for 10 min and the mixture subjected to on cycle of freeze-thawing. Cell debris was eliminated by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was recovered and the protein concentration determined using the DC Protein Assay Kit from Bio-Rad (Munich, Germany). For all proteome analysis performed, 3000 µg of protein material (corresponding to approx. 1 ml of lysate) was subjected to N-terminal COFRADIC analysis essentially as described previously (Staes et al., 2011), however in the case of Glu-C, Asp-N and chymotrypsin proteome digests, no SCX pre-fractionation was performed and modified proteome samples were digested overnight at 37°C using mass spectrometry grade trypsin (enzyme/substrate of 1:1000 w/w; Promega), Chymotrypsin (1:60 w/w; Promega), Glu-C (1:75 w/w; Thermo) or Asp-N (1:200 w/w; Promega) while mixing at 550 rpm. To enable the assignment of in vivo Nt-acetylation events, all primary protein amines were blocked making use of an N-hydroxysuccinimide ester of (stable isotopic encoded) acetate at the protein level (i.e. NHS esters of 13C2D3 acetate). In each case, a methionine oxidation step was introduced between the primary and secondary RP-HPLC separations, thereby shifting all methionine-containing N-terminal peptides to earlier elution times, allowing an enrichment of these (Van Damme et al., 2009).  The obtained peptide mixtures were introduced into an LC-MS/MS system, the Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously (Arnesen et al., 2009; Van Damme et al., 2011).

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS peak lists were searched in parallel using four mass spectrometry search engines and using identical parameter settings whenever possible. A multistage search strategy was used. First, mass spectrometry spectra were searched against the Arabidopsis proteome database (TAIR10, containing 35,386 entries; http://www.arabidopsis.org). Spectra that remained unidentified were used as input for a second MS/MS search against a custom peptide library.  Search engines used are COMET (Eng et al., 2013; version 2016.01 rev. 2), Crux (Park et al., 2008; version 2.1.16866) and MS-GF+ (Kim et al., 2014; version 2016.06.29). Mass tolerance on precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and on fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Peptide length was 7 to 40 amino acids. Enzyme settings were adjusted to the enzyme used and available options in the search engines (see Table 1). 13C2D3-acetylation of lysine side-chains, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.02Da) and methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide (15.99Da) were set as fixed modifications. Variable modifications were 13C2D3-acetylation (47.04Da) and acetylation (42.01Da) of protein N-termini. Pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine (-17.03Da) was additionally set as a variable modification.. Per LC-MS/MS run, the four resulting identification files were parsed and the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and their confidence scores extracted. While for COMET and Crux the cross-correlation score (XCorr) was parsed, in the case of OMSSA and MS-GF+ the expectation value (e-value) was parsed. The estimated false discovery rate was estimated by searching a concatenated target-decoy database (i.e. addition of reverted protein sequences). Here, the quality/probalistic scores were used to rank PSMs and calculate a combined FDR score using the method described by Jones et al. (2009).

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomics is an emerging research field yet lacking a uniform method of analysis. Proteogenomic studies in which N-terminal proteomics and ribosome profiling are combined, suggest that a high number of protein start sites are currently missing in genome annotations. We constructed a proteogenomic pipeline specific for the analysis of N-terminal proteomics data, with the aim of discovering novel translational start sites outside annotated protein coding regions. In summary, unidentified MS/MS spectra were matched to a specific N-terminal peptide library encompassing protein N termini encoded in the <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> genome. After a stringent false discovery rate filtering, 117 protein N termini compliant with N-terminal methionine excision specificity and indicative of translation initiation were found. These include N-terminal protein extensions and translation from transposable elements and pseudogenes. Gene prediction provided supporting protein-coding models for approximately half of the protein N termini. Besides the prediction of functional domains (partially) contained within the newly predicted ORFs, further supporting evidence of translation was found in the recently released Araport11 genome re-annotation of Arabidopsis and computational translations of sequences stored in public repositories. Most interestingly, complementary evidence by ribosome profiling was found for 23 protein N termini. Finally, by analyzing protein N-terminal peptides, an <i>in silico</i> analysis demonstrates the applicability of our N-terminal proteogenomics strategy in revealing protein-coding potential in species with well- and poorly-annotated genomes.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Positional proteomics, Proteogenomics, N-terminal cofradic, Ribo-seq, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
Medical Biotechnology Center, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium and Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
PSB-VIB

### Submitter
Patrick Willems

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
Medical Biotechnology Center, VIB, 9000 Ghent, Belgium and Department of Biochemistry, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium


