### Accession
PXD037258

### Title
Proximity labelling reveals effects of disease-causing mutations on the DNAJC5/cysteine string protein α interactome

### Description
Cysteine string protein α (CSPα), also known as DNAJC5, is a member of the DnaJ/Hsp40 family of co-chaperones. The name derives from a cysteine-rich domain, palmitoylation of which enables localization to intracellular membranes, notably neuronal synaptic vesicles. Mutations in the DNAJC5 gene that encodes CSPα cause autosomal dominant, adult-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (ANCL), a rare neurodegenerative disease. As null mutations in CSP-encoding genes in flies, worms and mice similarly result in neurodegeneration, CSP is evidently an evolutionarily conserved neuroprotective protein. However, the client proteins that CSP chaperones to prevent neurodegeneration remain unclear. Traditional methods for identifying protein-protein interactions such as yeast 2-hybrid and affinity purification approaches are poorly suited to CSP, due to its requirement for membrane anchoring and its tendency to aggregate after cell lysis. Therefore, we employed proximity labelling, which enables interacting proteins to be identified in situ in living cells via biotinylation. Neuroendocrine PC12 cell lines stably expressing wild type and L115R ANCL mutant CSP constructs fused to miniTurbo were generated; then the biotinylated proteomes were analysed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LCMS) and validated by western blotting. This confirmed several known CSP-interacting proteins, such as Hsc70 and SNAP-25, but also revealed novel binding proteins, including STXBP1/Munc18-1. Interestingly, some protein interactions (such as Hsc70) were unaffected by the L115R mutation, whereas others (including SNAP-25 and STXBP1/Munc18-1) were inhibited. These results define the CSP interactome in a neuronal model cell line and reveal interactions that are affected by ANCL mutation and hence may contribute to the neurodegeneration seen in patients.

### Sample Protocol
MiniTurbo biotinylation  Cell media was supplemented with 500 μM biotin, unless stated otherwise, dissolved in serum-free DMEM. Biotin supplementation was added overnight, either 4 hours post-transfection for transient transfections, or 24 hours after seeding for stable cell lines, unless stated otherwise. Biotin-free and empty miniTurbo constructs with biotin supplementation were used as negative controls.  Biotinylated protein pull-down Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100) with protease inhibitor and EDTA diluted 1:100, and clarified at 4°C for 10 minutes at 12,000 rpm. Prior to the addition of cell lysates, the NeutrAvidin/StreptAvidin beads were washed twice for 10 minutes in RIPA buffer. 50μL of normalised lysates as the input fraction, and the remaining lysates were then added to the washed beads at a ratio of 10 μL of NeutrAvidin/StreptAvidin beads per 100 μg of protein and incubated at 4°C on a rotator overnight, unless stated otherwise. The following day the supernatant was collected as the unbound fraction. The beads were then washed twice in RIPA buffer, once in 1 M KCl, once in 0.1 M Na2CO3, once in 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris HCl pH.8, then again twice in RIPA buffer.   Trypsin Digestion To prepare samples for analysis by mass spectrometry, the streptavidin bead slurry from the final stage of the pull-down described above was washed twice in 50 mM Tris HCl buffer, pH7.5. This was then followed by two further washes in 2 M urea/50 mM Tris, pH 7.5 and then incubation in 2 M urea/50 mM Tris, pH 7.5 with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 0.4 μg trypsin at 25°C for 1 hour, with shaking. The subsequent supernatant was collected and the beads were further washed twice in 2 M urea/50 mM Tris, pH 7.5 and the washes were combined with the supernatant collected from the on-bead digest and reduced with 4 mM DTT at 25°C for 30 minutes, with shaking. The sample was then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at 25°C for 45 minutes, with shaking. A further 0.5 μg of trypsin was then added to complete the digestion at 25°C overnight, with shaking. Lastly, the sample was acidified with formic acid so that the sample contains ~1% formic acid, then evaporated to dryness overnight using ThermoFisher Savant Speedvac SC210A at ambient temperature.  NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS Analysis  Reversed phase chromatography was used to separate tryptic peptides prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Two columns were utilised, an Acclaim PepMap µ-precolumn cartridge 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm 5 μm 100 Å and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm x 50 cm 2 µm 100 Å (Thermo Scientific). The columns were installed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto the µ-precolumn equilibrated in 2% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 5 min at 10 µL min-1 after which peptides were eluted onto the analytical column at 250 nL min-1 by increasing the mobile phase B concentration from 8% B to 25% over 36 min, then to 35% B over 10 min, and to 90% B over 3 min, followed by a 10 min re-equilibration at 8% B.  Eluting peptides were converted to gas-phase ions by means of electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1575 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 50% normalized AGC target and the max injection time was 150 ms. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.2 Th using the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 33, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 was set to 50% normalized AGC target and the max injection time was 200 ms. Precursors with charge state 2–6 were selected and sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were searched using MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0) against Rattus norvegicus database (www.uniprot.org/proteomes); sequences provided; and the MaxQuant common contaminant database. For the database search, peptides were generated from a tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were added as variable modifications. To analyse the results, it was used Perseus software (version 2.03.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stxbp1, Warwick_rtp, Pc12 cell, Miniturbo, Neurodegeneration, Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, Exocytosis, Snare

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Physiology and Cell Signalling Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology University of Liverpool
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Alan Morgan
Department of Molecular Physiology and Cell Signalling Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology University of Liverpool


