### Accession
PXD003545

### Title
Fatty-acylation in RAW264.7 -  Bioorthogonal Chemical Reporters for Monitoring Unsaturated Fatty-Acylated Proteins

### Description
Dietary unsaturated fatty acids beneficially affect human health, in part by modulating the immune system, but the mechanism is not completely understood. Given that unsaturated fatty acids have been shown to be covalently incorporated into a small subset of proteins, we designed three alkyne-tagged chemical reporters of unsaturated fatty acids, alk-16:1, alk-17:1 and alk-18:1, to explore the generality and diversity of this protein modification. Following cell lysis, proteins labelled with the reporters could be captured by azido-functionalized reagents via CuAAC for fluorescence detection or enrichment for proteomics analysis.  These reporters label many proteins in mammalian cells and can be incorporated site-specifically, notably on Cys residues. Quantitative proteomics analysis (n= 4 biological replicates) of LPS/IFN-gamma stimulated RAW264.7 labelled with oleic acid (control), alk-16 (palmitic acid chemical reporter), alk-16:1, alk-17:1 and alk-18:1, revealed that unsaturated fatty acids modify similar protein targets to saturated fatty acids, including several immune proteins. Interestingly, some proteins can be differentially labeled with unsaturated and saturated fatty acid.

### Sample Protocol
RAW264.7 were platted 24 h before treatment. Cells were stimulated with LPS/IFN-gamma for 12 h and labeled with the chemical reporters (alk-16, alk-16:1, alk-17:1, alk-18:1, oleic acid (18:1)) at 200 µM concentrations, for 8 h in DMEM supplemented with 10 % charcoal filtered FBS (n= 4 biological replicates). Cells were harvested, washed twice with cold PBS, and flash-frozen and stored at −80 °C. Cells were thaw on ice and the pellet resuspended in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM triethanolamine pH 7.4, Roche EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail, benzonase). Protein concentration was measured with the BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce).  500 µg of cell lysate were diluted with 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM triethanolamine pH 7.4 to 225 µL and 25 µL of freshly prepared CuAAC reactant solution [azido-biotin (2.5 µL, 10 mM stock solution in DMSO), CuSO4 (5 µL, 50 mM in H2O), TCEP (5 µL, 50 mM in H2O)), TBTA (12.5 µL, 10 mM stock solution in DMSO/t-butanol)] were added and vortexed for 1 h at room temperature. Following CHCl3/MeOH protein precipitation, protein pellets were air-dried and resuspended in 50 µL 2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM triethanolamine pH 7.4. 175 µL 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM triethanolamine pH 7.4 and 25 µL CuAAC reactant solution were added. The samples were vortexed at room temperature for 1 h and EDTA (6 µL of 0.5 M EDTA in H2O) was added to stop the reaction. Samples were precipitated, air dried and resuspended in 50 µL 2% SDS in PBS. Samples were diluted to 0.5 mg/mL and 0.2 % SDS in PBS. Samples were added to 35 µL of high-capacity streptavidin beads (pre-washed three times with 0.2 % SDS in PBS). Samples were incubated at room temperature with end-over-end rotation for 90 min. The beads were washed with 1 % SDS in PBS (3 x), 4 M urea in PBS (2 x), AMBIC (ammonium bicarbonate) (5 x). Samples were then reduced with TCEP (10 mM final) for 30 min at room temperature. The supernatant was removed and the beads were washed once with AMBIC. Samples were alkylated with iodoacetamide (10 mM final) in the dark for 30 min. The supernatant was removed and the beads were washed twice with AMBIC. The supernatant was removed and 50 µL AMBIC containing 1 µg Trypsin were added. Samples were digested at 37 °C overnight. The samples were centrifuged and the supernatant was transferred into clean tubes. The beads were washed with 50 µL 1 % FA, 15 % acetonitrile in H2O and 50 µL 1% FA in H2O. These washes were combined with the supernatant and peptide were cleaned-up using a C18 stage tip. Peptide pellets were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile/1% formic acid in H2O for LC-MS analysis. Extracted tryptic peptides were desalted on a trap column prior to separation on a 12 cm/75 μm reversed phase C18 column (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). A 120 minutes method increasing from 10% B to% 45% B in 80 minutes (A: 0.1% Formic Acid, B: Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid) were delivered at 300 nL/min.  The liquid chromatography setup (Dionex, Boston, MA, USA) was coupled to an Orbitrap XL (Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA) mass spectrometer operated in top-8-CID-mode. Mass spectra were collected in a 300-1800 m/z mass range using 60,000 resolution. n= 4 biological replicates, 20 RAW files (oleic acid ("Ol-A, Ol-B, Ol-C, Ol-D")), alk-16 ("P-A, P-B, P-C, P-D"), alk-16:1("16-A, 16-B, 16-C, 16-D"), alk-17:1 ("17-A, 17-B, 17-C, 17-D") and alk-18:1 ("18-A, 18-B, 18-C, 18-D")

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.0.25, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the database using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For the identification, the false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites, the minimum peptide length allowed was five amino acids, and the minimum number of unique peptides allowed was set to one. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. “Unique and razor peptides” mode was selected. Label free quantification experiments in MaxQuant was performed using the built in label free quantification algorithm enabling the ‘Match between runs’ option.

### Publication Abstract
Dietary unsaturated fatty acids, such as oleic acid, have been shown to be covalently incorporated into a small subset of proteins, but the generality and diversity of this protein modification has not been studied. We synthesized unsaturated fatty-acid chemical reporters and determined their protein targets in mammalian cells. The reporters can induce the formation of lipid droplets and be incorporated site-specifically onto known fatty-acylated proteins and label many proteins in mammalian cells. Quantitative proteomics analysis revealed that unsaturated fatty acids modify similar protein targets to saturated fatty acids, including several immunity-associated proteins. This demonstrates that unsaturated fatty acids can directly modify many proteins to exert their unique and often beneficial physiological effects in vivo.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Fatty-acylation, Raw264.7, Unsaturated fatty acid

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Microbial Pathogenesis The Rockefeller University USA

### Submitter
Emmanuelle Thinon

### Lab Head
Dr Howard C. Hang
Laboratory of Chemical Biology and Microbial Pathogenesis The Rockefeller University USA


