### Accession
PXD023403

### Title
Mechanistic Insights into the Metabolic Pathways for D-alanine of Marine Bacteria, D-amino acids utilizing by marine bacteria, and the metabolism mechanism of D-amino acids in marine bacteria

### Description
In the medium in which the D-amino acid as the sole nitrogen source, the bacterial solution with different culture time was selected to measure the expression level of each protein in the cell. Compared with 0 hours, the expression level of which protein was increased was checked.

### Sample Protocol
Strain cells cultured with 2 mM D-Ala as the sole nitrogen source were collected at initial phase, exponential phase. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic analysis were performed by Institute of genetics and developmental biology, Chinese academy of sciences.

### Data Protocol
The database search was performed for all raw MS files using the software MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16). The parameters used for the database search were set up as follows: The type of search, MS3; The type of isobaric labels,10-plex TMT; The mass tolerance for precursor ions, 20 PPM for the first search and 4.5 PPM for the main search; The mass tolerance for fragments ions, 20 PPM; The minimum score for unmodified peptides; The minimum score for modified peptides; The variable modifications include N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation; The fix modification includes Cysteine carbamidomethylating. The false discovery rates (FDR) for both peptide and protein identifications were set to 0.01. Default values were used for all other parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alanine racemase, Amino acid, D-alanine aminotransferase, D-alanine-d-alanine ligase., D-alanine metabolism, Marine bacteria

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, China.
Shandong University

### Submitter
yu yang

### Lab Head
Dr Yuzhong Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, China.


