### Accession
PXD043232

### Title
Mass spectrometry and phosphorylation analysis of ORC1 protein, wild type or RNA-binding mutant (R441A, R444A and R465A), in GAA-RNA (RNA interactors of ORC1 identified by RIP-seq and iCLIP) knockdown or control conditions.

### Description
Mass spectrometry of wild type or mutant (RNA-binding) ORC1. Experiments were done in cellstransfected with a control ASO or an anti-GAA ASO, to knockdown RNA interactors of ORC1.

### Sample Protocol
Transfected WT-ORC1-3xFlag and MUT-ORC1-3xFlag proteins in HCT116 cells, in control or anti-GAA knockdown conditions, were immunoprecipitated from nuclear extracts of 160·106 cells, and run in acrylamide gels for Coomassie blue staining. Bands at the expected molecular weight were cut, and containing proteins were subjected to mass spectrometry. The samples were reduced with 1 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 60ºC and then alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure. Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 minutes followed by removal of acetonitrile, and then completely dried in a speed-vac. Rehydration was done with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µL modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC. Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight.  Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. The extracts were dried in a speed-vac (~1 hour). For the analysis, samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip. After equilibrating the column, each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). As each peptides were eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then they entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Eluting peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein or translated nucleotide databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA). The modification of 79.9663 mass units to serine, threonine, and tyrosine was included in the database searches to determine phosphopeptides. Phosphorylation assignments were determined by the Ascore algorithm. All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Cells must coordinate the activation of thousands of replication origins dispersed throughout their genome. Active transcription is known to favor the formation of mammalian origins, although the role that RNA plays in this process remains unclear. We show that the ORC1 subunit of the human Origin Recognition Complex interacts with RNAs transcribed from genes with origins in their transcription start sites (TSSs), displaying a positive correlation between RNA binding and origin activity. RNA depletion, or the use of ORC1 RNA-binding mutant, result in inefficient activation of proximal origins, linked to impaired ORC1 chromatin release. ORC1 RNA binding activity resides in its intrinsically disordered region, involved in intra- and inter-molecular interactions, regulation by phosphorylation, and phase-separation. We show that RNA binding favors ORC1 chromatin release, by regulating its phosphorylation and subsequent degradation. Our results unveil a non-coding function of RNA as a dynamic component of the chromatin, orchestrating the activation of replication origins.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics of orc1 with altered protein rna-binding

### Affiliations
Center for Applied Medical Research, University of Navarra, Pio XII 55 Ave, 31008, Pamplona, Spain
1 Center for Applied Medical Research, University of Navarra, Pio XII 55 Ave, 31008, Pamplona, Spain.  2 Institute of Health Research of Navarra (IdiSNA), Cancer Center Clínica Universidad de Navarra (CCUN), Pamplona, Spain.

### Submitter
Aina Maria Mas

### Lab Head
Dr Maite Huarte
1 Center for Applied Medical Research, University of Navarra, Pio XII 55 Ave, 31008, Pamplona, Spain.  2 Institute of Health Research of Navarra (IdiSNA), Cancer Center Clínica Universidad de Navarra (CCUN), Pamplona, Spain.


