### Accession
PXD006239

### Title
Relative quantitative proteomics of uninfected vs wMel infected Aedes aegypti midguts

### Description
Wolbachia are intracellular maternally inherited bacteria that can spread through insect populations and block virus transmission by mosquitoes, providing an important new dengue control strategy. To better understand the mechanisms of virus inhibition, proteomic quantification of the effects of Wolbachia in mosquito (Aedes aegypti) midguts was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Midguts were dissected from 10 day old non-blood fed female Ae. aegypti and immediately frozen at -80oC. For each line (uninfected or wMel infected) midguts from 20 mosquitoes were used for a biological replicate. Midguts were lysed by sonicating 3 × 15 seconds in 8M urea 50mM TEAB. Protein was measured by BCA assay (Pierce). Samples were reduced with 5mM DTT for 30 mins at 50°C and alkylated with 15mM Iodoacetamide for 30 mins in the dark. Urea was diluted to 1.5M with 50mM TEAB and trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) added at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:25. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C. Digests were acidified with addition of TFA to 0.5% (v:v) and clarified by centrifugation for 7 mins at 18,000g. Peptides were desalted using Strata 50mg C18 cartridges (Phenomenex). Cartridges were prepared by passing through 3ml acetonitrile, 2ml aqueous 80% (v:v) acetonitrile 0.1% (v:v) TFA and 2ml aqueous 0.1% (v:v) TFA. Peptides were loaded and cartridges washed with 2 × 0.25ml aqueous 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with aqueous 80% (v:v) acetonitrile 0.1% (v:v) TFA and dried. Peptides were resuspended in 50mM TEAB at a concentration of 43µg/100µl. A 100µl aliquot of peptide solution from each sample was labelled using Tandem Mass Tag reagents (TMT-10plex, Thermo Fisher). For each sample, 0.8mg of TMT reagent was resuspended in 41µl acetonitrile and added to peptides, labelling took place over 1hr at RT. Excess labelling reagent was quenched with 8µl aqueous 5% (v:v) hydroxylamine for 15mins at RT. Labelled peptides were dried prior to high pH reversed phase fractionation. Labelled peptides from midgut digests were fractionated using high pH reversed phase spin columns according to manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce). Column was washed twice with 300µl acetonitrile and twice with aqueous 0.1% (v:v) TFA. Peptides were resuspended in 300µl aqueous 0.1% (v:v) TFA and applied to the column by centrifugation for 2mins at 3000g. Peptides were washed with 300µl water, then 300µl 5% acetonitrile 0.1% triethylamine and eluted with 300µl each of aqueous (v:v) 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, 50% acetonitrile 0.1% triethylamine. Fractions were dried down for analysis by mass spectrometry. Peptides from midgut samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo) equipped with a PepMap 100 Å C18, 5 µm trap column (300 µm x  5 mm, Thermo) and a PepMap, 2 µm, 100 Å, C18 EasyNano nanocapillary column (75 m x 150 mm, Thermo). The trap wash solvent was 0.05% (v:v) aqueous trifluoroacetic acid and the trapping flow rate was 15 µL/min. The trap was washed for 3 min before switching flow to the capillary column.  Separation used gradient elution of two solvents: solvent A, aqueous 1% (v:v) formic acid; solvent B, aqueous 80% (v:v) acetonitrile containing 1% (v:v) formic acid. The flow rate for the capillary column was 300 nL/min and the column temperature was 40°C. The linear multi-step gradient profile was: 3-10% B over 8 mins, 10-35% B over 125 mins, 35-65% B over 50 mins, 65-99% B over 7 mins and then proceeded to wash with 99% solvent B for 4 min. The column was returned to initial conditions and re-equilibrated for 15 min before subsequent injections.  The nanoLC system was interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) with an EasyNano ionisation source (Thermo). Positive ESI-MS, MS2 and MS3 spectra were acquired using Xcalibur software (version 4.0, Thermo). Instrument source settings were: ion spray voltage, 1,900 V; sweep gas, 0 Arb; ion transfer tube temperature; 275°C. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with: 120,000 resolution, scan range: m/z 380-1,500; AGC target, 2e5; max fill time, 50 ms. Data dependant acquisition was performed in top speed mode using a 4 s cycle, selecting the most intense precursors with charge states >1.  Dynamic exclusion was performed for 50 s post precursor selection and a minimum threshold for fragmentation was set at 3e4. MS2 spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap with: scan rate, turbo; quadrupole isolation, 1.2 m/z; activation type, CID; activation energy: 35%; AGC target, 1e4; first mass, 120 m/z; max fill time, 50 ms. MS3 spectra were acquired in multi notch synchronous precursor mode (SPS3), selecting the 5 most intense MS2 fragment ions between 400-1,000 m/z. SPS3 spectra were measured in the Orbitrap mass analyser using:  50,000 resolution, quadrupole isolation, 2 m/z; activation type, HCD; collision energy, 65%; scan range: m/z 110-500; AGC target, 5e4; max fill time, 86 ms.  Acquisitions were arranged by Xcalibur to inject ions for all available parallelizable time.

### Data Protocol
For midgut-derived TMT data peak lists were converted from centroided .raw to .mgf format using Mascot Distiller (version 2.6.1, Matrix Science) and MS3 spectra were concatenated into their parent MS2 spectra for database searching. Mascot Daemon (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) was used to combine .mgf files and search against a subset of the UniProt database containing Ae. aegypti and Wolbachia wMel proteins (17,811 sequences) using a locally-running copy of the Mascot program (Matrix Science Ltd., version 2.5.1).  Search criteria specified: Enzyme, trypsin; Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT6plex (N-term, K); Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Peptide tolerance, 5 ppm; MS/MS tolerance, 0.5 Da; Instrument, ESI-TRAP.  The Mascot .dat result file was imported into Scaffold Q+ (version 4.7.5, Proteome Software) and a second search run against the same database using X!Tandem was run.  Protein identifications were filtered to require a maximum protein and peptide false discovery rate of 1% with a minimum of two unique peptide identifications per protein.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm54. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.   Quantification of relative protein abundance was calculated from TMT reporter ion intensities using Scaffold Q+.  TMT isotope correction factors were taken from the document supplied with the reagents by the manufacturer. Normalization was performed iteratively (across samples and spectra) on intensities, as described in Statistical Analysis of Relative Labeled Mass Spectrometry Data from Complex Samples Using ANOVA55. Medians were used for averaging. Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins, and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm.  Differentially expressed proteins were determined by applying Permutation Test with unadjusted significance level p < 0.05 corrected by Benjamini-Hochberg for false discovery rate estimation.

### Publication Abstract
Wolbachia are intracellular maternally inherited bacteria that can spread through insect populations and block virus transmission by mosquitoes, providing an important approach to dengue control. To better understand the mechanisms of virus inhibition, we here perform proteomic quantification of the effects of Wolbachia in Aedes aegypti mosquito cells and midgut. Perturbations are observed in vesicular trafficking, lipid metabolism and in the endoplasmic reticulum that could impact viral entry and replication. Wolbachia-infected cells display a differential cholesterol profile, including elevated levels of esterified cholesterol, that is consistent with perturbed intracellular cholesterol trafficking. Cyclodextrins have been shown to reverse lipid accumulation defects in cells with disrupted cholesterol homeostasis. Treatment of Wolbachia-infected Ae. aegypti cells with 2-hydroxypropyl-&#x3b2;-cyclodextrin restores dengue replication in Wolbachia-carrying cells, suggesting dengue is inhibited in Wolbachia-infected cells by localised cholesterol accumulation. These results demonstrate parallels between the cellular Wolbachia viral inhibition phenotype and lipid storage genetic disorders. Wolbachia infection of mosquitoes can block dengue virus infection and is tested in field trials, but the mechanism of action is unclear. Using proteomics, Geoghegan et al. here identify effects of Wolbachia on cholesterol homeostasis and dengue virus replication in Aedes aegypti.

### Keywords
Wmel, Wolbachia, Tmt, Aedes aegypti, Ae. aegypti

### Affiliations
MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK
University of York

### Submitter
Vincent Geoghegan

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Sinkins
MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G61 1QH, UK


