### Accession
PXD007250

### Title
On the reproducibility of label-free quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry

### Description
Quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry (QCLMS) is an emerging approach to study conformational changes of proteins and multi-subunit complexes. Distinguishing protein conformations requires reproducibly identifying and quantifying cross-linked peptides. Here we analyzed the variation between multiple cross-linking reactions using bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] suberate (BS3)-cross-linked human serum albumin (HSA) and evaluated how reproducible cross-linked peptides can be identified and quantified by LC-MS analysis. To make QCLMS accessible to a broader research community we developed a workflow that integrates the established software tools MaxQuant for spectra pre-processing, Xi for cross-linked peptide identification and finally Skyline for quantification (MS1 filtering). Out of the 221 unique residue pairs identified in our sample, 146 (66% of those identified) could be imported into Skyline and 124 (84% of those imported) were subsequently quantified with coefficient of variation (CV) values of 14% (injection replica) and 32% (reaction replica). Thus our results demonstrate that the reproducibility of QCLMS is in line with the reproducibility of general quantitative proteomics and we establish a robust workflow for MS1-based quantitation of cross-linked peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Ten cross-linking reactions were performed in parallel as following: purified human serum albumin (40 μg; 2 µg/µL) in cross-linking buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5, 20 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2,) was mixed with BS3 (160 µg, 30 μg/μL in cross-linking buffer) and cross-linking buffer (14.6 µL), to a total reaction volume of 40 µL (1 µg/µL protein concentration) with a protein to cross-linker mass ratio of 1:4. After 1.5 hour incubation on ice, the reaction was stopped using 5 µL saturated ammonium bicarbonate (~2.5 M) for 30 min at room temperature. 40 µg of cross-linked HSA from each reaction were subjected to SDS-PAGE and protein bands were visualized using coomassie staining. Cross-linked HSA monomer bands were excised for digestion. Each sample-containing gel band was digested separately. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol , subsequently alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide and then digested using trypsin (300 ng/µL). After digestion, peptides were extracted using 80% v/v acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Tryptic peptides were desalted using C18-Stage Tips and eluted with 80% v/v ACN, 0.1% v/v TFA prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides were concentrated in a Vacufuge Concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany) and resuspended in 2% v/v ACN, 0.1% v/v formic acid (FA) to a final protein concentration of 0.75 μg/µL. 4/5 (nominally 32 µg) of each reaction sample were pooled as injection replica. The remaining 1/5 (nominally 8 µg) of each reaction sample was used for reaction replica experiment. Nominally for each mass spectrometric acquisition, 1.5 µg peptides were injected. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA) with a “high/high” acquisition strategy. The peptide separation was carried out on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% v/v FA and mobile phase B consisted of 80% v/v ACN and 0.1% v/v FA. Peptides were loaded onto the column with 2% buffer B at 0.3 µL/min flow rate and eluted at 0.25 µL/min flow rate with following gradient: 150 min linear increase from 2% to 40% mobile phase B followed by 11 min increase from 40 to 95% mobile phase B. Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer and analysed using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. In each 3 sec acquisition cycle, precursor ions were detected in the Orbitrap with resolution 120,000 and m/z range 400-1600. Ions with charge states from 3+ to 7+ were selected for fragmentation. The selection priority was set to first lowest charge and then highest intensity. Selected ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a window size of m/z 2. The isolated ions were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) and analyzed with resolution 30.000 in Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with the exclusion duration set to 60 sec and exclusion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant (v. 1.5.0.0). “FTMS top peaks per 100 Da” was set to 20, “FTMS de-isotoping” box was unticked, and all other parameters were set to default. The subsequent database search was conducted using Xi (https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/XiSearch) against the sequence of HSA (UniProt ID: P02768) with the reversed HSA sequence as decoy. The following search parameters were used: MS accuracy: 6 ppm, MS/MS accuracy: 20 ppm, enzyme: trypsin, missed cleavages: 4, cross-linker: BS3, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation on cysteine, variable modification: oxidation of methionine and modification by BS3 with the second NHS ester hydrolyzed or aminated. The BS3 reaction specificity was assumed to be at lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and the N-termini of proteins. For all identified cross-links that were auto-validated by Xi Software, the Cɑ-Cɑ distance between cross-linked residue pairs were measured in the crystal structure of HSA (PDB: 1AO6 chain A). Residue pairs with distance ≥ 30 Å and cross-links matched to decoys were excluded from subsequent quantitation using Skyline. Quantitation was performed on MS1 level using Skyline (version 3.5). The identification information of cross-linked peptides were introduced as a .ssl file following the standard format for custom libraries in Skyline (https://skyline.ms/wiki/home/software/BiblioSpec/). The .ssl file is constructed using an in-house script based on the list of peptide spectrum matches (PSM) of identified cross-links. In the .ssl file, an entry is generated for each cross-linking feature. A cross-linking feature is defined as an unique PSM for a cross-linked peptide with differences in either charge state, linkage sites or modification. Since Skyline does not natively support cross-linking data, the sequences of cross-linked peptides were converted into their linear forms, based on the principle described in Maiolica et al. 2007 and Chen et al. 2016. Skyline uses the .ssl file and the assigned mzML files (created from raw files using MSconvert) to create a spectral library by BiblioSpec. Peptide settings were as follows: Enzyme: Trypsin KR/P, max missed cleavages: 9, minimal length of peptide: 6, maximal length: 60, modifications: carbamidomethylation on cysteine, oxidation on methionine, cross-linker (lysine + 27.983 Da), BS3-OH (156.078 Da), BS3-NH2 (155.094 Da) and BS3-loop (138.068 Da). Transition settings were set to: precursor charges: 3-7; ion type: p (precursor); mass range: m/z 400-1600; tolerance: m/z 0.055; isotope peaks included: count 3; mass analyser: orbitrap; resolution: 120,000 at m/z 200. For the remaining settings the defaults were used. MS1 filtering was done as described in the Skyline Tutorial (version 2.5). Skyline uses the spectral library to detect so called transitions of identified precursors. The transitions of a single precursor consists of the intensity measurements across multiple MS1 spectra of selected isotopic peaks of the precursor. For each precursor the peak areas of transitions are integrated and interpreted as quantification signal. After automated peak picking and retention time alignment of Skyline, a manual correction of wrong peak boundaries was performed. Data from Skyline was exported into a .csv file for further processing. Concerning peak areas, Skyline is able to calculate a coefficient of variation (CV) which was used to compare the reproducibility of quantification within experiments. CVs represent the mean variation of peak areas within 10 replica to determine the variation introduced either by mass spectrometer or by conducting experiments in parallel. The CV was compared for 10 injection replicas and 10 reaction replicas separately. For each of them, the CV value of a cross-linked feature was calculated by Skyline. Furthermore, the CV value for a cross-linked residue pair was calculated as the median of CVs of all cross-linked features that are corresponding to this residue pair.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative cross-linking/mass spectrometry (QCLMS) is an emerging approach to study conformational changes of proteins and multi-subunit complexes. Distinguishing protein conformations requires reproducibly identifying and quantifying cross-linked peptides. Here we analyzed the variation between multiple cross-linking reactions using bis[sulfosuccinimidyl] suberate (BS<sup>3</sup>)-cross-linked human serum albumin (HSA) and evaluated how reproducible cross-linked peptides can be identified and quantified by LC-MS analysis. To make QCLMS accessible to a broader research community, we developed a workflow that integrates the established software tools MaxQuant for spectra preprocessing, Xi for cross-linked peptide identification, and finally Skyline for quantification (MS1 filtering). Out of the 221 unique residue pairs identified in our sample, 124 were subsequently quantified across 10 analyses with coefficient of variation (CV) values of 14% (injection replica) and 32% (reaction replica). Thus our results demonstrate that the reproducibility of QCLMS is in line with the reproducibility of general quantitative proteomics and we establish a robust workflow for MS1-based quantitation of cross-linked peptides. Graphical Abstract &#x115f;.

### Keywords
Skyline, Quatitation, Cross-linking, Mass-spectrometry

### Affiliations
Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, Scotland, United Kingdom
TU Berlin

### Submitter
Fränze Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, Scotland, United Kingdom


