### Accession
PXD028792

### Title
Functional characterization of the human Cdk10/Cyclin Q complex

### Description
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are key players in cell cycle regulation and transcription. The CDK-family member Cdk10 is important for neural development and can act as a tumor suppressor but the underlying molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, we provide an in depth analysis of Cdk10 substrate specificity and function. Using recombinant Cdk10/CycQ protein complexes we characterize RNA pol II CTD, c-MYC, and RB1 as in vitro protein substrates. Using an analog-sensitive mutant kinase, we identify 66 proteins as Cdk10 substrates from HEK cells. Among these, proteins involved in cell cycle, translation, stress response, growth signalling, as well as rRNA, and mRNA transcriptional regulation are found. Cdk10 is able to auto-phosphorylate in trans within the T-loop, offering the possibility of a positive feedback loop for activation. We also identify Cdk10 as an in vitro substrate of Cdk1 and Cdk5 at multiple sites, allowing for a potential cross-talk between these CDKs. With this functional characterization, Cdk10 adopts a hybrid position in both cell cycle and transcriptional regulation

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE (4–12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris Gel, Invitrogen) and the corresponding molecular weight band from the Coomassie blue-stained gel was cut. All the cut slices were reduced with 10 mm DTT for 55 min at 56 °C, alkylated with 55 mm iodoacetic acid (IAA) for 20 min at 26 °C and digested with modified trypsin (±Glu-C)  overnight at 37 °C. Digested peptides dried in SpeecVac and stored in -80 °C freezer waiting for LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (v1.5.5.1 & v1.6.5.0, MPI for Biochemistry) [Ref1]. MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniProtKB human database containing 92,954 protein entries (downloaded on Feb 2017) supplemented with 245 frequently observed contaminants via the Andromeda search engine [Ref2]. Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 6 and 20 ppm after initial recalibration, respectively. STY phosphorylation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing N-terminal cleavage to proline. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on the peptide, modification site and protein level using a forward-and-reverse concatenated decoy database approach.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are key players in cell cycle regulation and transcription. The CDK-family member Cdk10 is important for neural development and can act as a tumour suppressor, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, we provide an in-depth analysis of Cdk10 substrate specificity and function. Using recombinant Cdk10/CycQ protein complexes, we characterize RNA pol II CTD, c-MYC and RB1 as <i>in vitro</i> protein substrates. Using an analogue-sensitive mutant kinase, we identify 89 different Cdk10 phosphosites in HEK cells originating from 66 different proteins. Among these, proteins involved in cell cycle, translation, stress response, growth signalling, as well as rRNA, and mRNA transcriptional regulation, are found. Of a set of pan-selective CDK- and Cdk9-specific inhibitors tested, all inhibited Cdk10/CycQ at least five times weaker than their proposed target kinases. We also identify Cdk10 as an <i>in vitro</i> substrate of Cdk1 and Cdk5 at multiple sites, allowing for a potential cross-talk between these CDKs. With this functional characterization, Cdk10 adopts a hybrid position in both cell cycle and transcriptional regulation.

### Keywords
Transcription; cell cycle; cdk10; cyclin q; cyclin m; rna polymerase ii

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry,Goettingen, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences

### Submitter
Yanlong Ji

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry,Goettingen, Germany


