### Accession
PXD011515

### Title
InfectERA: Challenges in clinical metaproteomics highlighted by the analysis of acute leukemia patients with gut colonization by multidrug-resistant Enterobacteriaceae

### Description
The microbiome has a strong impact on human health and disease and is therefore increasingly studied in a clinical context. Metaproteomics is also attracting considerable attention and such data can be efficiently generated today owing to improvements in mass spectrometry based proteomics. As we will discuss in this study, there are still major challenges notably in data analysis that need to be overcome. Here, we analyzed 212 fecal samples from 56 hospitalized acute leukemia patients with multidrug-resistant Enterobactericeae (MRE) colonization using metagenomics and metaproteomics. This is one of the largest clinical metaproteomic studies to date and the first addressing the gut microbiome in MRE colonized acute leukemia patients. Based on this substantial data set, we discuss major current limitations in clinical metaproteomic data analysis to provide guidance to researchers in the field. Notably, the results show that public metagenome databases are incomplete and that sample-specific metagenomes improve results. Furthermore, biological variation is tremendous which challenges clinical study designs and argues that longitudinal measurements of individual patients are a valuable addition to the analysis of patient cohorts.

### Sample Protocol
For homogenization 0.5 ml washing buffer (50 mM Na2HPO4/NAH2PO4, pH 8.0, 0.1% Tween20, 1x cOmplete Protease inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich)) and 2 glass beads (3mm) were added to 50 mg feces, vortexed and sonicated for 10 min. After homogenization the sample was centrifuged for 15 min at 4 ⁰C with 200 xg and both fractions were kept. For further purification, this step was repeated three times. To process the bacterial pellet fraction, glass beads were removed and the pellet was resuspended in 20 mM Tris/HCl and then further diluted in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris/HCL, pH 7.5, 2 % SDS, 1x cOmplete Protease inhibitors (Sigma Aldrich)). Samples were heated up to 60 ⁰C for 10 min and ultrasonicated for 3x 1 min (0.5 amplitude) on ice. After lysis, samples were centrifuged for 1 h, 4 ⁰C, 20000 xg and the supernatant was reduced with 10 mM DTT at 50 ⁰C, 700 rpm for 40 min and alkylated with 55 mM CAA at room temperature for 20 min in the dark. Samples were denatured in 1x LDS buffer and shortly run on a SDS gel (5 min, 200 V). The gel was stained with Coomassie and sample bands were cut for in-gel digestion following standard procedure. For the supernatant fraction of the fecal washing, 50 µl of each sample supernatant was reduced, alkylated, denatured and in-gel digested as described before. Input material for LC-MS/MS analysis was normalized based on gram feces weighted. As quality control for lysis and digestion E. coli samples were processed with every 9 samples. LC-MS/MS analysis: LC-MS/MS measurement were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC+ system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After reconstitution in 0.1% formic acid (FA), one half of the peptides were loaded on a trap column (75 µm x 45 cm, packed in-house with 5 um C18 resin; Reprosil PUR AQ, Dr. Maisch) and washed using 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 5 µL/min for 10 min. Subsequently peptides were transferred to an analytical column (75 µm x 2 cm, packed in-house with 3 µm C18 resin; Reprosil PUR AQ, Dr. Maisch) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min and separated using a 60 min gradient from 4 % to 32 % LC solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in ACN) in LC solvent A (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO). The instrument was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 full scans were acquired from 360 to 1300 m/z at a resolution of 60K, an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 charges and a maximum injection time (maxIT) of 10 ms. Precursor ions for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) fragmentation were selected with a Top 20 method and MS2 spectra were recorded from 200 to 2000 m/z at 30K resolution using an isolation window of 1.7 m/z, an AGC target value of 2e5 charges, a maxIT of 50 ms (for pellets) and 100 ms (for supernatants), 25% normalized collisional energy (NCE), a dynamic exclusion of 20 ms (for pellets) and 25 ms (for supernatant) and with a fixed first mass of 100 m/z. Samples were randomized for measurement and E. coli standards were measured as quality control every 96 samples.

### Data Protocol
For the data analysis raw files were searched with Maxquant (version 1.5.7.4) against four different databases (IGC catalog: 9.878.647 entries, Swissprot bacteria: 333.480 entries, downloaded 24/04/2018, Swissprot human canonical and isoform: 42.123 entries, downloaded 02/01/2016, Sample specific databases based on metagenomic sequencing). For the human database all 424 rawfiles were search together, whereas for the bacterial databases each sample (pellet and supernatant combined) was searched separately. MaxQuant results were post-processed for 1% PSM and peptide FDR with Percolator. Taxonomic and functional annotation was added with the Unipept Metaproteome Analyzer tool (Version 4.0). For quantitative comparison spectral counts were used.

### Publication Abstract
The microbiome has a strong impact on human health and disease and is, therefore, increasingly studied in a clinical context. Metaproteomics is also attracting considerable attention, and such data can be efficiently generated today owing to improvements in mass spectrometry-based proteomics. As we will discuss in this study, there are still major challenges notably in data analysis that need to be overcome. Here, we analyzed 212 fecal samples from 56 hospitalized acute leukemia patients with multidrug-resistant Enterobactericeae (MRE) gut colonization using metagenomics and metaproteomics. This is one of the largest clinical metaproteomic studies to date, and the first metaproteomic study addressing the gut microbiome in MRE colonized acute leukemia patients. Based on this substantial data set, we discuss major current limitations in clinical metaproteomic data analysis to provide guidance to researchers in the field. Notably, the results show that public metagenome databases are incomplete and that sample-specific metagenomes improve results. Furthermore, biological variation is tremendous which challenges clinical study designs and argues that longitudinal measurements of individual patients are a valuable future addition to the analysis of patient cohorts.

### Keywords
Data analysis, Human gut microbiome, Proteomics, Multidrug-resistant enterobacteriaceae, Metaproteome, Clinical proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanlytics, Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Julia Woortman

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany


