### Accession
PXD014115

### Title
Agrobacterium sulfoquinovose metabolism

### Description
LFQ analysis of Whole bacterial lysates of Agrobacterium tumefaciens growth with and with sulfoquinovose.

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilised secreted samples or whole cell lysates were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris Ph8.0, 10mM DTT), quantified and precipitated overnight with ice-cold acetone. 100ug of precipitated protein per sample were resuspend in 6M urea, 2M thiourea, reduced with 10mM TCEP and alkylated with 20mM CAA for one hour. Samples were diluted with 100mM TEAB and digested overnight with 2ug trypsin (1:50 ratio). Digested samples were acidified with formic acid (to 1%) and cleaned up using home made STAGE tips (EMPORE C18 material. Five biological replicates of each growth condition were prepared in parallel.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Maxquant version 1.5.3.30 against Agrobacterium tumefaciens C58 proteome the using trypsin specifcity, up to 2 misscleavage events and allowing oxidation of Methionine. Matching between runs and LFQ based quantification was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Agrobacterium, Lfq, Sulfoquinovose

### Affiliations
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research Chemical Biology Division 1G Royal Parade Parkville VIC 3052 Australia
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Ethan D. Goddard-Borger
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research Chemical Biology Division 1G Royal Parade Parkville VIC 3052 Australia


