### Accession
PXD016497

### Title
H3 N-terminal tail peptide interactome

### Description
The closely related replicative H3 and non-replicative H3.3 variants show specific requirement during development in vertebrates. Whether it involves distinct mode of deposition or unique roles once incorporated into chromatin remains unclear. To disentangle the two aspects, we took advantage of the Xenopus early development combined with chromatin assays. We systematically mutated H3.3 at each four residues that differ from H3.2 and tested their ability to rescue developmental defects due to endogenous H3.3 depletion. Surprisingly, all H3.3 mutated variants functionally complemented endogenous H3.3, regardless of their incorporation pathways, except for one residue, the serine at position 31. The phosphorylation at this unique residue occurs onto chromatin with a peak in late mitosis, and depends on the networks of cell cycle kinases. Notably, while the alanine substitution failed to rescue H3.3 depletion, a phosphomimic residue sufficed. Based on proteomics studies with histone peptides and Xenopus extracts, we find that the phosphomimic histone mutant attracts transcription related factors. Furthermore, we evidence a crosstalk whereby phosphorylation on H3.3S31 favors H3.3K27ac. At gastrulation, we conclude that the critical importance of the H3.3S31 residue is independent of the variant incorporation pathway. It rather reflects a signaling role engaging key binding partners and crosstalks on neighboring amino acids. We discuss how this single evolutionary conserved residue conveys both in interphase and mitosis unique properties for this variant in vertebrates during cell cycle and cell fate commitment.

### Sample Protocol
H3.3 N-terminal tail biotinylated peptides in Xenopus egg extracts Streptavidin beads (0,3mg, 30uL total) are washed with PBS and incubated with the different peptides (60pmoles) in 300µL of PBS. After 2h of incubation and a 30min bock with BSA at room temperature, beads coupled to peptides are incubated 3h with either mitotic or interphase eggs extracts diluted 5x in 400µL total CSF-XB buffer (100mM KCl, 2mM MgCl2, 10mM CaCl2, 5mm Hepes-KOH pH7.7, 5mM EGTA, 50mM Sucrose, 1/1000 codeic acid, 10% glycerol, 0.1% Triton, 0.1% Tween-20 and 1mM DTT). Beads coupled to peptides are finally washed three times in PBS then washed twice additional times with 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Beads were resuspended and digested by adding 0.2 μg of trypsine/LysC (Promega) in 100 µL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 hour at 37°C. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using homemade C18 StageTips. After elution, peptides were analyzed using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as in Żylicz et al. (PMID: 30595450).

### Data Protocol
For identification the data were searched against the Xenopus Laevis Database (June 2019) from Xenbase.org and a database containing the common contaminants using SequestHF through proteome discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage site were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (PMID: 17610305) v3.6. FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. For each IP, we selected in best analysis the protein with at least 3 proteotypic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Vertebrates exhibit specific requirements for replicative H3 and non-replicative H3.3 variants during development. To disentangle whether this involves distinct modes of deposition or unique functions&#xa0;once incorporated into chromatin, we combined studies in Xenopus early development with chromatin assays. Here we investigate the extent to which H3.3 mutated at residues that differ from H3.2 rescue developmental defects caused by H3.3 depletion. Regardless of the deposition pathway, only variants at residue 31-a serine that can become phosphorylated-failed to rescue endogenous H3.3 depletion. Although an alanine substitution fails to rescue H3.3 depletion, a phospho-mimic aspartate residue at position 31 rescues H3.3 function. To explore mechanisms involving H3.3 S31 phosphorylation, we identified factors attracted or repulsed by the presence of aspartate at position 31, along with modifications on neighboring residues. We propose that serine 31-phosphorylated H3.3 acts as a signaling module that stimulates the acetylation of K27, providing a chromatin state permissive to the embryonic development program.

### Keywords
Xenopus laevis, Development, H3.3s31, Histone variant

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


