### Accession
PXD020236

### Title
Experimental evolution reveals post-transcriptional regulation as an important driver of fitness gain in the human parasite Leishmania donovani

### Description
Leishmania survival inside insect and mammalian hosts depends on the parasite’s capacity to develop into promastigote and amastigote stages, respectively. Promastigotes can be maintained in vitro in culture medium mimicking the insect milieu in which the parasites are surviving, differentiating and proliferating. We previously showed that the maintenance of the parasites in this in vitro environment lead to a progressive loss of infectivity together with genomic changes, notably chromosome amplifications. In contrast to classical eukaryotes Leishmania do not regulate expression of protein coding genes by transcriptional control, thus ruling out regulated gene expression changes in adaptation. In the absence of classical transcriptional regulation, Leishmania has evolved and emphasized other forms of control that are relevant for evolutionary adaptation, notably regulation of RNA abundance by gene dosage variation. In order to identify the biological signals that correlate with the observed fitness trade off we observed during L. donovani culture adaptation we combined DNAseq and RNAseq with label-free quantitative proteomics. Promastigotes freshly derived from splenic amastigotes purified from the spleen of infected hamsters were maintained in culture for 2 (EP) and 20 (LP) passages. Total protein extracts from four EP and four LP promastigotes were prepared for label free MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Biological samples were lysed and adjusted at the same concentration in 8M Urea, 50 mM  Tris-HCl, protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Disulfide bridges were reduced in 5mM DTT and alkylated in 20mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were 10 times diluted in 50 mM Tris-HCl and digested with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin. Proteolysis was stop by adding formic acid at 1% final. Resulting peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak SPE cartridge according to manufactures instructions. Peptides were concentrated to almost dryness and were resuspended in 2% Acetonitrile (ACN) / 0.1% FA just before LCMS injection.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched using Andromeda with MaxQuant software against an internal database. Quantification was performed using the XIC-based LFQ algorithm with the Fast LFQ mode. For pairwise comparisons, LFQ values were normalized by median centering within conditions . Missing values were imputed using the imp.norm function of the R package norm. Statistical testing was conducted, for proteins with a fold-change over 2,  using a limma t-test thanks to the R package limma. An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p. The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to a FDR of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcriptomics, Leishmania, Genomics, Proteomics, Experimental evolution, Post-transcriptional adaptation, Fitness

### Affiliations
Unité de Parasitologie Moléculaire et Signalisation, Institut Pasteur, Paris
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Gérald Spaeth
Unité de Parasitologie Moléculaire et Signalisation, Institut Pasteur, Paris


