### Accession
PXD003504

### Title
Seasonal variation of primary metabolism in the cambial zone of Eucalyptus grandis

### Description
Wood is formed by the differentiation of cells from the vascular cambium and it is an important source for pulp, paper and bioenergy production. However there is little information about the vascular cambium at the molecular level, particularly in response to seasonality in tropical regions. We used three different molecular approaches: transcripts, proteome and metabolome to characterize the seasonal alterations in the primary metabolism of the eucalyptus cambial zone. Based on 2-DE analysis, 71 proteins were differentially expressed.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein of the cambial zone was extracted from 6 grams of frozen tissue using the phenolic method according to Hurkman and Tanaka (1986). Total protein of the cambial zone was extracted from 6 grams of frozen tissue using the phenolic method according to Hurkman and Tanaka (1986). Proteins samples (500 mg) were mixed with buffer and used to rehydrate Imobiline IPG strips (18 cm, pH 4 -7). Rehydrated strips were isoeletrofocused in an Ettan IPGphor. Before the second dimension, stripswere kept at room temperature for 15 min in equiliobration buffer. The second dimension were performed in 12% (w/v) polyacrylamide gels. Proteins were detected using Coomassie Briliant Blue G-250. Gels were imaged using Image Scanner III and Labscan V.7.0. Image analysis was performed automatically using the Image Master 2D Platinum software V.7.0. Macthing was performed automatically and systematically confirmed after one-by-one visual. In-gel digestion of proteins were done as described in Celedon et al (2007). Peptide mixture were sequenced by online chromatography in a nono-Acquity UPLC (Waters) system coupled to a Q-TOF Ultima API mass spectrometer (Waters), using a positive ion mode at 3kV needle voltage. The mass range was set from 300 to 2000 m/z and the MS/MS spectra were acquired for the most intense peak having at least 15 counts.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS were processed uging ProteinLynx V.2.0 and Mascot Daemon softwares, the sequences searched against an in-house Eucalyptus database from Phytozome and NCBI. MS/MS criteiria used were as follows: trypsin digestion; fixed modification set as carbamidomethylation of cystein; variable modification set as methionine oxidation; mass accuracy of 50 ppm for the parental ion and MS/MS tolerance of 0.1 DA. According to MASCOT probability analysis, only significant hitas (P< 0.05) were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Eucalyptus species are the most widely hardwood planted in the world. It is one of the successful examples of commercial forestry plantation in Brazil and other tropical and subtropical countries. The tree is valued for its rapid growth, adaptability and wood quality. Wood formation is the result of cumulative annual activity of the vascular cambium. This cambial activity is generally related to the alternation of cold and warm, and/or dry and rainy seasons. Efforts have focused on analysis of cambial zone in response to seasonal variations in trees from temperate zones. However, little is known about the molecular changes triggered by seasonal variations in trees from tropical countries. In this work we attempted to establish a global view of seasonal alterations in the cambial zone of Eucalyptus grandis Hill ex Maiden, emphasizing changes occurring in the carbon metabolism. Using transcripts, proteomics and metabolomics we analyzed the tissues harvested in summer-wet and winter-dry seasons. Based on proteomics analysis, 70 proteins that changed in abundance were successfully identified. Transcripts for some of these proteins were analyzed and similar expression patterns were observed. We identified 19 metabolites differentially abundant. Our results suggest a differential reconfiguration of carbon partioning in E. grandis cambial zone. During summer, pyruvate is primarily metabolized via ethanolic fermentation, possibly to regenerate NAD(+) for glycolytic ATP production and cellular maintenance. However, in winter there seems to be a metabolic change and we found that some sugars were highly abundant. Our results revealed a dynamic change in E. grandis cambial zone due to seasonality and highlight the importance of glycolysis and ethanolic fermentation for energy generation and maintenance in Eucalyptus, a fast growing tree.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, 2-de

### Affiliations
USP
Genetics Department, Luiz de Queiroz College of Agriculture, University of São Paulo

### Submitter
Ilara Budzinski

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos Alberto Labate
Genetics Department, Luiz de Queiroz College of Agriculture, University of São Paulo


