### Accession
PXD014584

### Title
Yeast Nuclear Large Scale Cross-linking MS

### Description
Here, we apply large scale cross-linking mass spectrometry to profile the interactome of isolated and intact Saccharomyces cerevisiae nuclei. Two independent biological replicates (nuclei isolated from different cultures) were performed.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclei were isolated from wild-type Saccharomyces cerevisiae using sucrose density ultracentrifugation. Following unloading from the spun gradient, they were directly crosslinked with DSSO and quenched with Tris-HCl. Protein was extracted and then precipitated using TCA and acetone. Following resuspension of 8M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, the sample was reduced with DTT and alkylated with IAA and digested to peptides with Trypsin-LysC. Samples were then desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges and fractionated using strong cation exchange. Following desalting, dried down peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for subsequent MS analysis. Twenty-three fractions from each biological replicate were analysed by LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated online by nano-LC on an in-house packed C18 column, using an Ultimate 3000 ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) nano system. The following gradient was used with solvent A (0.1% v/v formic acid in 2% v/v acetonitrile) and solvent B (0.1% v/v formic acid in 45% v/v acetonitrile): 0-4 min (2% B), 5-30 min (2-10% B), 31-90 min (10-25% B), 91-109 min (25-80% B), 110 (80% B), 111-115min (80-2% B), 116-120 min (2% B). Eluting peptides were analysed by a Tribid Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a hybrid CID-MS/MS, ETD-MS/MS and CID-MS3 fragmentation scheme, as previously described 13. Briefly, MS scans were acquired in data dependent mode on the Orbitrap (resolution = 60,000, maximum injection time = 50 ms, AGC target = 1.0e5, scan range (m/z) = 375 – 1575). The duty cycle was restricted to 2 seconds. For each selected MS1 precursor (z = 3-10, dynamic exclusion = 18 s, intensity ≥ 2.5e-4), both ETD and CID (normalised collision energy of 25%) fragmentation was performed in sequential scans. MS/MS scans were recorded at an Orbitrap resolution of 30,000. A mass difference (DSSO reporter ion doublets) of 31.79 amu detected in CID-MS/MS was used to trigger up to 4 CID-MS3 rapid ion-trap analyses (normalised collision energy 35%). For both MS2 and MS3 analyses, dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion duration of 18 s.

### Data Protocol
Crosslinks were identified using XlinkX 2.0 as implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.3.0523. Replicate 1 consists of 23 fraction "F18" - "F40" with the date prefix 23102018. Replciate 2 consists of 23 fractions "F18" - F40" with the date prefix 01052019. The crosslink spectral match (CSM) tables as exported directly from Proteome Discoverer are provided for each replicate at the default Xlink Search score settings (minimum score 40, minumum delta score 4) or more stringent settings of minimum score 60, minumum delta score 10. The results of a Sequest search of linear peptides identified from CID and ETD MS2 spectra are also provided.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> has the most comprehensively characterized protein-protein interaction network, or interactome, of any eukaryote. This has predominantly been generated through multiple, systematic studies of protein-protein interactions by two-hybrid techniques and of affinity-purified protein complexes. A pressing question is to understand how large-scale cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) can confirm and extend this interactome. Here, intact yeast nuclei were subject to cross-linking with disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO) and analyzed using hybrid MS2-MS3 methods. XlinkX identified a total of 2,052 unique residue pair cross-links at 1% FDR. Intraprotein cross-links were found to provide extensive structural constraint data, with almost all intralinks that mapped to known structures and slightly fewer of those mapping to homology models being within 30 &#xc5;. Intralinks provided structural information for a further 366 proteins. A method for optimizing interprotein cross-link score cut-offs was developed, through use of extensive known yeast interactions. Its application led to a high confidence, yeast nuclear interactome. Strikingly, almost half of the interactions were not previously detected by two-hybrid or AP-MS techniques. Multiple lines of evidence existed for many such interactions, whether through literature or ortholog interaction data, through multiple unique interlinks between proteins, and/or through replicates. We conclude that XL-MS is a powerful means to measure interactions, that complements two-hybrid and affinity-purification techniques.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Yeast, Xl-ms, Crosslinking, Dsso

### Affiliations
UNSW Sydney
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences University of New South Wales NSW 2052 Australia

### Submitter
Tara Bartolec

### Lab Head
Dr Marc R. Wilkins
Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences University of New South Wales NSW 2052 Australia


