### Accession
PXD008843

### Title
Exosome from mouse T lymphocyte cells

### Description
Exosomes transferred from the T cell to the APC contain many different types of biologically active molecules, including proteins and genetic material. To investigate the possible specific function of the different components of the biologic material transferred from the T cell to the DC, we have characterized the protein and genetic content of EVs isolated from the culture supernatant of primary T lymphoblasts by differential ultracentrifugation

### Sample Protocol
Exosomes protein extracts from mouse T lymphoblasts were digested usinf FASP method.The resulting peptides were desalted and separated into 4 fractions by cation exchange with MCX cardtridges using graded concentrations of ammonium formate. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed usinga nano-HPLC Easy nLC 1000 chromatograph coupled to a Q-Exactive hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded in an analytical C18 nano-column (EASY-Spray column PepMap RSLC C18, 75 μm internal diameter, 3 μm particle size, and 50 cm length, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a continuous gradient consisting of 8-30% B for 60 min and 30-90% B for 2 min (B = 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 200 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from MS/MS spectra using the SEQUEST HT algorithm integrated in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). MS/MS scans were matched against a mouse database (UniProt 2016_07 Release). For database searching, parameters were selected as follows: a maximum of 2 missed trypsin cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 800 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was chosen as the fixed modification and methionine oxidation as the dynamic modification. The same MS/MS spectra collections were searched against inverted databases constructed from the same target databases. SEQUEST results were analyzed by the probability ratio method. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated for peptides identified in the inverted database search results using the refined method .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosome, Extracellular vesicles, Proteome, T lymphocyte

### Affiliations
Vascular Biology and Inflammation
Centro Nacioanal de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Inmaculada Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Sánchez-Madrid
Centro Nacioanal de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain


