### Accession
PXD008650

### Title
mRNA length and 3’UTR structure govern the translation selectivity in RPS14-haploinsufficient erythroblasts

### Description
5q- syndrome is a somatic ribosomopathy linked to the monoallelic deletion of the RPS14 gene and characterized by a proeminent erythroid phenotype. The mechanism of anemia involves an impaired differentiation and increased apoptosis of erythroblasts. We have analyzed total cell extracts from UT7 cells with or without a decrease of RPS14 proteins induced by shRNAs. Our data show that GATA1 protein expression is low in line with a defect in the representation of its mRNA at the ribosome. A global analysis of transcripts on polysomes indicates that translation is selective with a decreased representation of the transcripts with a short coding sequence and UTRs and a highly structured 3’UTR, a subset of transcripts that includes GATA1. Our whole proteome analysis confirms that post-transcriptionally downregulated proteins were encoded by transcripts with a short length and structured 3’UTR. We identified a subset of post-translationally downregulated proteins including ribosomal proteins and translation elongation factors encoded by 5’TOP mRNAs that were enriched on the ribosome. Our results indicate that the thermodynamic characteristics of 3’UTR and in a lesser extend 5’UTR and the transcript length are the determinants of translation selectivity under RPS14 haploinsufficiency conditions and that a post-translational regulation of ribosomal proteins accounts for their decreased content in the cell.

### Sample Protocol
For label free quantification proteomic experiments, peptides were prepared from whole-cell lysates, using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method as previously described.18 In the first experiment, peptides were prefractionated by strong cationic exchange (SCX) StageTips. In the subsequent experiments, peptides were analyzed without pre-fractionation since the study did not require the quantification of proteins expressed to very low levels. Each sample was analyzed in LC-MS-MS using an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatographic system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were directly loaded on a C18 reverse phase analytical column (2 µm particle size, 100 A˚ pore size, 75 µm internal diameter, 25 cm length) with a 3h gradient from 99% solution A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) to 55% solution B (80% ACN, 0.085% formic acid and 20% H2O) for MiFO170704 samples and with a 2h gradient from 99% A to 55% B for MiFO170522 and MiFO170727 samples. The Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired with the orbitrap, followed by stepped HCD MS/MS fragmentations acquired with the Ion Trap on the most abundant ions detected in top speed mode for 3 seconds. Resolution was set to 60,000 for full scans at AGC target 2.10e5 within 60 ms MIT. The MS scans spanned from 350 to 1500m/z. Precursor selection window was set at 1.6 m/z, with AGC target 2.10e4 within 100 ms MIT. HCD Collision Energy was set at 30%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s duration.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant version 1.5.3.30 (Cox et al., 2014; Cox et al., 2009). The database used was a concatenation of human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (Uniprot, release 2017-05) and an incremented list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant. The enzyme specificity was trypsin. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modification. Second peptide search was allowed and minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 ratio counts were required for LFQ. All experiments were analyzed simultaneously with the “match between runs” (MBR) option with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment time window of 30 min.

### Publication Abstract
In ribosomopathies, the Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) or 5q- syndrome, ribosomal protein (RP) genes are affected by mutation or deletion, resulting in bone marrow erythroid hypoplasia. Unbalanced production of ribosomal subunits leading to a limited ribosome cellular content regulates translation at the expense of the master erythroid transcription factor GATA1. In RPS14-deficient cells mimicking 5q- syndrome erythroid defects, we show that the transcript length, codon bias of the coding sequence (CDS) and 3&#x2019;UTR (untranslated region) structure are the key determinants of translation. In these cells, short transcripts with a structured 3&#x2019;UTR and high codon adaptation index (CAI) showed a decreased translation efficiency. Quantitative analysis of the whole proteome confirmed that the post-transcriptional changes depended on the transcript characteristics that governed the translation efficiency in conditions of low ribosome availability. In addition, proteins involved in normal erythroid differentiation share most determinants of translation selectivity. Our findings thus indicate that impaired erythroid maturation due to 5q- syndrome may proceed from a translational selectivity at the expense of the erythroid differentiation program, and suggest that an interplay between the CDS and UTR may regulate mRNA translation.

### Keywords
Human, Rps14, Erythropoiesis, Utr, Ribosome, Ut7, Label free

### Affiliations
Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Paris Descartes University
Plateforme Proteomique 3P5, Université Paris Descartes, Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Cnrs UMR8104,  France

### Submitter
Emilie-Fleur GAUTIER

### Lab Head
Dr Patrick MAYEUX
Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Paris Descartes University


