### Accession
PXD037454

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of ABC transporter proteins in pilocarpine mouse model of epilepsy

### Description
Hippocampal tissue from pilocarpine treated mice was examined by mass spectrometry to determine the change in levels of ABC transporter proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Male C57Bl6/N mice were either sham- or pilocarpine injected as described above. Both hemispheres of the hippocampus were extracted at 4 or 24 h post-pilocarpine injection and frozen on dry ice. Sixteen mice were injected allowing for four mice per time point. The tissue and protein extracted from sixteen hippocampal tissue was lysed, precipitated and digested. Two TMT-10plex kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used to label peptide to generate two 8-plex sets, one for each time point. The TMT labelled samples were fractionated by hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography. LC-MS/MS was performed on each fraction using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system and Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The TMT sets were pre-screened for ABC transporter peptides by data-dependent acquisition. Then, the identified ABC transporter peptides were targeted for re-analysis using an inclusion list, incorporating precursor mass-to-charge ratio, precursor charge state and elution time. A total of 124 peptide sequences corresponding to twenty-five ABC transporter proteins and two standard cytoskeletal proteins (Dynein heavy chain 1 and alpha tubulin), as loading controls, were targeted by LC-MS/MS. The gradient was from 5% to 25% buffer B in 74 min, then to 35% buffer B in 8 min and to 99% buffer B in 1 min. The MS automatic gain control target was 5,000,000 counts for a maximum ion time of 150 ms. MS/MS scans were at a resolution of 35,000 full width at half maximum for a maximum ion time of 400 ms and automatic gain control target of 50,000 counts.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data output was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.7.0. The Mus musculus reference proteome was downloaded March 14, 2022 and contained 63,628 canonical protein isoform entries.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Abc transporter, Tmt, Pilocarpine

### Affiliations
Synapse Proteomics, Children's Medical Research Institute, Australia
Children's Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Mark Graham

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Evan Graham
Synapse Proteomics, Children's Medical Research Institute, Australia


