### Accession
PXD011880

### Title
Dataset 1: SNO-CoA Targets in Mouse Kidney

### Description
Identification of murine targets of SNO-CoA-mediated S-nitrosylation following treatment of mouse kidney lysate with SNO-CoA in combination with recombinant WT or K127A mutant SNO-CoA reductase.

### Sample Protocol
SNO-proteins were enriched by SNO-RAC method and separated by SDS-PAGE gels. The gel slices were washed with 500 mL of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) / 50% 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for more than 5 hours [FvdA1] with vortexing. After removal of washing buffer, 400 mL of 100% ACN was added to gel pieces and vortexed for 10 min. After removal of ACN, gel pieces were dried in a speed vacuum dryer for 10 minutes. 200 mL of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to dry gel pieces and vortexed for 45 minutes. 200 mL of 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to the gel pieces after removal of DTT buffer and incubated for 45 minutes in the dark. After removal of IAA buffer, gel pieces were washed with 400 mL of 1x iTRAQ dissolution solution then 400 mL ACN, and this cycle was repeated once. Gel pieces were dried for 10 minutes in a speed vacuum dryer. 500 ng trypsin enzyme in 150 mL 1X iTRAQ buffer was added to dried gel pieces on ice for 30 minutes, and then incubated overnight at 37°C. Following incubation, supernatant from digested protein solution was transferred to a 1.5 mL tube using gel-loading tips. 200 mL extraction buffer of 60% ACN / 5% formic acid was added to gel pieces, vortexed for 30 minutes, and sonicated for 15 minutes. Supernatant containing peptide extracts was transferred to 1.5 mL tubes, and extraction was repeated two more times.  The digested protein solution was dried completely. To label peptides with iTRAQ reagents, 30 mL of iTRAQ dissolution buffer (10x) were added to each sample tube (pH>7.0). iTRAQ reagent (114, 115, 116, 117) was brought to room temperature and 70 mL of ethanol was added to each reagent. One iTRAQ labeling reagent was added to each sample tube. The labeling reaction was allowed to proceed for more than 5 hours at room temperature with vortexing. After labeling, the samples were mixed together and dried completely.  Prior to mass spectrometry, samples were cleaned-up as follows. 160 mL of 5% ACN containing 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the dried mixed-label sample. C18 ZipTips were wetted 5 times with 20 mL of 50% ACN and equilibrated with 100 mL of 5% ACN containing 0.5% TFA. Samples were then loaded to the tip by drawing and expelling 50 cycles to ensure complete binding. The tips were washed 10 times with 20 mL of 5% ACN containing 0.5% TFA. Peptides were eluted 3 times from tips with 20 ml of 60% ACN containing 0.1% formic acid, combined, and dried completely.  Digested peptides were separated by UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA) with a Nano-ACQUITY UPLC BEH300 C18. Separated peptides were continuously injected into an Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan) by a nanospray emitter (10 µm, New Objective). A linear gradient was used in chromatography by using mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (100% ACN) at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. Chromatography started with 1% mobile phase B and gradually increased to 40% at 130 minutes, then increased to 90% within 2 minutes and stayed at 90% for 10 minutes to clean the column. All mass spectrometry data were acquired in a positive ion mode. A full MS scan (m/z 300-1800) at resolution of 120,000 was conducted; ten MS2 scans (m/z 100-1600) were activated from five most intense peptide peaks of full MS scans. CID and HCD cleavage modes were performed alternatively on same peptides selected from full MS scans. MS2 resolution of HCD is 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic software MassMatrix was used to search MS data against a database composed of sequences of mouse or human proteins (depending on origin of sample) from Uniprot and their reversed sequences were used as a decoy database. Modifications such as oxidation of methionine and labeling of cysteine (IA modifications) were selected as variable modifications in searching. For iTRAQ label searches, MS tagging of N terminus, Lys and/or Tyr were selected as variable modifications to test labeling efficiency and as fixed modifications for quantitative iTRAQ analysis. Trypsin was selected as an in-silico enzyme to cleave proteins after Lys and Arg. Precursor ion searching was within 10 ppm mass accuracy, and product ions were within 0.8Da for CID cleavage mode and 0.02Da for HCD cleavage mode. 95% confidence interval was required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sno-coa, Mouse, Scor, Kidney

### Affiliations
Case Western Reserve University
Institute for Transformative Molecular Medicine, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Colin Stomberski

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan S Stamler
Institute for Transformative Molecular Medicine, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine


