### Accession
PXD009148

### Title
The endosomal proteome of LAMTOR2-deficient primary macrophages

### Description
A quantitative iTRAQ-based organelle proteomics analysis of endosomes derived from LAMTOR2-deficient macrophages has been performed. Primary macrophages were derived from bone marrow of conditional knockout mice carrying a specific deletion of LAMTOR2 in the monocyte/macrophage cell lineage. The combined proteomics and transcriptomics data indicated a function of LAMTOR2 in lipid metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Latex beads internalized endocytic organelles were isolated on a sucrose gradient. Protein bands were excised from SDS-PAGE, in-gel digested with trypsin, labeled with iTRAQ reagents 115 and 116, followed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ data analysis was performed using MaxQuant v1.5.2.6 (23). The UniProt protein annotation for Mus musculus (last update Jan 2014, uniprot.org) was used for peptide identification. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ4plex115 and iTRAQ4plex116 labeling at the N-terminus, lysine and tyrosine residues were set as variable modifications. Differential regulation was detected using significance B (Perseus v1.5.1.6).

### Publication Abstract
Late endosomal/lysosomal adaptor and MAPK and mTOR activator (LAMTOR/Ragulator) is a scaffold protein complex that anchors and regulates multiprotein signaling units on late endosomes/lysosomes. To identify LAMTOR-modulated endolysosomal proteins, primary macrophages were derived from bone marrow of conditional knockout mice carrying a specific deletion of LAMTOR2 in the monocyte/macrophage cell lineage. Affymetrix-based transcriptomic analysis and quantitative iTRAQ-based organelle proteomic analysis of endosomes derived from macrophages were performed. Further analyses showed that LAMTOR could be a novel regulator of foam cell differentiation. The lipid droplet formation phenotype observed in macrophages was additionally confirmed in MEFs, where lipidomic analysis identified cholesterol esters as specifically downregulated in LAMTOR2 knockout cells. The data obtained indicate a function of LAMTOR2 in lipid metabolism.

### Keywords
Ragulator, Lamtor, Organelle proteomics, Macrophages, Foam cells

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Biology, Biocenter, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria
Division of Cell Biology, Biocenter, Medical University of Innsbruck

### Submitter
Taras Stasyk

### Lab Head
Dr Lukas A. Huber
Division of Cell Biology, Biocenter, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria


