### Accession
PXD015143

### Title
Common Repository of FBS Proteins (cRFP) to be added to a search database for mass spectrometric analysis of cell secretome

### Description
We propose to use cRFP (common Repository of FBS Proteins) in the MS (mass spectrometry) raw data search of cell secretome. cRFP is a small supplementary sequence list of high abundant fetal bovine serum proteins added to the reference database in use. The aim behind using cRFP is to prevent the contaminant FBS proteins from being misidentified as other proteins in the reference database, just as we would use cRAP (common Repository of Adventitious Proteins) to prevent contaminant proteins present either by accident or through unavoidable contacts from being misidentified as other proteins. We expect it to be widely used in experiments where the proteins are obtained from serum-free media after thorough washing of the cells, or from a complex media such as SILAC, or from extracellular vesicles directly.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins in the isolated extracellular vesicle sample (10 μg protein amount) were separated on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel for a short distance (~ 1.5 cm) and silver-stained. Separated protein bands were cut into four slices, and placed into micro-tubes. Each slice was further cut into small pieces, washed 3 times with 200 μL of HPLC-grade water, and destained with 200 μL of 15 mM potassium ferricyanide and 50 mM sodium thiosulfate. The gel pieces were dehydrated for 5 min with 500 μL of acetonitrile, and incubated in a solution of 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (50 μL) at 56°C for 30 min, followed by 55 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (50 μL) at 25°C for 20 min in the dark. Then, the gel pieces were dehydrated again with 100% acetonitrile and rehydrated in 13 ng/μL solution of the sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The digestion was completed overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted by incubating gel pieces in 1:2 (v:v) mixture of 5% formic acid and acetonitrile, and the solution was dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptide samples were reconstituted in 7 μL of 0.1% formic acid and injected from an auto-sampler into a reversed-phase C18 column (20 cm × 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 300 Å, packed in-house; Dr. Maisch GmbH) on an Eksigent MDLC system at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Before use, the column was equilibrated with 95% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and 5% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5% to 40% B over 90 min, followed 10-min of 80% B wash, and re-equilibration with 5% B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a total run time of 120 min. The HPLC system was connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in data dependent acquisition mode. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 300–2000) were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 100,000. Source ionization parameters were as follows: spray voltage, 1.9 kV; capillary temperature, 275 °C. The MS/MS spectra of the 10 most intense ions from the MS1 scan with a charge state ≥2 were acquired in the ion-trap with the following options: isolation width, 2.0 m/z; normalized collision energy, 35%; dynamic exclusion, 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
For analysis of extracellular vesicle sample, the acquired MS/MS spectra were subjected to search against the UniProt (Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL) human-only database (release date 2017.1; 94,716 entries, downloaded from UniProt, denoted as HoDB) and the composite human plus 199 cRFP database (94,915 entries, denoted HcRDB), using SEQUEST HT software in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The FASTA file for cRFP database can be freely downloaded from the website, http://proteomics.kist.re.kr/Teams/proteomics/resources.htm#crfp. For selecting precursor ions from the raw data, spectrum selector node in Proteome Discoverer was used and the mass range and minimum count for precursor ions were set to 350-5000 Da and 1, respectively. For peak filtering 1.5 signal-to-noise threshold was applied. For database searching using SEQUEST HT, two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed, and the peptide mass tolerances for MS/MS and MS were set to ±0.6 Da and ±10 ppm, respectively. Other parameters used for the searches included the fixed modification of carbamidomethylation at cysteine (+57.021 Da) and the variable modification of oxidation at methionine (+15.995 Da). The data were also searched against a decoy database and the results were used to calculate q values using the Percolator algorithm within Proteome Discoverer. Peptide and protein results were filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
We propose to use cRFP (common Repository of FBS Proteins) in the MS (mass spectrometry) raw data search of cell secretomes. cRFP is a small supplementary sequence list of highly abundant fetal bovine serum proteins added to the reference database in use. The aim behind using cRFP is to prevent the contaminant FBS proteins from being misidentified as other proteins in the reference database, just as we would use cRAP (common Repository of Adventitious Proteins) to prevent contaminant proteins present either by accident or through unavoidable contacts from being misidentified as other proteins. We expect it to be widely used in experiments where the proteins are obtained from serum-free media after thorough washing of the cells, or from a complex media such as SILAC, or from extracellular vesicles directly.

### Keywords
Secretome, Common repository of fbs proteins, Database search

### Affiliations
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Center for Theragnosis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea

### Submitter
Yumi Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
Center for Theragnosis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea


