### Accession
PXD041323

### Title
Multiomic Approach Characterises the Neuroprotective Role of Retromer in Regulating Lysosomal Health

### Description
Retromer controls cellular homeostasis through regulating integral membrane protein sorting and transport and by controlling late-stage maturation of the endo-lysosomal network. Retromer dysfunction, which is linked to neurodegenerative disorders including Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases, manifests in complex cellular phenotypes, though the precise nature of this dysfunction, and its relation to neurodegeneration, remain unclear. Here, we perform the first integrated multiomics approach to provide precise insight into the impact of Retromer dysfunction on endo-lysosomal health and homeostasis within a human neuroglioma cell model. We quantify profound changes to the lysosomal proteome, indicative of broad lysosomal dysfunction and inefficient autophagic lysosome reformation, coupled with a reconfigured cell surface proteome and secretome reflective of increased lysosomal exocytosis. Through this global proteomic approach and parallel transcriptomic analysis, we provide an unprecedented integrated view of Retromer function in regulating lysosomal homeostasis and emphasise its role in neuroprotection.

### Sample Protocol
TMT Labelling and High pH reversed-phase chromatography:  For the cell surface proteome analysis, samples on beads were reduced (10mM TCEP, 55°C for 1h), alkylated (18.75mM iodoacetamide, room temperature for 30min.) and then digested from the beads with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin; 37°C, overnight). Alternatively, 50ug of each sample (whole cell lysate analysis), Bead eluates (LysoIP analysis), or media samples following concentration to 100ul using Amicon Ultra 3kDa cut-off centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore Ltd.) (secretome analysis) were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin, as described above.  Following tryptic digestion, the resulting peptides were labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) ten plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled.  The pooled sample was evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 5% formic acid and then desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA).  Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was again evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes.  The resulting fractions (15 for the whole cell lysate analysis, or 5 for the secretome, LysoIP or cell surface proteome analyses) were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The effects of TMT ratio suppression were minimised by pre-fractionation of the TMT-labelled pool and use of SPS-MS3-based acquisition to minimise ratio suppression due to co-isolation of peptides and, where possible, selecting the labelling set up to minimise any effects of channel bleed-through.  Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry:  High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.2m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 10 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded January 2022; 178486 sequences) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da.  Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021Da) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163Da) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Retromer controls cellular homeostasis through regulating integral membrane protein sorting and transport and by controlling maturation of the endo-lysosomal network. Retromer dysfunction, which is linked to neurodegenerative disorders including Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases, manifests in complex cellular phenotypes, though the precise nature of this dysfunction, and its relation to neurodegeneration, remain unclear. Here, we perform an integrated multi-omics approach to provide precise insight into the impact of Retromer dysfunction on endo-lysosomal health and homeostasis within a human neuroglioma cell model. We quantify widespread changes to the lysosomal proteome, indicative of broad lysosomal dysfunction and inefficient autophagic lysosome reformation, coupled with a reconfigured cell surface proteome and secretome reflective of increased lysosomal exocytosis. Through this global proteomic approach and parallel transcriptomic analysis, we provide a holistic view of Retromer function in regulating lysosomal homeostasis and emphasise its role in neuroprotection.

### Keywords
Human, Neuroglioma, Cell surface proteome, Lc-ms/ms, Secretome, H4, Whole cell proteome, Retromer, Lysoip

### Affiliations
King's College London
School of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University Walk, University of Bristol, BS8 1TD, U.K.

### Submitter
James Daly

### Lab Head
Dr Peter J. Cullen
School of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University Walk, University of Bristol, BS8 1TD, U.K.


