### Accession
PXD016571

### Title
T2D patients’ urine LC-MSMS for predicting prognosis w/ and w/o renal dysfunction

### Description
Renal dysfunction and its functional regression have been known as one of major complication of type 2 diabetes (T2D). The prognosis for kidney function can be determined by estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and the known protein makers such as albumin and those parameters can classy patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) grade 3 or higher but there are limitations in prediction. Therefore, there have been clinical unmet needs for urinary protein biomarkers to monitor or predict the patient status for precision medicine.

### Sample Protocol
< 1. Urinary protein sample preparation > Urine samples were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 30 min to remove debris, and 300 µl of each supernatant was mixed with 100 µl High Select™ HSA/Immunoglobulin Depletion Resin (Cat. No: A36368, Thermo, USA) and incubated for 1 hour at 4C to remove albumin and immunoglobulin. Following centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 min, the supernatant was dried using a speed vac with a cold trap (CentriVap Cold Traps, Labconco, USA).  < 2. Enzymatic digestion in-solution > Each dried urine sample was dissolved in 100 µl of 8 M urea, reduced with 10 mM DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at 56C, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min in the dark. Each urine sample was incubated overnight at 37C with 12.5 ng/µL sequencing grade modified trypsin/LysC (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer (pH 7.8), followed by quenching with 5% formic acid and lyophilization with a cold trap. The samples were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid, desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore, MA, USA), and dried for LC-MS analysis. < 3. Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis>    Digested peptides were separated using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides from the bead column were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and separated on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 column (500 mm75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å) equipped with a C18 Pepmap trap column (20 mm100 μm i.d., 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, USA)  over 200 min (250 nl/min) using a 0–48% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO for 150 min at 50°C. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a nano-ESI source. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan and ten data-dependent MS/MS scans. The target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The ion target value for MS/MS was set to 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. Repeated peptides were dynamically excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched using the SequestHT on Proteome discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) against the SwissProt human database (May 2017) 12. The search parameters were set as default including cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications with 2 miscleavages. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 10 ppm, and the allowed fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm. And label free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using peak intensity for unique and razor peptide of each protein.

### Publication Abstract
Renal dysfunction, a major complication of type 2 diabetes, can be predicted from estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and protein markers such as albumin concentration. Urinary protein biomarkers may be used to monitor or predict patient status. Urine samples were selected from patients enrolled in the retrospective diabetic kidney disease (DKD) study, including 35 with good and 19 with poor prognosis. After removal of albumin and immunoglobulin, the remaining proteins were reduced, alkylated, digested, and analyzed qualitatively and quantitatively with a nano LC-MS platform. Each protein was identified, and its concentration normalized to that of creatinine. A prognostic model of DKD was formulated based on the adjusted quantities of each protein in the two groups. Of 1296 proteins identified in the 54 urine samples, 66 were differentially abundant in the two groups (area under the curve (AUC): <i>p</i>-value &lt; 0.05), but none showed significantly better performance than albumin. To improve the predictive power by multivariate analysis, five proteins (ACP2, CTSA, GM2A, MUC1, and SPARCL1) were selected as significant by an AUC-based random forest method. The application of two classifiers-support vector machine and random forest-showed that the multivariate model performed better than univariate analysis of mucin-1 (AUC: 0.935 vs. 0.791) and albumin (AUC: 1.0 vs. 0.722). The urinary proteome can reflect kidney function directly and can predict the prognosis of patients with chronic kidney dysfunction. Classification based on five urinary proteins may better predict the prognosis of DKD patients than urinary albumin concentration or eGFR.

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Lc-msms, Diabetic nephropathy, Diabetes mellitus type 2, Kidney

### Affiliations
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.
Asan Medical Center

### Submitter
Kyunggon Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kyunggon Kim
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.


