### Accession
PXD036672

### Title
Proteomes and Ubiquitylomes Analysis in rosa hybrida during petal abscission.

### Description
The ubiquitome dataset by imputing missing values and normalization of 6844 ubiquitin modified peptides, 7026 lysine ubiquitination (Kub) site were defined in 2720 proteins, of which 3718 Kub site in 1379 proteins were quantified. Among these quantified Kub sites and proteins, 139 sites in 100 proteins were identified as upregulated ubiquitination sites, and 55 sites in 48 proteins were identified as downregulated ubiquitination sites at a threshold of 1.5 (P < 0.05)

### Sample Protocol
Petal abscission zone of rose flowers at stage 3 and 5 were grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). Inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer. The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Then, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www.http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment, and molecular function. The KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathways. Ten amino acids upstream and downstream of the Kub sites in all protein sequences were chosen for analyzing sequence properties of ubiquitinated sites using Motif-X software (http://motif-x.med. harvard.edu/motif-x.html). All database protein sequences were used as a background database, and other parameters were set to default values. Setting parameters for motif searching using Motif-X were 20 occurrences and a Bonferroni-corrected p-value of 0.000001.

### Publication Abstract
Plant organ abscission is regulated by multiple physiological and biochemical processes. However, the transcriptional, translational, and post-translational modifications occurring during organ abscission have not been systematically investigated. In this study, we report transcriptome, proteome, and ubiquitome data for the abscission zone (AZ) of rose petals collected during petal shedding. We quantified 40,506 genes, 6,595 proteins, and 2,720 ubiquitinated proteins in rose petal AZ. Our results showed that during petal abscission, 1,496 genes were upregulated and 2,199 were downregulated; 271 proteins were upregulated and 444 were downregulated; and 139 ubiquitination sites in 100 proteins were upregulated and 55 ubiquitination sites in 48 proteins were downregulated. Extracellular levels of cell component proteins were significantly increased, while levels within protoplasts were significantly decreased. During petal abscission, transcript levels of genes involved in defense response, transport, and metabolism changed significantly. Levels of proteins involved in the starch and sucrose metabolism and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathways were significantly altered at both the transcript and protein levels. The transcriptional and translational upregulation of peroxidase (POD), in the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis, pathway may be associated with deposition of lignin, which forms a protective layer during petal abscission. Overall, our data provide a comprehensive assessment of the translational and post-translational changes that occur during rose petal abscission.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Petal abscission, Rosa hybrida

### Affiliations
China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Chuyan Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Chao Ma
China Agricultural University


