### Accession
PXD042346

### Title
The murine metastatic microenvironment of experimental brain metastases in breast cancer differs by host age in vivo: A proteomic study.

### Description
Breast cancer in young patients is known to exhibit more aggressive biological behavior and is associated with a less favorable prognosis than the same disease in older patients, owing in part to an increased incidence of brain metastases, the mechanistic explanations behind which remain poorly understood. We recently reported that young mice, compared to older mice, showed about a three-fold increase in the development of brain metastases in mouse models of triple-negative and luminal B breast cancer. Here we have performed a quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis to identify proteins contributing to age-related disparities in the development of breast cancer brain metastases. Using a mouse model of brain-tropic (MDA-MB-231BR) triple-negative breast cancer, we harvested subpopulations of tumor metastases, the tumor-adjacent metastatic microenvironment, and uninvolved brain tissues via laser microdissection followed by quantitative proteomic analysis using high resolution mass spectrometry to characterize differentially abundant proteins contributing to age-dependent rates of brain metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Using a mouse model of brain-tropic TNBC (human MDA-MB-231BR cells), we independently harvested the tumor metastases, the tumor-adjacent metastatic microenvironment, and the uninvolved brain from fresh-frozen brain tissue specimens obtained from young and old mice using laser microdissection (LMD) for quantitative proteomic analysis using liquid chromatography, high resolution tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identifications were generated by searching the .RAW data files with a publicly-available, combined non-redundant human and mouse proteome database using Mascot and Proteome Discoverer and in-house software tools. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) that mapped to both human and mouse accessions were manually reconciled and assigned to either human (for LMD enriched metastasis samples) or mouse (for LMD enriched metastatic microenvironment and uninvolved brain samples) accessions. PSMs mapping exclusively to mouse accessions in the LMD enriched metastasis samples (14.2% of all PSMs measured in the LMD enriched tumor multiplex) and human accessions in the LMD enriched metastatic microenvironment/uninvolved brain samples (<10% of all PSMs measured in the two LMD enriched stroma multiplexes) were removed. The remaining mouse-specific PSMs in the LMD enriched multiplexes were normalized and Log2-transformed. The remaining human-specific PSMs in the LMD enriched metastasis multiplex were normalized to an artificial pool using mean TMT reporter ion channel abundances, followed by Log2 transformation.

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer in young patients is known to exhibit more aggressive biological behavior and is associated with a less favorable prognosis than the same disease in older patients, owing in part to an increased incidence of brain metastases. The mechanistic explanations behind these findings remain poorly understood. We recently reported that young mice, in comparison to older mice, developed significantly greater brain metastases in four mouse models of triple-negative and luminal B breast cancer. Here we have performed a quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis to identify proteins potentially contributing to age-related disparities in the development of breast cancer brain metastases. Using a mouse hematogenous model of brain-tropic triple-negative breast cancer (MDA-MB-231BR), we harvested subpopulations of tumor metastases, the tumor-adjacent metastatic microenvironment, and uninvolved brain tissues via laser microdissection followed by quantitative proteomic analysis using high resolution mass spectrometry to characterize differentially abundant proteins potentially contributing to age-dependent rates of brain metastasis. Pathway analysis revealed significant alterations in signaling pathways, particularly in the metastatic microenvironment, modulating tumorigenesis, metabolic processes, inflammation, and neuronal signaling. Tenascin C (TNC) was significantly elevated in all laser microdissection (LMD) enriched compartments harvested from young mice relative to older hosts, which was validated and confirmed by immunoblot analysis of whole brain lysates. Additional in vitro studies including migration and wound-healing assays demonstrated TNC as a positive regulator of tumor cell migration. These results provide important new insights regarding microenvironmental factors, including TNC, as mechanisms contributing to the increased brain cancer metastatic phenotype observed in young breast cancer patients.

### Keywords
Laser microdissection, Mouse model, Brain metastases, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Inova Health System
Women’s Service Line Ionva Health System

### Submitter
Thomas Conrads

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas P. Conrads
Women’s Service Line Ionva Health System


