### Accession
PXD041067

### Title
Structural dynamics of the chicken TRPV4 N-terminal domain

### Description
Intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) are essential for membrane receptor regulation but often remain unresolved in structural studies. TRPV4, a member of the TRP vanilloid channel family involved in thermo- and osmosensation, has a large N-terminal IDR of approximately 150 amino acids. With an integrated structural biology approach, we analyze the structural ensemble of the TRPV4 IDR and identify a network of regulatory elements that modulate channel activity in a hierarchical lipid-dependent manner through transient long-range interactions. A highly conserved autoinhibitory patch acts as a master regulator by competing with PIP2 binding to attenuate channel activity. Molecular dynamics simulations show that loss of the interaction between PIP2-binding site and the membrane reduces the force exerted by the IDR on the structured core of TRPV4. This work demonstrates that IDR structural dynamics are coupled to TRPV4 activity and highlights the importance of IDRs for TRP channel function and regulation.

### Sample Protocol
HDX-MS was conducted on three independent preparations of Gallus gallus TRPV4 IDR, ARD or NTD protein each, and for each of those three technical replicates (individual HDX reactions) per deuteration timepoint were measured. Preparation of samples for HDX-MS was aided by a two-arm robotic autosampler (LEAP Technologies). HDX reactions were initiated by 10-fold dilution of pre-dispensed protein sample (25 µM) with buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7, 300 mM NaCl) prepared in D2O and incubated for 10, 30, 100, 1,000 or 10,000 s at 25 °C. The exchange was stopped by mixing with an equal volume of pre-dispensed quench buffer (400 mM KH2PO4/H3PO4, 2 M guanidine-HCl; pH 2.2) kept at 1 °C, and 100 μl of the resulting mixture injected into an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System with HDX Technology. Non-deuterated samples were generated by a similar procedure through 10-fold dilution with buffer prepared in H2O. The injected HDX samples were flushed out of the injection loop (50 μL) with water + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 100 μl/min and guided over a column containing immobilized porcine pepsin kept at 12 °C. The resulting peptic peptides were collected on a trap column (2 mm x 2 cm), that was filled with POROS 20 R2 material (Thermo Scientific) and kept at 0.5 °C. After three minutes, the trap column was placed in line with an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 1.7 μm 1.0 x 100 mm column (Waters) and the peptides eluted with a gradient of water + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (eluent A) and acetonitrile + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (eluent B) at 60 μl/min flow rate as follows: 0-7 min/95-65% A, 7-8 min/65-15% A, 8-10 min/15% A. Eluting peptides were guided to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters) and ionized with by electrospray ionization (capillary temperature and spray voltage of 250 °C and 3.0 kV, respectively). Mass spectra were acquired over a range of 50 to 2,000 m/z in enhanced high definition MS (HDMSE) or high definition MS (HDMS) mode for non-deuterated and deuterated samples, respectively. Lock mass correction was conducted with [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B standard (Waters). During separation of the peptides on the ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column, the pepsin column was washed three times by injecting 80 μl of 0.5 M guanidine hydrochloride in 4% (v/v) acetonitrile. Blank runs (injection of double-distilled water instead of the sample) were performed between each sample. All measurements were carried out in triplicates. No correction for back-exchange was conducted.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and evaluated for their deuterium incorporation with the softwares ProteinLynx Global SERVER 3.0.1 (PLGS) and DynamX 3.0 (both Waters). Peptides were identified with PLGS from the non-deuterated samples acquired with HDMSE employing low energy, elevated energy and intensity thresholds of 300, 100 and 1,000 counts, respectively and matched using a database containing the amino acid sequences of IDR, ARD, NTD, porcine pepsin and their reversed sequences with search parameters as follows: Peptide tolerance = automatic; fragment tolerance = automatic; min fragment ion matches per peptide = 1; min fragment ion matches per protein = 7; min peptide matches per protein = 3; maximum hits to return = 20; maximum protein mass = 250,000; primary digest reagent = non-specific; missed cleavages = 0; false discovery rate = 100. For quantification of deuterium incorporation with DynamX, peptides had to fulfil the following criteria: Identification in at least 2 of the 3 non-deuterated samples; the minimum intensity of 10,000 counts; maximum length of 30 amino acids; minimum number of products of two; maximum mass error of 25 ppm; retention time tolerance of 0.5 minutes. All spectra were manually inspected and omitted if necessary, e.g. in case of low signal-to-noise ratio or the presence of overlapping peptides disallowing the correct assignment of the isotopic clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) are essential for membrane receptor regulation but often remain unresolved in structural studies. TRPV4, a member of the TRP vanilloid channel family involved in thermo- and osmosensation, has a large N-terminal IDR of approximately 150 amino acids. With an integrated structural biology approach, we analyze the structural ensemble of the TRPV4 IDR and the network of antagonistic regulatory elements it encodes. These modulate channel activity in a hierarchical lipid-dependent manner through transient long-range interactions. A highly conserved autoinhibitory patch acts as a master regulator by competing with PIP<sub>2</sub> binding to attenuate channel activity. Molecular dynamics simulations show that loss of the interaction between the PIP<sub>2</sub>-binding site and the membrane reduces the force exerted by the IDR on the structured core of TRPV4. This work demonstrates that IDR structural dynamics are coupled to TRPV4 activity and highlights the importance of IDRs for TRP channel function and regulation.

### Keywords
Trpv4

### Affiliations
Philipps-University Marburg, Department of Chemistry & SYNMIKRO, Hans-Meerwein-Straße, 35043 Marburg, GERMANY
Philipps-University Marburg, Center for Synthetic Microbiology (SYNMIKRO) & Faculty of Chemistry, Karl-von-Frisch-Straße 14, 35043 Marburg, Germany

### Submitter
Wieland Steinchen

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Gert Bange
Philipps-University Marburg, Center for Synthetic Microbiology (SYNMIKRO) & Faculty of Chemistry, Karl-von-Frisch-Straße 14, 35043 Marburg, Germany


