### Accession
PXD027652

### Title
Release of a nuclear ubiquitin-like protein activates proteasomal degradation of mislocalized hydrophobic mitochondrial proteins in trypanosomes

### Description
Mitochondrial protein import in the parasitic protozoan Trypanosoma brucei is mediated by the atypical outer membrane translocase ATOM. It consists of seven subunits including ATOM69, the import receptor for hydrophobic proteins. Ablation of ATOM69, but not of any other subunit, triggers a unique quality control pathway resulting in the proteasomal degradation of non-imported mitochondrial proteins. The process requires a protein of unknown function, an E3 ubiquitin ligase and the ubiquitin-like protein (TbUbL1), which all are recruited to the mitochondrion upon ATOM69 depletion. TbUbL1 is a nuclear protein, a fraction of which is released to the cytosol upon triggering of the pathway. Nuclear release is essential since cytosolic TbUbL1 can bind mislocalized mitochondrial proteins and likely transfers them to the proteasome. Mitochondrial quality control has previously been studied in yeast and metazoans. Finding such a pathway in the highly diverged trypanosomes suggests such pathways are an obligate feature of all mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling and LC-MS sample preparation: Transgenic cells enabling the tetracycline-inducible expression of TbUbL1-myc in wildtype or ATOM69-RNAi cells were grown in SDM-80 medium containing 5.55 mM glucose, 10% dialyzed FCS and either the unlabeled "light" or stable isotope-labeled "heavy" versions of arginine (Arg0 or Arg10) and lysine (Lys0 or Lys8). To guarantee complete labeling of all proteins with heavy amino acids, the cells were cultured in SILAC medium for 6–10 cell doublings. Differentially labeled tetracycline-induced and uninduced cells were harvested, mixed in equal amounts, and subjected to co-immunoprecipitation as follows: cells were solubilized for 15 min on ice in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0.1 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 25 mM KCl containing 0.5% (w/v) digitonin. After centrifugation (15 min, 20,000 g, 4°C), the lysate was transferred to 50 μl of myc-affinity bead slurry equilibrated with solubilization buffer. After incubation at 4°C for 2 hours, the supernatant was removed, the bead slurry was washed three times with solubilization buffer and the bound proteins were eluted by boiling the beads for 10 min in 2% SDS in 60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8. The eluates were further processed for LC-MS analysis as described before (von Känel et al., 2020, eLIFE 9). Experiments were performed in three independent replicates including a label-switch. LC/MS analysis: TbUbL1 complexes were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) using the set up and LC-MS parameters described before (von Känel et al., 2020, eLIFE 9).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1) and its integrated search engine Andromeda. MS/MS data were searched against all entries for T. brucei TREU927 listed in the respective fasta file downloaded from the TriTryp database (version 8.1; http://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/). Protein identification and quantification were based on ≥ 1 unique peptide and ≥ 1 ratio count, respectively. For all other parameters, MaxQuant default settings were used, including carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications, and Lys8 and Arg10 as heavy labels. The rank sum method (Breitling and Herzyk, 2005, J. Bioinf. Comput. Biol. 3), as implemented in the R package 'RankProd' (Carratore et al., 2017, Bioinformatics 33), was applied to calculate p-values for the enrichment of proteins that were quantified in 3/3 replicates. The rank sum, defined as the arithmetic mean of the ranks of a protein in all replicates, was converted into a p-value. Proteins with the smallest rank sum are the most likely to be significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Proteomics, Silac, Trypanosoma brucei, Mitochondrial quality control

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg, Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry/Functional Proteomics
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
University of Freiburg, Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry/Functional Proteomics


