### Accession
PXD035818

### Title
Characterization of Phosphorylation-dependent Antibody Binding to Cancer-mutated Linkers of C2H2 Zinc Finger Proteins by Intact Transition Epitope Mapping - Thermodynamic Weak-force Order Analysis.

### Description
We describe mass spectrometric antibody-peptide binding motif analyses of a monoclonal antibody (clone 18E9.D9, BioLegend, London, England) from mouse which was raised against the predominantly occuring phosphorylated linker sequence HpTGEKP of human C2H2 zinc finger proteins. As the anti-HpTGEKP antibody is assumed to bind to related phosphorylated C2H2 ZNF protein linker sequences as well, specific amino acid exchanges were investigated for evaluating their importance for immune complex formation. Two point mutations of the zinc finger protein 331 (ZNF331) gene, causing single amino acid exchanges R9I and H11Y, respectively, have been found to be significantly enriched in Uterine Corpus Endometrial Carcinoma, Colon and Rectal Adenocarcinomas, and Skin Cutaneous Melanoma. Since the H11Y amino acid exchange affects histidine residue H1 of the HpTGEKP linker motif which is recognized by the anti-HpTGEKP antibody, we examined in this work whether the in several cancers mutated linker amino acid sequence YTGEKP  and its phosphorylated derivatives YpTGEKP, pYTGEKP, and pYpTGEKP would be bound by the anti-HpTGEKP antibody. Immune complex formation ability was compared to that of peptides HTGEKP, HpTGEKP, and HpTGKKP, respectively, which served as controls. Binding behaviors towards the anti-HpTGEKP antibody were investigated by "Intact Transmission Epitope Mapping - Thermodynamic Weak-force Order (ITEM-TWO)".

### Sample Protocol
The anti-HpTGEKP antibody was rebuffered into 200 mM ammonium acetate, pH 6.7, using centrifugal filters with a molecular mass cut-off of 50 kDa (Merck Milipore, Carrigtwohill, Ireland). Subsequently, the anti-HpTGEKP phospho-peptide antibody concentration was measured to be between 0.52 and 0.63 ug/ul using the Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer assay (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, California, USA). Phospho-hexapeptides HpTGEKP (001), HpTGKKP (002), YpTGEKP (101), pYTGEKP (102), bi-phosphorylated hexapeptide pYpTGEKP (103) as well as non-phosphorylated hexapeptides HTGEKP (000) and YTGEKP (100) were synthesized (peptides and elephants, Hennigsdorf, Germany). 0.1 to 0.9 mg of the peptide powders were each dissolved in 200 mM ammonium acetate buffer, pH 6.7, to receive peptide concentrations between 31.5 and 35.7 pmol/ul. Peptide solutions were individually mixed with antibody solutions to molar ratios of approx. 3 : 1, and mixtures were incubated at room temperature for at least 1 h. NanoESI capillary needles were produced manually and each one was filled using one microloader pipette tip (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) per experiment with 3 ul of the above described antibody - peptide mixture solutions. The anti-HpTGEKP antibody formed specific immune complexes with phospho-hexapeptides 001 and 002. Peptides 000 and 100 did not bind to the anti-HpTGEKP antibody. Interestingly, peptide 102 did bind as well, however, different to the binding of peptides 001 or 002, the ion signal satellites with peptide 102 as binding partner in the high-mass range of the mass spectrum were not seen when bound to the anti-HpTGEKP antibody. ITEM-TWO measurements were performed with the solutions which contained antibody, peptides, and immune complexes using a Synapt G2S instrument (Waters MS-Technologies, Manchester, UK) with the following instrumental settings: capillary voltage, 1.8 kV; source temperature, 50 Â°C; sample cone voltage, 130 V; source off-set voltage, 130 V; nano flow gas, 0.05 bar; trap collision cell voltage difference, 0 V and higher (see scan number protocols below); trap gas flow (Argon), 8 ml/min; transfer collision cell voltage difference, 2 V. All mass spectra were acquired in positive-ion mode using a mass window of m/z 300 or 400-8000. The quadrupole analyzer was applied to block transmission of lower molecular mass ions: M1 = 4800 with dwell time of 25% and ramp time of 25%; M2 = 5000 with dwell time of 25% and ramp time of 25%; M3 = 5200. The respective immune complexes were dissociated in the first collision cell (TRAP). Immune complex dissociation at increasing collision cell voltage differences are recorded for at least 1.5 min at each particular ΔCV setting.  Scan number protocols (list scan numbers per collision cell voltage difference)  1) Mixture consisting of antibody and peptide HTGEKP (000): set: 07022021_PEP201_KOMPLEX_ITEM.raw: scans 1-88, 0V; 251-338, 10V; 503-590, 30V; 842-929, 60V.  2) Immune complex with peptide HpTGEKP (001): set: 03022021_PEP_1_KOMPLEX_ITEM_WDH.raw: scans 1-88, 0V; 399-486, 30V; 488-575, 40V; 665-752, 60V; 754-841, 70V.  3) Immune complex with peptide HpTGKKP (002):  set: 14022021_PEP5_KOMPLEX_QUAD.raw: scans 1-88, 0V; 177-264, 10V; 266-353, 20V; 622-709, 60V.  4) Mixture consisting of antibody and peptide YTGEKP (100): set: 10022021_PEP101_KOMPLEX_ITEM_2.raw: scans 1-88, 0V; 251-338, 10V; 496-583, 30V; 724-811, 50V; 812-899, 60V.  5) Mixture consisting of antibody and peptide YpTGEKP (101): set: 10022021_PEP102_KOMPLEX_ITEM.raw: scans 1-88, 0V; 177-264, 10V; 354-441, 30V; 532-619, 50V; 621-708, 60V.  6) Immune complex with peptide pYTGEKP (102): set: 11022021_PEP103_KOMPLEX_ITEM.raw: scans 1-88, 0V; 352-439, 30V; 540-627, 50V; 639-726, 60V; 728-815, 70V.  7) Mixture consisting of antibody and peptide pYpTGEKP (103): set: 16022021_PEP104_KOMPLEX_QUAD_2.raw: scans 1-88, 0V; 182-269, 10V; 359-446, 30V; 625-712, 60V.  8) Mixture consisting of antibody, peptide HpTGKKP (002), and peptide pYpTGEKP (103): set: 6022021_PEP104_KOMPLEX_PUS_PEP_5_QUAD.raw: scans 1-88, 0V; 95-182, 30V.  9) Mixture consisting of anti-Histag antibody and peptide pYTGEKP (102): 1st set: 26102022_ANTIHIS_PHOSPHO_PEP103.raw: scans 2-118, 0V. 2nd set: 26102022_ANTIHIS_PHOSPHO_PEP103_ITEM_01.raw: 206-265, 30V; 265-323, 60V.  10) Mixture consisting of anti-Histag antibody, peptide pYTGEKP (102) and Histag peptide (GSSHHHHHHSSGLVPR): 1st set: 26102022_ANTIHIS_PHOSPHO_PEP103_HISPEP.raw: scans 2-104, 0V. 2nd set: 26102022_ANTIHIS_PHOSPHO_PEP103_HISPEP_ITEM_01.raw: scans 207-265, 30V.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were smoothed in 20 cycles with a window of 10 prior to determining the m/z values of unbound peptide ions in the low mass range and the anti-HpTGEKP antibody and/or its respective immune complex ions in the high mass range. The m/z values of the ion signals (in arbitrary units) were extracted from the mass spectra of the applied collision cell voltage differences individually (see scan number protocols above) using MassLynx version 4.1.

### Publication Abstract
With Intact Transition Epitope Mapping-Thermodynamic Weak-force Order (ITEM-TWO) analysis in combination with molecular modeling, the phosphorylation-dependent molecular recognition motif of the anti-HpTGEKP antibody has been investigated with binary and ternary component mixtures consisting of antibody and (phospho-) peptides. Amino acid sequences have been selected to match either the antibody's recognition motif or the cancer-related zinc finger protein mutations and phosphorylations of the respective amino acid residues. Upon electrospraying of all the components of the mixtures, that is, hexapeptides, antibody, and intact immune complexes, the produced ions were subjected to mass spectrometric mass filtering. The antibody ions as well as the immune complex ions traversed into the mass spectrometer's collision chamber, whereas paths of unbound peptide ions were blocked prior to entering the collision cell. After dissociation of the multiply charged immune complexes in the gas phase, the complex-released peptide ions were recorded after having traversed the second mass filter. Complex-released peptides were unambiguously identified by their masses using mass analysis with isotope resolution. From the results of our studies with seven (phospho-) peptides with distinct amino acid sequences, which resembled either the antibody's binding motif or mutations, we conclude the following: (i) A negatively charged phospho group, located near the peptide's N-terminus is mandatory for antibody binding when placed on the peptide surface at a precise distance to the C-terminally located positively charged &#x3b5;-amino group of a lysinyl residue. (ii) A bulky amino acid residue, such as the tyrosinyl residue at the N-terminal position of the (phospho-) threoninyl residue, abolishes antibody binding. (iii) Two closely spaced phospho groups negatively interfere with the surface polarity pattern and abolish antibody binding as well. (iv) Non-phosphorylated peptides are not binding partners of the anti-HpTGEKP antibody.

### Keywords
Uterine corpus endometrial carcinoma, Zinc finger-phosphopeptide, Off-line esi-ms, Skin cutaneous melanoma, Item-two, Colon and rectal adenocarcinomas, Antiphosphopeptide-antibody

### Affiliations
Director, Proteome Center Rostock, University of Rostock, Germany
University Medical Center Rostock

### Submitter
Michael Kreutzer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Michael O. Glocker
Director, Proteome Center Rostock, University of Rostock, Germany


