### Accession
PXD019272

### Title
Itch attenuates CD4 T cell proliferation in mice by limiting WBP2 protein stability

### Description
To mount an anti-pathogen response, CD4 T cells must undergo rapid cell proliferation. However, poorly controlled expansion can result in diseases such as autoimmunity. One important regulator of T cell activity is the E3 ubiquitin ligase Itch. Itch deficient patients suffer from extensive autoinflammation. Similarly, Itch deficient mice exhibit inflammation characterized by high numbers of activated CD4 T cells. While the role of Itch in limiting CD4 T cell cytokine production has been extensively studied, it is less clear whether and how Itch regulates proliferation of these cells. We determined that Itch deficient CD4 T cells are hyperproliferative in vitro and in vivo, due to increased S phase entry. Whole cell proteomics analysis of Itch deficient primary mouse CD4 T cells revealed increased abundance of the -catenin co-activator WW domain binding protein 2 (WBP2). Furthermore, Itch deficient cells demonstrate increased WBP2 protein stability, and Itch and WBP2 interact in CD4 T cells. Knockdown of WBP2 in CD4 T cells caused reduced proliferation. Together, our data support that Itch attenuates CD4 T cell proliferation by promoting WBP2 degradation. This study identifies novel roles for Itch and WBP2 in regulating CD4 T cell proliferation, providing insight into how Itch may prevent inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
Naive CD4 T cells were isolated using the Naïve CD4 T cell isolation kit as described above, and verified to have at least 95% purity.  Cells were then either pelleted immediately (for the 0-hour timepoint) or stimulated using plate-bound anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibody as described, and harvested at 24 and 48 hours post activation. 3 biological replicates in 3 independent experiments were collected for each genotype at each time point. Each biological replicate consisted of two mice pooled.  Samples were analyzed by the Proteomics Core at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific San Jose, CA) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system and and EasySpray source. Whole proteome samples were collected using data independent acquisition (DIA) and the spectral library was generated using data dependent acquisition (DDA). Tryptic digests were spiked with iRT standards (Biognosys) and separated by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on a nanocapillary column, 75 μm id × 50 cm 2um PepMap RSLC C18 column at 50C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B of 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at 210 nL/min with each RP-LC run comprising a 125 min gradient from 1 to 5 % B in 15 min, 5-45%B in 110 min for DDA and 140min for DIA. To generate the spectral library for the DIA analysis, biological replicates for each time point were pooled and data was acquired in a single shot using DDA mode.  For DDA, the mass spectrometer was set to repetitively scan m/z from 300 to 1400 (R = 240,000) followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans on the twenty most abundant ions, minimum AGC 1e4, dynamic exclusion with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30s, (R=15000) FTMS full scan AGC target value was 3e6, while MSn AGC was 1*105, respectively.  MSn injection time was 160 ms; microscans were set at one. Rejection of unassigned and 1+,6-8 charge states was set.  DIA data collection was as follows: one full MS scan at 120,000 resolution and a scan range of 300-1650 m/z with an AGC target of 3*106 and a maximum inject time of 60ms.  This was followed by 22 (DIA) isolation windows with varying sizes at 30,000 resolution, an AGC target of 3*106, injection times set to auto, loop count and msx count of 1.  The default charge state was 4, the first mass was fixed at 200 m/z and the normalized collision energy (NCE) for each window was stepped at 25.5, 27 and 30.

### Data Protocol
MaxQaunt (default settings) was used to generate spectral libraries form DDA files. Protein identification and quantification was based on MS2 intensity readings using Spectronaut software with its default settings. Values were compared between IL4 KO and Itch IL4 DKO mice. Data was filtered, normalized and statistically analyzed using R software. A protein was considered “detected” in a particular genotype and timepoint if it was identified in at least 2 of the 3 replicates. Statistical significance was determined by t-test.

### Publication Abstract
To mount an antipathogen response, CD4 T cells must undergo rapid cell proliferation; however, poorly controlled expansion can result in diseases such as autoimmunity. One important regulator of T-cell activity is the E3 ubiquitin ligase Itch. Itch deficient patients suffer from extensive autoinflammation. Similarly, Itch deficient mice exhibit inflammation characterized by high numbers of activated CD4 T cells. While the role of Itch in limiting CD4 T-cell cytokine production has been extensively studied, it is less clear whether and how Itch regulates proliferation of these cells. We determined that Itch deficient CD4 T cells are hyperproliferative in vitro and in vivo, due to increased S phase entry. Whole cell proteomics analysis of Itch deficient primary mouse CD4 T cells revealed increased abundance of the &#x3b2;-catenin coactivator WW domain-binding protein 2 (WBP2). Furthermore, Itch deficient cells demonstrate increased WBP2 protein stability, and Itch and WBP2 interact in CD4 T cells. Knockdown of WBP2 in CD4 T cells caused reduced proliferation. Together, our data support that Itch attenuates CD4 T cell proliferation by promoting WBP2 degradation. This study identifies novel roles for Itch and WBP2 in regulating CD4 T cell proliferation, providing insight into how Itch may prevent inflammation.

### Keywords
Autoinflammation, Cell cycle, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Proliferation

### Affiliations
Director of Proteomics Core Facility,  Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,  Philadelphia, PA USA
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Steven H. Seeholzer
Director of Proteomics Core Facility,  Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,  Philadelphia, PA USA


