### Accession
PXD008412

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of the 2016 WHO Neisseria gonorrhoeae reference strains identifies vaccine candidates and antimicrobial resistance signatures.

### Description
Neisseria gonorrhoeae is the causative agent of gonorrhea, a leading sexually transmitted disease with severe complications on reproductive health. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has categorized the public health threat induced by N. gonorrhoeae as “urgent”, due to the ease of transmission and the fast emergence of multi-drug resistant strains. The need for development of vaccines and understanding the underlying factors leading to antibiotic resistance is of utmost importance. The proteomic profiles of the 14 WHO N. gonorrhoeae reference strains have been compared to the WHO F reference strain using a mass spectrometry with tandem mass tags (TMT) labeling to analyze the cell envelope and the cytoplasmic fractions extracted from each strain. Identifying novel vaccine candidates and proteomic signatures for antimicrobial resistance will further our understanding of N. gonorrhoeae proteotypes, in relationship to their respective genotypes and phenotypes, and provide deep insights that will impact the development of preventive and therapeutic tools to combat gonorrhea.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were reconstituted in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Samples were distributed between 10-plex and 6-plex label sets, along with 2 pooled samples per set. Each sample containing 100 μg of peptide was combined with 12 μl of its respective TMT reagent as follows: WHO F strain: 126, WHO K strain: 127C, WHO G strain: 127N, WHO M strain: 128C, WHO L strain: 128N, WHO O strain: 129C, WHO N strain: 129N, WHO U strain: 130C, WHO P strain: 130N, WHO V strain: 131; for the 6-plex:  WHO W strain: 127,  WHO X strain: 128, WHO Y strain: 129, WHO Z strain: 130, FA strain: 131. Samples were fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) with a Paradigm (Michrom Biosciences, Bruker, Billerica, MA) HPLC with mobile phases of 5 mM potassium phosphate monobasic in 30% Acetonitrile/70% water (v/v) pH 2.7 (A) and 5 mM potassium phosphate monobasic in 30% Acetonitrile/70% water (v/v) pH 2.7 with 500 mM potassium chloride (B). The sample was brought up in A (200 µL) and spun hard (13.4 x g) on a micro centrifuge.  The peptides were separated using a 2.1 mm x 100 mm Polysulfoethyl A column (PolyLC, Columbia, MD) over 60 min at a flow rate of 200 µL/min. The separation profile was as follows:  hold 2% B for 5 min,  2% to 8%B in 0.1 min, 8% to 18% B in 14.9 min, 18% to 34% B in 12 min, 34% to 60% B in 18 min, 60% to 98% B in 0.1 min and hold for 10 min. Fractions were collected in 96-well plates at 1 min/frac, 60 fractions. The 60 fractions were reduced into 12 pools and dried on a speed vac.   The pools were desalted using Oasis HLB 1cc cartridges. The cartidges were washed with 70% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. Samples were loaded onto the cartridge in 0.1% TFA and, washed with 0.1% TFA and eluted in 1 mL 70% ACN/0.1% TFA. The samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Desalted SCX fractions were analyzed by LC/ESI MS/MS with a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC II (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) nano HPLC system coupled to a hybrid Orbitrap Elite ETD (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. In-line de-salting was accomplished using a reversed-phase trap column (100 μm × 20 mm) packed with Magic C18AQ (5-μm 200Å resin; Michrom Bioresources, Bruker, Billerica, MA) followed by peptide separations on a reversed-phase column (75 μm × 250 mm) packed with Magic C18AQ (5-μm 100Å resin; Michrom Bioresources, Bruker, Billerica, MA) directly mounted on the electrospray ion source. A 90-minute gradient from 7% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nL/minute was used for chromatographic separations. The heated capillary temperature was set to 300 oC and a spray voltage of 2750 V was applied to the electrospray tip.  The Orbitrap Elite instrument was operated in the data-dependent mode, switching automatically between MS survey scans in the Orbitrap (AGC target value 1,000,000, resolution 120,000, and injection time 250 milliseconds) with MS/MS spectra acquisition in the Orbitrap (AGC target value of 50,000, 15,000 resolution and injection time 250 milliseconds). The 15 most intense ions from the Fourier-transform (FT) full scan were selected for fragmentation in the HCD cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 40%. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds with a list size of 500 and exclusion mass by mass width +/- 10ppm.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The data were searched against WHO_F_CDS with cRAP (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) fasta file. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with maximum missed cleavages set to 2. The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. Variable modifications included TMT6Plex (+229.163 Da) on any N-Terminus, oxidation on methionine (+15.995 Da), carbamidomethyl on cysteine (+57.021 Da), and TMT6Plex on lysine (+229.163 Da). Data were searched using Sequest HT. All search results were run through Percolator for scoring. Quantification was performed using the canned TMT6plex method through Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
The sexually transmitted disease gonorrhea (causative agent: <i>Neisseria gonorrhoeae</i>) remains an urgent public health threat globally because of its reproductive health repercussions, high incidence, widespread antimicrobial resistance (AMR), and absence of a vaccine. To mine gonorrhea antigens and enhance our understanding of gonococcal AMR at the proteome level, we performed the first large-scale proteomic profiling of a diverse panel (<i>n</i> = 15) of gonococcal strains, including the 2016 World Health Organization (WHO) reference strains. These strains show all existing AMR profiles - established through phenotypic characterization and reference genome publication - and are intended for quality assurance in laboratory investigations. Herein, these isolates were subjected to subcellular fractionation and labeling with tandem mass tags coupled to mass spectrometry and multi-combinatorial bioinformatics. Our analyses detected 904 and 723 common proteins in cell envelope and cytoplasmic subproteomes, respectively. We identified nine novel gonorrhea vaccine candidates. Expression and conservation of new and previously selected antigens were investigated. In addition, established gonococcal AMR determinants were evaluated for the first time using quantitative proteomics. Six new proteins, WHO_F_00238, WHO_F_00635c, WHO_F_00745, WHO_F_01139, WHO_F_01144c, and WHO_F_01126, were differentially expressed in all strains, suggesting that they represent global proteomic AMR markers, indicate a predisposition toward developing or compensating gonococcal AMR, and/or act as new antimicrobial targets. Finally, phenotypic clustering based on the isolates' defined antibiograms and common differentially expressed proteins yielded seven matching clusters between established and proteome-derived AMR signatures. Together, our investigations provide a reference proteomics data bank for gonococcal vaccine and AMR research endeavors, which enables microbiological, clinical, or epidemiological projects and enhances the utility of the WHO reference strains.

### Keywords
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Proteomics, Vaccine, Antimicrobial resistance, Who

### Affiliations
Oregon State University
Associate Professor | Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences | College of Pharmacy | Oregon State University

### Submitter
Fadi El-Rami

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Sikora
Associate Professor | Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences | College of Pharmacy | Oregon State University


