### Accession
PXD004634

### Title
Deep Biosphere - Beatrix 326 BH2 (270712)

### Description
This project aims to investigate the metabolic pathways expressed by the active microbial community occurring at the deep continental subsurface. Subsurface chemoLithoautotrophic Microbial Ecosystems (SLiMEs) under oligotrophic conditions are supported by H2; however, the overall ecological trophic structures of these communities are poorly understood. Some deep, fluid-filled fractures in the Witwatersrand Basin, South Africa appear to support inverted trophic pyramids wherein methanogens contributing <5% of the total DNA apparently produce CH4 that supports the rest of the community. Here we show the active metabolic relationships of one such trophic structure by combining metatranscriptomic assemblies, metaproteomic and stable isotopic data, and thermodynamic modeling. Four autotrophic β-proteobacteria genera that are capable of oxidizing sulfur by denitrification dominate. They co-occur with sulfate reducers, anaerobic methane oxidizers and methanogens, which each comprises <5% of the total community. Defining trophic levels of microbial chemolithoautotrophs by the number of transfers from the initial abiotic H2-driven CO2 fixation, we propose a top-down cascade influence of the metabolic consumers that enhances the fitness of the metabolic producers to explain the inverted biomass pyramid of a multitrophic SLiME. Symbiotic partnerships are pivotal in the deep biosphere on and potentially beyond the Earth.

### Sample Protocol
Crustal fluid at 1.34 kilometers below land surface was filtered on-site at Beatrix gold mine shaft No. 3 Level 26, which is situated at southwest of the Witwatersrand Basin, using a sterile stainless steel manifold that was installed onto the borehole casing. Approximately 86,400 L of water was filtered over 15 days, at an initial water flow rate set at 4 L min-1. Biomass captured on the pre-autoclaved Memtrex NY filter (MNY-91- 1-AAS; pore size of 0.1 μm; General Electric Co.) was preserved in RNA-preservation solution [20 mM Ethylenediaminetetraaceticacid (EDTA), 0.3 M sodiumcitrate and 4.3 M ammoniumsulfate; pH adjusted to 5.2 using concentrated H2SO4] and stored at -20°C until extraction. Total RNA and protein, together with total DNA, were extracted using 2X CTAB lysis buffer and phenol/chloroform (pH=6.5-6.9). Total RNA was re-suspended in 1× TE-buffer (Tris-EDTA, pH = 8) and stored in 1.5 mL eppendorf tubes at -20°C(20). In order to reduce RNA degradation during the extraction process, all extraction tubes were kept on ice between steps. An aliquot of the nucleic acid sample was treated with DNase I (Cat# AMPD1; Sigma-Aldrich Co. LLC) following the manufacturer’s instructions, which included a 15-minute incubation at room temperature and an inactivation step at 70°C for 10 minutes. PCR amplification of the treated RNA yielded no PCR products after 35 cycles, indicating the sample was DNA-free. Prior to sequencing, the total RNA sample was analyzed on the Agilent 2100 BioAnalyzer system using RNA 6000 Nano kit. The high-quality RNA was treated using RNase III (0.5 mM final concentration) and resulted in a majority of 500-bp long fragments. The RNA products from the controlled fragmentation step were used to prepare the strand-specific metatranscriptomic library, following the manufacturer’s instruction of Apollo 324 TM PrepX mRNA library protocol (IntegenX Inc., CA, USA), which was based on directional RNA adaptor ligation. Sequencing of 141-nt single-end reads was performed on one lane of Illumina 2500 HiSeq platform with Illumina’s Truseq Rapid SBS chemistry. This protocol generated sequences that are in the same orientation as the actual transcripts. Total protein was purified from the organic fraction by standard methanol/acetone purification. In brief, debris at the interface layer was removed before adding five volumes of chilled methanol and ammonium acetate (100 mM final concentration). The mixture was incubated overnight at -20°C. Protein was pelleted at 17,000 xg for 20 minutes with supernatant discarded afterward. Protein pellets were washed with chilled HPLC-grade methanol and collected by centrifugation at 17,000 xg for 10 minutes. Methanol was discarded. The wash step finished with two additional rounds of HPLC-grade acetone. The protein pellets were air-dried for 5-10 minutes and stored in 1.5 mL eppendorf tubes at -20°C. Total protein pellet extracted as abovementioned was dissolved in hot 7 M Urea/ 2 M Thiourea/ 100 mM Tris solution (pH 8.0), which was subjected to thiol reduction alkylation using DTT and iodoacetamide, followed by in-solution trypsin proteolysis using the FASP procedure(49). The digested peptides were fractionated into 10 fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography using a Dionex Ultimate NanoLC capillary HPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) employing a gradient from a 75%:25% mix of buffers A:B to 100% buffer B (buffer A: 7mM KH 2 PO 4 , pH 2.65, 30% acetonitrile; buffer B: 7mM KH 2 PO 4 , 350mM KCl, pH 2.65, 30% acetonitrile). Each of these fractions was analyzed by high-resolution nano-UPLC- MS/MS analysis on an accurate-mass Linar Trap Quadropole (LTQ) OrbiTrap Elite platform (ThermoFisher Scientific), outfitted with an Easy nLC 1000 UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a Flex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Separations were performed using a trapping capillary column (150 μm x ca. 40 mm, packed with 3 μm, 100 Å Magic AQ C18 resin, Michrom, Auburn, CA) at a flow rate of 4 μL min -1 for 4 mininutes, followed by an analytical capillary column (75 μm x ca. 50 cm, packed with 3 μm, 100 Å Magic AQ C18 resin, Michrom) under a linear gradient of A and B solutions (solution A: 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid; solution B: 97% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid) from 5%-35% B over 180 min at a flow rate of 300 nL min -1 . Nanospray was achieved using commercial sprayer tips (New Objective, Woburn, MA) at a voltage of 2.4 kV, with the Elite heated capillary at 275 °C. Full-scan (m/z 335–1800) positive-ion mass spectra were acquired in the LTQ Orbitrap at a resolution setting of 120,000. MS/MS spectra were simultaneously acquired using collision-induced dissociation method (CID) in the LTQ OrbiTrap for the top 20 most abundant multiply charged species in the full-scan spectrum having signal intensities of >1000 NL. Lockmass was employed, maintaining calibration to 2-3 ppm of accurate mass. All samples were analyzed in technical duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Totally 29,980,240 single-end reads were generated from total RNA. The fastq data was filtered for high-quality reads using the tools on galaxy.princeton.edu. The QC was ran in the following order: (i) removed reads that contain 90% of bases with Phred quality score (Q-score) lower than 30 (i.e. error probability of base calling = 0.001); (ii) screened for reads that matched the first 30 bp of the 3’-end adapter sequence (5’-AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAG- 3’) anywhere along the read length, with search criteria set to maximum error rate=0.1, match times=1, minimum overlap length=20, allow ‘Ns’ in the read over aligned region as matches, then clipped off the portion following the adapter sequence; (iii) clip from the 3’-end of the reads that matched with the above 30-bp adaptor sequence, discard reads that contained Ns and that were shorter than 50 nt. The QC-run resulted in 21,577,391 reads (average read length of 123 ± 21 nt) that had an average Q-score higher than 30 at each nt position. The high quality RNA reads were organized into two subsets, protein-coding RNA (cRNA) sequences and non-coding RNA (ncRNA) sequences. First, all high quality RNA reads were search against four databases using USEARCH for its faster run-time comparing to BLAST. The four databases (DB) were transfer RNA DB (872,667 sequences), 5S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) DB (last updated was in Sept, 2005; 1,379 sequences), small and large rRNA DBs (version 119.1; 4,346,329 sequences in SSUParc_tax_silva.fasta.gz and 446,998 sequences LSUParc_tax_silva.fasta.gz). Then, RNA reads were assigned into the ncRNA subset when they shared at least 80% of identity in global alignment with any of references in the four DBs, regardless of the orientation. The options used were “-usearch_global”, “-uid 0.8”, “-strand both”, and “-threads” for multithreading. The remaining RNA reads were assigned into the cRNA subset. RNA reads were parsed into cRNA and ncRNA subsets, containing, 1,498,563 (7%) and 20,078,828 (93%) reads. The cRNA and ncRNA subsets were assembled separately using de Bruijn graph-based de novo transcriptiomic assemblers. The “strand-specific” option was indicated in the execution commands. Transcript contigs in the final assemblies have minimum length of 200 nt. The cRNA subset was assembled using five de novo transcriptomic assemblers: Trinity, Trans-ABySS, Oases, IDBA-tran and Rockhopper. Transcript contigs were clustered using the CD-HIT package version 4.6.4. The messenger RNA (mRNA) transcript contigs generated from the cRNA assembly were first subjected to gene prediction. Prodigal version 2.6.1 was used to identify open reading frames using the option “-p” for metagenome and translation table 11. Since the orientation of our RNA-seq reads was known and all the transcript contigs ran in the sense direction, any predictions made for the anti-sense orientation were discarded. A python script was used to extract the amino acid sequences translated from the sense strands. All the protein-encoding peptide sequences (PEGs) generated from the mRNA transcript contigs were compiled into a proteome-searchable database. MS/MS data were analyzed in aggregate using the SEQUEST HT search engine in ProteomeDiscoverer v1.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific) to search against a sample-specific metaproteome database, which was created by compiling the in silico translation of the PEG sequences. Search parameters included trypsin digestion with up to one missed cleavage, methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamidomethylation. A peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 5% was achieved by using the Percolator node in ProteomeDiscoverer, which utilizes the frequency of matching against a reversed database as a rigorous model of the probability of error in the forward matches at given score thresholds. Numbers of peptide-spectral match (PSM) were used as a surrogate measure of protein abundance. A PEG was considered positively validated as an expressed protein if one of the following criteria were met: (1) the PEG was identified by matches to two unique peptides in replicated UPLC-MS/MS runs; (2) if it was identified only in one run, but at least two unique peptides in the PEG were matched; or (3) if it was identified only in one run and by a single unique peptide, but at least five PSMs were assigned to the PEG.

### Publication Abstract
Metatranscriptomics has recently been applied to investigate the active biogeochemical processes and elemental cycles, and <i>in situ</i> responses of microbiomes to environmental stimuli and stress factors. <i>De novo</i> assembly of RNA-Sequencing (RNA-Seq) data can reveal a more detailed description of the metabolic interactions amongst the active microbial communities. However, the quality of the assemblies and the depiction of the metabolic network provided by various <i>de novo</i> assemblers have not yet been thoroughly assessed. In this study, we compared 15 <i>de novo</i> metatranscriptomic assemblies for a fracture fluid sample collected from a borehole located at 1.34 km below land surface in a South African gold mine. These assemblies were constructed from total, non-coding, and coding reads using five <i>de novo</i> transcriptomic assemblers (Trans-ABySS, Trinity, Oases, IDBA-tran, and Rockhopper). They were evaluated based on the number of transcripts, transcript length, range of transcript coverage, continuity, percentage of transcripts with confident annotation assignments, as well as taxonomic and functional diversity patterns. The results showed that these parameters varied considerably among the assemblies, with Trans-ABySS and Trinity generating the best assemblies for non-coding and coding RNA reads, respectively, because the high number of transcripts assembled covered a wide expression range, and captured extensively the taxonomic and metabolic gene diversity, respectively. We concluded that the choice of <i>de novo</i> transcriptomic assemblers impacts substantially the taxonomic and functional compositions. Care should be taken to obtain high-quality assemblies for informing the <i>in situ</i> metabolic landscape.

### Keywords
Native microbial community, Deep subsurface ecosystem, Ecological trophic structure, Crustal fluid, Sample-derived metatranscripome database

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Onstott Lab, Department of Geosciences, Princeton University

### Submitter
Maggie Lau

### Lab Head
Dr Maggie Lau
Onstott Lab, Department of Geosciences, Princeton University


