### Accession
PXD031022

### Title
Neurodegeneration and humoral response proteins in cerebrospinal fluid associate with pediatric-onset multiple sclerosis -- Validation

### Description
The pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (MS) remains to be elucidated. Pediatric-onset MS (POMS) represents the earliest stage of the disease. CSF proteins in POMS may therefore provide causal information. Therefore, the aim of the current study was to analyze CSF proteins in children with an initial CNS acquired demyelinating syndrome (ADS) and to make a comparison between POMS and monophasic ADS (mADS). Patients were selected from two prospective pediatric ADS studies. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was performed in a Dutch discovery cohort (POMS n=28; mADS n=39). Parallel reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry was performed on selected proteins more abundant in POMS with ≥ 8 unique peptides in a combined Dutch and Canadian validation cohort (POMS n=48; mADS n=106).

### Sample Protocol
Ten μL of CSF sample was added to 47μL digestion buffer (100mM TEAB, 1% SDC, 10% Acetonitrile), spiked with 37.5 fmol of a mixture of SIL peptides (final 0.5fmol/ul) and digested overnight by the addition of 400ng trypsin (Promega, gold-grade) incubated at 37°C with gentle shaking. Digest was carried out in a 96-well plate (Axygen). Next, digests were stopped and detergent (SDC) was removed by acidic precipitated (addition of 60µL 1.5% TFA), centrifugation (4,400g), and filtration through a 0.45µm membrane (AcroPrep, PALL Laboratory), and transferred to a 384 well plate in two aliquots of 40uL. PRM measurements were acquired on a nano‐LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany) online coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, US). Ten µL digest was loaded on a C18 trap column (C18 PepMap, 300 µm inner diameter (ID) × 5 mm, 5 µm particle size) and desalted for 10 minutes using a flow rate of 20µL/min 0.1% TFA. Then, trap column was switched inline with the analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 µm ID ×250 mm, 2 µm particle), and peptides were eluted with the following binary (A and B) gradient: 4%–38% solvent B in 30 minutes whereby solvent A consists of 0.1% formic in water and solvent B consists of 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in water. The column flow rate was set to 300nL/min. For electrospray ionization, nano ESI emitters (New Objective, Woburn, MA) were used, and a spray voltage of 2.0kV was applied. A scheduled targeted PRM method with following parameters was used: isolation width 1.0 Da, HCD fragmentation at optimized collision energy, ion injection time was set to 118 ms and AGC target to 50,000 ions, Orbitrap resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
Samples were measured with PRM and ratios between the endogenous and SIL peptides were calculated to determine the protein concentration. The PRM signals were integrated using Skyline software (<https://skyline.ms>).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteins, Pediatrics, Multiple sclerosis, Proteomics, Cerebrospinal fluid, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics
Erasmus MC Rotterdam
Department of Neurology

### Submitter
Christoph Stingl

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
Head of Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Neurology, Clinical & Cancer Proteomics


