### Accession
PXD021457

### Title
Critical role of Aquaporin-1 and telocytes in infantile hemangioma response to propranolol beta-blockade

### Description
Propranolol, a non-selective β-adrenergic receptor (ADRB) antagonist, is the first-line therapy for severe infantile hemangiomas (IH). Since the incidental discovery of propranolol efficacy in IH, preclinical and clinical investigations have shown evidence of adjuvant propranolol response in some malignant tumors. However, the mechanism for propranolol antitumor effect is still largely unknown, owing to the absence of a tumor model responsive to propranolol at non-toxic concentrations. Immunodeficient mice engrafted with different human tumor cell lines were treated with anti-VEGF bevacizumab, to create a model sensitive to propranolol. Proteomics analysis was used to reveal propranolol-mediated protein alteration correlating with tumor growth inhibition and Aquaporin-1 (AQP1), a water channel modulated in tumor cell migration and invasion, was identified. IH tissues and cells were then functionally investigated. Our functional protein association networks analysis and knockdown of ADRB2 and AQP1 indicated that propranolol treatment and AQP1 downregulation trigger the same pathway, suggesting that AQP1 is a major driver of betablockers antitumor response. Examining AQP1 in human hemangioma samples, we found it exclusively in a perivascular layer, so far unrecognized in IH, made of telocytes (TC). Functional in vitro studies showed that AQP1-positive telocytes play a critical role in IH response to propranolol and that modulation of AQP1 in IH-TC by propranolol or shAQP1 decreases capillary-like tube formation in a Matrigel based angiogenesis assay. We conclude that IH sensitivity to propranolol may rely at least in part to a cross talk between lesional vascular cells and stromal telocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in a lysis buffer RIPA [Tris-HCl, pH 8, 50 mM; NaCl 150 mM; sodium dodecyl sulfate 0.1%; NP40 1%; sodium deoxycholate 0.5%; protease inhibitors cocktail (Sigma)]. After 30 min on ice, the samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 15 000g. The supernatants containing soluble proteins were used. Samples were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and were deposited in triplicate onto SDS-PAGE. Separation was stopped once proteins had entered the resolving gel. After colloidal blue staining, bands were cut out from the SDS-PAGE gel and subsequently cut into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50% ACN, rinsed twice in ultrapure water and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After removal of ACN, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, covered with the trypsin solution (10 ng/µl in 50 mM NH4HCO3), rehydrated at 4 °C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37 °C. Spots were then incubated for 15 min in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature with rotary shaking. The supernatant was collected, and an H2O/ACN/HCOOH (47.5:47.5:5) extraction solution was added onto gel slices for 15 min. The extraction step was repeated twice. Supernatants were pooled, dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and resuspended in 25 µl of formic acid (5%, v/v) so as to inject about 500 ng.

### Data Protocol
nLC-MS/MS analysis Peptide mixture was analysed on a Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to an Electrospray Q-Exactive quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Ten microliters of peptide digests were loaded onto a 300-µm-inner diameter x 5-mm C18 PepMapTM trap column (LC Packings) at a flow rate of 30 µL/min. The peptides were eluted from the trap column onto an analytical 75-mm id x 25-cm C18 Pep-Map column (LC Packings) with a 4–40% linear gradient of solvent B in 108 min (solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in 5% ACN, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8-kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 2.2 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 300-2000) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70 000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 1 x 106 ions was collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and the top 15 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1 x 105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 120 ms and a resolution of R = 35000. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Other settings were as follows: neither sheath nor auxiliary gas flow heated capillary temperature, 260 °C; normalized HCD collision energy of 25% and an isolation width of 3 m/z.  Database search and results processing Data were searched by SEQUEST through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) against a subset of the 2018.01 version of the UniProt database restricted to the Homo Sapiens Reference Proteome Set (71,536 entries). Spectra from peptides higher than 5000 Da or lower than 350 Da were rejected. The search parameters were as follows: mass accuracy of the monoisotopic peptide precursor and peptide fragments were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Only b- and y-ions were considered for mass calculation. Oxidation of methionines (+16 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57 Da) were considered as variable and fixed modifications, respectively. Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Peptide validation was performed using the Percolator algorithm (3) and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false positive rate at peptide level.  Label-Free Quantitative Data Analysis Raw LC-MS/MS data were imported in Progenesis QI for Proteomics 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, U.K). Data processing included the following steps: (i) Features detection, (ii) Features alignment across all samples, (iii) Volume integration for 2-6 charge-state ions, (iv) Normalization on feature median ratio, (v) Import of sequence information, (vi) Calculation of protein abundance (sum of the volume of corresponding peptides), (vii) A statistical test was performed and proteins were filtered based on p-value<0.05. Only non-conflicting features and unique peptides were considered for calculation at protein level. Quantitative data were considered for proteins quantified by a minimum of 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hemangioma; propranolol; telocyte; aquaporin-1; angiogenesis.

### Affiliations
Proteome Platform, University of Bordeaux, F-33076, Bordeaux, France.
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Bonneu M.
Proteome Platform, University of Bordeaux, F-33076, Bordeaux, France.


