### Accession
PXD019267

### Title
Proteome changes in monocytic THP-1 cells induced by 31 engineered nanomaterials

### Description
Here, we investigated a panel of 31 engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) with different core chemistries and surface modifications using conventional cytotoxicity assays coupled with omics-based approaches. Proteomics analysis were conducted in order to monitor changes in cells proteome exposed to ENMs. In this standard approach, cells are exposed to various types and amounts of ENMs and proteins are extracted after a given exposure period. For controls, no ENM are applied but the incubation and extraction of proteins is done the same way. Proteome changes are monitored using high-resolution Fourier transform mass spectrometry (Orbitraps) as well as in-house developed label-free software. Similar approaches have been used for quantitative analysis of posttranslational modifications. Proteomics analyses following low-dose exposure of THP-1 cells suggested a non-specific stress response to ENMs while microarray-based profiling revealed significant changes in gene expression as a function of both surface functionalization and core chemistry of the ENMs. Pathway analysis revealed that the most biologically active ENMs displaying cationic surfaces downregulated DNA replication/cell cycle responses and upregulated inflammatory responses. This study shows that surface chemistry is a key determinant of nanomaterial effects on immune cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture The human monocytic THP-1 cell line was purchased from ATCC (UK). The cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and 0.05 mM β-mercaptoethanol. The cell density was strictly maintained at 0.1-2.0 x 106 cells/mL. Cell exposure One million cells / well were seeded in a 12 well plate one day before exposure. Cells were exposed for 24 h with the respective concentrations of freshly resuspended ENMs. Staurosporine (at the dose equivalent of EC10 for both cell lines), lipopolysaccharide (100 ng/mL) and culture media were used as positive controls for cell death, immune activation and negative control, respectively. Each condition was performed in triplicate. After exposure, the cells were washed twice with PBS at RT by centrifugation 300 g, 5 min. After the last centrifugation, all the PBS was removed carefully. The cell pellets were labelled and stored at -80°C prior to delivery. Lysate preparation and sample digestion All cell pellets where lysed by probe sonication using a lysis buffer with urea. After removing cell debris, the protein concentration was determined using the BCA protein assay from Pierce. 10 µg of each sample were then digested using a digestion robot. During the procedure the proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. After the digestion, all samples where desalted and concentrated using StageTips. Mass spectrometry 1 µg of the purified peptides from each sample were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a nanoUltimate 3000 (Dionex) chromatographic system coupled on-line to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated on a 25 cm self-packed C18 analytical column (75 µm ID) using a 2 h gradient from 4% to 26% B, followed by 26% to 95% during 5 min (where solvent A and B were 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, respectively). The spectra where acquired using a top 16 method, where the 16 most intense peaks were selected for fragmentation in each MS spectrum. While the MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 140,000, the MS/MS were acquired at 17,500 using a normalized collision energy of 26. The data showed good data quality and reproducibility between the samples.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was done using Raw2MGF and ClusterMGF from the Quanti workflow 18. The data were searched against the human complete proteome database (Uniprot) using the Mascot search engine and quantified by Quant, an in-house developed software for label-free quantification. Student’s t-test, adjusted for multiple testing false discovery rate (FDR), where used to compare the different treatments. The normalized protein abundances were then compared to the negative control (media) to generate log 2 ratios. In total, 2,720 protein groups were quantified in the THP.1 samples. Many samples show excellent reproducibility.

### Publication Abstract
Despite considerable efforts, the properties that drive the cytotoxicity of engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) remain poorly understood. Here, the authors inverstigate a panel of 31 ENMs with different core chemistries and a variety of surface modifications using conventional in vitro assays coupled with omics-based approaches. Cytotoxicity screening and multiplex-based cytokine profiling reveals a good concordance between primary human monocyte-derived macrophages and the human monocyte-like cell line THP-1. Proteomics analysis following a low-dose exposure of cells suggests a nonspecific stress response to ENMs, while microarray-based profiling reveals significant changes in gene expression as a function of both surface modification and core chemistry. Pathway analysis highlights that the ENMs with cationic surfaces that are shown to elicit cytotoxicity downregulated DNA replication and cell cycle responses, while inflammatory responses are upregulated. These findings are validated using cell-based assays. Notably, certain small, PEGylated ENMs are found to be noncytotoxic yet they induce transcriptional responses reminiscent of viruses. In sum, using a multiparametric approach, it is shown that surface chemistry is a key determinant of cellular responses to ENMs. The data also reveal that cytotoxicity, determined by conventional in vitro assays, does not necessarily correlate with transcriptional effects of ENMs.

### Keywords
Nanotoxicology, Proteomics, Nanomaterials, Immunotoxicology, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
ADME of Therapeutics (ADMEoT),
Uppsala University Drug Optimization and Pharmaceutical Profiling (UDOPP),
SciLifeLab Drug Discovery and Development Platform (DDD), 
Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden


### Submitter
Jimmy Ytterberg

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Roman Zubarev
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


