### Accession
PXD026481

### Title
Metabolic resistance to the inhibition of mitochondrial transcription revealed by CRISPR-Cas9 screen

### Description
Cancer cells depend on mitochondria to sustain their increased metabolic needs therefore, mitochondria constitute an interesting target for cancer treatment. We recently developed novel small-molecule inhibitors of mitochondrial transcription (IMTs) that selectively target mitochondrial gene expression. IMTs showed potent antitumor properties in vitro and in vivo, without affecting normal tissues. Because therapy-induced resistance is a major constraint to successful cancer therapy, we investigated mechanisms involved in resistance to IMTs. We employed a CRISPR-Cas9 whole genome screen to determine pathways responsible for resistance to acute IMT1 treatment. Loss of genes belonging to VHL and mTORC1 pathways caused IMT1 resistance. The relevance of these pathways was then validated by chemical modulation of these processes in cancer cells. We also generated IMT1-resistant cells to dissect responses to chronic mitochondrial gene expression impairment. We report that acquired resistance to IMT1 occurs through compensatory increase of mtDNA levels, transcripts and proteins. We found that chloramphenicol-mediated inhibition of mitochondrial translation impaired resistant cells’ survival. The identified susceptibility and resistance mechanisms to IMTs are important for future pharmacological interventions with mitochondria-targeted therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were suspended in 0.1% ProteaseMax (Promega), 4 M Urea (Sigma-Aldrich), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 10% acetonitrile (AcN). The samples were sonicated using VibraCell probe (Sonics & Materials, Inc.) for 1 min, with pulse 2/2, at 20% amplitude, and sonicated in bath for 5 minutes, followed by vortexing and centrifugation for 5 min at 13,000 rpm. The supernatants were transferred to new tubes and concentration determination was performed in a 1:10 dilution, in water. Protein yields were 500-1300 µg (mouse fibroblasts).  25 µg of each sample were subjected to a tryptic digestion protocol including protein reduction in 6 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 60 min and alkylation in 22 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 and digestion was carried out over night at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were cleaned with C18 HyperSep Filter Plate, bed volume 40 µL (Thermo Scientific) and dried on a speedvac (miVac, Thermo Scientific). Six of TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) in 100 µg aliquots were dissolved in 30 µL dry AcN, scrambled and mixed with the digested samples dissolved in 70 µL TEAB (resulting final 30% AcN), followed by incubation at 22°C for 2 hours at 550 rpm. The reaction was then quenched with 12 µL of 5% hydroxylamine at 22°C for 15 min at 550 rpm. The labeled samples were pooled and dried on a speedvac (miVac, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were directly loaded in Proteome Discoverer v2.2 and searched against mouse or human SwissProt protein databases (42,793 and 21,008 entries, respectively) using the Mascot 2.5.1 search engine (Matrix Science Ltd.). Parameters were chosen as follows: up to two missed cleavage sites for trypsin, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, and 0.05 Da for the HCD fragment ions. Dynamic modifications of oxidation on methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation of N-termini were set. For quantification both unique and razor peptides were requested. The final quantitative data analysis was performed with an in-house developed R-studio script. Sub-mitochondrial localization was based on data extracted from (Vögtle et al., 2017). Human homologs were mapped wit DIOPT v.8.0 (Hu et al., 2011), and filtered for proteins in human MitoCarta 2.0  (Calvo, Clauser and Mootha, 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mtdna, Inhibitor of mitochondrial transcription, Crispr-cas9 genetic screen, Chemoresistance, Cancer

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177, Sweden

### Submitter
Oleksandr Lytovchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Nils-Göran Larsson
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm 17177, Sweden


