### Accession
PXD018903

### Title
phospho-proteomic data on the LATS1 interactome from cells treated with two proapoptotic signals: FAS and etoposide

### Description
Using this approach, we obtained phospho-proteomic data on the LATS1 interactome from cells treated with two proapoptotic signals: FAS and etoposide, which both activate LATS kinase activity [28].To identify the LATS1 interactome we transiently expressed GFP-LATS1 in HeLa cells, immunoprecipitated GFP-LATS1 with anti-GFP antibodies and identified the associated proteins using mass-spectrometry. Unspecific binding proteins were discarded by comparing with the control GFP IP.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were transiently transfected with a GFP-tagged LATS1 construct or a GFP construct as control. After 2 days they were serum starved overnight and left untreated (control) or were treated with FasL (50nM) or Etoposide (50muM) for 16 hours. Then, cells were lysed with Lysis buffer (20mM 4-(2 hydroxyethyl)-1piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) pH7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, phosphatase inhibitors (10 mM -Gycerolphosphate, 1 mM Na3VO4, 2mM Na4P2O7, 2 mM NaF) and protease inhibitors (5 g/ml Leupeptin and 2.2 g/ml Aprotinin), and proteins were immunoprecipitated using GFP-trap A (Chromotek) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The beads were washed 3 times with lysis buffer followed by two washes with the same buffer not containing NP-40. The proteins immunoprecipitated onto GFP-beads were prepared for masss-spectrometry analysis as previously described [36]. Briefly, the immunoprecipitates were digested in two steps. Firstly, by adding 60 l of elution buffer-1 (2M urea, 50mM Tris- HCl pH7.5, 5 g/ml Trypsin), to each sample and incubation at 27 C on a shaker. After 30 minutes initial digestion the samples were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm in a table top centrifuge for 30 seconds and the supernatant was collected into a new Eppendorf tube. In the second step 25 l of elution buffer-2 (2M urea, 50mM Tris-HCL pH7.5, 1mM Dithiothreitol) was added

### Data Protocol
Please Contact Corresponding Author David.Gomez@ucd.ie

### Publication Abstract
The Hippo pathway regulates a complex signalling network which mediates several biological functions including cell proliferation, organ size and apoptosis. Several scaffold proteins regulate the crosstalk of the members of the pathway with other signalling pathways and play an important role in the diverse output controlled by this pathway. In this study we have identified the scaffold protein IQGAP1 as a novel interactor of the core kinases of the Hippo pathway, MST2 and LATS1. Our results indicate that IQGAP1 scaffolds MST2 and LATS1 supresses their kinase activity and YAP1-dependent transcription. Additionally, we show that IQGAP1 is a negative regulator of the non-canonical pro-apoptotic pathway and may enable the crosstalk between this pathway and the ERK and AKT signalling modules. Our data also show that bile acids regulate the IQGAP1-MST2-LATS1 signalling module in hepatocellular carcinoma cells, which could be necessary for the inhibition of MST2-dependent apoptosis and hepatocyte transformation.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Lats1

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin

### Submitter
David Matallanas

### Lab Head
Dr David Gomez
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin


