### Accession
PXD010427

### Title
Identification of nuclear Plasmodium falciparum proteins via mass spectrometry and proposed annotation

### Description
The nuclear proteome of mixed populations of Plasmodium falciparum was explored by GeLC-MS/MS and 2D-LC-MS/MS with a peptide exclusion procedure in order to increase the detection of low abundant proteins such as those involved in gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts (NE) and cytoplasmic extracts (CE) were prepared from red blood cells at 5% parasitaemia infected with 3D7 asexual-stage cells. For GeLC-MS/MS, protein extracts were separated by SDS-PAGE. Protein lanes were fractionated and tryptic in-gel digestions were performed on all fractions. Peptide digests were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. For 2D-LC-MS/MS, in-solution tryptic digestions were performed on protein extracts. Peptide digests were analyzed by 2D-LC-MS/MS, with Strong Cation eXchange (SCX) as first LC separation and Reverse Phase (RP) as second LC separation.

### Data Protocol
Data were submitted to Mascot software (version 2.2.07) using both PlasmoDB v13 (14 jan 2015, 5542 entries) and human SwissProt (6 march 2013, 20329 entries) databases. Search parameters were the following: MS and MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.5 Da; missed cleavages = 1; fixed modification = Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modification = Oxidation (M): FDR < 1% (search against the reversed merged database).

### Publication Abstract
The nuclear proteome of Plasmodium falciparum results from the continual shuttle of proteins between the cell cytoplasm-nucleus and vice versa. Using shotgun proteomics tools, we explored the nuclear proteins of mixed populations of Plasmodium falciparum extracted from infected erythrocytes. We combined GeLC-MS/MS and 2D-LC-MS/MS with a peptide ion exclusion procedure in order to increase the detection of low abundant proteins such as those involved in gene expression. We have identified 446 nuclear proteins covering all expected nuclear protein families involved in gene regulation. All structural ribosomal (40S and 60S) proteins were identified which is consistent with the nuclear localization of ribosomal biogenesis. Proteins involved in the translation machinery were also found suggesting that translational events might occur in the nucleus in P. falciparum as previously hypothesized in eukaryotes. These data were compared to the protein list established by PlasmoDB and submitted to Plasmobase a recently reported Plasmodium annotation website to propose new functional putative annotation of several unknown proteins found in the nuclear extracts.

### Keywords
Plasmodium nucleus proteins proteome annotation shotgun lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Plateforme P3S - UMS Omique - Sorbonne Université
Plateforme P3S UMS-37 PASS – Sorbonne Universite

### Submitter
Cédric Pionneau

### Lab Head
Dr Solenne Chardonnet
Plateforme P3S - UMS Omique - Sorbonne Université


