### Accession
PXD030954

### Title
Liver Proteomic Profile in Mice on a High-Fat Diet

### Description
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is becoming a primary cause of liver damage in Western society. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is an advanced stage of NAFLD and may lead to liver cancer. Our previous long-term murine studies have shown the beneficial role of Aquamin, a red marine algae-derived (calcium, magnesium, additional trace elements-rich) supplement, in reducing liver injury and decreasing liver tumor incidence. The main objective of the study was to determine how manifestations and effects of NASH can be mitigated using Aquamin. We hypothesized that mice on a high-fat Western diet (HFWD) with minerals would exhibit less liver injury than mice on a HFWD without minerals. Methods: Two cohorts of MS-NASH mice (8-week-old) were placed on a HFWD with and without minerals for 16 weeks. An additional cohort of MS-NASH mice on the same HFWD was treated with obeticholic acid (OCA). C57BL/6 mice on a regular chow were included as a control. During the in-life phase of the study, weight changes were assessed weekly. At termination, livers were histologically assessed for steatosis and fibrosis by using hematoxylin and eosin, and picrosirius red staining. Liver tissue samples were also subjected to tandem mass tag (TMT) mass-spectroscopic proteomics for protein expression profile in individual mice. Results: Mice on HFWD gained more weight than mice on control diet, but there was no overall change in weight for mice on HFWD, irrespective of interventions. On histological assessment, there was no difference in steatosis between the two high-fat groups, but mice on Aquamin showed reduced picrosirius red staining or collagen deposition as compared to placebo on HFWD mice. Regarding proteomic profile, there was a clear distinction among control and HFWD groups. Placebo (on HFWD) mice were used for comparison. Aquamin intervention altered 91 proteins while OCA altered 84 proteins in liver samples with a 2-fold change. Of these, 57 proteins were common between Aquamin and OCA. Most of the proteins were upregulated. Aquamin upregulated 39 unique pathways (with a p-value <0.05) as assessed by the Reactome database. Some of the pathways significantly impacted by Aquamin were formation of cornified envelope; keratinization; gap junction assembly; type I hemidesmosome assembly; apoptosis-related; plasma lipoprotein assembly, remodeling and clearance; and hedgehog “off” state pathways. Proteins downregulated by OCA are mainly involved in the synthesis of bile acids and bile salts. Conclusion: The addition of dietary minerals may play a protective role in interfering with downstream advancement from steatosis to NASH. Our studies provide mechanistic insight into how mineral supplementation may contribute to the reduction in liver injury and tumor formation (one of the most devastating consequences) of fatty liver disease in the context of HFWD-induced steatosis.

### Sample Protocol
A cryopreserved tissue piece from the left lobe (of each mouse liver) was weighed and homogenized in  Radioimmuno-Precipitation Assay (RIPA) - lysis and extraction buffer (Pierce, # 89901; ThermoFisher Scientific) for protein isolation, as described in our past publications (34-36). Fifty micrograms of sample protein from each liver were digested separately with trypsin and individual samples labeled with one of 11 isobaric mass tags following the manufacturer’s protocol. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)11plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher Scientific) was utilized for this application. After labeling, equal amounts of peptide from each sample were mixed together.  In order to achieve in-depth characterization of the proteome, the labeled peptides were fractionated using 2D-LC (basic pH reverse-phase separation followed by acidic pH reverse phase) and analyzed on a high-resolution, tribrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid, ThermoFisher Scientific) using conditions optimized at the PRF.  MultiNotch MS3 analysis (37) was used to get accurate quantitation of the identified proteins/peptides.A cryopreserved tissue piece from the left lobe (of each mouse liver) was weighed and homogenized in  Radioimmuno-Precipitation Assay (RIPA) - lysis and extraction buffer (Pierce, # 89901; ThermoFisher Scientific) for protein isolation, as described in our past publications (34-36). Fifty micrograms of sample protein from each liver were digested separately with trypsin and individual samples labeled with one of 11 isobaric mass tags following the manufacturer’s protocol. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)11plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher Scientific) was utilized for this application. After labeling, equal amounts of peptide from each sample were mixed together.  In order to achieve in-depth characterization of the proteome, the labeled peptides were fractionated using 2D-LC (basic pH reverse-phase separation followed by acidic pH reverse phase) and analyzed on a high-resolution, tribrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid, ThermoFisher Scientific) using conditions optimized at the PRF.  MultiNotch MS3 analysis was used to get accurate quantitation of the identified proteins/peptides.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer (v 2.4, ThermoFisher Scientific).  MS2 spectra were searched against UniProt mouse protein database (17011 sequences as reviewed entries; downloaded on  05/06/2020) using the following search parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) and TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) were considered static modifications; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) were considered variable. Identified proteins and peptides were filtered to retain only those that passed ≤2% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of detection.  Quantitation was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra (Average signal-to-noise ratio of 10 and <40% isolation interference).  Differential protein expression in each treatment cohort normalized to the high-fat alone (placebo) cohort.

### Publication Abstract
Male MS-NASH mice were maintained on a high-fat diet for 16 weeks with and without red algae-derived minerals. Obeticholic acid (OCA) was used as a comparator in the same strain and diet. C57BL/6 mice maintained on a standard (low-fat) rodent chow diet were used as a control. At the end of the in-life portion of the study, body weight, liver weight, liver enzyme levels and liver histology were assessed. Samples obtained from individual livers were subjected to Tandem Mass Tag labeling / mass spectroscopy for protein profile determination. As compared to mice maintained on the low-fat diet, all high-fat-fed mice had increased whole-body and liver weight, increased liver enzyme (aminotransferases) levels and widespread steatosis / ballooning hepatocyte degeneration. Histological evidence for liver inflammation and collagen deposition was also present, but changes were to a lesser extent. A moderate reduction in ballooning degeneration and collagen deposition was observed with mineral supplementation. Control mice on the high-fat diet alone demonstrated multiple protein changes associated with dysregulated fat and carbohydrate metabolism, lipotoxicity and oxidative stress. Cholesterol metabolism and bile acid formation were especially sensitive to diet. In mice receiving multi-mineral supplementation along with the high-fat diet, there was reduced liver toxicity as evidenced by a decrease in levels of several cytochrome P450 enzymes and other oxidant-generating moieties. Additionally, elevated expression of several keratins was also detected in mineral-supplemented mice. The protein changes observed with mineral supplementation were not seen with OCA. Our previous studies have shown that mice maintained on a high-fat diet for up to 18 months develop end-stage liver injury including hepatocellular carcinoma. Mineral-supplemented mice were substantially protected against tumor formation and other end-state consequences of high-fat feeding. The present study identifies early (16-week) protein changes occurring in the livers of the high-fat diet-fed mice, and how the expression of these proteins is influenced by mineral supplementation. These findings help elucidate early protein changes that contribute to end-stage liver injury and potential mechanisms by which dietary minerals may mitigate such damage.

### Keywords
Liver cancer, Nafld, High fat, Ccn3, Minerals, Nash

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Pathology The University of Michigan 1150 W Medical Center Dr Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

### Submitter
Muhammad Aslam

### Lab Head
Dr Muhammad N Aslam
Department of Pathology The University of Michigan 1150 W Medical Center Dr Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA


