### Accession
PXD015801

### Title
Effect of hydrogen peroxide on Echinococcus granulosus protoescoleces proteome

### Description
We collected protoescoleces (PSCs) from individual bovine cysts. Then we incubated 20 uL of PSCs in RPMI medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum with 2.5 mM hydrogen peroxide (treated) or without hydrogen peroxide (Control) for 2 h at 37 °C. After that we collected PSCs by sedimentatios in 1.5 mL tube and washed 4 times with PBS at 37°C.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis, protein extracts were prepared using RapiGest SF (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). Briefly, PSC pellets (obtained as described above) were suspended in 400 uL 0.1% RapiGest in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and sonicated for 5 cycles of 30 s with 60 s interval between pulses. 100 ug of total protein were processed for mass spectrometry analysis according to the RapiGest SF surfactant protocol. The proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 60°C for 30 min, then alkylated using 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature and incubated with mass spectrometry grade trypsin gold (Promega, Wisconsin, USA) at a ratio of 1 g/100 g protein. Samples were treated with 1 g of trypsin for 4 h at 37°C. After an additional aliquot of 1 g of trypsin was added, samples were incubated for 16 h at 37°C. After removing the RapiGest using 0.5% TFA, the resulting peptides were desalted using OASIS HLB cartridges (Waters, Massachusetts, USA), eluted in 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA and lyophilized in a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Elite tandem mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, Illinois, USA) equipped with a nanoAcquity ultra performance liquid chromatography system (Waters, Massachusetts, USA).  LC separation were performed usingmobile phase solvents consisted of (solvent A) 0.1% formic acid in water and (solvent B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. A 8-μl volume of each sample (corresponding to 5 μg of tryptic peptides) was loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 LC Column (03 mm x 5 mm) ThermoFisher, Illinois, USA at a flow rate of 5 μl/min. Peptides were eluted to an Easy Spray Column PepMap RSLC C18 (75 μm x 15 cm) using a  nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) and separated using a gradient elution at a flow rate of 300 nl /min. The LC gradient included a hold at 5% B for 5 min, followed by a ramp up to 35% B over 25 min, then a ramp up to 95% B in 5 min, a hold at 95% for 5 min before returning to 5% B in 5 min and re-equilibration at 5% B for 20 min. Mass spectra were collected in the data-dependent acquisition mode by scanning the mass range from mass-to-charge (m/z) 400 to 1600 at a nominal resolution setting of 60,000 for precursor ion acquisition in the Orbitrap. For the MS/MS analysis, the mass spectrometer was programmed to select the top 15 most intense ions with two or more charges. The spray voltage applied to the electrospray tip was 2.0 kV.  Two biological and three technical replicates were analyzed. Each biological sample was composed of PSCs collected from one hydatid cyst.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS raw data were processed using msConvert tool (ProteoWizard, version 3)101. The peak lists were exported in Mascot generic format (.mgf). The MS/MS data were analyzed using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.3.02) against a local E. granulosus database (21,764 sequences) containing the deduced amino acid sequences from the 2017 genome annotation available on WormBase ParaSite (http://www.parasite.wormbase.org/). The search parameters included a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 Da and a peptide ion tolerance of 50 ppm. Carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was specified as a variable modification. We used Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., version 4.4.1) to validate the peptide and protein identifications. The peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability as assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm102. The protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99% probability as assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm103 and contained at least two identified peptides. The false discovery rate (decoy) was 0.0% for proteins and 0.2% for peptides. The normalized spectral abundance factor 104 was calculated for each protein and the quantitative differences were statistically analyzed using Student’s t-test in Scaffold. The differences with P-values lower than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Cystic hydatid disease (CHD) is a worldwide neglected zoonotic disease caused by Echinococcus granulosus. The parasite is well adapted to its host by producing protective molecules that modulate host immune response. An unexplored issue associated with the parasite's persistence in its host is how the organism can survive the oxidative stress resulting from parasite endogenous metabolism and host defenses. Here, we used hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) to induce oxidative stress in E. granulosus protoescoleces (PSCs) to identify molecular pathways and antioxidant responses during H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> exposure. Using proteomics, we identified 550 unique proteins; including 474 in H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-exposed PSCs (H-PSCs) samples and 515 in non-exposed PSCs (C-PSCs) samples. Larger amounts of antioxidant proteins, including GSTs and novel carbonyl detoxifying enzymes, such as aldo-keto reductase and carbonyl reductase, were detected after H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> exposure. Increased concentrations of caspase-3 and cathepsin-D proteases and components of the 26S proteasome were also detected in H-PSCs. Reduction of lamin-B and other caspase-substrate, such as filamin, in H-PSCs suggested that molecular events related to early apoptosis were also induced. We present data that describe proteins expressed in response to oxidative stress in a&#xa0;metazoan parasite, including novel antioxidant enzymes and targets with potential application to treatment and prevention of CHD.

### Keywords
Echinococcus, Hydrogen peroxide, Proteome

### Affiliations
UFRGS
Laboratório de Genômica Estrutural e Funcional, Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil

### Submitter
Martin Cancela

### Lab Head
Dr Henrique Bunselmeyer Ferreira
Laboratório de Genômica Estrutural e Funcional, Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil


