### Accession
PXD010863

### Title
BTLA interacting proteins in mouse CD4+ effector T cells - Part2

### Description
Identifying BTLA interacting proteins in mouse CD4+ effector T cells expressing BTLA at endogenous levels and after stimulation with pervanadate.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification coupled to proteomic detection was performed to detect the interacting proteins of BTLA+ CD4+ effector T cells from WT mice and from knockin mice expressing endogenous PD-1 molecules tagged with a Twin-Strep-tag (OST) (BTLA-OST) was performed. Cells before treatment or after 20 s, 2 min, 5 min or 15 min after treatement with pervanadate were measured in three different independent replicates.

### Data Protocol
The data was searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 against a FASTA file containing 16985 mouse protein sequences (downloaded 13. August 2018 from www.uniprot.org) and iRT peptide and enzyme sequences. Carbamidomethyl was defined as a fixed modification, and Oxidation (M) and Phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications. Standard MaxQuant settings for Orbitrap were used (e.g. peptide tolerance 20 ppm for first search and 4.5 for main search). A search was performed searching 10 injections of unfractionated peptides and resulted in the identification of 3285 peptides respectively. The search results were imported into Spectronaut Pulsar (Biognosys, Schlieren) to build a spectral library with the following settings: PSM FDR Cut off of 0.01, fragment m/z between 200 and 1800, peptides with at least 3 amino acids, fragment ions with a relative intensity of at least 5, precursors with at least 5 fragments. Moreover, an iRT calibration was performed with a minimum root mean square error of 0.8 and segmented regression. The three spectral libraries contained coordinates for 469 protein groups and 2279 proteotypic peptides. Quantitative data were extracted from the acquired SWATH-MS maps using Spectronaut Pulsar (Biognosys, Schlieren) and standard settings (e.g. dynamic MS1, and MS2 mass tolerance strategy was used, a dynamic XIC RT Extraction Window with a non-linear iRT calibration strategy, identification was performed using a precursor and protein Q value cutoff of 0.01). The quantified intensities for each fragment were extracted from 30 SWATH-MS injections and exported for further statistical analysis to R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Btla, T cells

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, 8006 Zurich, Switzerland
Idorsia Pharmaceuticals Ltd

### Submitter
Peter Blattmann

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, 8006 Zurich, Switzerland


