### Accession
PXD043058

### Title
Extracellular Vesicles in COVID-19 convalescence can regulate T cell metabolism and function

### Description
Long-term T cell dysregulation has been reported following COVID-19 disease. Prolonged T cell activation is associated with initial disease severity and may be implicated mechanistically in the onset of long-covid symptoms. Here we assess the role of extracellular vesicles (EV) in regulating T cell function over several weeks post COVID-19 infection. We find both the cellular origin and protein content of EV was altered in COVID-19 convalescent individuals compared to healthy donors, with alterations linked to initial disease severity. We demonstrate that convalescent donor-derived EV can alter the function and metabolic rewiring of both CD4 and CD8 T cells. Of note, EV following mild, but not severe disease, show distinctly immunesuppressive properties, reducing T cell effector cytokine production and glucose metabolism. Mechanistically our data indicate the involvement of EV-surface ICAM-1 in facilitating EV - T cell interaction. Taken together, our data demonstrate that circulatory EV are phenotypically and functionally altered several weeks following acute infection, suggesting a role for EV as long-term immune modulators.

### Sample Protocol
EV samples were processed for proteomic analysis using the S-trap method. Briefly, 2 μg of isolated EV in PBS were lysed in an equal volume of 2x concentrated S-trap lysis buffer to a final concentration of 5% SDS, 10 mM TCEP and 50 mM TEAB. Samples were shaken at 1000 rpm for 30 minutes at room temperature, then boiled at 95ºC for 5 mins with shaking at 500 rpm, then at 1000 rpm for 5 mins at room temperature. Samples were sonicated briefly, then incubated with benzonase for 15 mins at 37ºC to shear any DNA. To alkylate, freshly made iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 20mM and samples incubated for 1hr in the dark at room temperature. Samples were then processed using the S-trap micro columns (Profiti) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For protein digestion, samples were incubated with 1 μg trypsin for 2 hrs at 47ºC. Following digestion, peptides were eluted from the S-trap column and dried down in a SpeediVac. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed by the FingerPrints Proteomics Facility, University of Dundee. Peptides were resuspended in 18 μL 1% formic acid and 15 μL injected onto a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography column coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher) and an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Loaded peptides were eluted from the resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å) with a flow of 300 nL/min and a gradient of 3% buffer B to 6% buffer B in 5 mins, then 6% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 115 mins, then 80% buffer B in 7 mins, where buffer A is 0.1% formic acid and buffer B is 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Data was acquired using an easy spray source operated in positive mode, and the mass spectrometer was operated in DIA mode, with a scan cycle consisting of a full MS scan (m/z range 350 – 1650). Data for MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched using Spectronaut version 15 using a library generated from the EV samples and a Swiss-Prot human database downloaded in July 2020. An inverse decoy library was used, and precursor and protein Q-value cut-off of 0.01 (0.05 for proteins per run). Quantification was done using the Quant 2.0 LFQ method and with the major and minor group quantity set as sum peptide quantity and sum precursor quantity respectively. Cross-run normalization was deselected. The resulting intensity data was further analysed in R (version 4.1.1) with data normalised with the cyclic loess method using the limma package. Differential expression analysis was performed using the limma and q-value packages. Significantly regulated proteins were defined as those with a q-value < 0.1. For pathway enrichment analysis, proteins were submitted to the DAVID analysis tool with the whole human proteome as background, with enriched pathways defined as those with a q-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Covid-19, Extracellular vesicles, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Department of Infectious Diseases, School of Immunology and Microbial Sciences, King’s College London, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Schurich
Department of Infectious Diseases, School of Immunology and Microbial Sciences, King’s College London, UK


