### Accession
PXD036304

### Title
Distinct spectrum of ciliopathic diseases results from de novoTUBB4B variants through differential effects on organelle-specific microtubules

### Description
Microtubules are ancient and highly conserved polymers composed of alpha and beta tubulin heterodimers. Their dynamic remodelling drives diverse cellular processes from organelle trafficking and chromosome segregation to templating more stable structures like those of centrioles and ciliary axonemes. While organisms like Chlamydomonas reinhardtii only have a single - and -tubulin gene, TUBB4B, is one of 10 human -tubulin isotypes which can pair with one of the 9 isotypes of -tubulin. Whether this diversification permits discrete transcriptional units for cell type specific expression, or whether additional functional differences exist between isotypes remains unclear. Here, using human disease genetics, we reveal three distinct classes of ciliopathic disease in human patients carrying de novo mutations in TUBB4B. Using structure-function studies, we demonstrate these mutations differentially affect microtubule dynamics and cilia formation in a dominant negative manner. Importantly, using patient-modelled mutant as well as knockout Tubb4b mice we establish a necessary and non-redundant function for TUBB4B in building centrioles and axonemes of multiciliated cells. Our results suggest that a functional difference in TUBB4B is required to support the unique microtubule architecture in motile ciliated cells.  It places primary ciliary dyskinesia and the ciliopathies more broadly into an expanding phenotypic and clinical spectrum of human tubulinopathies.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion Eluates were separated by SDS–PAGE The MW region form around tubulin was cut out, further dissected into 1 × 1 mm2 fragments, dehydrated with Acetonitrile (CAN), reduced with 10 mM DTT and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) for 20 min at 56 °C, alkylated with 55 mM iodacetamide and 50 mM AB for1 h at room temperature, and washed by sequential dehydration/hydration steps alternating between ACN and 50 mM AB. Then, samples were digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C for overnight, extracted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 80% ACN 0.1 % TFA. The combined eluates were  concentrated in a CentriVap Concentrator (Labconco) and loaded onto StageTips. The tryptic peptides eluted from StageTips (80% ACN, 0.1% TFA) were lyophilised and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. Samples were analysed on a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate Ultra3000 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Germany) incorporating an autosampler. 5 μL of each tryptic peptide sample was loaded on an Aurora column (IonOptiks, Australia, 250 mm length), and separated by an increasing ACN gradient, using a 40 min reverse-phase gradient (from 3%–40% ACN) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 275 °C, with a potential of 1,500 V applied to the column. Data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode, using the following settings: MS 70k resolution in the Orbitrap, MS/MS 17k resolution obtained by HCD fragmentation (26 normalised collision energy). FASP digestion Lysed samples  were processed by the FASP procedure [https://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/pr900748n] briefly with following alterations. We used Vivaspin500  30k cut-off ultrafiltration devices (Sartorius) and 50 μL aliquots. All other steps, washes, reduction, alkylation were identical.  Aliquot was diluted with 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 (UA), loaded into the filtration devices, and centrifuged at 14 000g for 15 min. The concentrates were diluted in the devices with 0.2 mL of UA solution and centrifuged again. After centrifugation, the concentrates were mixed with 0.1 mL of 50 mM iodoacetamide in UA solution and incubated in darkness at room temperature (RT) for 30 min followed by centrifugation for 15 min. Then, the concentrate was diluted with 0.2 mL of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 (UB solution), and concentrated again. This step was repeated twice.  The resulting sample was diluted to 50 μL with 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 solution and 1 μg of endoproteinase LysC (Wako) was added. After overnight incubation at 37°C, the LysC fraction was collected by centrifugation of the filter units for 20 min. The sample in the filter was then diluted with 50 μL of 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 containing 1 μg of trypsin. Following a 4 h digestion, Tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation of the filter units for 20 min. Samples were acidified with 1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using StageTips, dried using a CentriVap Concentrator (Labconco) and resuspended in 15 µl 0.1% TFA. Protein concentration was determined by absorption at 280 nm on a Nanodrop 1000, then 2 µg of de-salted peptides were loaded onto a 50 cm emitter packed with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur 200 C18-AQ (Dr Maisch, Germany) using a RSLC-nano uHPLC systems connected to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (both Thermo, UK). Peptides were separated by a 140-min linear gradient from 5% to 30% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid. The Lumos was operated using following settings: MS 120k resolution in the Orbitrap, MS/MS obtained by HCD fragmentation (30 normalised collision energy), read out in the ion-trap with “rapid” resolution with a cycle time of 1 s.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis MaxQuant version 1.6. was used for mass spectra analysis and peptide identification via Andromeda search engine [https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/pr101065j#:~:text=Andromeda%20is%20a%20peptide%20search,and%20accommodates%20extremely%20large%20databases.] using standard settings apart from: Match between runs was enabled. Trypsin or LysC was chosen as a protease with minimum peptide length 7 and maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tubulin, Cilia

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
University of Edinburgh


