### Accession
PXD031926

### Title
Top-down detection of oxidative protein footprinting by Collision-Induced Dissociation, Electron-Transfer Dissociation and Electron-Capture Dissociation

### Description
Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) footprinting is a structural mass spectrometry method that maps proteins by fast and irreversible chemical reactions. The position of oxidative modification reflects solvent accessibility and site reactivity and thus provides information about protein conformation, structural dynamics, and interactions. Bottom-up mass spectrometry is an established standard method to analyze FPOP samples. In the bottom-up approach, all forms of the protein are digested together by a protease of choice, which results in mixture of peptides from various subpopulations of proteins with varying degrees of photochemical oxidation. But, once the protein is already oxidized at least once, the spatial distribution of any consecutive oxidation no longer truly reflects initial protein solvent accessibility and residue reactivity, because the site preference of further oxidation may also be influenced by the changes caused by the prior oxidation. Thus, it would be interesting to obtain an assessment of the protein structure based on the FPOP data, by analyzing only singly oxidized protein populations. This requires utilization of more specific top-down mass spectrometry approaches. The key element of any top-down experiment is selection of a suitable method of ion isolation, excitation and fragmentation. Here we employ and compare collision-induced dissociation (CID), electron-transfer dissociation (ETD), and electron-capture dissociation (ECD) combined with multi continuous accumulation of selected ions (CASI).  Singly oxidized subpopulation of FPOP labeled ubiquitin was used to optimize the method. The usefulness was then demonstrated further by using it to visualize structural changes induced by cofactor removal from holo/apo myoglobin system. The top-down data were compared with the literature and with the bottom-up data set obtained on the same samples. The top-down results were found to be in a good agreement, which indicates that monitoring singly FPOP oxidized ion population by top-down is a functional workflow for oxidative protein footprinting.

### Sample Protocol
The FPOP continuous flow setup used three syringes pumped by standard syringe pumps32,33. The first syringe was filled with 0.4mg/mL solution of the protein (ubiquitin or myoglobin) dis-solved in 50 mM degassed ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 7.2), the second syringe contained H2O2 (final concentration of 0.03%), and the third syringe contained 150 mM methionine as a quencher of the reaction. H2O2 solution was mixed with the protein solution in the first segment of the flow setup (both syringes operated at 10 µL/min) and the photolysis of H2O2 was then performed by a 248 nm KrF excimer laser (Coherent, COMPex50) with the energy of 50 mJ per pulse and frequency 50 Hz (100 mJ and 10 Hz in case of myoglobin). The laser irradiation was done in a 75-μm i.d. fused silica tubing (Polymicro Technologies) through a 3 mm transparent window of removed polyimide coating. The sample was then mixed with methionine quencher from the third syringe (operated at 20 µL/min) resulting in the quenching of the photooxidation photoox-idation reaction. The sample was collected for 1 minute. Three independent samples were produced and collected. Each was then split and analyzed independently by top-down approach and by bottom-up approach.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis (for top-down FPOP analysis): Oxidation level quantitation was calculated by the fragment ion intensities from ETD, ECD, and CID to determine the oxidation extent of a given fragment. DataAnalysis 5.0 (Bruker Daltonics) was used for the visualization and calibration of MRMS spectra. Theoretical m/z values of CID, ETD, ECD, multi CASI/CID and multi CASI/ECD fragment ions were obtained using the Ms2links tool.30 Extent of the oxidation was quantified using the oxidized fragment ion intensities in CID, ETD, and ECD. Oxidation yields for all the ions were calcu-lated as the ratio of the oxidized fragment (Iox) to the sum of all frag-ments (oxidized (Iox) and non-oxidized (I))

### Publication Abstract
Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP) footprinting is a structural mass spectrometry method that maps proteins by fast and irreversible chemical reactions. The position of oxidative modification reflects solvent accessibility and site reactivity and thus provides information about protein conformation, structural dynamics, and interactions. Bottom-up mass spectrometry is an established standard method to analyze FPOP samples. In the bottom-up approach, all forms of the protein are digested together by a protease of choice, which results in a mixture of peptides from various subpopulations of proteins with varying degrees of photochemical oxidation. Here, we investigate the possibility to analyze a specifically selected population of only singly oxidized proteins. This requires utilization of more specific top-down mass spectrometry approaches. The key element of any top-down experiment is the selection of a suitable method of ion isolation, excitation, and fragmentation. Here, we employ and compare collision-induced dissociation, electron-transfer dissociation, and electron-capture dissociation combined with multi-continuous accumulation of selected ions. A singly oxidized subpopulation of FPOP-labeled ubiquitin was used to optimize the method. The top-down approach in FPOP is limited to smaller proteins, but its usefulness was demonstrated by using it to visualize structural changes induced by co-factor removal from the holo/apo myoglobin system. The top-down data were compared with the literature and with the bottom-up data set obtained on the same samples. The top-down results were found to be in good agreement, which indicates that monitoring a singly oxidized FPOP ion population by the top-down approach is a functional workflow for oxidative protein footprinting.

### Keywords
Electron-transfer dissociation, Mass spectrometry., Top-down, Fast photochemical oxidation of proteins, Collision-induced dissociation, Electron-capture dissociation

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, BIOCEV, Prumyslova 595, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic,
Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences 

### Submitter
Zdenek Kukacka

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Novak
Institute of Microbiology, The Czech Academy of Sciences, BIOCEV, Prumyslova 595, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic,


