### Accession
PXD000821

### Title
In vivo SILAC-based proteomics reveals phosphoproteome changes during mouse skin carcinogenesis

### Description
Cancer progresses through distinct stages and mouse models recapitulating traits of this progression are frequently used to explore genetic, morphological and pharmacological aspects of tumor development. To complement genomic investigations of this process, here we quantify phosphoproteomic changes in skin cancer development using the SILAC mouse technology coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry. We distill protein expression signatures from our data that distinguish between skin cancer stages. A distinct phosphoproteome of the two stages of cancer progression is identified which correlates with perturbed cell growth and implicates cell adhesion as a major driver of malignancy. Importantly, integrated analysis of phosphoproteomic data and prediction of kinase activity revealed PAK4-PKC/SRC network to be highly deregulated in SCC but not in papilloma. This detailed molecular picture, both at the proteome and phosphoproteome level, will prove useful for the study of mechanisms of tumor progression.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse skin, TPA-treated skin, papilloma and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) tissues from FVB/N mice treated or not with DMBA-TPA were used for this study. Skin from C57BL/6 SILAC-labeled (13C6 lysine) mice was used to generate the internal standard. For each MS measurement we pooled tissues collected from 3-6 different mice and mixed them at a ratio of 1:1 with the SILAC skin lysate as internal standard.For proteome analysis of experiments 1-3, 150 µg of mixed lysates were separated on 4-12% gradient NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen), each gel lane was cut into 18 slices, and proteins were in-gel digested with endoproteinase Lys-C. For experiment 1, additional 250 µg starting material was digested in 8 M urea with endoproteinase Lys-C according to the FASP protocol and 40 µg of digested peptides separated into 6 fractions according to the StageTip-based fractionation protocol. Data from in-gel and FASP digestion were combined and included in the proteome analysis reported in this study. Because in-gel digestion gave a slightly higher number of protein identification, for experiment 2 and 3 only in-gel digestion have been carried out. For the phosphoproteome, 10-12 mg of mixed lysates was digested in 8 M urea with endoproteinase Lys-C according to the FASP protocol. Two-four milligrams of peptides were separated using strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography column. SCX fractions were pooled into 5-6 fractions according to UV absorbance and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment with TiO2 in the presence of dihydrobenzoic acid (DHB). The flow-through, containing a complex mixture of multiply phosphorylated peptides, was sequentially incubated with TiO2 beads for 5-4 times. A total of 10 fractions of TiO2-enriched phosphorylated peptides were analyzed per each experiment. Of note: the phosphoproteome of experiment 3 gave mush less phosphorylation sites identified and quantified likely due to inefficient Lys-C digestion. Acidified peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ)-Orbitrap mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray ion source. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 30,000 (Velos) or 60,000 (Elite), and a target value of 1,000,000 charges. The ten most intense ions were selected for fragmentation. Peptide fragmentation was performed by HCD at the MSn target value of 40,000 charges and the spectra of the fragmented ions were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with resolution of 7,500 (Velos) or 15,000 (Elite) at m/z 400 Th. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
The RAW MS files from the LTQ-Orbitrap were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform, version 1.2.6.12 for the proteome and 1.2.6.20 for the phosphoproteome. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the concatenated forward and reversed mouse UniProt database release-2012 01. To search precursor and fragment ions, an initial maximal mass deviation of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively, was required. Lys-C/P with full enzyme specificity and only peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids were selected. A maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification. Oxidation (Met) and N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications, as well as phosphoSTY for phosphoproteome analysis. For identification of protein, peptide and phosphorylation sites, we required a maximum FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer progresses through distinct stages, and mouse models recapitulating traits of this progression are frequently used to explore genetic, morphological, and pharmacological aspects of tumor development. To complement genomic investigations of this process, we here quantify phosphoproteomic changes in skin cancer development using the SILAC mouse technology coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry. We distill protein expression signatures from our data that distinguish between skin cancer stages. A distinct phosphoproteome of the two stages of cancer progression is identified that correlates with perturbed cell growth and implicates cell adhesion as a major driver of malignancy. Importantly, integrated analysis of phosphoproteomic data and prediction of kinase activity revealed PAK4-PKC/SRC network to be highly deregulated in SCC but not in papilloma. This detailed molecular picture, both at the proteome and phosphoproteome level, will prove useful for the study of mechanisms of tumor progression.

### Keywords
Mouse, Phosphoproteomics, Skin carcinogenesis, Silac

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute
Tumour Microenvironment & Proteomics

### Submitter
Sara Zanivan

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute


