### Accession
PXD030419

### Title
Comparative analyses of vertebrate CPEB-family of proteins define two sub-families with distinct, but coordinated, functions in post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression

### Description
Background: The vertebrate CPEB-family of RNA-binding proteins promote translational repression or activation of their target mRNAs, which harbor cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements (CPEs) in their 3’ UTRs, through cytoplasmic changes in their poly(A) tail lengths. However, their regulation(s) and mechanism(s) of action have not been systematically addressed as a family. Results: Here we perform a comparative analysis of the four vertebrate CPEBs in their regulation by phosphorylation, supramolecular assemblies’ composition and properties and in their mRNA targets. Conclusions: We show that although all four CPEBs are able to recruit CCR4-NOT deadenylation complex when not phosphorylated, their mechanisms of action determine two subfamilies with distinct, but coordinated, regulation by phosphorylation and target specificity. Thus, CPEB1 forms ribonucleoprotein complexes that are remodeled upon a single phosphorylation event, by AurkA, and are associated with mRNAs containing canonical CPEs. On the other hand, CPEB2-4 are regulated by multiple proline-directed phosphorylations that control their liquid-liquid phase-separation. CPEB2-4 mRNA-targets include CPEB1-bound transcripts, with canonical CPEs, but also a specific subset of mRNAs with non-canonical CPEs. In turn, CPEB2-4 coacervates display compositional, morphological and dynamic differences. Altogether, these results show how, globally, the CPEB family of proteins is able to integrate cellular cues to generate a finetuned adaptive response in gene expression regulation.

### Sample Protocol
In vivo biotinylation Per condition, circa 150 oocytes were microinjected with the corresponding BirA-containing in vitro transcribed polyadenylated RNAs. The injected oocytes were incubated in MBS (88 mM NaCl, 1 mM KCl, 1 mM MgSO4, 2.5 mM NaHCO3, 0.7 mM CaCl2, pH 7.8) with 20 μM biotin (B4501, Merck) for 40 hours at 18ºC. In the case of activation BioIDs, oocytes microinjected with CPEB1(6A)-BirA fusions were stimulated with 10M progesterone (Sigma Aldrich, P0130). Biotinylated peptides affinity purification Oocytes were lysed in 6 μL/oocyte cold lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 1x Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche), 1 mM PMSF) and centrifuged twice for clarification 15 minutes at 16000 x g, 4ºC. 300 μL of cold lysis buffer were added to 200 μL of cleared extract and the resulting 500 μL were subjected to clearing with PD MiniTrap G-25 columns (28-9180-07, GE Healthcare). Triton-X100 and SDS were added to a final concentration of 1.6% and 0.04%, respectively, and the volume was increased to 1 mL, maintaining all concentrations.  Cleared extracts were incubated with 200 μL MyOne Dynabeads Streptavidin C1 (65001, Invitrogen) 20 hours with orbital shaking at 4ºC. After incubation, beads were washed thrice with wash buffer 1 (8 M Urea, 0.25% SDS in PBS), twice with wash buffer 2 (6 M Guanidine-HCl in PBS), once with wash buffer 3 (6.4 M Urea, 1 M NaCl, 0.2% SDS in PBS), thrice with wash buffer 4 (4 M Urea, 1 M NaCl, 10% isopropanol, 10% ethanol, 0.2% SDS in PBS), once with wash buffer 1, once with wash buffer 5 (8 M Urea and 1% SDS in PBS) and thrice with wash buffer 6 (2% SDS in PBS). The washed beads were further washed with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4 to remove detergents that could interfere with MS and 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8 to eliminate the traces of Tris. Sample preparation for MS For disulfide bond reduction, beads were resuspended in 500 μL 3 M urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3 (ammonium bicarbonate) pH 8.0, 5 mM DTT for 1 hour with orbital shaking at RT. Alkylation of thiol groups was achieved by incubation in the dark with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at RT. Alkylation was stopped by addition of excess DTT (5 μL of 500 mM). Sample volumes were brought to 1.5 mL with 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8 to reduce urea concentration and proteins were digested on-bead with 2 μg trypsin (V5111, Promega) 16 hours with orbital shaking at 37ºC. Tryptic digestion was stopped by addition of 1% HCOOH (formic acid). The supernatant, containing released peptides, was recovered. Sample processing from this point on was performed at the IRB Barcelona Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Core Facility. Digested peptide samples were desalted with PolyLC tips C18. Peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. Samples were diluted to 20% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and loaded into strong cation exchange columns. Peptides were eluted in 5% NH4OH (ammonium hydroxide) and 30% methanol. Finally, samples were evaporated and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. For the nano-LC-MS/MS, 10% of the samples volume was used. Nano-LC-MS/MS Samples were loaded to a C18 precolumn (Acclaim PepMap100, 5 m, 100 Å, 300 m x 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 μl/minute using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 50cm, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 120 minutes run, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 1 to 35% B in 90 minutes, from 35 to 50% B in 5 minutes, and from 50% to 85% B in 2 minutes, followed by isocratic elution at 85% B in 5 minutes and stabilization to initial conditions (where B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and the other eluate was 0.1% formic acid in water). The column outlet was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120,000. The lock mass was user-defined at 445.12 m/z in each Orbitrap scan. The top speed (most intense) ions per scan were fragmented and detected in the linear ion trap. The ion count target value was 400,000 for the survey scan and 10,000 for the MS/MS scan. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15 s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.60 kV. RF Lenses were tuned to 30%. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 5000 and activation Q was 0.250. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification MS/MS spectra were searched against UniprotKB Xenopodinae release 201702, contaminants and user-defined proteins using Proteome Discoverer v2.1.0.81 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Sequest HT search engine. Searches were run against targeted and decoy database to determine the false discovery rate (FDR). Search parameters included trypsin enzyme specificity, allowing for two missed cleavage sites, oxidation in methionine and acetylation in protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications. When specified, biotin in lysine was included as a dynamic modification as well. Peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance 0.6 Da. Peptides with a q-value lower than 0.1 and FDR < 1% were considered positive identifications with a high confidence level. Statistical analysis Log10(iBAQ) values were used as protein intensity. Percentile normalization of the data was performed to minimize batch effects across biological replicates. K-nearest neighbours (kNN) was used for missing values imputation (function impute.knn from the impute R package) with k set to 10. Only the cases with one or two missing values were imputed. Cases with 3 or 4 missing observations were manually included only when the 3 or 4 missings occurred in the control condition and the test condition had 1 or none plus, the average log10(iBAQ) of the test was not within the 25% percentile of values detected in the whole sample (so as to filter out weaker-intensity proteins). Candidate interactions were found following a differential expression analysis, using functions lmFit and eBayes from limma R package. Biological replicates were used as adjusting variable in the model when needed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Deadenylation, Phosphorylation, Phase-separation, Ccr4-not complex, Cpeb, 3’utr, Mrna translation

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08028 Barcelona, Spain Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), 08010 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Marina Gay

### Lab Head
Dr Raul Mendez
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08028 Barcelona, Spain Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), 08010 Barcelona, Spain


