### Accession
PXD043482

### Title
A widespread family of oxidoreductive sulfoquinovosidases at the gateway to sulfoquinovose catabolism

### Description
Proteome analysis to study Sulfoquinovose catabolism Arthrobacter sp. strain AK01

### Sample Protocol
Frozen whole bacterial pellets were prepared using the in-StageTip preparation approach as previously described 1. Cells were resuspended in 4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100 mM Tris pH 8.0 and boiled at 95˚C with shaking for 10 minutes to aid solubilisation. Samples were allowed to cool for 10 minutes and then boiled for a further 10 minutes before the protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid assays (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 50μg of protein for each biological replicate were reduced / alkylated with the addition of Tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride and iodoacetamide (final concentration 20 mM and 60mM respectively), by incubating in the dark for 1 hour at 45˚C. Following reduction / alkylation samples were digested overnight with Trypsin (1/25 w/w Solu-trypsin, Sigma) at 37˚C with shaking at 1000rpm. Digests were then halted by the addition of isopropanol and TFA (50% and 1% respectively) and samples cleaned up using home-made SDB-RPS StageTips prepared according to previously described protocols 1-3. SDB-RPS StageTips were placed in a Spin96 tip holder 2 to enable batch-based spinning of samples and tips conditioned with 100% acetonitrile; followed by 30% methanol, 1% TFA followed by 90% isopropanol, 1% TFA with each wash spun through the column at 1000 x g for 3 minutes. Acidified isopropanol / peptide mixtures were loaded onto the SDB-RPS columns and spun through, and tips washed with 90% isopropanol, 1% TFA followed by 1% TFA in Milli-Q water. Peptide samples were eluted with 80% acetonitrile, 5% ammonium hydroxide and dried by vacuum centrifugation at room temperature before being stored at -20˚C.  Prepared digested proteome samples were re-suspended in Buffer A* (2% acetonitrile, 0.01% trifluoroacetic acid) and separated using a two-column chromatography setup composed of a PepMap100 C18 20-mm by 75-m trap and a PepMap C18 500-mm by 75-m analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 l/min for 5 min with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface at 300 nl/minute via the analytical columns using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLCs (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 125-minute analytical runs were undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 2% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 22% B over 95 min, then from 22% B to 40% B over 10 min, then from 40% B to 80% B over 5 min. The composition was held at 80% B for 5 min, and then dropped to 2% B over 2 min before being held at 2% B for another 8 min. The Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer was operated in a stepped FAIMS data-dependent mode at two different FAIMS CVs -40 and -60. For each FAIMS CV a single Orbitrap MS scan (300-1600 m/z and a resolution of 60k) was acquired every 1.7 seconds followed by Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans of precursors (Stepped NCE 25,35,45%, with a maximal injection time of 54 ms with the Automatic Gain Control set to 250% and the resolution to 30k).

### Data Protocol
Identification and LFQ analysis were accomplished using MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0)4 using the in house generated proteome of AK01 allowing for oxidation on Methionine. Prior to MaxQuant analysis dataset acquired on the Fusion Lumos were separated into individual FAIMS fractions using the FAIMS MzXML Generator 5. The LFQ and “Match Between Run” options were enabled to allow comparison between samples. The resulting data files were processed using Perseus (v1.4.0.6)6 to compare the growth conditions using student t-tests as well as Pearson correlation analyses. For LFQ comparisons biological replicates were grouped and missing values imputed based on the observed total peptide intensities with a range of 0.3σ and a downshift of 1.8σ.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sulfoquinovose, Arthrobacter

### Affiliations
School of Chemistry, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Spencer J. Williams
School of Chemistry, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia


