### Accession
PXD016557

### Title
ARP-T1 is a ciliary protein associated with a novel ciliopathy in inherited basal cell cancer, Bazex-Dupré-Christol Syndrome

### Description
The interactors of the protein Arp-T1 were studied in human cells ( keratinocytes)

### Sample Protocol
Gel separation and protein digestion :  Protein samples were loaded on a 12 % mini polyacrylamide gel and migrated about 2.5 cm in non-reducing conditions. After Coomassie staining, gel lanes between 15-300 kDa were excised into 5-6 pieces, and digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) as described (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for mass spectrometry analyses.  Mass spectrometry analyses : Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected on a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced via a nanospray source to a high resolution mass spectrometer based on Orbitrap technology: Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid or QExactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany), depending on the experiments considered. Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Dionex) before separation on a C18 reversed-phase analytical nanocolumn, using a gradient from 4 to 76 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid for peptide separation (total time: 65min). Q-Exactive Plus instrument was interfaced with an Easy Spray C18 PepMap column (25 cm x 75µm ID, 2µm, 100Å, Dionex). Full MS survey scans were performed at 70,000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher), the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy NCE=27 %) and analysis in the orbitrap at 17’500 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.5 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 60s from further analysis.  Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument was interfaced with a reversed-phase C18 Nikkyo column (75 μm ID x 15 cm, 3.0 μm, 120Å, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) or a custom packed column (75 μm ID × 40 cm, 1.8 μm particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch). Full survey scans were performed at a 120’000 resolution, and a top speed precursor selection strategy was applied to maximize acquisition of peptide tandem MS spectra with a maximum cycle time of 3s. HCD fragmentation mode was used at a normalized collision energy of 32%, with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the ion trap. Peptides selected for MS/MS were excluded from further fragmentation during 60s. References : Shevchenko, A., Tomas, H., Havlis, J., Olsen, J. V, and Mann, M. (2006). In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat. Protoc. 1, 2856–2860.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis MS data were analyzed using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science, London, UK) set up to search the Swiss-Prot (www.uniprot.org) database restricted to Homo sapiens taxonomy (UniProt, December 2015 version: 20’194 sequences). Trypsin (cleavage at K,R) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages. Mascot was searched with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da (Orbitrap Fusion) or 0.02 Da (QExactive Plus). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. Scaffold software (version 4.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications, and to perform dataset alignment. Peptide identifications established at lower than 90.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm were filtered out. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. All data for an entire gel lane were pooled for database search.  references: Nesvizhskii, A. I., Keller, A., Kolker, E., and Aebersold, R. (2003). A statistical model for identifying proteins by tandem mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 75 (17): 4646-58.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Lc-msms, Gel electrophoresis

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Dermatology Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois Université de Lausanne Hôpital de Beaumont,  Lausanne,  Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Hohl
Department of Dermatology Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois Université de Lausanne Hôpital de Beaumont,  Lausanne,  Switzerland


