### Accession
PXD007108

### Title
Cigarette smoke induces mitochondrial metabolic reprogramming in lung cells

### Description
Cigarette smoking remains the leading cause of non-small cell lung carcinoma. Studies involving acute exposure of smoke on lung cells revealed induction of pre- cancerous state in lung cells. Recently few studies have reported the chronic effect of cigarette smoke in inducing cellular transformation. Yet no systemic study has been performed to understand the molecular alterations in lung cells due to cigarette smoke. Hence it is both important and necessary to study the chronic effect of cigarette smoke in a temporal setting to understand the molecular alterations. In this study, we carried out TMT based proteomic profiling of lung cells which were exposed to cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) for upto 12 months. We identified 2621 proteins in total, of which 145, 114, 87, 169 and 671 proteins were differentially expressed (p<0.05, 1.5 fold) in 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th and 12th month respectively. Pathway analysis revealed enrichment of xenobiotic metabolism signaling for the first 8 months of smoke treatment, where as continued exposure of smoke for 12 months revealed mitochondrial reprogramming in cells which includes dysregulation of oxidative phosphorylation machinery leading to enhanced reactive oxygen species and higher expression of enzymes involved in  tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA). In addition, chronic exposure of smoke led to overexpression of enzymes involved in glutamine metabolism, fatty acid degradation and lactate synthesis. This could possibly explain the availability of alternative source of carbon in TCA cycle apart from glycolytic pyruvate. Our data indicates that chronic exposure to cigarette smoke induces mitochondrial metabolic transformation in cells to support growth and survival.

### Sample Protocol
H358 cells were cultured in the smoke dedicated incubator. Cells were subjected to chronic exposed to CSC (0.1%). Cells that were cultured in a normal incubator were labelled as parental. Cells that were maintained and passaged in the smoke dedicated incubator for 2 months, 4 months, 6 months , 8 months and 12 months were labeled as H358-2M, H358-4M, H358-6M, H358-8M and H358-12M respectively. H358-P and smoke exposed cells were harvested after 12 hour of serum starvation. The cells were lysed in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 5mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1mM sodium orthovanadate in 50mM Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC)). Equal amount of protein from all conditions was used for protein digestion. We employed filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol using 30kDa filters to reduce the amount of SDS in the lysate. Peptide samples were labeled using TMT 6-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides derived from H358-P, H358-2M, H358-4M, H358-6M, H358-8M and H358-12M were labeled with TMT tag 126, 127, 128, 129, 130 and 131 respectively. The labeled samples were pooled and fractionated using basic pH reverse phase chromatography (bRPLC). The pooled sample was reconstituted in bRPLC solvent A (10 mM TAEBC, pH 8.5) and separated on XBridge C18 Column (Waters, UK) with a linear increase in gradient from 5 to 100% of 10 mM TEABC with 90% acetonitrile (pH 8.5) over a 60 min run. Total of 6 fractions were collected and desalting using C18 StageTips prior to mass spectrometry analysis.  Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy nLC-1000 system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark) was used for the analysis of TMT-labeled fractions in technical triplicates. Peptide digest was reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and loaded on trap column (75 µm x 2 cm 3µm Magic C18 AQ (MichromBioresources, Inc., Auburn, CA, USA). Peptides were separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 µm x 25 cm, 2.4 µm Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 2.4 µm) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient of 10-32% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) for  100 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent SPS-MS3 acquisition mode. The survey MS scans (from m/z 400–1,600) was acquired with a cycle time of 3sec from 400-1,600 m/z at a resolution of 1, 20,000. The precursor ions from the MS scan were isolated with 1.6 m/z isolation width and fragmented using higher-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with 34% normalized collision energy. The fragment ion scans were acquired in orbitrap analyser with resolution of 30,000. AGC target of 2x105 ions and maximum injection time of 55ms were set for MS scans. Dynamic exclusion of 45 sec was used to prevent repeated MS/MS analysis of the precursor ions. For MS3 scans, top 10 precursor ions from each MS/MS scan were further fragmented using HCD mode with 55% NCE and the fragment ions were detected in orbitrap from 100-400 m/z with 60,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The protein identification and quantitation was done using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1) software suite (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Mass spectrometry data was searched against NCBI Human RefSeq protein database (Version 75) supplemented with common contaminants using Mascot (version 2.2.0) and SEQUEST search algorithms. In search parameters, oxidation of methionine was set to dynamic modification while static modifications included - carbamidomethylation at cysteine and TMT modification at N-terminus of the peptide and lysine. Trypsin was specified as protease and maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. Decoy database searches was carried out to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) and peptides identification. The FDR cut-off of 1% was considered for further analysis. Quantitation node in Proteome Discoverer was used to calculate the protein ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular transformation owing to cigarette smoking is due to chronic exposure and not acute. However, systematic studies to understand the molecular alterations in lung cells due to cigarette smoke are lacking. To understand these molecular alterations induced by chronic cigarette smoke exposure, we carried out tandem mass tag (TMT) based temporal proteomic profiling of lung cells exposed to cigarette smoke for upto 12months. We identified 2620 proteins in total, of which 671 proteins were differentially expressed (1.5-fold) after 12months of exposure. Prolonged exposure of lung cells to smoke for 12months revealed dysregulation of oxidative phosphorylation and overexpression of enzymes involved in TCA cycle. In addition, we also observed overexpression of enzymes involved in glutamine metabolism, fatty acid degradation and lactate synthesis. This could possibly explain the availability of alternative source of carbon to TCA cycle apart from glycolytic pyruvate. Our data indicates that chronic exposure to cigarette smoke induces mitochondrial metabolic reprogramming in cells to support growth and survival.

### Keywords
Nsclc, Cigarette smoking, Metabolism, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India

### Submitter
Aditi Chatterjee

### Lab Head
Dr Aditi Chatterjee
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India


