### Accession
PXD035495

### Title
Positive feedback between TOR singling, energy metabolism and lysine acetylation drives heterosis in elite hybrid rice

### Description
Heterosis refers to the superior performance of the hybrid compared with its parental lines. Despite several genetic models and different molecular pathways proposed to explain heterosis, it remains unclear how hybrid cells integrate complementary gene expression, metabolic accumulation and/or hormone signaling to drive heterotic growth. In this work, using integrative omics combined with biochemical analyses, we uncovered an enhanced TORC1 signaling in the elite hybrid rice Shanyou 63 (SY63) relative to the parental lines, which was associated with accumulation of growth-promoting (translation, cell division) and energy metabolic (glycolysis and TCA) proteins, enhanced energy metabolic activities, increased histone H3 and cellular protein lysine acetylation, and superior growth of the panicle meristem. Metabolism of nuclear-cytosolic acetyl-Coenzyme A was also enhanced in the hybrid, which paralleled with increases of histone H3 acetylation to selectively target growth-promoting and metabolic genes expression. Lysine acetylation of cellular proteins including TORC1, ribosomal proteins, and energy metabolic enzymes was also augmented and/or remodeled, potentially modulating their activities. The data indicate that the positive feedback loop between TOR-signaling, energy-producing metabolic activity, lysine acetylation, and growth-promoting gene expression is a mechanism underling the superior growth rate of the hybrid. The results imply that any enhanced activity within the loop would drive and sustain the TOR signaling to promote superior growth of hybrids, which may represent a general mechanistic model for heterosis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Lysine acetylated peptides enrichment

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis Protein database search Proteomics and acetyl-proteomics data analysis

### Publication Abstract
Heterosis refers to the superior performance of a hybrid compared with its parental lines. Although several genetic and molecular models have been proposed to explain heterosis, it remains unclear how hybrid cells integrate complementary gene expression or activity to drive heterotic growth. In this work, we show that accumulation of growth-promoting and energy metabolism proteins, enhanced energy metabolism activities, and increased protein lysine acetylation were associated with superior growth of the panicle meristem in the elite hybrid rice Shanyou 63 relative to its parental varieties. Metabolism of nuclear/cytosolic acetyl-coenzyme A was also enhanced in the hybrid, which paralleled increases in histone H3 acetylation to selectively target the expression of growth-promoting and metabolic genes. Lysine acetylation of cellular proteins, including TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN complex 1, ribosomal proteins, and energy metabolism enzymes, was also augmented and/or remodeled to modulate their activities. The data indicate that an enhanced network of energy-producing metabolic activity and growth-promoting histone acetylation/gene expression in the hybrid could contribute to its superior growth rate and may constitute a model to explain heterosis.

### Keywords
Hybrid rice;proteome;torc1;lysine acetylation; energy metabolism

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Hubei Hongshan Laboratory, Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070 Wuhan, China
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Xuan Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Xuan Ma
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Hubei Hongshan Laboratory, Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070 Wuhan, China


