### Accession
PXD014135

### Title
Germline maintenance through the multifaceted activities of GLH/Vasa in Caenorhabditis elegans P granules

### Description
Vasa is a highly conserved member of the ATP-dependent DEAD box helicase family, a multipotency factor, and a critical component for the specification and maintenance of the germline. Its homologs have been shown to regulate translation, small RNA amplification, and serve as a molecular solvent for single-stranded RNA; however, the function of Vasa’s defining domains and what they interact with are unclear. To address this, 28 mutant alleles of the C. elegans Vasa homolog GLH-1 were generated in conserved motifs. Mutations in the flanking and helicase domains show that GLH-1 retains its association with P granules through its helicase activity and not through static interactions with other P-granule proteins. Changes outside of these domains retain GLH-1 in P granules but still compromise fertility, and removal of glycine-rich repeats progressively diminish P-granule wetting-like interactions at the nuclear periphery. A mutation that facilitates Vasa aggregation was previously leveraged in insects and mammals to identify the transient association of Vasa with piRNA amplifying Argonautes. This same mutation in GLH-1 also stimulates aggregation and association with Argonautes, suggesting that the transient amplifying complex is evolutionarily conserved even though the method of piRNA amplification in C. elegans is not. Mass spectrometry analysis of proteins that co-immunoprecipitate with wild type and mutant GLH-1 reveal an affinity for all three PCI (26S Proteasome Lid, COP9, eIF3) scaffolding complexes, which regulate protein turnover and translation, and an aversion for ribosomes and the 26S proteasome core.  These results suggest that phase-separated P granules compartmentalize the cytoplasm to exclude large protein assemblies and emphasize the role of Vasa homologs in maintaining proteostasis.

### Sample Protocol
CRISPR/Cas9 was used to place a GFP::3xFLAG tag on the C-terminus of endogenous GLH-1 (strain DUP64 - curation set 28180,28181), which shows constitutive expression in P granules.  CRISPR was then used to introduce mutations within the helicase's DEAD-box to create GLH-1(DAAD) (DUP173 - curation set 28186,28187) and GLH-1(DQAD) (DUP171 curation set 28184,28185) mutant strains.  A fourth strain, DUP73 - curation set 28182,28183, was created using CRISPR to introduce a bicistronic rla-1 spacer between GLH-1 and GFP::3xFLAG to create a transcriptional glh-1 reporter for use as a control.  Anti-FLAG beads were used to co-immunoprecipitate these tags from all four strains, and then shotgun proteomics was performed on replicates of each sample.  Pairwise comparisons among the four strains were used to calculate normalized fold changes.  C. elegans were syncronized and grown in liquid culture until the first day of adulthood, pelleted and flash frozen. 1-2 ml of frozen worms were ground in liquid nitrogen and resuspended in lysis buffer (25mM Hepes-KOH (pH 7.4), 10mM KOAc, 2mM Mg(OAc)2, 100mM KCl, 0.25% Triton X-100, 1mM PMSF, 1 proteinase inhibitor tablet, 1:200 Riboguard and 1:200 DNase). Samples were then spun at 5,000 RPM for 5 minutes and supernatant was then immediately used for immunoprecipitation. 100ul of Anti DYKKDDDDK agarose beads (018-22783, Wako Chemicals, USA)were washed with cold TBS, pelleted and resuspended with 1 ml of lysate, and incubated for 3 hours at 4C. Beads were pelleted and the unbound fraction removed, washed 3X with TBS, and then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to sending to Cell Signaling Technologies for Mass Spec.  The mass spectromety was performed by Cell Signaling Technologies (CST) (Danvers, MA) using their PTMScan Discovery service.On bead protease digestion was performed followed by C18 solid phase extraction, peptide lyophilization, and antibody enrichment of post-translational modification (PTM) containing peptides using CST developed antibodies. Then peptides were loaded onto a 50 cm x 100 m PicoFrit capillary column packed with C18 reversed-phase resin for LC-MS/MS. The MS parameters were as follows: MS Run Time 168 min, MS1 Scan Range (300.0 – 1500.00), Top 20 MS/MS (Min Signal 500, Isolation Width 2.0, Normalized Coll. Energy 35.0, Activation-Q 0.250, Activation Time 20.0, Lock Mass 371.101237, Charge State Rejection Enabled, Charge State 1+ Rejected, Dynamic Exclusion Enabled, Repeat Count 1, Repeat Duration 35.0, Exclusion List Size 500, Exclusion Duration 40.0, Exclusion Mass Width Relative to Mass, Exclusion Mass Width 10ppm).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry informatics was also done by Cell Signaling Technologies. The MS/MS spectra were evaluated using SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994) and the Core platform from Harvard University. Searches were performed against the most recent update of the WormBase C elegans database with mass accuracy of +/-50 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Results were then filtered with mass accuracy of +/– 5 ppm on precursor ions and presence of the intended motif. These were then further filtered to a 1% protein false discovery rate.  Analysis results are included in Table S2 and uploaded to the PRIDE proteomics repository.

### Publication Abstract
Vasa homologs are ATP-dependent DEAD-box helicases, multipotency factors, and critical components that specify and protect the germline. They regulate translation, amplify piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), and act as RNA solvents; however, the limited availability of mutagenesis-derived alleles and their wide range of phenotypes have complicated their analysis. Now, with clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR/Cas9), these limitations can be mitigated to determine why protein domains have been lost or retained throughout evolution. Here, we define the functional motifs of GLH-1/Vasa in <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i> using 28 endogenous, mutant alleles. We show that GLH-1's helicase activity is required to retain its association with P granules. GLH-1 remains in P granules when changes are made outside of the helicase and flanking domains, but fertility is still compromised. Removal of the glycine-rich repeats from GLH proteins progressively diminishes P-granule wetting-like interactions at the nuclear periphery. Mass spectrometry of GLH-1-associated proteins implies conservation of a transient piRNA-amplifying complex, and reveals a novel affinity between GLH-1 and three structurally conserved PCI (26S Proteasome Lid, COP9, and eIF3) complexes or "zomes," along with a reciprocal aversion for assembled ribosomes and the 26S proteasome. These results suggest that P granules compartmentalize the cytoplasm to exclude large protein assemblies, effectively shielding associated transcripts from translation and associated proteins from turnover. Within germ granules, Vasa homologs may act as solvents, ensuring mRNA accessibility by small RNA surveillance and amplification pathways, and facilitating mRNA export through germ granules to initiate translation.

### Keywords
Vasa, C. elegans, Glh-1 coip, Glh-1

### Affiliations
The MDI Biological Laboratory
The Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory

### Submitter
Dustin Updike

### Lab Head
Dr Dustin Lynn Updike
The Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory


