### Accession
PXD000105

### Title
An extensive proteome map of tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) fruit pericarp

### Description
Fruit pericarp at two stages, cell expasion and orange red. From Solaunm Lycopersicum and Solaunm Lycopersicum var cerasiforme genotypes. Two Dimensional Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (Coomasie staining, Band excision, Enzyme digestion) LC/MS (Thermo Finnigan LTQ XL) Software processing (X! Tandem, CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)) Databases (Contaminants database is a home-made database. It is a set of 25 proteic sequences corresponding to proteins that could be present in the samples, 21 correspond with keratins, 2 with trypsin and 2 with bovin serum albumins. 17 sequences come from SwissProt and 8 from TrEMBL. ITAG2.3 database is the set of proteic sequences predicted in the version 2.3 of the annotation of the tomate genome published by the ITAG group (ftp.solgenomics.net))

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) is the model species for studying fleshy fruit development. An extensive proteome map of the fruit pericarp is described in light of the high-quality genome sequence. The proteomes of fruit pericarp from 12 tomato genotypes at two developmental stages (cell expansion and orange-red) were analyzed. The 2DE reference map included 506 spots identified by nano-LC/MS and the International Tomato Annotation Group Database searching. A total of 425 spots corresponded to unique proteins. Thirty-four spots resulted from the transcription of genes belonging to multigene families involving two to six genes. A total of 47 spots corresponded to a mixture of different proteins. The whole protein set was classified according to Gene Ontology annotation. The quantitative protein variation was analyzed in relation to genotype and developmental stage. This tomato fruit proteome dataset is currently the largest available and constitutes a valuable tool for comparative genetic studies of tomato genome expression at the protein level. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000105.

### Keywords
Fruit, Proteome, Tomato

### Affiliations
INRA

### Submitter
Laura Pascual

### Lab Head


