### Accession
PXD011808

### Title
BAP1 complex promotes transcription by opposing PRC1-mediated H2A ubiquitylation

### Description
In Drosophila, a complex consisting of Calypso and ASX catalyzes H2A deubiquitination and has been reported to act as part of the Polycomb machinery in transcriptional silencing. The mammalian homologs of these proteins (BAP1 and ASXL1/2/3, respectively), are frequently mutated in various cancer types, yet their precise functions remain unclear. Using an integrative approach based on isogenic cell lines generated with CRISPR/Cas9, we uncover an unanticipated role for BAP1 in gene activation. This function requires the assembly of an enzymatically active BAP1-associated core complex (BAP1.com) containing one of the redundant ASXL proteins. We investigate the mechanism underlying BAP1.com-mediated transcriptional regulation and show that it does not participate in Polycomb-mediated silencing. Instead, our results establish that the function of BAP1.com is to safeguard transcriptionally active genes against silencing by the Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis of Flag-tagged constructs overexpressed in HeLa cells, 100 mg of nuclear extracts were used. Nuclear extracts were first dialyzed in BC250 (50 mM Tris pH8.0, 250 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol and protease inhibitors). Precipitates were removed by centrifugation and the supernatant was incubated with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel overnight. The beads were then washed three times with BC250 + 0,05% NP40 and eluted with 0.2 mg/ml Flag peptide, precipitated with ice-cold acetone and resuspended in 1X Laemmli Sample Buffer. Of note, for mass spectrometry analysis of Flag-tagged BAP1 overexpressed in MP41 cells, 50 mg of nuclear extracts was used and first purified on an ion exchange chromatography HiTrap Q 1ml column (GE Healthcare).  After IP and elution of enriched proteins, SDS-PAGE (Invitrogen) was used without separation as a cleanup step to remove lipids, metabolites, salts, and denaturing agents from the samples. After colloidal blue staining (LabSafe GEL BlueTM GBiosciences), 4 gel slices were excised and proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT prior to alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After washing and shrinking the gel pieces with 100% MeCN, in-gel digestion was performed using trypsin/Lys-C (Promega) overnight in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 30°C.

### Data Protocol
We acquired Survey MS scans in the Orbitrap on the 400-1200 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 120,000 and a 4 × 105 ion count target. Each scan was recalibrated in real time by co-injecting an internal standard from ambient air into the C-trap. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 35, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 100 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. Data were searched against the uniprot-Human database, using Sequest HT from Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (thermo Scientific). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two miss cleavages was allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS 58. The Sequest HT target and decoy search results were validated at 1% FDR with Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
In Drosophila, a complex consisting of Calypso and ASX catalyzes H2A deubiquitination and has been reported to act as part of the Polycomb machinery in transcriptional silencing. The mammalian homologs of these proteins (BAP1 and ASXL1/2/3, respectively), are frequently mutated in various cancer types, yet their precise functions remain unclear. Using an integrative approach based on isogenic cell lines generated with CRISPR/Cas9, we uncover an unanticipated role for BAP1 in gene activation. This function requires the assembly of an enzymatically active BAP1-associated core complex (BAP1.com) containing one of the redundant ASXL proteins. We investigate the mechanism underlying BAP1.com-mediated transcriptional regulation and show that it does not participate in Polycomb-mediated silencing. Instead, our results establish that the function of BAP1.com is to safeguard transcriptionally active genes against silencing by the Polycomb Repressive Complex 1.

### Keywords
Bap, Prc1, Asxl

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University


