### Accession
PXD016811

### Title
sRNA scr5239 involved in important feedback loop of S. coelicolor central metabolism

### Description
The project is focused on the highly conserved sRNA scr5329 in Streptomyces coelicolor. A proteomics approach revealed that the sRNA regulates several metabolic enzymes, among them the Phosphoenolpyruvate-Carboxykinase (PEPCK), a key enzyme of the central carbon metabolism. The sRNA scr5239 promotes its degradation on the post-transcriptional level. The expression itself is dependent on the global transcriptional regulator DasR, which is N-acetylglucosamine-responsive thereby creating a feedback regulation. By post-transcriptional regulation of PEPCK and likely more targets, scr5239 adds an additional layer to the DasR regulatory network, providing a tool to control the metabolism in dependency to the carbon source.

### Sample Protocol
S. coelicolor were grown on solid medium 100 mln. spores per 300 µl were pregerminated as described by Kieser et al. (Kieser, 2000), plated out on R2YE with cellophane overlays and incubated at 30°C for 3-4 days. For growth in liquid medium 100 mln spores per 50 ml were pregerminated and incubated at 28°C under continuous shaking for 3-4 days in Jasenka medium (10% sucrose, 3% tryptic soy broth, 0,1% MgCl2 and 0,1% yeast extract). All integrating plasmids were constructed based on pAR933a (Rodriguez-Garcia, 2005).The plasmids used in this work all enable a stable integration of one single copy per chromosome (Kuhstoss, 1991), avoiding possible problems associated with the copy number of multicopy plasmids. The luciferase gene was excised from pAR933a using XbaI and SpeI and a 3x FLAG-tag (for western blot detection) was inserted converting the XbaI site to an MfeI site. Then, an insert containing two BsaI sites for golden gate cloning, was cloned into the SpeI/MfeI digested vector resulting in pGold_F3. E. coli ET12567/pUZ8002 was used to transfer the plasmids into S. coelicolor via intergeneric conjugation (Kieser, 2000). For quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis the S. coelicolor wild type M145 and the sRNA overexpression and deletion strain where grown on solid R2YE medium as described above. Cells where harvested at the end of exponential growth when the mycelium just started to turn red. Cell lysis and whole proteome preparation was done as described in 2.4. Proteins were precipitated from the lysates using ReadyPrep™ 2-D Cleanup Kit (Bio-Rad). Obtained protein pellets were suspended in dissolving buffer containing 2% SDS, 8 M urea, 25 mM HEPES, 1 mM DTT (pH 7.4) and the protein concentration was measured using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). For the digestion aliquots containing 200 µg of total protein amount were added onto Microcon-10 kDa Centrifugal Filter Units (Millipore) and processed using FASP protocol (Nat Methods, 2009) with modified digestion buffer containing 0.2% sodium deoxycholate, 0.25 M urea, in 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.6. After digestion, the samples were cleaned from sodium deoxycholate by precipitation of it in the presence of formic acid followed by centrifugation at 12 000 x g. Concentration of obtained peptides was measured using Lowry assay. Equal amount of protein digests (100 µg) from each sample were labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 6-plex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Labelled samples were dissolved in loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.1% FA), resulting in a final concentration of 10 μg/μl prior the liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Before analysis on the Q Exactive (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA), peptides were separated using an Agilent 1200 nano-LC system. Samples were trapped on a Zorbax 300SB-C18, and separated on a NTCC-360/100-5-153 (Nikkyo Technos., Ltd) column using a gradient of A (5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) and B (90% ACN, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA), ranging from 5 % to 37 % B in 240 min with a flow of 0.4 µl/min. The Q Exactive was operated in a data dependent manner, selecting top 5 precursors for fragmentation by HCD. The survey scan was performed at 70.000 resolution from 300-1700 m/z, with a max injection time of 100 ms and target of 1 x 106 ions. For generation of HCD fragmentation spectra, a max ion injection time of 500 ms and AGC of 1 x 105 were used before fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy, 35.000 resolution. Precursors were isolated with a width of 2 m/z and put on the exclusion list for 70 s. Single and unassigned charge states were rejected from precursor selection.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS raw files were searched against the UniProtKB/ S. coelicolor database and filtered to a 1% FDR cut off. Ion mass tolerance of precursors equals ±10 ppm while the fragments have a more limited mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for HCD-FTMS. The search algorithm assessed tryptic peptides with maximum 1 missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation (C), TMT 10-plex (K, N-term) as fixed modifications and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Only unique peptides in the data set were used for quantification, while reporter ions were quantified by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 on HCD-FTMS tandem mass spectra (integration tolerance 20 ppm).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Srna, Streptomyces, Carbon metabolism, Dasr

### Affiliations
Synthetic Genetic Circuits, Department of Biology, Technical University Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany
Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Elena Ossipova

### Lab Head
Dr Beatix Suess
Synthetic Genetic Circuits, Department of Biology, Technical University Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany


