### Accession
PXD040166

### Title
STAT5b is a key effector of NRG-1/ERBB4-mediated cardiomyocyte growth

### Description
Interactome of ErbB4 JM-a and JM-b in MDA-MB-468 cells.

### Sample Protocol
The Erbb4 JM-a and JM-b expressing MDA-MB468 cells were cross-linked with 1 mM DTPB for 2 minutes and quenched with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4 for 15 minutes at room temperature.  The cross-linked cells were lysed to Triton-X based lysis buffer and precleared with 50µl of preclear beads for 1 hour at 4⁰C under gentle agitation. To prepare the preclear beads, 160 µl of magnetic G-protein beads were blocked with 5% BSA, incubated with 8 µg mouse IgG and 8 µg of rabbit IgG for 3 hours at 4 ⁰C and cross-linked with 3 mM BS3 crosslinker for 30 minutes at room temperature. The mixture was quenched with 50 mM Tris pH 7.5. The precleared lysate was incubated with the ErbB4 antibodies cross-linked to magnetic G-protein beads for 3hours at 4⁰C under gentle agitation. To prepare the ErbB4 G-protein beads, 160 µl of magnetic G-protein beads were blocked with 5% BSA, incubated with 8 µg anti-ErbB4 (HFR-1) and 8 µg anti-ErbB4 (E200) for 3 hours at 4 ⁰C and cross-linked with 3 mM BS3 crosslinker for 30 minutes at room temperature. The mixture was quenched with 50 mM Tris pH 7.5 for 15 minutes and washed 3 times with 0.1% Tween 20 in PBS.  The immunoprecipitates were washed 7 times with 0.2% Tween 20 in PBS. Immunoprecipitates were eluted with 6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 10 mM chloroacetamide and 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 in 95 °C for 10 minutes. Guanidine hydrochloride was diluted to 2 M and eluted samples were digested with 1:50 (w/v) trypsin (Thermo Scientific) overnight at 37 °C. Following digestion, the reactions were quenched with 10% trifluoroacetic acid at a final concentration of approximately 0.5% (pH ~2), desalted on tC18 SepPak 96-well plate (Waters), and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Peptides were analyzed on an Easy-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. Peptides were loaded on an in-house packed 100 μm × 2 cm precolumn packed with ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch) using 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A) and separated by reverse phase chromatography on a 75 μm × 15 cm analytical column packed with ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ beads. All separations were performed using a 60-minute gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/minute. The gradient ranged from 6% buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) to 21% buffer B in 28 minutes and from 21% buffer B to 36% buffer B in 22 minutes. Buffer B concentration was ramped up to 100% in 5 minutes, and 100% buffer B was run 5 minutes for washout. The DDA method consisted of a full MS scan (120,000 resolution, 7E5 automatic gain control (AGC) target, 50 ms maximum injection time, 300 to 1750 m/z, profile mode), followed by data-dependent MS/MS acquisitions on the top 20 most intense precursor ions (15,000 resolution, 5E4 AGC target, 100 ms maximum injection time, 1.6 m/z isolation window, normalized collision energy = 27, centroid mode).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data files were searched with Metamorpheus (version 0.0.307) against human proteome. nown post-translational modifications were included in the proteomes downloaded from Uniprot (accessed March 6, 2019).  Built-in calibration, post-translational discovery and search and quantification tasks of Metamorpheus were utilized for calibration, post-translational modification search, and peptide and protein identification and quantification. Trypsin was set as the protease and two missed cleavages were allowed. Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021463) was set as a constant modification and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. All other possible modifications were set using the Post-translational discovery search in Metamorpheus. Search results were filtered to a 1% FDR at PSM, peptide and protein levels. Peptides were accepted with search engine score above 5 and at least one unique peptide was required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Interactome, Stat5, Erbb4, Cardiomyocyte, Nrg-1

### Affiliations
Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akadem University, 20520 Turku, Finland Medicity Research Laboratories, University of Turku, 20520 Turku, Finland Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, 20520 Turku, Finland  Department of Oncology, Turku University Hospital, Turku, 20521, Finland
Turku Bioscience
University of Turku

### Submitter
Johannes Merilahti

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Elenius
Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akadem University, 20520 Turku, Finland Medicity Research Laboratories, University of Turku, 20520 Turku, Finland Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, 20520 Turku, Finland  Department of Oncology, Turku University Hospital, Turku, 20521, Finland


