### Accession
PXD034964

### Title
Identification of proteins that interact with TRAF6 in ADP-heptose- or IL-1β-stimulated HEK293 cells

### Description
The bacterial metabolite ADP-heptose activates the mammalian protein kinase ALPK1 (alpha protein kinase 1), which then phosphorylates TIFA (TRAF interacting protein with FHA domain). This leads to the oligomerisation of TIFA and the recruitment and oligomerisation of TRAF6 (TNF receptor-associated factor 6), activating a signalling network that culminates in the production of inflammatory mediators that mount responses to combat microbial infection.  To identify other protein(s) that associate with TRAF6 in ADP-heptose-stimulated cells, we re-expressed FLAG-TRAF6 in TRAF6 KO cells, stimulated the cells with ADP-heptose and immunoprecipitated TRAF6 from the cell extracts using a FLAG antibody. Proteins associated with TRAF6 were identified by mass spectrometry and included the components of LUBAC (the linear ubiquitin assembly complex), the components of the TAK1 and IB kinase (IKK) complexes, TRAF2 and c-IAP1, providing insight into the molecular details and mode of operation of the ADP-heptose signalling pathway. In parallel experiments the cells were stimulated with IL-1b, a cytokine that also signals via TRAF6, which served as a control.

### Sample Protocol
To identify proteins interacting with TRAF6, TRAF6 KO IL-1R* HEK293 cells that stably re-express FLAG-TRAF6 under a constitutive promoter were either left untreated, or stimulated for 15 min with ADP-heptose or IL-1 (5 replicates per condition, giving a total of 15 samples). Cells were lysed in MRC lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 50 mM sodium fluoride, 5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 270 mM sucrose, 10 mM sodium 2-glycerophosphate, 0.2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and 1 mM benzamidine, and complete protease inhibitor cocktail) containing 100 mM iodoacetamide, centrifuged (30 min at 20,000 x g at 4 °C) and the cell extracts passed through 0.45 µm filters and transferred to LoBind 1.5 ml microcentrifuges tubes (Eppendorf) and again centrifuged. The supernatants from unstimulated, ADP-heptose-stimulated and IL-1β-stimulated cells (30 mg protein per condition) were transferred separately to 15 ml conical centrifuge tubes, diluted to 2 mg/ml protein with lysis buffer and pre-cleared by incubation for 12 h at 4°C on a rotating wheel with mouse IgG-agarose. The supernatants were collected and incubated for 4 h at 4 °C on a rotating wheel with 40 μl of packed anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma), which had been washed three times with lysis buffer prior to use. After centrifugation to pellet the gel, the supernatant was discarded, the gel resuspended in 1.0 ml of lysis buffer and transferred from the 15 ml conical centrifuge tubes to 1.5 ml microcentrifuges tubes and washed three times with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100 containing 300 mM NaCl and twice with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1% (v/v) Triton X-100. The proteins captured on the anti-FLAG resin were eluted by incubation with 46 μl 3x FLAG peptide solution (Sigma) in Tris-buffered saline.    The Flag-TRAF6 preparations eluted from FLAG resin with 3X FLAG peptide were digested with a combination of trypsin and Lys-C protease using S-trap mini columns (Protifi) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, except that the washing steps with 100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol (v/v) were repeated 20 times (rather than the recommended 3 times) to remove all traces of Tris that would otherwise interfere with TMT labelling. The resultant peptides were resuspended for 15-plex TMT labelling according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher) and the 15 samples were combined in equimolar amounts and dried.    Peptides were resuspended in 100 μl of 5 mM ammonium acetate at pH 10 and injected on to an XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (Waters #186003561). Peptides were eluted from the column using basic reverse phase fractionation (using 10 mM ammonium acetate in water as Buffer A and 10 mM ammonium acetate in 80:20 (v/v) acetonitrile:water as Buffer B) on a 55 min multistep gradient at 100 μl/min. Eluted peptides were collected into 96 fractions, pooled into 24 fractions using non-consecutive concatenation and dried. The peptides were redissolved in 5% (v/v) formic acid and injected on a UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were loaded on to an Acclaim Pepmap trap column (Thermo Fisher #164564-CMD) prior to analysis on a PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (Thermo Fisher #ES903) and eluted using a 120 min linear gradient from 3% to 35% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, Buffer B: 0.08% formic acid in 80:20 (v/v) acetonitrile:water. The eluted peptides were then analysed by the mass spectrometer operating in synchronous precursor selection mode (SPS) on a TOP 3s method.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 against Uniprot SwissProt Human database containing isoforms (released on 05 October 2021). Quantitation was performed using MS3 reporter ions (TMT16 kit WD319902). Other parameters were left as default, with the addition of Deamidation (NQ) and Phospho (STY) as variable modifications.  The proteinGroups file was then processed in Python. In short, protein groups identified as reversed, only identified by sites and potential contaminants were filtered out. Only protein groups with at least 4 valid values in at least 1 condition were kept. Missing values were then imputed from a normal distribution with a downshift of 1.8 and width of 0.3 relative to the standard deviation.  Finally, statistical significance was assessed using a 2 sample Welch test and P values were then adjusted using Benjamini Hochberg multiple hypothesis correction.

### Publication Abstract
ADP-heptose activates the protein kinase ALPK1 triggering TIFA phosphorylation at Thr9, the recruitment of TRAF6 and the subsequent production of inflammatory mediators. Here, we demonstrate that ADP-heptose also stimulates the formation of Lys63- and Met1-linked ubiquitin chains to activate the TAK1 and canonical IKK complexes, respectively. We further show that the E3 ligases TRAF6 and c-IAP1 operate redundantly to generate the Lys63-linked ubiquitin chains required for pathway activation, which we demonstrate are attached to TRAF6, TRAF2 and c-IAP1, and that c-IAP1 is recruited to TIFA by TRAF2. ADP-heptose also induces activation of the kinase TBK1 by a TAK1-independent mechanism, which require TRAF2 and TRAF6. We establish that ALPK1 phosphorylates TIFA directly at Thr177 as well as Thr9 in vitro. Thr177 is located within the TRAF6-binding motif and its mutation to Asp prevents TRAF6 but not TRAF2 binding, indicating a role in restricting ADP-heptose signalling. We conclude that ADP-heptose signalling is controlled by the combined actions of TRAF2/c-IAP1 and TRAF6.

### Keywords
Traf6, Tifa, Adp-heptose, Alpk1

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit,  The Sir James Black Centre,  University of Dundee,  United Kingdom
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Frederic Lamoliatte

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Sir Philip Cohen
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit,  The Sir James Black Centre,  University of Dundee,  United Kingdom


