### Accession
PXD015738

### Title
Deletion of intestinal Hdac3 remodels the lipidome of enterocytes and protects mice from diet-induced obesity

### Description
Deletion of intestinal Hdac3 remodels the lipidome of enterocytes and protects mice from diet-induced obesity

### Sample Protocol
Samples were subjected to dimethyl labeling and label-free proteomics analysis. Total protein (250 µg) was subjected to acetone precipitation, reduced by shaking for 30 min at 37°C in 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), and alkylated using 55 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 45 min. Protein samples were subsequently digested with trypsin at 37°C overnight using a protein to trypsin ratio of 50:1 (w/w), and purified by solid phase extraction. LC-MS/MS was carried out on a LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray interface coupled to an Ultimate 300 RSLC nanosytem (Dionex). The nanoLC system was equipped with an Acclaim Prepmap Nanotrap column (Dionex C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap analytical column (Dionex C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm x 15 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected onto the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min for 5 minutes in 2% v/v CH3CN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid, before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column.

### Data Protocol
Extract-MSn within Bioworks 3.3.1 (Thermo Scientific) was used to generate peak list files with the following parameters: minimum mass 300; maximum mass 5,000; grouping tolerance 0 Da; intermediate scans 200; minimum group count 1; 10 peaks minimum and total ion current of 100. Peak lists for each LC-MS/MS run were merged into a single mascot generic file format for MASCOT searches. Automatic charge state recognition was used due to the high resolution survey scan (30,000). LC-MS/MS spectra were searched against the NCBI RefSeq mouse protein database in a target decoy fashion using X! Tandem Sledgehammer (2013.09.01.1).

### Publication Abstract
Histone deacetylase 3 (Hdac3) regulates the expression of lipid metabolism genes in multiple tissues, however its role in regulating lipid metabolism in the intestinal epithelium is unknown. Here we demonstrate that intestine-specific deletion of Hdac3 (Hdac3<sup>IKO</sup>) protects mice from diet induced obesity. Intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) from Hdac3<sup>IKO</sup> mice display co-ordinate induction of genes and proteins involved in mitochondrial and peroxisomal &#x3b2;-oxidation, have an increased rate of fatty acid oxidation, and undergo marked remodelling of their lipidome, particularly a reduction in long chain triglycerides. Many HDAC3-regulated fatty oxidation genes are transcriptional targets of the PPAR family of nuclear receptors, Hdac3 deletion enhances their induction by PPAR-agonists, and pharmacological HDAC3 inhibition induces their expression in enterocytes. These findings establish a central role for HDAC3 in co-ordinating PPAR-regulated lipid oxidation in the intestinal epithelium, and identify intestinal HDAC3 as a potential therapeutic target for preventing obesity and related diseases.

### Keywords
Hdac3

### Affiliations
La Trobe University
Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research Institute Level 5, ONJCWC, 145 Studley Road, Heidelberg, Vic 3084 Australia

### Submitter
Suresh Mathivanan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof John Mariadason
Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research Institute Level 5, ONJCWC, 145 Studley Road, Heidelberg, Vic 3084 Australia


