### Accession
PXD002883

### Title
Combined assessment of global proteome, phosphoproteome and N-terminal protein cleavage to characterize altered platelet functions in human Scott syndrome

### Description
The Scott syndrome is a rare bleeding disorder associated with a mutation in the gene encoding anoctamin-6 (TMEM16F). After stimulation of Ca2+-mobilizing agonists, syndromatic platelets show a reduced phosphatidylserine exposure and do not form membrane blebs. Given the central role of anoctamin-6 in the platelet procoagulant response, we used quantitative proteomics to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms and the complex phenotypic changes in Scott platelets compared to control platelets. Therefore, we applied an iTRAQ-based multi-pronged strategy to quantify changes in (i) the global proteome, (ii) the phosphoproteome and (iii) proteolytic events between resting and stimulated Scott and control platelets.  Our data indicate a limited number of proteins with decreased (70) or increased (64) expression in Scott platelets, among those we observed the absence of anoctamin-6 and the strong up-regulation of aquaporin-1. Furthermore, the quantification of 1,566 phosphopeptides revealed major differences between Scott and control platelets after stimulation with thrombin/convulxin or ionomycin. Finally, we quantified 1,596 N-terminal peptides in activated Scott and control platelets, 180 of which we identified as calpain-regulated, whereas a distinct set of 23 neo-N-termini was caspase-regulated. In Scott platelets, calpain-induced cleavage of cytoskeleton-linked and signaling proteins was down-regulated, in accordance with an increased phosphorylation state. Thus, multi-pronged proteomic profiling of Scott platelets provides detailed insight into their protection against detrimental Ca2+-dependent changes that are normally associated with phosphatidylserine exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentrations of well purified platelets were determined using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce, Thermo-Fisher). Afterwards, samples were reduced and alkylated. Next, for filter-aided sample preparation, 150 µg of protein per sample were loaded onto a 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin filter, as described elsewhere before. Thus, proteins were digested in triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer pH 8.0, consisting of 50 mM TEAB, 200 mM guanidinium hydrochloride and 2 mM CaCl2, in the presence of trypsin (1:20 w/w, Sigma, T-1426) at 37 °C. After incubation for 7 hours, digested peptides were collected by centrifugation at 13,800 g for 25 minutes. Filters were additionally washed with 50 µl of 50 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate) and 50 µl of LC-MS grade water to increase peptide yield. Then, equal peptide amounts (~100 µg) were dried under vacuum and reconstituted in iTRAQ 8-plex solution buffer (AB Sciex, Dreieich, Germany) to label them according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The eight differently labelled activation states from the control subject and Scott patient (unstimulated and stimulated with thrombin, convulxin/thrombin and ionomycin) were pooled in a 1:1 ratio and the volume was reduced under vacuum. Subsequently, 10% of the pooled sample was used to analyse the global proteome. For this analysis, 50 µg were separated into a high-pH Reversed phase chromatographic system (pH6) thus 20 concatenated fractions were collected and individually analysed by LC-MS. However, to account for potential isolation interference in reporter ion-based quantification methods which can lead to ratio compression, we conducted an additional label-free quantification workflow. Therefore, 2 µg of untreated healthy and Scott platelets were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS in DDA mode, using a U3000 nano-RSLC system online-coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. The remaining 90% of the sample was used to perform a phosphopeptide analysis. Thus, a TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment protocol was conducted as previously described by Larsen and co-workers (Engholm-Keller K, et al. , 2012). Afterwards, enriched phosphopeptides were fractionated with a U3000 RSLC system running in hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) mode and 9 fractions were collected. All fractions were individually analyzed by LC-MS.  Sample digestion and preparation for determination of neo N-terminal cleavage sites was performed in triplicate for  sample set 1: platelets from healthy donor and the Scott patient, either (i) unstimulated or stimulated with (ii) thrombin (4 nM), (iii) convulxin/thrombin (100 ng/ml, 4 nM) or (iv) ionomycin (10 µM) and in duplicate for sample set 2: platelets from healthy donors either (i) unstimulated for 30 min, or 30 min stimulated with (ii) ionomycin (10 µM), (iii) ionomycin (10 µM) + calpain inhibitor calpeptin (200 µM), (iv) ionomycin (10 µM) + caspase inhibitor QVD-OPh (20 µM); as well as platelets from healthy donors either (v) unstimulated for 60 min, or 60 min stimulated with (vi) pro-apoptotic agent ABT-7373 (10 µM), (vii) pro-apoptotic agent ABT-7373 (10 µM) + calpain inhibitor calpeptin (200 µM), (viii) pro-apoptotic agent ABT-7373 (10 µM) + caspase inhibitor QVD-OPh (20 µM).  Thus, proteins were precipitated using ice-cold ethanol to further be resuspended in 10 µl 10% SDS. These samples were then diluted to 1% SDS with 0.5 M TEAB containing 20% isopropanol (v/v). iTRAQ 8-plex reagents in isopropanol (40 µl) were added and allowed to react for 2 hours at 25 °C. Subsequently, all 8 samples were pooled and the reaction was quenched with 60 mM glycine (10 minutes at room temperature), followed by incubation with 130 mM hydroxylamine to reverse side reactions of hydroxyl groups (10 minutes at room temperature). For proteolytic digestion, the multiplex samples were subjected to ethanol precipitation and resuspended in 0.2 M guanidine HCl, 50 mM TEAB buffer and 2 mM CaCl2 (final concentrations). Trypsin (Sigma, T1426) was added at enzyme/protein ratio of 1:20. After 14 hours trypsination at 37 °C, reactions were stopped with 1% TFA, and the proteolytic digest was controlled using monolithic reversed phase chromatography. Afterwards, Charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography (ChaFRADIC) for determination of neo-N-terminal cleavage sites was essentially conducted as previously described (Venne AS, et a.l, 2013). Finally enriched fractions in N-terminal peptides were analysed by LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
iTRAQ global proteome and phosphoproteome data were interpreted as follows. Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and 1.3 respectively (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Thus, data were searched against the Uniprot human database, Mascot and Sequest were used as search algorithms with the following settings: (i) trypsin as enzyme allowing two missed cleavages, (ii) iTRAQ 8-plex at N-termini and lysines and carbamidomethylation of Cys residues as fixed modifications, (iii) oxidation of methionine as variable modification, (iv) mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. False discovery rate (FDR) estimation on the level of peptide spectrum matches was performed using the peptide validator node with filtering for 1% FDR (high confidence filter). The reporter ion quantifier node was used for iTRAQ reporter quantification. For the phosphoproteome analysis, phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr (+79.9663 Da) was set as variable modification furthermore, for localization of phosphorylated sites phospho-RS was used.For the global proteome only unique proteins quantified with at least 2 unique peptides were considered. Next, normalization factors were determinate and used to compensate for individual systematic errors (i.e. unequal sample amounts derived from pipetting errors or inaccurate BCA results) and to obtain normalized ratios. In addition, all data was scaled to obtain normalized abundance per iTRAQ channel. For the phosphoproteome, the obtained normalization factors from the global proteome were used to normalize the data and it was as well scaled to obtain normalized abundances. Furthermore, only phosphopeptides with phospho-RS probabilities >90% were considered as confident. Thus, for determination of confident phosphorylation sites at the peptide and protein level a ready-to-use Excel macro provided by Mechtler lab (http://ms.imp.ac.at/?goto=phosphors) was used. Additionally, label free quantification was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software version 4.1 from Nonlinear Dynamics in combination with SearchGUI 2.8.1 and PeptideShaker 1.19.2.The following search parameters were used: (i) trypsin as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages, (ii) carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed, and (iii) oxidation of Met as variable modification. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. For all proteins, ratios between Scott and control platelets were calculated based on normalized areas obtained from Progenesis and log2-transformed. Regulations factors in both cases were as 2x SD of the normal distributed data. Finally, generated raw data from ChaFRADIC were searched against the human Uniprot database using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 and Mascot 2.4 as search engine, reporter ion quantifier and percolator nodes. Enzyme specificities were set to semi-Arg-C, as Lys residues were blocked by iTRAQ labeling. To enable the quantification of two classes of N-terminal peptides, i.e. those with N-terminal iTRAQ label and those with endogenous N-acetylation, a two-step search strategy was performed. First, data were searched with iTRAQ-8plex (+304.2053 Da) as fixed modification at Lys and peptide N-termini; second, iTRAQ 8plex of Lys and N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0105 Da) of N-termini were set as fixed modifications. In both cases, carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.0214 Da) was selected as fixed and oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine as variable modification. Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for MS and 0.02 Da for MS/MS. Identified peptides were filtered for high confidence corresponding to an FDR <1% at the PSM level, and a search engine rank of 1. The reporter ion quantifier node was adjusted according to the search settings. Quantification of N-terminal peptides across samples and conditions were essentially done as described for the phosphoproteome data. Sample set 2 was used to validate potential Calpain substrates. Therefore, the following ratios were determined: (i) ionomycin / unstimulated (ion effect); (ii) ionomycin+calpeptin / unstimulated (effect calpain inhibition); (iii) ionomycin+QVD-OPh / unstimulated (effect caspase inhibition)., (iv) ABT737 / unstimulated (ABT effect), (v)  ABT737+QVD-OPh / unstimulated (effect caspase inhibition), (vi) ABT737+calpeptin/ unstimulated (effect calpain inhibition). Sample set 1 was used to identify differential proteolytic cleavage between Scott and healthy platelets which we hypothesized to partially derive from Calpain activity. Therefore, for Set 1 only N-terminal peptides which were in agreement with the consensus motif (previously defined by an in vitro digestion of purified platelets platelets with recombinant calpain) showing a fold change between conditions were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
The Scott syndrome is a very rare and likely underdiagnosed bleeding disorder associated with mutations in the gene encoding anoctamin-6. Platelets from Scott patients are impaired in various Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent responses, including phosphatidylserine exposure, integrin closure, intracellular protein cleavage, and cytoskeleton-dependent morphological changes. Given the central role of anoctamin-6 in the platelet procoagulant response, we used quantitative proteomics to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms and the complex phenotypic changes in Scott platelets compared with control platelets. Therefore, we applied an iTRAQ-based multi-pronged strategy to quantify changes in (1) the global proteome, (2) the phosphoproteome, and (3) proteolytic events between resting and stimulated Scott and control platelets. Our data indicate a limited number of proteins with decreased (70) or increased (64) expression in Scott platelets, among those we confirmed the absence of anoctamin-6 and the strong up-regulation of aquaporin-1 by parallel reaction monitoring. The quantification of 1566 phosphopeptides revealed major differences between Scott and control platelets after stimulation with thrombin/convulxin or ionomycin. In Scott platelets, phosphorylation levels of proteins regulating cytoskeletal or signaling events were increased. Finally, we quantified 1596 N-terminal peptides in activated Scott and control platelets, 180 of which we identified as calpain-regulated, whereas a distinct set of 23 neo-N termini was caspase-regulated. In Scott platelets, calpain-induced cleavage of cytoskeleton-linked and signaling proteins was downregulated, in accordance with an increased phosphorylation state. Thus, multipronged proteomic profiling of Scott platelets provides detailed insight into their protection against detrimental Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent changes that are normally associated with phosphatidylserine exposure.

### Keywords
N-terminal chafradic, Lc-ms, Human platelets, Proteome, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für
Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.

### Submitter
Fiorella Andrea Solari

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. René P. Zahedi
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V.


