### Accession
PXD029829

### Title
Diabetes disturbs protein secretome of human adipose-derived stem cells and promotes tumorogenesis in hepatic cancer cells

### Description
Metabolic disorders impact adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs), which play a central role in adipose tissue (AT) homeostasis but might also regulate tumour microenvironments via paracrine signalling routes. Here, we aimed to determine whether type 2 diabetes (T2D) disturbs the protein secretome of human ASCs, and its potential relevance for their pro-tumoral activity. An untargeted proteomics approach by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry was used to analyse the secretome of ASCs isolated from the subcutaneous AT of subjects with and without T2D. Out of 231 quantified proteins, 52 factors were found differentially secreted on T2D-ASCs. In silico studies revealed that only 46,7% of the total proteins identified used the conventional secretory pathway. Network analysis showed up-secreted factors in T2D were implicated in immune system processes, extracellular matrix organization and endoplasmic reticulum stress. We found that diabetic ASCs secretome increases some inflammatory-, invasiveness- and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-related markers in HepG2 cells, an effect that was blocked with an anti-SUB1 antibody. Remarkably, SUB1 neutralization also inhibited invasive capacities of HepG2 in response to T2D-ASCs secretome. Overall, our study demonstrates that T2D-ASCs show an aberrant protein secretome and although further studies will be needed to understand the pathogenic consequences of this disturbance, our findings suggest that SUB1 might serve as a novel molecular link in the interplay between ASCs and tumor cells.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media processing for LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (30 nmol, 37 ºC, 60 min) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (60 nmol, 25 ºC, 30 min). The resulting protein extract was first diluted to 2M urea with 200 mM NH4HCO3 for digestion with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, o/n, Wako, cat # 129-02541), and then diluted 2-fold with 200 mM NH4HCO3 for trypsin digestion (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 8h, Promega cat # V5113). After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  LCMS Analysis Samples were analyzed in an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to nano-LC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) equipped with a reversed-phase chromatography 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1,9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients from 97% buffer A, 3% buffer B to 65% buffer A, 35% buffer B in 120 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min, in which buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The instrument was operated in DDA mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2,000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Following each survey scan the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the linear ion trap. Digested bovine serum albumin (New England Biolabs cat. # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument and QCloud(Chiva et al, 2018) has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.  All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science(Perkins et al, 1999)). Data were searched against Swiss-Prot human database (as in April 2018) plus a list of common contaminants (refined from MaxQuant contaminants.fasta) and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level was used, trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were defined as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Protein abundance was estimated using the average area under the chromatographic peak for the three most intense peptides. Differential enrichment was done using DEP package that provides an integrated analysis workflow for robust and reproducible analysis of mass spectrometry proteomics data (Zhang et al, 2018). Briefly, identified proteins were filtered to keep those detected in all or all but one replicates of at least one condition resulting in 231 proteins retained. The filtered data was then background corrected and normalized by variance stabilizing transformation (vsn) (Välikangas et al, 2018). Protein-wise linear models combined with empirical Bayes statistics were used for the differential enrichment analysis using the limma package (Ritchie et al, 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mass spectometry, T2d, Adipose-derived stem cells, Secretome

### Affiliations
UPF
CRG, UPF

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
CRG, UPF


