### Accession
PXD018270

### Title
Chemical genetics strategy to profile kinase target engagement reveals role of FES in neutrophil phagocytosis via SYK activation

### Description
Identification of covalently bound protein targets of probe WEL028 in wild-type or mutant HL-60 cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells (HL-60, wild-type or FES_S700C mutant) were incubated with WEL028, lysed and the labeled proteome was conjugated to biotin-azide using click chemistry. Proteins were enriched using streptavidin affinity chromatograpy, digested to peptides and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed with ISOQuant software. The following cut-offs were used for target identification: unique peptides ≥ 1, identified peptides ≥ 2, ratio WEL028-treated over vehicle-treated ≥ 2 with q-value < 0.05 based on t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg multiple comparison correction (FDR = 10%), kinase annotation in Uniprot database.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical tools to monitor drug-target engagement of endogenously expressed protein kinases are highly desirable for preclinical target validation in drug discovery. Here, we describe a chemical genetics strategy to selectively study target engagement of endogenous kinases. By substituting a serine residue into cysteine at the DFG-1 position in the ATP-binding pocket, we sensitize the non-receptor tyrosine kinase FES towards covalent labeling by a complementary fluorescent chemical probe. This mutation is introduced in the endogenous FES gene of HL-60 cells using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. Leveraging the temporal and acute control offered by our strategy, we show that FES activity is dispensable for differentiation of HL-60 cells towards macrophages. Instead, FES plays a key role in neutrophil phagocytosis via SYK kinase activation. This chemical genetics strategy holds promise as a target validation method for kinases.

### Keywords
Chemical biology, Kinase, Target engagement, Target validation, Chemical genetics, Inhibitor, Probe

### Affiliations
Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University
Department of Molecular Physiology, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University

### Submitter
Tom van der Wel

### Lab Head
Dr Mario van der Stelt
Department of Molecular Physiology, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Leiden University


