### Accession
PXD044705

### Title
Interactions of Histone Deacetylase 6 with DNA damage repair fac-tors strengthens its utility as a combination drug target in high-grade serous ovarian cancer

### Description
High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is the deadliest gynecologic malignancy in women.The lack of effective second line therapeutics remains a substantial challenge for BRCA-1/2 wildtype HGSOC patients, and contributes to poor survival rates due to drug resistance. There is a striking need to elucidate and implement new and alternative treatment options for patients with HGSOC. Histone Deacetylases (HDACs) are promising targets in HGSOC treat-ment, however, the mechanism and efficacy of HDAC inhibitors is understudied in HGSOC. In order to consider HDACs as a treatment target, we need to better understand how they are functioning within HGSOC. This includes elucidating HDAC6 protein-protein interactions. In this study, we carried out substrate trapping to elucidate HDAC6-specific interactors in the context of BRCA-1/2 wildtype HGSOC

### Sample Protocol
Genscript generated HDAC6-FLAG (WT) plasmids and carried out site directed mutagenesis(CD1, CD2, CD1/2). The resulting plasmids were transfected into OVCAR3 cells and treated with DMSO or Vorinsotat. The cells were harvested, lysed, and immunoprecipitated using an anti-FLAG M2 antibody. Immunoprecipitation/transfection efficiency was validated with western blot. Remaining sample was loaded onto SDS PAGE and followed with in-gel digestion. Each sample was divided into 6 fractions. Peptides were extracted from the gels and analyzed on a QE plus mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data was processed using MaxQuant version 2.1.3.0 with match between runs and label free quantification. All other parameters on MaxQuant were kept under the default settings. A Homo sapiens database from Swiss Prot (downloaded August 2022) was modified to include the sequence of the anti-FLAG M2 antibody (GenBank). This customized FASTA file was used for protein identification. The protein groups were then imported into Perseus and the rows were filtered by categorical column to remove proteins with: only identi-fied by site, reverse sequences, and potential contaminants. The data was then log2 transformed, and each sample was normalized to the intensity of the anti-FLAG M2 antibody to account for potential loading differences across samples and then median-normalized.            Replicates were filtered individually across samples and each catalytically inactive mutant (CD1, CD2, CD1/2) was analyzed individually against its paired wild-type HDAC6 sample. Proteins that were of higher abundance in the ve-hicle control than the wildtype and mutant samples were removed to eliminate identifications from non-specific binding. Proteins that had a higher abundance in the sam-ples treated with Vorinostat were removed to eliminate potential interactors not at the catalytic site. Proteins that were quantified in the mutant sample but not in the wild-type sample were considered significant. Varying levels of filtering stringency were applied, similarly to Nalawansha et al.25 The base filtering (Level I) required proteins quanti-fied in 2 of the 4 replicates to have log2(fold change (FC)) > 0.56, then to increase the stringency filtering (Level II) re-quired proteins quantified in 3 of the 4 replicates to have log2(FC) > 0.56, and a higher stringency (Level III) required proteins to be quantified in 3 of the 4 replicates to have log2(FC) > 1. Lastly, Level IV required proteins to be quan-tified across all 4 replicates and a log2(FC) > 1

### Publication Abstract
High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is the deadliest gynecologic malignancy in women. The low survival rate is largely due to drug resistance. Approximately 80% of patients who initially respond to treatment relapse and become drug-resistant. The lack of effective second-line therapeutics remains a substantial challenge for BRCA-1/2 wild-type HGSOC patients. Histone Deacetylases (HDACs) are promising targets in HGSOC treatment; however, the mechanism and efficacy of HDAC inhibitors are understudied in HGSOC. In order to consider HDACs as a treatment target, an improved understanding of their function within HGSOC is required. This includes elucidating HDAC6-specific protein-protein interactions. In this study, we carried out substrate trapping followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to elucidate HDAC6 catalytic domain (CD)-specific interactors in the context of BRCA-1/2 wild-type HGSOC. Overall, this study identified new HDAC6 substrates that may be unique to HGSOC. The HDAC6-CD1 mutant condition contained the largest number of significant proteins compared to the CD2 mutant and the CD1/2 mutant conditions, suggesting the HDAC6-CD1 domain has catalytic activity that is independent of CD2. Among the identified substrates were proteins involved in DNA damage repair including PARP proteins. These findings further justify the use of HDAC inhibitors as a combination treatment with platinum chemotherapy agents and PARP inhibitors in HGSOC.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Hdacs, Human, Protein-protein interaction, Histone deacetylase 6, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Patholoogy, University of Minnesota. Minneapolis, MN, USA

### Submitter
Jolene Duda

### Lab Head
Dr Stefani N Thomas
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Patholoogy, University of Minnesota. Minneapolis, MN, USA


