### Accession
PXD018780

### Title
Cryo-EM structure of the volume-regulated anion channel LRRC8D isoform identifies features important for substrate permeation

### Description
Members of the leucine-rich repeat-containing 8 (LRRC8) protein family, composed of the five LRRC8A-E isoforms, are pore-forming components of the volume-regulated anion channel (VRAC), which is activated by cell swelling and transports halide anions and small organic compounds. Despite the recent availability of the cryo-EM structures of homo-hexameric LRRC8A, the structural basis of how LRRC8 isoforms other than LRRC8A contribute to the functional diversity of VRAC has remained elusive. In this study, we confirmed the absence of LRRC8 isoforms in the purified HsLRRC8D using mass spectrometry, and the structure of the HsLRRC8D homomer was analyzed using the cryo-EM. This work provides structural insights into the functional diversity of the LRRC8 protein family.

### Sample Protocol
The purified HsLRRC8D protein was reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol and 4 M guanidine-HCl at 37 °C for 2 h, followed by carboxylation with 100 mM sodium iodoacetate at 25 °C for 30 min. The protein was desalted with PAGE Clean Up Kit (Nacalai tesque) following to instruction manual. The desalted protein was dissolved with 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH8.0) / 0.03% n-Dodecyl-β-D-maltoside, and digested with trypsin (TPCK-treated, Worthington Biochemical). The digested mixture was analyzed three times by nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated on a nano ESI spray column (75 μm (inside diameter) × 100 mm (length), NTCC analytical column C18, 3 μm, Nikkyo Technos), with a gradient of 0-64% buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) in buffer A (MilliQ water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 over 30 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive-ion mode for mass spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry, and the tandem mass spectrometry spectra were acquired using the data-dependent TOP 10 method.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with integrated Mascot (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science). The MSMS data were used to search the NCBI-nr protein database (20160711, Taxonomy: H. sapiens 326,427 sequences), using the following parameters: enzyme = trypsin; maximum missed cleavages = 3; variable modifications = Acetyl (Protein N-term), Gln- > pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M); product mass tolerance = ± 15 ppm; product mass tolerance = ± 30 milli mass unit; instrument type = ESI-TRAP. The quantitative results were calculated from the average of three analyses results using Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Members of the leucine-rich repeat-containing 8 (LRRC8) protein family, composed of the five LRRC8A-E isoforms, are pore-forming components of the volume-regulated anion channel (VRAC). LRRC8A and at least one of the other LRRC8 isoforms assemble into heteromers to generate VRAC transport activities. Despite the availability of the LRRC8A structures, the structural basis of how LRRC8 isoforms other than LRRC8A contribute to the functional diversity of VRAC has remained elusive. Here, we present the structure of the human LRRC8D isoform, which enables the permeation of organic substrates through VRAC. The LRRC8D homo-hexamer structure displays a two-fold symmetric arrangement, and together with a structure-based electrophysiological analysis, revealed two key features. The pore constriction on the extracellular side is wider than that in the LRRC8A structures, which may explain the increased permeability of organic substrates. Furthermore, an N-terminal helix protrudes into the pore from the intracellular side and may be critical for gating.

### Keywords
Lrrc8d

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


