### Accession
PXD027664

### Title
N-Acetyl-β-D-hexosaminidases mediate the generation of paucimannosidic proteins via a putative non-canonical truncation pathway in human neutrophils

### Description
We recently discovered that human neutrophils express immunomodulatory glycoproteins carrying unusual and highly truncated paucimannosidic N-glycans (Man1-3GlcNAc2Fuc0-1), but their biosynthesis remains elusive. Guided by the well-characterised truncation pathway in invertebrates and plants in which the N-acetyl-β-D-hexosaminidase (Hex) isoenzymes catalyse paucimannosidic protein (PMP) formation, we here set out to test if the homologous human Hex α and β subunits encoded by HEXA and HEXB drive a similar truncation pathway in human neutrophils. To this end, we performed quantitative glycomics and glycoproteomics of several CRISPR-Cas9-edited Hex-disrupted neutrophil-like HL-60 mutants (HEXA-/- and HEXB-/-) and matching unedited cell lines. Hex disruption was validated using next-generation sequencing, ELISA, proteomics and Hex activity assays. Excitingly, all Hex-disrupted mutants displayed significantly reduced levels of paucimannosylation, particularly of Man2-3GlcNAc2Fuc1, relative to unedited HL-60 suggesting that both HEXA and HEXB contribute to PMP formation via a hitherto unexplored truncation pathway in neutrophils. Quantitative N-glycomics indeed demonstrated reduced utilisation of a putative non-canonical truncation pathway in favour of the canonical elongation pathway in all Hex-disrupted mutants relative to unedited controls. Quantitative glycoproteomics recapitulated the truncation-to-elongation switch in all Hex-deficient mutants and showed a pronounced switch for N-glycoproteins co-trafficking with Hex to the azurophilic granules of neutrophils such as myeloperoxidase. Finally, we supported the Hex-PMP relationship by documenting that primary neutrophils isolated from an early-onset Sandhoff disease patient (HEXB-/-) displayed dramatically reduced paucimannosylation relative to neutrophils from an age-matched unaffected donor. We conclude that both human Hex α and β mediate PMP formation via a putative non-canonical truncation pathway in neutrophils.

### Sample Protocol
The HL-60 cell lines were cultured under stable growth conditions in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)-1640 media supplemented with 10% (v/v) FBS in Corning T25 cell culture flasks. The incubator was set to 37°C and 5% (v/v) carbon dioxide levels.

### Data Protocol
The label-assisted quantitative (glyco)proteomics experiments were carried out using a recently published method (Kawahara, R., et al. 2021). Briefly, protein extracts from the HL-60 cell lysate and secretome fractions were reduced, alkylated and digested overnight with sequence-grade trypsin (Promega). Peptides were desalted, labelled with TMT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and desalted again. Glycopeptides were enriched with ion-pairing zwitterionic hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography solid phase extraction (Mysling, S., et al. 2010). Both the peptide and glycopeptide fractions were subjected to high pH reversed-phase C18 solid phase extraction pre-fractionation and were desalted prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. All peptide samples were on-line separated using nanoscale C18 chromatography and detected on a Q-Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion mode. The LC-MS/MS raw data were searched against the entire human proteome (UniProtKB, all reviewed entries) using MaxQuant v1.6.17 (Tyanova, S., et al. 2016) and Byonic v3.9.4 (Protein Metrics International, Cupertino, CA) as a node in Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Only glycopeptides with Byonic PEP-2D scores < 0.001 were considered. Unmodified peptides and peptides with non-glycan modifications were filtered to peptide-to-spectral matches and protein false discovery rates below 0.01. Glycopeptides were quantified using the Report Ion Quantifier node in Proteome Discoverer. Unmodified peptides and peptides with non-glycan modifications were quantified with MaxQuant using the reporter ion intensities.

### Publication Abstract
We recently discovered that human neutrophils express immunomodulatory glycoproteins carrying unusual and highly truncated paucimannosidic N-glycans (Man1-3GlcNAc2Fuc0-1), but their biosynthesis remains elusive. Guided by the well-characterized truncation pathway in invertebrates and plants in which the N-acetyl-&#x3b2;-D-hexosaminidase (Hex) isoenzymes catalyze paucimannosidic protein (PMP) formation, we here set out to test if the homologous human Hex &#x3b1; and &#x3b2; subunits encoded by HEXA and HEXB drive a similar truncation pathway in human neutrophils. To this end, we performed quantitative glycomics and glycoproteomics of several CRISPR-Cas9-edited Hex-disrupted neutrophil-like HL-60 mutants (HEXA-KO and HEXB-KO) and matching unedited cell lines. Hex disruption was validated using next-generation sequencing, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), quantitative proteomics and Hex activity assays. Excitingly, all Hex-disrupted mutants displayed significantly reduced levels of paucimannosylation, particularly Man2-3GlcNAc2Fuc1, relative to unedited HL-60 suggesting that both HEXA and HEXB contribute to PMP formation via a hitherto unexplored truncation pathway in neutrophils. Quantitative N-glycomics indeed demonstrated reduced utilization of a putative noncanonical truncation pathway in favor of the canonical elongation pathway in all Hex-disrupted mutants relative to unedited controls. Quantitative glycoproteomics recapitulated the truncation-to-elongation switch in all Hex-disrupted mutants and showed a greater switch for N-glycoproteins cotrafficking with Hex to the azurophilic granules of neutrophils such as myeloperoxidase. Finally, we supported the Hex-PMP relationship by documenting that primary neutrophils isolated from an early-onset Sandhoff disease patient (HEXB-/-) displayed dramatically reduced paucimannosylation relative to neutrophils from an age-matched unaffected donor. We conclude that both human Hex &#x3b1; and &#x3b2; mediate PMP formation via a putative noncanonical truncation pathway in neutrophils.

### Keywords
N-acetyl-β-d-hexosaminidase, Biosynthesis, Neutrophil, Mass spectrometry, N-glycosylation, Paucimannose, Truncation

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Julian Ugonotti

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Morten Thaysen-Andersen
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia


