### Accession
PXD025779

### Title
Topical application of temperature sensitive gel containing caerin 1.1 and 1.9 peptides on TC-1 tumour bearing mice modulates heterogeneity of macrophage and dendritic cell in the tumour microenvironment

### Description
In this study, we demonstrate that, the topical application of a temperature-sensitive gel containing caerin 1.1 and 1.9 peptides significantly reduces the tumour weight of HPV 16 E6/E7 transformed TC-1 tumour bearing mice via improving the tumour microenvironment (TME) when compared with untreated tumour or a control peptide-containing gel. We use single cell transcriptomics and TMT10 plex-labelling proteomics to quantify changes in cellular activity across different cell types within the TME. We show that caerin 1.1/1.9 gel increased immune activating macrophages, modulated the heterogeneity of NK and dendritic cells to be more pro-inflammatory, and increased numbers of activated CD8+ T cells. Proteomic profiling demonstrated higher innate immune responses, especially the positive regulations of interferon-alpha/beta secretion and response to cytokine stimulus in the caerin gel groups. Further, computational integration of the proteome with the single cell transcriptome consistently suggested more activated T cells and NK cells with the treatment of caerin peptide gel.

### Sample Protocol
Tumour samples was collected and directly frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to protein extraction and sample preparation. Biological triplicates were collected for each treatment. These tissues were the same biological triplicates from which the CD45+ cells were extracted for scRNA-seq. The tissue samples were homogenised thoroughly in SDT buffer (4%(w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH7.6, 0.1M DTT) at 4 oC, with the total protein contents quantified using the Pierce BCA protein assay on a NanoDrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Certain amounts of samples containing 500ug of protein were subjected to trypsin digestion by the filter aided proteome preparation (FASP) described elsewhere 121. Tryptic peptides were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters, Milford, MA) and lyophilised. The peptide samples (n=9) were resuspended in 30 μL of 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5) and quantified on the NanoDrop 2000 using OD280 nm. Then, the samples containing 100 μg peptides were transferred to Eppendorf tubes and labelled by TMT10-plex following the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, the TMT labelling reagents were dissolved in 41 μL acetonitrile per vial and added to the samples. The reaction was incubated for 1 h at RT and quenched by 5% hydroxylamine. In this study, 126, 127N and 127C were used to label untreated tumour samples; 128N, 128C and 129N were used to label the treatments with caerin peptides; the treatments with the addition of P3 were labelled using 129C, 130N and130C, respectively. The labelled samples were mixed and fractionated using a PierceTM high pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, U.S.) according to manufacturer’s instruction. In brief, the columns were first conditioned using 0.1%TFA/100%ACN and loaded with samples, which were then washed using MilliQ water by centrifugation at 3,000g. Finally, the fractions were eluted by increasing concentrations of ACN in ACN/ Triethylamine (0.1%) from 5% to 50%. All fractions were lyophilised on a SpeedVac and resuspended 12 μL 0.1%FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.  A 10 μl of sample solution was loaded onto a two dimensional EASY-nLC1000 system coupled to a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In the nanoLC separation system, mobile phase A solution containing 0.1 % formic acid in water, and mobile phase B solution containing 84 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid. Before peptide loading, the columns were pre-equilibrated with 95 % mobile phase A for 30 min. The samples were first injected into the sample loading column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm × 2cm, nanoViper C18), then fractionated by the analytic column (Thermo scientific EASY column, 10cm, ID75μm, 3μm, C18-A2) Thermo EASY SC200 trap column (RP-C18, 3 μm, 100 mm × 75 μm). The phosphopeptides were first transferred to the Thermo scientific EASY column (2cm × 100 μm 5 μm-C18) and then separated via the trap column using a gradient of 0–55 % mobile phase B for 220 min. Then, the columns were rinsed with 100 % mobile phase B for 8 min and re-equilibrated to the initial conditions for 12 min. The flow rate of the above procedures was 300 nl/min. The samples were then analysed on a Q-Exactive Obitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The ion spray voltage was set to 5500 V, the declustering potential was set to 100 V, the curtain gas flow was set at 30, ion source gas 1 was set at 40, the ion source gas 2 was set at 50 and spray temperature was set at 450°C. The mass spectrometer acquired the mass spectral data in an Information Dependant Acquisition, IDA mode. Full scan MS data was acquired over the mass range 300-1800 with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. AGC (Automatic gain control) target was set at 106, the maximum IT was set at 50ms and the dynamic exclusion was set at 60.0s. In every full scan, twenty MS/MS spectra were obtained. The MS/MS activation type was HCD and the isolation window was2 m/z. The resolution of MS/MS was 35,000 at 200 m/z, the normalized Collision Energy was set at 30 and the underfill was set at 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data was searched against Swissprot Mouse (76,413 sequences, downloaded on Dec 12, 2014) database for protein identification using Mascot2.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with the following search settings: enzyme trypsin; two missed cleavage sites; precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.1 Da; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT 10plex (N-term),TMT10 plex (K); variable modifications: oxidation (M) , TMT 10plex (Y). The results of the search were further submitted to generate the final report using a cut-off of 1% FDR on peptide levels and only unique peptides were used for protein quantitation. All peptide ratios were normalised by the median protein ratio, and the median protein ratio was 1 after the normalisation. The protein showing a fold change≥1.2 (upregulation≥ 1.2 or downregulation ≤0.83) compared to the untreated group and the P-value<0.05 were considered significantly regulated by the treatment and included in further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The development of topical cream drugs that increase the immune activation of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes against tumour and chronic viral infection-associated lesions is of great immunotherapeutic significance. This study demonstrates that the topical application of a temperature-sensitive gel containing caerin 1.1 and 1.9 peptides reduces nearly 50% of the tumour weight of HPV16 E6/E7-transformed TC-1 tumour-bearing mice <i>via</i> improving the tumour microenvironment. Confocal microscopy confirms the time-dependent penetration of caerin 1.9 through the epidermal layer of the ear skin structure of mice. Single-cell transcriptomic analysis shows that the caerin 1.1/1.9 gel expands the populations with high immune activation level and largely stimulates the pro-inflammatory activity of NK and dendritic cells. Closely associated with INF&#x3b1; response, <i>Cebpb</i> seems to play a key role in altering the function of all <i>Arg1<sup>hi</sup></i> macrophages in the caerin group. In addition, the caerin gel treatment recruits almost two-fold more activated CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells to the TME, relative to the untreated tumour, which shows a synergistic effect derived from the regulation of S1pr1, <i>Ccr7</i>, <i>Ms4a4b</i> and <i>Gimap</i> family expression. The TMT10plex-labelling proteomic quantification further demonstrates the activation of interferon-alpha/beta secretion and response to cytokine stimulus by the caerin gel, while the protein contents of several key regulators were elevated by more than 30%, such as <i>Cd5l</i>, <i>Gzma</i>, <i>Ifit1</i>, <i>Irf9</i> and <i>Stat1</i>. Computational integration of the proteome with the single-cell transcriptome consistently suggested greater activation of NK and T cells with the topical application of caerin peptide gel.

### Keywords
Cd8+ t cell, Cervical cancer, Caerin peptide, Tumour microenvironment, Tc-1 cell

### Affiliations
University of the Sunshine Coast
Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast

### Submitter
Tianfang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfang Wang
Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast


