### Accession
PXD004430

### Title
Secretome profiling of human airway epithelial cultures infected with respiratory syncytial virus

### Description
The respiratory epithelium is a polarised layer at the interface between the outside environment and deeper lung structures, overlaid by the epithelial lining fluid (ELF). This provides a mechanical and immunological barrier to inhaled particulates, such as viruses. Human respiratory syncytial virus (hRSV) is a major cause of disease in humans, and targets the respiratory epithelium.  However, little is known of the disruption of the ELF proteome in the context of virus-driven respiratory illnesses. To address this, a proteomics approach was combined with an ex-vivo human airway epithelial model (HAE) to investigate the apical and basolateral secretome in hRSV-infected cultures. This demonstrated that several apically- and basolaterally-restricted proteins were subsequently secreted in both directions upon infection, while a number of proteins saw their apical/basolateral abundance ratios significantly altered. Furthermore, another 35 proteins were uniquely identified after hRSV treatment. Importantly, some of these changes were correlated in nasal aspirates (NA) from children with and without hRSV. This study showed that hRSV could affect airway secretions, and disrupted the directionality of the respiratory epithelium.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection After infection, the basolateral medium (500 µL) and apical wash (200 µL) from hRSV A2- and mock-infected cells were collected at 2, 24, 48, 72, 96 and 120 hrs post-infection (hpi). The apical wash was generated by incubation with 200 µL of sterile PBS at 37°C 5% CO2 for 10 min followed by gentle pipetting, while fresh medium was added in the basolateral compartment. In order to remove cell debris and abrogate infectivity, the apical and basolateral samples were centrifuged at 300xg for 10 min (+4°C) and the supernatant was heat-treated for 10min at 95°C. Each supernatant was then separated in two equal aliquots, one for MS analysis and one for virus titration and western blot analysis, then snap-frozen on a dry ice/ethanol bath and store at -80°C.  Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Soluble proteins were precipitated by addition of an equal volume of ice-cold 30 % (w/v) TCA in acetone with incubation at  20°C for 2 hr. Samples were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min (4⁰C) to pellet proteins. Pellets were washed three times with ice-cold acetone and allowed to air dry. Protein pellets were then re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1 % (w/v) RapiGest SF (Waters). Samples were heated at 80°C for 10 min, reduced with 3 mM DTT at 60°C for 10 min, cooled, then alkylated with 9 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 min (room temperature) protected from light; all steps were performed with intermittent vortex-mixing. Proteomic-grade trypsin (Sigma) was added (0.2µg) and incubated at 37°C overnight. To remove RapiGest SF, the samples were precipitated using 1 % (v/v) TFA at 37°C for 2 hr and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 1 hr (4°C). The peptide supernatant was desalted using C18 reverse-phase stage tips (Thermo Scientific Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were desalted and reduced to dryness and re-suspended in 3 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) TFA for analysis by MS.  NanoLC MS ESI MS/MS analysis Peptide solutions were analysed by on-line nanoflow LC using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) MS equipped with the manufacturer’s nanospray ion source. The analytical column (nanoACQUITY UPLC BEH130 C18 1.7 µm particle size, 15 cm, 75 µm capillary) was maintained at 35°C and a flow-rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient consisted of 3 - 40% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for 90 minutes, then a ramp of 40 - 85% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes in positive ionisation mode. Full scan MS spectra (m/z range 300 - 2000) were acquired by the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000, and analysis was performed in data-dependent mode. The top 20 most intense ions from MS1 scan (full MS) were selected for tandem MS by CID and all product spectra were acquired in the LTQ ion trap. Ion trap and Orbitrap maximal injection times were set to 50 ms and 500 ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification and Quantification Label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.4.1.2 (Cox & Mann, 2008)) with its internal search engine Andromeda (Cox et al, 2011). Precursor mass and fragment mass were searched with mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. All other settings were default. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two mis-cleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications.  The Andromeda search engine was configured for a database containing human proteins and hRSV (Uniprot release-2013_05, 56601 entries (Consortium, 2014).  The software further includes a decoy database as well as common contaminants database to determine the false discovery rate and to exclude false positive hits due to contamination by proteins from different species. For label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis, “multiplicity” was set to one. Feature matching between raw files was enabled, using a retention time window of 2 min. “Discard unmodified counterpart peptides” was unchecked. Only unmodified and unique peptides were utilized. Averaged LFQ intensity values were used to calculate protein ratios. Contaminants, keratins and host proteins only identified by unique peptides were excluded.  Finally, a positive identification was made when a protein was detected in at least 2 replicates with at least two unique peptides per replicate, and corresponding LFQ values . For each positive ID, several parameters related to the mass spectrometry analysis were kept throughout which included the percentage of sequence coverage, the molecular weight, the number of unique peptides and the LFQ values in each replicate, and the posterior error probability (PEP), a probability of false hit.

### Publication Abstract
The respiratory epithelium comprises polarized cells at the interface between the environment and airway tissues. Polarized apical and basolateral protein secretions are a feature of airway epithelium homeostasis. Human respiratory syncytial virus (hRSV) is a major human pathogen that primarily targets the respiratory epithelium. However, the consequences of hRSV infection on epithelium secretome polarity and content remain poorly understood. To investigate the hRSV-associated apical and basolateral secretomes, a proteomics approach was combined with an <i>ex vivo</i> pediatric human airway epithelial (HAE) model of hRSV infection (data are available via ProteomeXchange and can be accessed at https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/ with identifier PXD013661). Following infection, a skewing of apical/basolateral abundance ratios was identified for several individual proteins. Novel modulators of neutrophil and lymphocyte activation (CXCL6, CSF3, SECTM1 or CXCL16), and antiviral proteins (BST2 or CEACAM1) were detected in infected, but not in uninfected cultures. Importantly, CXCL6, CXCL16, CSF3 were also detected in nasopharyngeal aspirates (NPA) from hRSV-infected infants but not healthy controls. Furthermore, the antiviral activity of CEACAM1 against RSV was confirmed <i>in vitro</i> using BEAS-2B cells. hRSV infection disrupted the polarity of the pediatric respiratory epithelial secretome and was associated with immune modulating proteins (CXCL6, CXCL16, CSF3) never linked with this virus before. In addition, the antiviral activity of CEACAM1 against hRSV had also never been previously characterized. This study, therefore, provides novel insights into RSV pathogenesis and endogenous antiviral responses in pediatric airway epithelium.

### Keywords
Human respiratory syncytial virus, Lc-ms/ms, Secretome, Human airway epithelial model

### Affiliations
Chair in Infection and Global Health, Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool,
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Hiscox
Chair in Infection and Global Health, Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool,


