### Accession
PXD006067

### Title
A mitogen-activated protein kinase limits the apical formation of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate during polarized cell expansion of pollen tubes

### Description
Mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPKs) and phosphoinositides contribute to establishment and maintenance of polarity in eukaryotic cells. However, interactions between these important signaling pathways are largely unclear. Pollen tubes are an important model for the study of polarized cell expansion, in which PI4P 5-kinases control apical secretion and MAPKs contribute to pollen tube guidance. Here we report on the regulation of the Arabidopsis PI4P 5-kinase, AtPIP5K6, by the MAPK, MPK6. Purified recombinant AtPIP5K6 was phosphorylated in vitro upon incubation with pollen tube extracts. Non-targeted in-gel-kinase assays of pollen tube extracts followed by mass-spectrometry identified MPK6 as a candidate protein kinase upstream of AtPIP5K6. MPK6 interacted with AtPIP5K6 in yeast-two-hybrid tests, and bimolecular fluorescence complementation verified the interaction at the apical plasma membrane of pollen tubes. Recombinant AtPIP5K6 was phosphorylated in vitro by recombinant MPK6, resulting in reduced catalytic activity of AtPIP5K6. Alanine-substitution of phosphorylation sites, T590A and T597A, abrogated phosphorylation of AtPIP5K6 by MPK6 and prevented the in vitro inhibition. A T597D substitution resulted in reduced catalytic activity of the modified AtPIP5K6 protein in vitro. Coexpression of MPK6 with AtPIP5K6 in pollen tubes resulted in attenuation of PI4P 5-kinase-mediated polarity defects in vivo. Reciprocally, AtPIP5K6 effects were enhanced upon concomitant RNAi-inhibition of endogenous tobacco MAPKs. Both effects were absent when a AtPIP5K6 T590A T597A-variant was expressed, which could no longer be phosphorylated. We conclude that MPK6 limits PI4P 5-kinase-dependent polarized secretion to effect pollen tube guidance, revealing a new link between conserved signaling pathways with potential ramifications across eukaryotic kingdoms.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material Experiments were performed using material from Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 or Nicotiana tabacum (ecotype Samsun N).  Identification of candidate protein kinases from pollen tube extracts Protein kinase candidates in pollen tube extracts were identified by liquid chromatographyhigh definition multi-parallel collision-induced dissociation MS (Nano-LC-HD-MSE) using anACQUITY UPLC System and a coupled Synapt G2-S (Waters, Eschborn, Germany) in resolution mode with positive ionization. Peptides were analyzed in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode without pre-selection of precursor ions. Glu-Fib (Glu-1-Fibrinopeptide B) was used as lock mass (m/z = 785.8426, z = 2).  Identification of phosphopeptides AtPIP5K6 residues phosphorylated by MPK6 were identified by liquid chromatography on-line with high resolution accurate MS (HR/AM LC-MS) using an Orbitrap Velos Pro System (Thermo Scientific, Dreireich, Germany). Proteins separated by SDS-PAGEwere subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion, and peptides were analyzed by a data dependent acquisition (DDA) scan strategy with inclusion list to specifically select and isolate AtPIP5K6 phosphorylated peptides for MS/MS peptide sequencing. The use of an inclusion list aimed for the identification of low abundant species in the survey scan (targeted DDA). Multi stage activation (MSA) was applied to further fragment ion peaks resulting from neutral loss of the phosphate moiety by dissociation of the high energy phosphate bond to generate b- and y- fragment ion series rich in peptide sequence information.

### Data Protocol
Synapt - mass correction was applied to the spectra during data processing in ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS 3.0, Apex3D algorithm v. 2.128.5.0, 64 bit, Waters, Eschborn, Germany). ). The processing parameters were set as described [59]. The intensity of precursor ions was ≥180 counts and for fragment ions ≥15 counts to be distinguished from noise. The designation of fragment ions to precursor ions was achieved by by PLGS 3.0 based on peak form, retention time, isotope cluster and m/z value as well as ion mobility. Further data analysis was carried out by PLGS 3.0. MSE data were searched against the modified A. thaliana database (TAIR10, ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org) containing common contaminants such as keratin (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta). Protein identification required the detection of two fragment ions per peptide, a minimum of five fragment ions and two peptide matches. Primary digest reagent was trypsin with one missed cleavage allowed.   Velos - MS/MS spectra were used to search the TAIR10 database (ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org) amended with mutant AtPIP5K6 sequences (AtPIP5K6 T590A, AtPIP5K6 T597A and AtPIP5K6 T590A T597A) with the Mascot software v.2.5 integrated in Proteome Discoverer v.1.4. The phosphoRS module was used to localize phosphorylation sites within the primary structure of the peptide.

### Publication Abstract
An apical plasma membrane domain enriched in the regulatory phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate [PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub>] is critical for polar tip growth of pollen tubes. How the biosynthesis of PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub> by phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinases (PI4P 5-kinases) is controlled by upstream signaling is currently unknown. The pollen-expressed PI4P 5-kinase PIP5K6 is required for clathrin-mediated endocytosis and polar tip growth in pollen tubes. Here, we identify PIP5K6 as a target of the pollen-expressed mitogen-activated protein kinase MPK6 and characterize the regulatory effects. Based on an untargeted mass spectrometry approach, phosphorylation of purified recombinant PIP5K6 by pollen tube extracts could be attributed to MPK6. Recombinant MPK6 phosphorylated residues T590 and T597 in the variable insert of the catalytic domain of PIP5K6, and this modification inhibited PIP5K6 activity in vitro. PIP5K6 interacted with MPK6 in yeast two-hybrid tests, immuno-pull-down assays, and by bimolecular fluorescence complementation at the apical plasma membrane of pollen tubes. In vivo, MPK6 expression resulted in reduced plasma membrane association of a fluorescent PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub> reporter and decreased endocytosis without impairing membrane association of PIP5K6. Effects of PIP5K6 expression on pollen tube growth and cell morphology were attenuated by coexpression of MPK6 in a phosphosite-dependent manner. Our data indicate that MPK6 controls PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub> production and membrane trafficking in pollen tubes, possibly contributing to directional growth.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Map-kinase, Ptdins(4, Pi4p 5-kinase, Polar tip growth, 5)p2

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular Biochemistry Institute for Biochemistry and Biotechnology Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg Kurt-Mothes-Str. 3 06120 Halle (Saale)
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head
Dr Ingo Heilmann
Department of Cellular Biochemistry Institute for Biochemistry and Biotechnology Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg Kurt-Mothes-Str. 3 06120 Halle (Saale)


