### Accession
PXD037807

### Title
Longitudinal multi-omic changes in the transcriptome and proteome of peripheral blood cells after a 4 Gy total body radiation dose to Rhesus macaques.

### Description
Background: Non-human primates, such as Rhesus macaques, are a powerful model for studies of the cellular and physiological effects of radiation, development of radiation biodosimetry, and for understanding the impact of radiation on human health. Here, we study the effects of 4 Gy total body irradiation (TBI) at the molecular level out to 28 days and at the cytogenetic level out to 56 days after exposure. We combine the global transcriptomic and proteomic responses in peripheral whole blood to assess the impact of acute TBI exposure at extended times post irradiation.  Results: The overall mRNA response in the first week reflects a strong inflammatory reaction, infection response with neutrophil and platelet activation. At 1 week, cell cycle arrest and re-entry processes were enriched among mRNA changes, oncogene-induced senescence and MAPK signaling among the proteome changes. Influenza life cycle and infection pathways initiate earlier in mRNA and are reflected among the proteomic changes during the first week. Transcription factor proteins SRC, TGF and NFATC2 were immediately induced at 1 day after irradiation with increased transcriptional activity as predicted by mRNA changes persisting up to 1 week. Cell counts revealed a mild / moderate hematopoietic acute radiation syndrome (H-ARS) reaction to irradiation with expected lymphopenia, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia that resolved within 30 days. Measurements of micronuclei per binucleated cell levels in cytokinesis-blocked T-lymphocytes remained high in the range 0.27-0.33 up to 28 days and declined to 0.1 by day 56. Conclusions: Overall, we show that the TBI 4 Gy dose in NHPs induces many cellular changes that persist up to 1 month after exposure, consistent with damage, death, and repopulation of blood cells.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic sample preparation and analysis, TMT (Tandem Mass Tagging)-based proteomic quantification method was performed on the batch A samples and the next-generation proteomics platform, DIA (data-independent acquisition) was used for batch B.

### Data Protocol
The default settings were used for targeted analysis of DIA data in Spectronaut except the decoy generation was set to “mutated”. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with the mProphet approach and set to 1% at peptide precursor level and at 1% at the protein level. Results obtained from Spectronaut were further analyzed using the Spectronaut statistical package. Significantly changed protein abundance was determined by un-paired t-test (comparing irradiated to unirradiated animals) with a threshold for significance of p < 0.05 (permutation-based FDR correction) and 0.58 log2FC

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Radiation, Biomarkers

### Affiliations
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA
CUIMC

### Submitter
Shanaz Ghandhi

### Lab Head
Dr Shanaz Ghandhi
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA


