### Accession
PXD026258

### Title
HMGB1 interactome in prostate and ovarian cancer cells

### Description
This study reports the interactome of HMGB1 in prostate and ovarian cancer cells, which includes a variety of proteins involved in diverse cellular processes. Subcellular fractionation is used to map the distribution of interacting proteins. In the nucleus, HMGB1 interacts directly with NuRD complex subunit RBBP7, as confirmed by yeast two-hybrid. Amongst HMGB1 interacting proteins are also subunits of the THOC complex and the septin complex. THOC5 IP-MS experiments confirmed that THOC proteins interact with septins and also with RAB11.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates, nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts were incubated with anti-HMGB1 antibody (ab86070, Abcam) coupled to Protein G Dynabeads. On bead digestion was performed as previously described (Hillier et al., Cell Reports 2019).  Peptides from large-scale inmunoprecipitations were analyzed with online nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System. Samples were first loaded and desalted on a nanotrap (100 µm id x 2 cm) (PepMap C18, 5 µ) at 10 µl/min with 0.1% formic acid for 10 min and then separated on an analytical column (75 µm id x 25 cm) (PepMap C18, 2µ) over a 120 min linear gradient of 4-32% CH3CN/0.1% formic acid at 300 nl/min, and the total cycle time was 150 min. The Orbitrap Velos was operated in standard data-dependent acquisition. The survey scans (m/z 380-1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30000 at m/z 400, and one micro-scan was acquired per spectrum. The 10 most abundant multiply charged ions with a minimal intensity of 2000 counts were subject to MS/MS in the linear ion trap at an isolation width of 2 Th. Dynamic exclusion width was set at ± 10 ppm for 45 s. The automatic gain control target value was regulated at 1x106 for the Orbitrap and 5000 for the ion trap, with maximum injection time at 200 ms for Orbitrap and 100 ms for the ion trap, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database searches were performed with Mascot (Matrix Science) against the human Uniprot database (2014, 77606 entries) and an in-house contaminant database. The search parameters were: trypsin/P digestion, 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modifications of acetyl (N-terminal), carbamidomethyl (C), N-formylation (protein), oxidation (M), and pyro-glu (N-term Q). Database search results were refined through processing with Percolator (significance threshold < 0.05, FDR < 1%).

### Publication Abstract
This study reports the HMGB1 interactomes in prostate and ovary cancer cells lines. Affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry confirmed that the HMGB1 nuclear interactome is involved in HMGB1 known functions such as maintenance of chromatin stability and regulation of transcription, and also in not as yet reported processes such as mRNA and rRNA processing. We have identified an interaction between HMGB1 and the NuRD complex and validated this by yeast-two-hybrid, confirming that the RBBP7 subunit directly interacts with HMGB1. In addition, we describe for the first time an interaction between two HMGB1 interacting complexes, the septin and THOC complexes, as well as an interaction of these two complexes with Rab11. Analysis of Pan-Cancer Atlas public data indicated that several genes encoding HMGB1-interacting proteins identified in this study are dysregulated in tumours from patients diagnosed with ovary and prostate carcinomas. In PC-3 cells, silencing of <i>HMGB1</i> leads to downregulation of the expression of key regulators of ribosome biogenesis and RNA processing, namely <i>BOP1</i>, <i>RSS1</i>, <i>UBF1</i>, <i>KRR1</i> and <i>LYAR</i>. Upregulation of these genes in prostate adenocarcinomas is correlated with worse prognosis, reinforcing their functional significance in cancer progression.

### Keywords
Pc3, Rab11, Ribosome biogenesis, Thoc complex, Hmgb1, Skov-1, Nurd complex, Septin, Prostate cancer, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


