### Accession
PXD049088

### Title
The protein profiles of washes from the body cavity of Gasterosteus aculeatus L., infected with the Schistocephalus solidus, and from the surface of the helminth

### Description
The aim of this study was to describe the excretory–secretory proteins from the helminth Schistocephalus solidus and its intermediate host, the three-spined stickleback Gasterosteus aculeatus L., which are likely to be involved in interactions between them. Combined samples of washes from the G. aculeatus sticklebacks cavity infected with the S. solidus, and washes from the parasite surface were used as experimental samples (samples 5 to 8), while washes from the uninfected fish body cavity were used as control (samples 1 to 4). The obtained samples were analyzed using mass-spectrometry nLC–MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The three-spined sticklebacks G. aculeatus, infected and uninfected with plerocercoid of S. solidus, were caught in June 2020 from the Lake Mashinoe (the White Sea basin, Karelia, Russia) with fishing net and a live trap. The fish were delivered alive to the laboratory in barrels filled with water and aeration. The sticklebacks were killed with a needle, destroying the brain. The worms were removed from the fishes’ body cavity, weighed, placed in a 1.5 ml tube with 500 μl of PBS buffer pH 7.4 with 1% cocktail of protease inhibitors and washed for 30 s. At that time, the fishes’ body cavity was washed 3 times with 100 μl of new portions of the buffer with a protease inhibitor. Buffer from the fish body cavity were collected into a tube from which helminths were previously removed. Samples were taken from sticklebacks infected with at least one worm weighing more than 50 mg. Cavity fluids from the uninfected stickleback individuals were used as control. Then, samples were centrifuged at 400 g for 7 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was taken and dried in a freeze dryer. The sex and age of G. aculeatus were determined by annual rings on otoliths. The lyophilized samples were dissolved in 300 μl of buffer containing 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide pH 8.5. Then, the samples were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and concentrated to a final volume of 100 μL on Microcon devices YM-10 filters. To measure the total protein concentration, a water solution of bovine serum albumin at a concentration of 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 25,50 μg/μL was used as a standard. To 30 μl of BSA standard solutions and experimental samples, 1 ml of a reagent containing 1% water solution of sodium salt of bicinchoninic acid, 2% Na2CO3, 0.16% sodium tartrate, 0.4% NaOH and 0.95% NaHCO3, pH 11 was added, 25, 20 μl 4% aqueous solution of CuSO4. Then, the solutions were mixed and incubated at 56 °C for 20 min on a Termomixer comfort thermal shaker (Eppendorf). The construction of a calibration curve for standard albumin solutions and measurement of the total protein concentration in experimental samples was carried out using a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a wave length of 562 nm in 3 replicates. For reduction and alkylation of disulfide bonds, the samples were brought to a volume of 50 μL with a buffer containing 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, incubated in the presence of 4 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and 6.2 mM2-chloroacetamide at 80°C for 30 min. For protein hydrolysis, trypsin was added to the sample at an enzyme/total protein weight ratio of 1/50. The mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C with shaking at 350 rpm. The reaction was stopped with a 30% formic acid solution, 5 μlin each sample. The samples were centrifuged at 11,000g for 15 min at 20°C. The filtrate was dried in a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in20 μl of 5% formic acid for subsequent mass spectrometric analysis. Proteomic analysis of peptides was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatographic HPLC system connected to a Q-exactive HFXmass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). One micro-gram of the peptide mixture was loaded and separated on an Acclaim Pepmap® C18 HPLC column (75 μm × 150 mm,2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) in a gradient elution mode. The gradient was formed by mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B: (80% acetonitrile,0.1% aqueous formic acid solution) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The column was washed with 2% mobile phase B for7 min, after which the concentration of mobile phase B was increased linearly to 35% in 63 min, then the concentration of phase B was linearly increased to 99% in 5 min, after 10 min of washing at 99% buffer B, the concentration of this buffer was linearly reduced to the original 2% in 5 min. The total analysis duration was 90 min. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a Q-exactive HFX mass spectrometer in the positive ionization mode using an NESIsource (Thermo Scientific). The following settings were set: emitter voltage 2.1 kV, capillary temperature 240°C. Panoramic scanning was performed in the mass range from 300 to 1500 m/z, at a resolution of 120,000. In tandem scanning, the resolution was set to 15,000 in the mass range from 100 m/z to the upper limit, which is determined automatically based on the mass of the precursor. The precursor ions were isolated in a ± 1 Da window. The maximum number of ions allowed for isolation in MS2 mode was set as no more than 25, while the cut off limit for choosing a precursor for tandem analysis of the score was set at 80,000 units, and the normalized collision energy was 29. For tandem scanning, only ions from z were taken into account =2 + to z=5 + by charging state. The maximum accumulation time for precursor ions was 50 ms, and for fragment ions, 100 ms. The AGC value for precursors and fragment ions was set to 1*106 and 2*105, respectively. All measured precursors were dynamically excluded from tandem MS/MS analysis for 70 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw files obtained after mass spectrometry were loaded into the MaxQuant v.1.6.4.3 program (Cox, 2008). Searches were performed using the Andromeda algorithm (built into MaxQuant) on the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Schistocephalus solidus database (access in May 2020; 43,048 sequences) and Gasterosteus aculeatus (access in May 2020; 29,065sequences) combined into one database. The following search parameters were set: the degrading enzyme—trypsin, the accuracy of determining the masses of monoisotopic peptides ± 5 ppm, the accuracy of determining the masses in the MS/MS spectra ± 0.01 Da, and the possibility of skipping two sites of trypsin cleavage; oxidation of methionines, N-terminal acetylation and modification of cysteine with iodoacetoamide were taken into account as possible and mandatory modification of peptides, respectively; for validation of comparisons (pairing) of spectra and PSM peptides (Peptide Spectrum Matches), identification of peptides and identification of proteins, the FDR value (False DiscoveryRate) no more than 1.0%. Protein quantification was based on LFQ method (Label-free quantification).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Host–parasite interaction, Proteomics, Schistocephalus solidus, Excretory–secretory proteins, Gasterosteus aculeatus

### Affiliations
Institute of Biology of the Karelian Research Centre of the Russian Academy of Sciences
Institute of Biology, Biosystem's adaptation laboratory,Irkutsk State University,Russia

### Submitter
Albina Kochneva

### Lab Head
Dr Ekaterina Borvinskaya
Institute of Biology, Biosystem's adaptation laboratory,Irkutsk State University,Russia


