### Accession
PXD014223

### Title
Proteomics analysis of muscles from long lived O1/O3 flies in young and old age (Circadian gene variants and the skeletal muscle circadian clock contribute to the evolutionary divergence in longevity across Drosophila populations) Liam C. Hunt, Jianqin Jiao, Yong-Dong Wang, David Finkelstein, Deepti Rao, Michelle Curley, Maricela Robles-Murguia, Abbas Shirinifard, Vishwajeeth R. Pagala, Junmin Peng, Yiping Fan, and Fabio Demontis. Genome Research In press 2019.

### Description
Protein expression profiles in the whole tissue lysate extracted from the thorax of O1 and O3 long-lived flies with the control B3 strain flies and analyzed by tandem mass tag (TMT)–based mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Total number of samples: 20 Thoracic whole-tissue samples from four 1-week old control B3 flies and three 1 week old O1 and O3 flies as well as three 6 week old B3, O1 and O3 flies. Drosophila thoraces, consisting mostly of skeletal muscle, from >50 male flies/replicate were lysed by a denaturing 8M urea-based buffer. Specifically, ~20 mg of tissue was lysed with ~400 µL of the lysis buffer in a NextAdvance bullet blender at 4°C, with addition of ~200 µL of glass beads. The lysate was further centrifuged to remove any remaining cuticle fragments. Each sample was digested and desalted, followed by TMT labeling. The labeled samples were equally mixed and fractionated by basic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography (LC). The LC fractions were collected and further analyzed by acidic pH reverse phase LC-MS/MS. Approximately 1 µg of peptides from every faction was analyzed by MS (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Scientific), for 1 h of acetonitrile gradient generated from buffer A (0.2% formic acid) and buffer B (0.2% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile). For a three-sec duty cycle, 1 MS scan and MS/MS scans were acquired throughout the gradient.

### Data Protocol
The JUMP searching engine and the UniProt Drosophila database were used for data processing.  Searches were performed using 25 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions due to JUMP’s auto mass correction function and 15 ppm for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.16293 Da) were used for static modifications, and dynamic modifications included oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da).  Assigned peptides were filtered by minimal peptide length, maximum miscleavages, mass-to-charge accuracy, and matching scores. Peptides were then divided into groups according to peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein false discovery rate to below 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all peptide-spectrum matches using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
Organisms use endogenous clocks to adapt to the rhythmicity of the environment and to synchronize social activities. Although the circadian cycle is implicated in aging, it is unknown whether natural variation in its function contributes to differences in lifespan between populations and whether the circadian clock of specific tissues is key for longevity. We have sequenced the genomes of <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> strains with exceptional longevity that were obtained via multiple rounds of selection from a parental strain. Comparison of genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data revealed that changes in gene expression due to intergenic polymorphisms are associated with longevity and preservation of skeletal muscle function with aging in these strains. Analysis of transcription factors differentially modulated in long-lived versus parental strains indicates a possible role of circadian clock core components. Specifically, there is higher <i>period</i> and <i>timeless</i> and lower <i>cycle</i> expression in the muscle of strains with delayed aging compared to the parental strain. These changes in the levels of circadian clock transcription factors lead to changes in the muscle circadian transcriptome, which includes genes involved in metabolism, proteolysis, and xenobiotic detoxification. Moreover, a skeletal muscle-specific increase in <i>timeless</i> expression extends lifespan and recapitulates some of the transcriptional and circadian changes that differentiate the long-lived from the parental strains. Altogether, these findings indicate that the muscle circadian clock is important for longevity and that circadian gene variants contribute to the evolutionary divergence in longevity across populations.

### Keywords
Genomic analyses of aging; evolution of aging; circadian muscle transcriptome; longevity; circadian cycle; skeletal muscle; sarcopenia; proteostasis; timeless; drosophila

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospitasl
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital

### Submitter
Vishwajeeth Pagala

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Demontis
St. Jude Children's Research Hospitasl


