### Accession
PXD014410

### Title
Phosphorylation of the multi functional signal transducer B-cell adaptor protein (BCAP) facilitates recruitment of multiple SH2/SH3 proteins including Grb2.

### Description
B-cell adaptor protein (BCAP) is a multimodular, multi-functional signal transducer that regulates signal transduction processes in leukocytes including macrophages, B-cells and T-cells. In particular BCAP acts as a negative regulator of inflammatory signaling by the Toll-like receptors. Here we characterize the complex phosphorylation patterns of BCAP and use a novel protein complex trapping strategy (virotrap) to identify interaction partners. This analysis identifies known interactions with BCAP with PI3K p85 subunit and Nck, together with novel SH2 and SH3 domain adaptor proteins notably Grb2 and CRKL. We show that the SH3 domain of Grb2 can bind to BCAP independently of phosphorylation, suggesting that the SH2 domains mediate interaction with activated receptor tyrosine kinase complexes including the CD19 subunit of the B-cell receptor. Our data also suggest that PI3K p85 subunit binds to the BCAP via SH3 domains forming an inactive complex that is activated subsequently by sequential binding with the SH2 domains. Taken together our results indicate that BCAP is a complex hub that processes signals from multiple pathways in diverse immune system cells.

### Sample Protocol
Virotrap experiments were performed essentially as described (Titeca et al., 2017) with a minor modification in the transfection conditions and using an alternative data analysis strategy. In brief, 10 million authenticated HEK293T cells were seeded the day before transfection in T75 bottles. After 24hrs cells were transfected with 6.4 µg of pMET7-GAG-BCAP bait construct, or with 3.75 µg of a pMET7-GAG-eDHFR control construct. For single step purification, a ½ ratio of expression vectors for VSV-G and FLAG-VSV-G was co-transfected in the cells (for a total of 1.1 µg). Transfection mixes were normalized with mock vector (pSVsport). The supernatants containing Virotrap particles were harvested 40 h after transfection and were cleared by centrifugation and by filtering (0.45 μm). Supernatants were then incubated with MyOne Streptavidin T1 beads loaded with BioM2 antibody. Two hours after binding, beads containing Virotrap particles were washed, and particles were released by competition with FLAG-peptide. After removal of the beads, samples were processed with Amphipols and digested using trypsin. After acidification, peptides were analyzed by LC–MS using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Analysis was performed on three independent transfections for BCAP and for control experiments.

### Data Protocol
The peptide mixtures were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm I.D. × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr.Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 150 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) packed in the nanospray needle (PicoFrit SELF/PPicoTip emitter, PF360-75-15-N-5, New Objective). The samples were loaded and separated with a linear gradient from 98% solvent A′ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 40% solvent B′ (0.08% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. This was followed by a 15 min wash reaching 99% solvent B′. The Q Exactive instrument was operated in datadependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 3.4 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400–2000, AGC target 3 × 106 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms) acquired at a resolution of 70 000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 10 tandem MS scans (resolution 17 500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling the defined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104 ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, minimum AGC target 1000, intensity threshold 1.4 × 104, exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5–8, and >8 charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% normalized collision energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass). All MS data were searched using MAXQUANT (version 1.5.7.4) against the human SwissProt database (Jan 2017; complemented with GAG, VSV-G, and eDHFR sequences) with 4.5 and 20 ppm tolerance on precursor and fragment mass, respectively, with trypsin/P settings allowing up to two missed cleavages and with methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation formation as variable modifications. Minimum peptide length was set to 7, and maximum peptide mass was 4600 Da. PSM FDR and protein FDR were set to 0.01. Min. peptides and min. razor + unique peptides were set to 1. The searches were performed together with the corresponding control samples to allow matching of MS spectra between runs. Contaminants and identifications against the REVERSE database were removed in the PERSEUS (version 1.5.5.3) analysis after the log2 transformation of the non-normalized protein LFQ ratios. Only proteins identified in all three samples of the BCAP or eDHFR conditions were retained for further analysis. Default PERSEUS settings were used for missing value imputation from a normal distribution. A two-sided t test was performed with multiple testing correction using 1000 randomizations. FDR was set at 5% with the S0 curve set at 1.

### Publication Abstract
B-cell adaptor protein (BCAP) is a multimodular, multifunctional signal transducer that regulates signal transduction pathways in leukocytes, including macrophages, B-cells, and T-cells. In particular, BCAP suppresses inflammatory signaling by Toll-like receptors (TLRs). However, how BCAP itself is regulated and what its interaction partners are is unclear. Here, using human immune cell lines, including THP-1 cells, we characterized the complex phosphorylation patterns of BCAP and used a novel protein complex trapping strategy, called virotrap, to identify its interaction partners. This analysis identified known interactions of BCAP with phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) p85 subunit and NCK adaptor protein (NCK), together with previously unknown interactions of BCAP with Src homology 2 (SH2) and SH3 domain-containing adaptor proteins, notably growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2) and CRK-like proto-oncogene, adaptor protein (CRKL). We show that the SH3 domain of GRB2 can bind to BCAP independently of BCAP phosphorylation status, suggesting that the SH2 domains mediate interactions with activated receptor tyrosine kinase complexes including the CD19 subunit of the B-cell receptor. Our results also suggested that the PI3K p85 subunit binds to BCAP via SH3 domains forming an inactive complex that is then activated by sequential binding with the SH2 domains. Taken together, our results indicate that BCAP is a complex hub that processes signals from multiple pathways in diverse cell types of the immune system.

### Keywords
Phosphoinositide 3-kinase, Phosphorylation, Human cell line hek293t bcap, Sh3 domains, Toll-like receptors, Sh2 domains

### Affiliations
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology Ghent University Dept. of Biomolecular Medicine

### Submitter
Sven Eyckerman

### Lab Head
Dr Sven Eyckerman
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology Ghent University Dept. of Biomolecular Medicine


