### Accession
PXD003888

### Title
Identification of Proteins Sensitive to Thermal Stress in Human HEK293 cells

### Description
Heat-shock is an acute insult to the mammalian proteome. The sudden elevation in temperature has far-reaching effects on protein metabolism, leads to a rapid inhibition of most protein synthesis, and the induction of protein chaperones. Using heat-shock in human HEK293 cells, in conjunction with detergent extraction and sedimentation followed by LC-MS/MS proteomic approaches, we identify proteins that lose solubility upon heat-shock. We assume that these are metastable in protein homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 4 mM L-glutamine at 37°C in 100 mm dishes in a 5% CO2 incubator. The experiment involved 8 dishes. At 70–80% confluence, 4 dishes were moved to a 42°C incubator with 5% CO2 1 hour before harvesting while 4 dishes were kept at the original 37°C incubator as controls. After the treatments, the cells were harvested by scraping in PBS, and then sequential detergent extraction was used to fractionate the proteins according to their solubility. The detail method is described in project <a href ="http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD003914">PXD003914</a>.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Analyst QS (version 1.1). Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2.0) to search IPI databases [IPI HUMAN (version 3.32, 67524 entries)] assuming digestion with trypsin. For bioinformatic analysis, we used X! Tandem (version 2007.01.01.1) to search a subset of the IPI HUMAN database (version 3.80, 556 entries). Both Mascot and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.30 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 0.30 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. S-carbamoylmethylcysteine cyclization of the N-terminus, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, and ubiquitination of lysine were specified in Mascot and X! Tandem as variable modifications. Scaffold (version 2_01_02, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
The capacity of the cell to produce, fold and degrade proteins relies on components of the proteostasis network. Multiple types of insults can impose a burden on this network, causing protein misfolding. Using thermal stress, a classic example of acute proteostatic stress, we demonstrate that &#x223c;5-10% of the soluble cytosolic and nuclear proteome in human HEK293 cells is vulnerable to misfolding when proteostatic function is overwhelmed. Inhibiting new protein synthesis for 30&#x2005;min prior to heat-shock dramatically reduced the amount of heat-stress induced polyubiquitylation, and reduced the misfolding of proteins identified as vulnerable to thermal stress. Following prior studies in C. elegans in which mutant huntingtin (Q103) expression was shown to cause the secondary misfolding of cytosolic proteins, we also demonstrate that mutant huntingtin causes similar 'secondary' misfolding in human cells. Similar to thermal stress, inhibiting new protein synthesis reduced the impact of mutant huntingtin on proteostatic function. These findings suggest that newly made proteins are vulnerable to misfolding when proteostasis is disrupted by insults such as thermal stress and mutant protein aggregation.

### Keywords
Hek293, Ccf-sttg1, Lc-ms/ms, Detergent insoluble, Heat shock, Sh-sy5y

### Affiliations
Neuroscience
Department of Neuroscience, University of Florida

### Submitter
Guilian Xu

### Lab Head
Dr David R. Borchelt
Department of Neuroscience, University of Florida


