### Accession
PXD021301

### Title
Comparative analysis of PAD4 and SAG101 interactors upon activation of NLR immunity in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Intracellular NLR receptors with a central nucleotide-binding domain allow plants to detect specific pathogen-secreted proteins and initiate immune signaling. A family of conserved Enhanced disease susceptibility 1 proteins with a lipase-like and the EP domain transduces the signal from activated NLRs downstream. This family includes EDS1, PAD4 and SAG101 that form mutually exclusive heterodimers EDS1-PAD4 and EDS1-SAG101. Despite sequence similarities, PAD4 and SAG101 control different aspects of NLR immune signaling. More specifically, PAD4 and SAG101 regulate resistance and cell death outputs of the NLR receptor pair RRS1-RPS4, respectively. Also, PAD4 and SAG101 genetically cooperate with distinct downstream signaling NLRs - ADR1 and NRG1. The main aim of this IP-LC/MS project is to assess whether PAD4 and SAG101 form complexes with ADR1 and NRG1 and to gain insight into mechanisms of the genetically established functional links between EDS1 family proteins and downstream signaling NLRs.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and IP. Five-week-old Arabidopsis plants expressing p35S:YFP-StrepII-3xHA (Col-0), pPAD4:YFP-gPAD4 (pad4-1 sag101-3 background) or pSAG101:gSAG101-YFP (pad4-1 sag101-3) were vacuum infiltrated with Pf0-1 avrRps4 bacteria (OD=0.2 in 10 mM MgCl2 with 0.01% Silwet L-70) to induce RRS1-RPS4 dependent defense signaling. 2-3 gram of rosette material was collected at 6 hours post infiltration (hpi), snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80C until IP. The storage time between sample collection and IP - 2-4 days.   On the day of IP, samples were ground to fine powder in Precellys 15 ml tubes. The protein extraction was performed in the 10 ml of buffer composed of PIPES-KOH pH7.0 20 mM, NaCl 150 mM, MgCl2 10 mM, Glycerol 10% (v/v), DTT 5 mM, Triton X-100 1%, Plant Protease Inhibitor cocktail. The protein extraction was performed at 4C for 20 min under constant end-to-end mixing (~60 rpm). After that, the samples were cleared by centrifuging 20 min at 4C 3,000 xg. The supernatant was passed once through 0.22 um filters to remove small debris. Each sample (10 ml in 15 ml Falcon tubes) was incubated for 2.5 hours at 4C under constant end-to-end mixing (~20 rpm) with equilibrated GFP-trapA beads corresponding to 20 ul of  slurry. After the incubation, beads were washed 3x 5 min each with the wash buffer containing Tris-HCl pH7.4 20 mM, NaCl 150 mM, Triton X-100 0.1%, Plant Protease Inhibitor cocktail. Finally, the beads were washed two additional times 1 min each in the buffer without Triton X-100 Tris-HCl pH7.4 20 mM and NaCl 150 mM.  After IP, only low protein bind Eppendorf tubes were used. The tubes were changed 2x to reduce background and Triton X-100 carryover (1 - transfer of beads from 15 ml tubes to 2 ml, 2 - after first wash with Triton-free buffer). On-bead digest and LC-MS/MS data acquisition. Proteins (from GFP-trap enrichment) were submitted to an on-bead digestion. In brief, dry beads were re-dissolved in 25 µL digestion buffer 1 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2M urea, 1mM DTT, 5 ng/µL trypsin) and incubated for 30 min at 30 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm. Next, beads were pelleted and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Digestion buffer 2 (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 2M urea, 5 mM CAA) was added to the beads, after mixing the beads were pelleted, the supernatant was collected and combined with the previous one. The combined supernatants were then incubated o/n at 32 °C in a Thermomixer with 400 rpm; samples were protected from light during incubation. The digestion was stopped by adding 1 µL TFA and desalted with C18 Empore disk membranes according to the StageTip protocol (Rappsilber et al, Anal. Chem. 2003, 75, 663.).  Dried peptides were re-dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA (10 µL) for analysis and measured without dilution. Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on 16 cm frit-less silica emitters (New Objective, 0.75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded on the column and eluted for 115 min using a segmented linear gradient of 5% to 95% solvent B (0 min : 5%B; 0-5 min -> 5%B; 5-65 min -> 20%B; 65-90 min ->35%B; 90-100 min -> 55%; 100-105 min ->95%, 105-115 min ->95%) (solvent A 0% ACN, 0.1% FA; solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1%FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode with a TOP15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300–1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM and a target value of 3×106 ions. Precursors were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 25. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a target value of 105 ions at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM, a maximum injection time (max.) of 55 ms and a fixed first mass of m/z 100. Peptides with a charge of +1, greater than 6, or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2, dynamic exclusion for 30s prevented repeated selection of precursors.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox et al., Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1367.) with label-free quantification (LFQ) and iBAQ enabled (Cox et al., Nat. Protoc. 2016, 11, 2301.). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a combined database containing the sequences from A. thaliana (TAIR10_pep_20101214; ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Proteins/TAIR10_protein_lists/) and sequences of 248 common contaminant proteins and decoy sequences. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.  Statistical analysis of the MaxLFQ values was carried out using Perseus (version 1.5.8.5, http://www.maxquant.org/). Quantified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and hits “identified by site” and MaxLFQ values were log2 transformed. After grouping samples by condition only those proteins were retained for the subsequent analysis that had three valid values in one of the conditions. Two-sample t-tests were performed using a permutation-based FDR of 5%. Alternatively, quantified proteins were grouped by condition and only those hits were retained that had 4 valid values in one of the conditions. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (1.8 downshift, separately for each column). Volcano plots were generated in Perseus using an FDR of 5% or 1% and an S0=1. The Perseus output was exported and further processed using Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Plants utilise intracellular nucleotide-binding, leucine-rich repeat (NLR) immune receptors to detect pathogen effectors and activate local and systemic defence. NRG1 and ADR1 "helper" NLRs (RNLs) cooperate with enhanced disease susceptibility 1 (EDS1), senescence-associated gene 101 (SAG101) and phytoalexin-deficient 4 (PAD4) lipase-like proteins to mediate signalling from TIR domain NLR receptors (TNLs). The mechanism of RNL/EDS1 family protein cooperation is not understood. Here, we present genetic and molecular evidence for exclusive EDS1/SAG101/NRG1 and EDS1/PAD4/ADR1 co-functions in TNL immunity. Using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry, we show effector recognition-dependent interaction of NRG1 with EDS1 and SAG101, but not PAD4. An EDS1-SAG101 complex interacts with NRG1, and EDS1-PAD4 with ADR1, in an immune-activated state. NRG1 requires an intact nucleotide-binding P-loop motif, and EDS1 a functional EP domain and its partner SAG101, for induced association and immunity. Thus, two distinct modules (NRG1/EDS1/SAG101 and ADR1/EDS1/PAD4) mediate TNL receptor defence signalling.

### Keywords
Sag101, Helper nlr, Tnl, Pad4, Arabidopsis, Immunity

### Affiliations
Plant Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Group
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Carl-von-Linné Weg 10
50829 Cologne
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Sara Christina Stolze

### Lab Head
Dr Hirofumi Nakagami
Basic Immune System of Plants / Protein Mass Spectrometry Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research Carl-von-Linne-Weg 10, 50829 Cologne, Germany


