### Accession
PXD009607

### Title
Data-Independent Proteome Analysis of ARPE-19 Cells

### Description
We have performed a proteomics analysis of a human retinal pigment epithelial cell line (ARPE-19), which represents a widely used model for in vitro studies of cellular and molecular mechanisms related to human RPE cells. The project was jointly supervised by <b>Francesco Giorgianni</b> and <b>Sarka Beranova-Giorgianni</b>.

### Sample Protocol
ARPE-19 cells whole protein extracts were separated by short SDS-PAGE. Gel slices were digested with sequencing grade trypsin. The resulting peptides were purified with ZipTip C18 micro columns.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were analyzed by UPLC LC-MS/MS on a Waters Synapt G2-Si. The data were acquired in UDMSE mode. The raw data were analyzed with Progenesis QI for proteomics.

### Publication Abstract
We have performed a proteomics analysis of a human retinal pigment epithelial cell line (ARPE-19), which represents a widely used model for <i>in vitro</i> studies of cellular and molecular mechanisms related to human RPE cells (Dunn et al., 1996; Weigel et al., 2002) [1], [2]. Whole cell protein extracts were separated in four gel fractions via short (10&#x202f;min) SDS-PAGE runs. Following fractionation and trypsin digestion, the resulting peptides were separated on a nano UPLC LC system and analyzed on-line with a QTof-IMS instrument: a tandem mass spectrometer with ion mobility separation (Synapt G2-Si). Data were acquired in data-independent mode (UDMS<sup>E</sup>), which allows for absolute and/or relative post-acquisition protein quantification (Silva et al., 2006) [3]. The proteome profile data obtained from this study can be used as a protein reference database with qualitative and quantitative protein information related to ARPE-19 cells under normal growth conditions.

### Keywords
Rpe cells; data-independent; label-free quantification

### Affiliations
UTHSC

### Submitter
Francesco Giorgianni

### Lab Head
Dr Francesco Giorgianni
UTHSC


