### Accession
PXD005451

### Title
Effect of ploidy on Salmon physiology - White muscle

### Description
This study investigated firstly, the impact of ploidy on growth performance and whole body composition of Atlantic salmon at different early freshwater stages (34 dph (days post-hatching) alevin; 109 dph; fry and 162 dph parr;) and secondly, whether phenotypic differences at these stages were reflected in protein samples collected from whole fish, white muscle or liver tissue. Female diploid and triploid Atlantic salmon (n = 3) were first fed at 35 dph and then maintained by feeding to satiation on commercial feeds. NOTE on file nomenclature - T/D refer to triploid/diploid; E* refers to sequential protein extract (1 or 2) and S3 refers to sampling time point #3 (all other files with either no suffix or long suffix are sampling time point #2)

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from white muscle used sequential fractionation in non-denaturing buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris at pH 8.0) followed by denaturing buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 50 mM Tris at pH 8.0)  Tryptic digests prepared using the co-precipitation method and peptides analysed using Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC and LTQ-Orbitrap MS

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant platform for LFQ used based on FDR of 0.01 for peptide and protein ID, Andromeda search engine used to interrogate the Salmo salar database.  Significant differentially-expressed proteins determined on the basis of FDR-adjusted t-test p<0.05

### Publication Abstract
There is currently renewed interest in farming triploid Atlantic salmon. Improving farming requires identifying triploid specific phenotypic and physiological traits that are uniquely derived from ploidy per se and developed under optimal growing conditions. This study investigated firstly, the impact of ploidy on growth performance and whole body composition of Atlantic salmon at different early freshwater stages [34dph (days post-hatching) alevin, 109dph fry, and 162dph parr] and secondly, whether phenotypic differences at these stages were reflected in protein samples collected from whole fish, white muscle or liver tissue. Female diploid and triploid Atlantic salmon (n=3) were first fed at 35dph and then maintained by feeding to satiation on commercial feeds. Triploids were significantly lower in weight at the late alevin and fry stages but matched diploid weight at the parr stage. The whole-body lipid content was significantly higher for triploids at the parr stage, while the whole-body lipid class profile was broadly similar and was largely not affected by ploidy. Comparative label-free shotgun proteomic analysis did not detect significant alterations in protein expression between diploids and triploids at any growth stage. The present results indicate that ploidy under optimal growing conditions and during early freshwater stages only result in small phenotypic differences in weight and whole body lipid content that were not reflected at the proteome level. These findings suggest that optimal husbandry conditions for freshwater Atlantic salmon are similar between ploidies, at least for all-female populations.

### Keywords
Ploidy, Salmon, Muscle

### Affiliations
Facility manager, Senior research fellow
University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Facility manager, Senior research fellow


