### Accession
PXD040719

### Title
Myelin proteome differences in old and young mice

### Description
Aging of the peripheral nervous system (PNS) is associated with structural and functional changes that lead to a reduction in regenerative capacity and the development of age-related peripheral neuropathy.  Myelin is a central component in maintaining physiological peripheral nerve function, and differences in myelin maintenance, degradation, formation and clearance have been suggested to contribute to age-related PNS changes.  In addition, recent proteomic studies have elucidated the complex composition of the total myelin proteome in health and its changes in neuropathy models.  However, changes in the myelin proteome of peripheral nerves during ageing have not been investigated. Hence, the aim of this proteomics experiment was to define proteome changes in isolated myelin fractions during ageing, by investigating myelin proteome profiles from young (nerves from 2-3 month old mice) and old (nerves from 18 months old mice) nerves.

### Sample Protocol
Myelin was isolated from pooled sciatic nerve fractions (n = 7-10 nerves per pool) with one pool representing one biological replicate  (n = 3 biological replicates for each age) as described previously in the protocol by Larocca et al. (DOI: 10.1002/0471143030.cb0325s33).  In brief, sciatic nerves were isolated from mice on a C57BL/6 J background and snap-freezed in liquid nitrogen.  Pooled sciatic nerves were lysed in 0.27 M Sucrose using a Polytron homogenizer and were carefully added to ultracentrifuge tubes containing 0.83M sucrose.  Subsequently, samples were ultra-centrifuged for 45 min at 82.000 x g. The formed myelin intermediate phase was isolated, washed in TRIS-Cl buffer, centrifuged again for 15 min at 82.000 x g and resuspended in TRIS-Cl buffer. Then, myelin protein pellets were centrifuged again for 10 min at 17.000 x g, before samples were resuspended in PBS and frozen at -80°C until further proteomic characterisation. The following experimental groups were included in this study: Young = Myelin fraction isolated from sciatic nerves from 2-3 month old mice; Old = Myelin fraction isolated from sciatic nerves from 18 month old mice.Pellets were were resuspended in lysis buffer (final concentration: 0.1 M HEPES/pH 8; 2 % SDS; 0.1 M DTT), vortexed and then sonicated using a Bioruptor (Diagenode) (10 cycles with 1min on and 30s off with high intensity @ 20°C).  For reduction full denaturation of the proteins, the lysates were first incubated at 95 °C for 10 min and subsequently sonicated in the Bioruptor for a further 10 cycles as before.  The supernatants (achieved after centrifugation, 14000 rpm, room temperature, 2 minutes) were then treated with iodacetamide (room temperature, in the dark, 30 minutes, 15 mM). After running a coomassie gel to estimate the amount of protein in each sample, approximately 60-120 µg of each sample were treated with 4 volumes ice cold acetone to 1 volume sample and left overnight at -20 °C, to precipitate the proteins.  The samples were then centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 30 minutes, 4 °C.  After removal of the supernatant, the precipitates were washed twice with 400 µL 80% acetone (ice cold).  After each wash step, the samples were vortexed, then centrifuged again for 2 minutes at 4°C. The pellets were then allowed to air-dry before being dissolved in digestion buffer (60 µL, 3M urea in 0,1M HEPES, pH 8) with sonication (3 cycles in the Bioruptor as  above) and incubated for 4 h with LysC (1:100 enzyme: protein ratio) at 37 °C with shaking at 600 rpm. Then the samples were diluted 1:1 with milliQ water (to reach 1.5M urea) and were incubated with trypsin (1:100 enzyme: protein ratio) for 16 h at 37 °C. The digests were then acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm in the presence of a slow vacuum. In this process, the columns were conditioned with 3x100 µL solvent B (80% acetonitrile; 0.05% formic acid) and equilibrated with 3x 100 µL solvent A (0.05% formic acid in milliQ water). The samples were loaded, washed 3 times with 100 µL solvent A, and then eluted into PCR tubes with 50 µL solvent B. The eluates were dried down with the speed vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 50 µL 5% acetonitrile, 95% milliQ water, with 0.1% formic acid prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18).  The outlet of the analytical column was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A waswater, 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. The sampleswere loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 µL/min onto the trapping column.  Trappingtime was 6 minutes. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3 % to 25 % in 30 minutes, then increased to 32 % in 5 more minutes and finally to 50 % in a further 0.1 minutes.Total runtime was 60 minutes.The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was 300 °C, RF lens was 30%. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 375-1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap withresolution of 120000. The filling time was set at maximum of 50 ms with limitation of 2 x 105 ions.“Top Speed” method was employed to take the maximum number of precursor ions (with an intensity threshold of 5 x 103) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 30%) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) and measurement in the ion trap, with a cycle time of 3 seconds.  MIPS (monoisotopic precursor selection) was employed but with relaxed restrictions . The fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 2 x 103 ions or after filling time of 300 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode, with the Rapid scan rate and a fixed first mass of 120 m/z. Only multiply charged (2+ - 7+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 60 seconds and relative mass window of 10 ppm.Isotopes were excluded.Additionally only 1 data dependent scan was performed per precursor (only the most intense charge state selected).Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time. In order to improve the mass accuracy, a lock mass correction using a background ion (m/z 445.12003) was applied. Data acquisition was performed using Xcalibur 4.0/Tune 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the quantitative label-free analysis, raw files from the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.28). MS/MS spectra were searched against the Mus Musculus Swiss-Prot entries of the Uniprot KB (database release 2016_01, 16755 entries) using the Andromeda search engine.A list of common contaminants was appended to the database search.The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues, unless followed by proline); 2 missed cleavages were allowed; oxidation (M), and acetylation (protein N-term) were applied as variable modifications, with mass tolerances of 20 ppm set for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragments. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as decoy database. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy strategy. Additionally, only proteins identified by at least 2 unique peptides were retained. The iBAQ intensity values per protein (from the proteinGroups.txt output of MaxQuant) were used for further analysis. All comparative analyses were performed using R version 3.2.3. The R packages MSnbase (Gatto and Lilley, 2012) for processing proteomics data and the included package imputeLCMD for imputing missing values based on the definitions for values MAR and MNAR. MNAR were defined for each pairwise comparison as values that were (i) missing in 5 or 4 out of 5, or 3 out of 5 biological replicates in one sample group, and (ii) present in 3 of the 5 biological replicates in the second sample group. MNAR values were computed using the method “MinDet” by replacing values with minimal valuesobserved in the sample. MAR were consequently defined for each pairwise comparison as values that were missing in 2 out of 5 biological replicates per sample group. MAR values were imputed based on the method “knn” (k-nearest neighbors). All the other cases (e.g., protein groups that had less than 2 values in both sample groups) were filtered out because of the lack of sufficient information. The data was quantile normalized to reduce technical variations. Protein differential expression was evaluated using the Limma package. Differences in protein abundances were statistically determined using the Student’s t-test with variances moderated by limma’s empirical Bayes method. False discovery rate was estimated using fdrtool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peripheral nervous system, Myelin, Neuropathy

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging, Fritz Lipmann Institute, Beutenbergstrasse 11, 07745 Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Helen Morrison
Leibniz Institute on Aging, Fritz Lipmann Institute, Beutenbergstrasse 11, 07745 Jena, Germany


