### Accession
PXD014297

### Title
Proteomic mapping of atrial and ventricular protein expression in patients with aortic valve stenosis

### Description
Objectives: The primary objective of this high-resolution proteomic study was to investigate patients with severe aortic valve stenosis (AVS) to detect novel biomarkers for diagnostic and/or therapeutic purposes. Background: Among patients with severe AVS, some are likely to rapidly progress with a higher mortality and benefit from prompt surgical or interventional care. To select these patients, novel disease-related biomarkers are needed. Methods: We used induced pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes as a relative quantification standard to profile the proteomes of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) atria and left ventricles from 30 patients with AVS. Results: In total, 3370 proteins were quantified using high-resolution mass spectrometry. Statistical analysis revealed significant upregulation of 64 proteins in the atria and 27 proteins in the ventricles including several known chamber specific marker-proteins. Atrial upregulation of proteins that belong to the interstitial compartment or contribute to endocrine function was observed. To uncover disease related proteins, we compared our data to similar published datasets from healthy and diseased hearts. We performed gene set enrichment analyses to pinpoint global proteomic characteristics of a decompensated state of AVS with hypertrophy, like the downregulation of ventricular mitochondrial proteins and the development of ventricular fibrosis. Finally, we propose a set of high abundant proteins like LGALS3BP, TUBA4A, TINAGL1 and LAMA2 as well as SRL, FHL1 and ATP2A2 playing a crucial role in AVS-related heart disease. Conclusions: We established a reproducible workflow for high-resolution quantitative proteomics of FFPE myocardial samples and provide interesting candidate proteins with biomarker potential for AVS.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE heart samples were prepared for MS analysis as described previously. Briefly, areas containing at least 80% CMs were marked on an H&E-stained slide by a pathologist and corresponding areas of five sequential unstained 10 µm thick slides were isolated by macrodissection. Cardiac samples were deparaffinized and dehydrated and lysed in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), pH 8.0, 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 0.2% deoxycholic acid (DCA) and 50 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphin (TCEP). Protein concentrations were determined using the 660nm Kit (Thermo Fisher) following the manufacturer’s instructions. 50µg clarified tissue lysate were mixed with equal amounts of super-SILAC standard and combined with 200 µl of 8 M urea and 0.2% DCA in 100 mM ABC, pH 8.0 and loaded onto a 30 kDa microcon filter (Millipore) to perform FASP. All on-column washing steps were performed for 10 minutes at 14,000g. After 4 washing steps, protein was alkylated with 50 mM Indole-3-acetic acid in 100 mM ABC, pH 8.0, for 60 min. Urea was then washed out with 0.2% DCA in 50 mM ABC, pH 8.0 and samples were digested using sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Peptides were collected using 50 mM ABC, pH 8.0 and mixed with 200μl ethyl acetate and 2.5 µl TFA. After sonification and centrifugation at 16,000g the upper organic layer was removed, and samples were vacuum-dried and washed with 50% methanol. Resulting peptides were fractionated with Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo scientific) and again vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database containing 134,921 protein entries (downloaded in July 2014) supplemented with 245 frequently observed contaminants collated with the Andromeda search engine. Precursor and fragment-ion mass tolerances were set to 6 and 20 ppm, respectively, after initial recalibration. Protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at both the peptide and the protein level by using a forward-and-reverse concatenated decoy database approach. For SILAC quantification, multiplicity was set to two for double SILAC (Lys+0/Arg+0, Lys+8/Arg+10) labeling. At least two ratio counts were required for peptide quantification, and the “re-quantify” option enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Aortic valve stenosis (AVS) is one of the most common valve diseases in the world. However, detailed biological understanding of the myocardial changes in AVS hearts on the proteome level is still lacking. Proteomic studies using high-resolution mass spectrometry of formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) human myocardial tissue of AVS-patients are very rare due to methodical issues. To overcome these issues this study used high resolution mass spectrometry in combination with a stem cell-derived cardiac specific protein quantification-standard to profile the proteomes of 17 atrial and 29 left ventricular myocardial FFPE human myocardial tissue samples from AVS-patients. In our proteomic analysis we quantified a median of 1980 (range 1495-2281) proteins in every single sample and identified significant upregulation of 239 proteins in atrial and 54 proteins in ventricular myocardium. We compared the proteins with published data. Well studied proteins reflect disease-related changes in AVS, such as cardiac hypertrophy, development of fibrosis, impairment of mitochondria and downregulated blood supply. In summary, we provide both a workflow for quantitative proteomics of human FFPE heart tissue and a comprehensive proteomic resource for AVS induced changes in the human myocardium.

### Keywords
Proteome. heart. silac

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany


