### Accession
PXD027242

### Title
Data-independent acquisition protease-multiplexing enables increased proteome sequence coverage across multiple fragmentation modes

### Description
The use of multiple proteases has been shown to increase protein sequence coverage in proteomics experiments, but due to the additional sample preparation and analysis time required, it has not been widely adapted in routine proteomic workflows. While data-independent acquisition (DIA) has been primarily optimized for fragmenting tryptic peptides with beam type (bt)-CID, it has the potential to analyze multiplexed samples from different protease digests. Here we evaluate a DIA multiplexing method that combines three proteolytic digests (Trypsin, AspN, and GluC) into a single sample. We first optimize DIA conditions for both resonance excitation (re-CID) and bt-CID to determine the optimal consensus fragmentation conditions for tryptic and non-tryptic peptides, and apply these methods to a human cell line. We demonstrate that using this multiplexed approach results in similar protein identifications and quantitative performance as compared to trypsin alone, but enables up to a 63% increase in peptide detections, resulting in up to a 8% increase in average sequence coverage. Importantly, this resulted in 100% sequence coverage for numerous proteins, suggesting the utility of this approach in applications where sequence coverage is critical, such as proteoform analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. HEK 293T, HSC6, and SCC25 cell pellets were resuspended in a lysis buffer composed of 8 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and 100 mM NaCl (pH~8). Cells were lysed via probe sonication, on ice, at 20% amplitude for 20 seconds, followed by 10 seconds rest. In total, this process was performed three times. Lysate protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay. Disulfide bond reduction and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was performed by the addition of a 1:10 volume of reduction/alkylation buffer (100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 400 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA)) to the lysate. Samples were then incubated for 5 minutes at 45°C with shaking (1,500 rpm). Lysate was diluted to 1.5 M final urea concentration with 100 mM ABC, 100 mM NaCl solution. Lysate was split into three individual samples and digested overnight with either trypsin (Promega), GluC (Worthington Biochem), or AspN (Promega) at 37°C at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:100 (w:w). Following digestion, peptides were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a pH~2. Peptides were desalted using C18 tips (Nest Group). Tips were activated with 0.1% TFA/80% acetonitrile (ACN) and equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. Following the addition of peptide samples, tips were washed with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 0.25% formic acid (FA)/50% ACN. Samples were dried down by SpeedVac and resuspended in 0.1% FA. To generate digest mixtures, trypsin, AspN, and GluC generated peptides were combined (w:w:w) in the following ratios (trypsin:GluC:AspN) : 1:1:1 (equal amounts of all digest mixtures), 1:2:2 (twice as much GluC and AspN digests as tryptic digest), and 1:3:3 (three times as much GluC and AspN digests as tryptic digest).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data from each DDA dataset was independently searched using the Andromeda search engine built into MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43). Samples were searched against a database of homo sapiens protein sequences (downloaded from Uniprot February 3, 2020). Each dataset was searched using default settings with the appropriate enzyme (either AspN, GluC, or trypsin) with up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionines and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptides and protein groups were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Protein groups were filtered for "Only identified by site", "Reverse", and "Contaminant". Spectral libraries for DIA searches were built from the MaxQuant msms.txt file using Spectronaut’s Pulsar search engine.36  Spectral libraries from all digestion enzymes were combined into a single library for each fragmentation mode and NCE. DIA data from each enzyme and enzyme mixture was searched independently using the corresponding spectral library and DIA-NN (version 1.7.16)37 For DIA-NN searches, raw data files were deconvoluted and converted to mzML files using ProteoWizard,46 with filter settings peakPicking (vendor msLevel=1-), demultiplex (optimization=overlap_only massError=10.0ppm), and titleMaker, with SRM as spectra selected for Eclipse experiments. In DIA-NN, MS1 mass accuracy was set to 5 ppm (suggested setting), and the neural network classifier was set to double-pass mode. Precursor FDR was set to 1%. Protein inference was performed at the Gene level using proteotypic peptides. Likely interferences were removed.

### Publication Abstract
The use of multiple proteases has been shown to increase protein sequence coverage in proteomics experiments; however, due to the additional analysis time required, it has not been widely adopted in routine data-dependent acquisition (DDA) proteomic workflows. Alternatively, data-independent acquisition (DIA) has the potential to analyze multiplexed samples from different protease digests, but has been primarily optimized for fragmenting tryptic peptides. Here we evaluate a DIA multiplexing approach that combines three proteolytic digests (Trypsin, AspN, and GluC) into a single sample. We first optimize data acquisition conditions for each protease individually with both the canonical DIA fragmentation mode (beam type CID), as well as resonance excitation CID, to determine optimal consensus conditions across proteases. Next, we demonstrate that application of these conditions to a protease-multiplexed sample of human peptides results in similar protein identifications and quantitative performance as compared to trypsin alone, but enables up to a 63% increase in peptide detections, and a 45% increase in nonredundant amino acid detections. Nontryptic peptides enabled noncanonical protein isoform determination and resulted in 100% sequence coverage for numerous proteins, suggesting the utility of this approach in applications where sequence coverage is critical, such as protein isoform analysis.

### Keywords
Multiplexing, Gluc, Dia, Aspn

### Affiliations
University of California San Francisco, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA
Krogan lab

### Submitter
Alicia Richards

### Lab Head
Dr Danielle L. Swaney
University of California San Francisco, Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA


