### Accession
PXD004149

### Title
Personalized proteome profiles of healthy and tumor human colon organoids reveal both individual diversity and basic features of colorectal cancer.

### Description
We performed quantitative mass spectrometry based proteomic analysis and comparative transcriptomics analysis of 7 individual patient-derived human colorectal tumor and healthy organoids, the latter acquired from adjacent healthy tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Organoids were lysed at 95 degrees for 5 minutes in a solution of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.2 with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Prior to the digestion the proteins were reduced with 2 mM DTT for 25 min at 56 degrees and alkylated with 4 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. In order to avoid over alkylation an extra step of DTT was added. For the digestion of the proteins Lys-C  and trypsin were used, both at 37 degrees for 4 hours more. After digestion the samples were acidified with 0.5%TFA and a liquid-liquid extraction with ethyl acetate was performed in order to remove the remaining SDC. The resulting peptides were chemically labelled using stable isotope dimethyl labelling. Prior to the MS analysis, samples were fractionated to reduce the complexity using a strong cation exchange (SCX) system. The SCX fractions containing doubly and triply charged peptides (25 fractions from each SCX) were reconstituted in 10% formic acid and analyzed using a nano-UHPLC Proxeon system coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap Elite or Q-Exactive.

### Data Protocol
The raw files obtained from both instruments (Elite and Q-Exactive) were processed with Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 1.4, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, DE). The spectra were searched against a modified SwissProt human database (version 56.2) to which Matrigel proteins were added that were determined separately using a triplicate proteomics experiment. Searching was done with Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK), with the following parameters: trypsin digestion with up to two allowed missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, dimethyl labeling (light and intermediate) of lysine residues and the peptide N termini as dynamic modifications. Peptide tolerance was set to 50 ppm for both instruments, MS/MS tolerances were set to 0.6 Da for ETD-IT and 0.05 Da for ETD-FT and HCD.  The quantification protocol for PD was Double dimethyl labeling, with a mass precision of 2 ppm for consecutive precursor mass scans. The results were filtered using Percolator. All further analyses were performed in RStudio 0.98.1103, with R version 3.1.2.

### Publication Abstract
Diseases at the molecular level are complex and patient dependent, necessitating development of strategies that enable precision treatment to optimize clinical outcomes. Organoid technology has recently been shown to have the potential to recapitulate the in&#xa0;vivo characteristics of the original individual's tissue in a three-dimensional in&#xa0;vitro culture system. Here, we present a quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomic analysis and a comparative transcriptomic analysis of human colorectal tumor and healthy organoids derived, in parallel, from seven patients. Although gene and protein signatures can be derived to distinguish the tumor organoid population from healthy organoids, our data clearly reveal that each patient possesses a distinct organoid signature at the proteomic level. We demonstrate that a personalized patient-specific organoid proteome profile can be related to the diagnosis of a patient and with future development contribute to the generation of personalized therapies.

### Keywords
Colon cancer, Organoids, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Utrecht University
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Alba Cristobal

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J. R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Utrecht University


