### Accession
PXD019170

### Title
Subcellular localization of the J-protein Sis1 regulates the heat shock response

### Description
How heat shock inducesthe heat shock response (HSR) – a gene expression program encoding chaperones and other protein homeostasis (proteostasis) factors –remains an unresolved question in eukaryotic cell biology. Here we show that subcellular localization of the conserved J-protein Sis1 is a key regulator of the HSRin yeast. Under nonstress conditions, nucleoplasmic Sis1 promotes interaction between the chaperone Hsp70 and the transcription factor Hsf1to repress the HSR. Heat shock triggers Sis1 to localize to the nucleolar periphery and condense on the ER surface with the ribosome quality control complex. Sis1 recruits the proteasome to this spatial network.Through localization dynamics, Sis1 relaysthe condition of the proteome to Hsf1.Thus, the activation state of the HSR is built into spatial organization of the proteostasis network.

### Sample Protocol
DP2   Proteomic Methods  In-Solution Trypsin Digestion 30ul of eluate was in-solution digested with Trypsin by first reducing in 50mM ABC with 6ul Rapigest surfactant (Waters) and 10% 200mM TCEP.  Alkylated with 50mM Iodoacetamide (33ul) in dark 30 min RT.  Digested 1:50 v/v Trypsin (Promega) at 37C o/n. Detergent was removed with 1ul TFA at 37C for 45min.   Digested peptides were cleaned up on a C18 column (Pierce), speed vac’d and sent for LC-MS/MS to the Proteomics Core at Mayo Clinic.  HPLC for mass spectrometry All samples were resuspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% TFA (Pierce), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3-16 (Calbiochem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2M + H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3-12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μL C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic (Optimize Technologies) C8, washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nL/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%-95% B over the next 10 min, hold 10 min at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition and analysis The samples were analyzed via data-dependent electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360-2000 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 20 HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 s.  An inclusion list was utilized consisting of expected prototypic peptide ions in the 2+ and 3+ charge state for the yeast proteins ySIS1 and yHSF1 using in-house software. All LC-MS/MS *.raw Data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8, searching against the  SPROT Yeast database (Downloaded 5/23/2019 with isoforms, 12154 entries) *.fasta sequence, using the following criteria: LFQ was selected for Quantitation with a minimum of 1 high confidence peptide to assign LFQ Intensities. Trypsin was selected as the protease with maximum missing cleavage set to 2. Carbamiodomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to Oxidization (M), Formylation (N-term), Deamidation (NQ), and Phospo (STY). Orbitrap mass spectrometer was selected using an MS error of 20 ppm and a MS/MS error of 0.5 Da. 1% FDR cutoff was selected for peptide, protein, and site identifications. Ratios were reported based on the LFQ Intensities of protein peak areas determined by MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) and reported in the proteinGroups.txt

### Data Protocol
The proteingroups.txt file was processed in Perseus (version 1.6.7). Proteins were removed from this results file if they were flagged by MaxQuant as “Contaminants”, “Reverse” or “Only identified by site”. Three biological replicates were performed. Samples were filtered to require hits to have been seen in at least two replicates per condition. LFQ peak intensities Log2 transformed and median normalized and missing values were imputed via default settings in Perseus

### Publication Abstract
Cells exposed to heat shock induce a conserved gene expression program, the heat shock response (HSR), encoding protein homeostasis (proteostasis) factors. Heat shock also triggers proteostasis factors to form subcellular quality control bodies, but the relationship between these spatial structures and the HSR is unclear. Here we show that localization of the J-protein Sis1, a cofactor for the chaperone Hsp70, controls HSR activation in yeast. Under nonstress conditions, Sis1 is concentrated in the nucleoplasm, where it promotes Hsp70 binding to the transcription factor Hsf1, repressing the HSR. Upon heat shock, Sis1 forms an interconnected network with other proteostasis factors that spans the nucleolus and the surface of the endoplasmic reticulum. We propose that localization of Sis1 to this network directs Hsp70 activity away from Hsf1 in the nucleoplasm, leaving Hsf1 free to induce the HSR. In this manner, Sis1 couples HSR activation to the spatial organization of the proteostasis network.

### Keywords
, J-protein, Q-exactive, Sis1, Hsf1, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Heat shock

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr David Pincus
Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.


