### Accession
PXD026529

### Title
Identification of early neurodegenerative pathways in progressive multiple sclerosis

### Description
Progressive multiple sclerosis (MS) is characterized by unrelenting neurodegeneration, which causes cumulative disability and is refractory to current treatments. Drug development to prevent disease progression is an urgent clinical need yet is constrained by an incomplete understanding of its complex pathogenesis. Using spatial transcriptomics and proteomics on fresh-frozen human MS brain tissue, we identified multicellular mechanisms of progressive MS pathogenesis and traced their origin in relation to spatially distributed stages of neurodegeneration. By resolving ligand–receptor interactions in local microenvironments, we discovered defunct trophic and anti-inflammatory intercellular communications within areas of early neuronal decline. Proteins associated with neuronal damage in patient samples showed mechanistic concordance with published in vivo knockdown and central nervous system (CNS) disease models, supporting their causal role and value as potential therapeutic targets in progressive MS. Our findings provide a new framework for drug development strategies, rooted in an understanding of the complex cellular and signaling dynamics in human diseased tissue that facilitate this debilitating disease.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for MS analysis Fresh frozen brain samples were cryo-sectioned into consecutive 10 μm sections. The principal slide used for laser capture microdissection (LCM) was mounted on polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) membrane slides (ThermoFisher) and transferred back to -80°C storage before further processing. Anti-MOG staining on the remaining two slides was used as anatomical reference to delineate boundaries between grey matter and white matter. Each individual LCM slide was retrieved from storage and stained with haematoxylin and eosin (HE) immediately prior to micro-dissection performed on a laser pressure catapulting micro-dissection microscope (PALM Microbeam, Zeiss). Grey matter areas were chosen for sampling manually on the microscope by referring to MOG-stainings and HE-stained tissue morphology. Laser-dissected areas were circular (0.05 mm2), with each completed sample consisting of approximately 120 adjacent circular cuts and a total volume of < 0.06 mm3. Samples were collected into adhesive caps and transported on dry ice for further processing and subsequent proteomics analysis. Collected tissue was transferred in 100 µl lysis buffer (300mM Tris/HCl pH8, 50% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol) into 0.2ml PCR tubes for further processing. After controlled heating (to avoid cap opening from overpressure) for 90 min at 90°C, samples were sonicated in a Bioruptor (15 cycles, duty cycle 50%). Samples were then vacuum-dried for for approx. 1h at 60°C until 20ul remained. DTT was added to a final concentration of 5mM and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. 20mM CAA were added for alkylation and incubated for another 20min at RT. LC-grade water was added to adjust the sample volume to 100ul and tryptic digestion started by the addition of LysC and Trypsin at an enzyme to protein ratio at 1:100. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C at 1400 rpm. The next day, TFA was added to 1% final concentration (v/v) to stop digestion. Peptide clean-up was carried out by Stage Tipping. Details of the entire workflow can be found in our recent publication (Coscia and Doll et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS analysis  Nanoflow LC–MS analysis of tryptic peptides was conducted on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 ultra-high-pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nano-electrospray ion source. About 300 ng of peptides were loaded on a 50 cm HPLC-column (75 μm inner diameter, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA; in-house packed using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-µm silica beads; Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and measured over a total gradient length of 100min with increasing buffer B (80% acetonitrile [ACN] and 0.1% formic acid; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) concentration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. The DIA method consisted of one MS1 scan (350 or 300 to 1,650m/z, resolution 60,000 or 120,000, maximum injection time 60 ms, AGC target 3E6) and 32 segments at varying isolation windows from 14,4 m/z to 562,8 m/z (resolution 30,000, maximum injection time 54 ms, AGC target 3E6). Stepped normalized collision energy was 25, 27.5 and 30. The default charge state for MS2 was set to 2. DIA raw files were analyzed with Spectronaut Pulsar X software (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland, version 14.9.201124.47784) under default settings for direct DIA analysis. The human UniProtKB database (2019) was used as target database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis spatial proteomics

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Fabian Coscia

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Fugger
University of Oxford


