### Accession
PXD027504

### Title
The regulatory landscape of the human HPF1- and ARH3-dependent ADP-ribosylome (part 2)

### Description
Despite the involvement of Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1) in many important biological pathways, the target residues of PARP1-mediated ADP-ribosylation remain ambiguous. To explicate the ADP-ribosylation regulome, we analyze human cells depleted for key regulators of PARP1 activity, histone PARylation factor 1 (HPF1) and ADPribosylhydrolase 3 (ARH3). Using quantitative proteomics, we characterize 1,596 ADP-ribosylation sites, displaying up to 1000-fold regulation across the investigated knockout cells. We find that HPF1 and ARH3 inversely and homogenously regulate the serine ADP-ribosylome on a proteome-wide scale with consistent adherence to lysine-serine-motifs, suggesting that targeting is independent of HPF1 and ARH3. Notably, we do not detect an HPF1-dependent target residue switch from serine to glutamate/aspartate under the investigated conditions. Our data support the notion that serine ADP-ribosylation mainly exists as mono-ADP-ribosylation in cells, and reveal a remarkable degree of histone co-modification with serine ADP-ribosylation and other post-translational modifications.

### Sample Protocol
For Dataset 1 (DS1; “in_vitro_data”), in vitro ADPr experiments were performed using recombinant PARP1, PARP10 catalytic domain, PARP14 WWE plus catalytic domain, HPF1, and H1.0. In vitro reactions were performed in 50 mM TRIS-HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, supplemented with 100 μM NAD+, and incubated at 37 °C for 2.5 h. For subsequent MS analysis, samples were diluted 10-fold with 50 mM TRIS pH 8.5, and digested using 1:50 trypsin (w/w), overnight at RT. Peptides were reduced and alkylated, split in two, after which one half was mock treated and the other half incubated with 1:500 recombinant PARG (w/w), overnight at RT shaking at 300 RPM. Peptides were purified via C18 StageTip and analyzed by MS.  For Dataset 2 (DS2; “BSA_HA_data”), bovine serum albumin was dissolved in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5, and sequentially digested using 1:500 Lys-C (w/w) for 1.5 hours, and further digested overnight using modified sequencing grade Trypsin (1:500 w/w). The digest was either mock treated or treated with hydroxylamine at a final concentration of 2 M, after which additional Lys-C and trypsin were added (1:1,000 w/w). Samples were incubated overnight while mixing at RT, after which peptides were purified via C18 StageTip and analyzed by MS.  For Dataset 3 (DS3; “BA_data”), HeLa cells were cultured at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and a penicillin/streptomycin mixture (100 U/mL). ADP-ribosylation was optionally induced with 1 mM H2O2 for 10 min in PBS at 37°C. For MS analysis, approximately 100 million HeLa cells were cultured per biological replicate. For all experiments, cells were harvested in ice-cold PBS, lysed in 6 M guanidine buffer, reduced and alkylated, and subsequently digested with Lys-C and trypsin. ADP-ribosylated peptides were enriched using boronate affinity beads, essentially as described previously (Zhang et al., 2013), except final elution was performed with 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (pH<3) to retain the intact ADPr moiety on peptides. Samples were purified and fractionated via C18 StageTip and analyzed by MS.  Samples for DS1 and DS3 were measured using an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo), and analyzed on 20-cm long analytical columns with an internal diameter of 75 μm, packed in-house using ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). On-line reversed-phase liquid chromatography to separate peptides was performed using an EASY-nLC™ 1200 system (Thermo), and the analytical column was heated to 40°C using a column oven. Peptides were eluted from the column using a gradient of Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). The primary gradient ranged from 3% buffer B to 24% buffer B over 50 minutes, followed by an increase to 40% buffer B over 12 minutes to ensure elution of all peptides, followed by a washing block of 18 minutes. For DS1, gradient times were halved. Electrospray ionization (ESI) was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo). Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, capillary temperature to 275°C, and RF level to 40%. Full scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 375 to 1,125 m/z, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 600,000 charges. Precursors were isolated from 400 to 1,000 m/z, at a width of 1.3 m/z, an AGC target of 200,000 charges, and precursor fragmentation was accomplished using electron transfer disassociation with supplemental higher-collisional disassociation (EThcD) at 20 NCE, using calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters (Rose et al., 2015). Precursors with charge state 3-5 were isolated for MS/MS analysis, and prioritized from charge 3 (highest) to charge 5 (lowest). Selected precursors were excluded from repeated sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds (DS3) or 30 seconds (DS1). MS/MS spectra were measured in the Orbitrap, with a loop count setting of 3, a maximum precursor injection time of 120, 180, or 240 ms dependent on sample load, and a scan resolution of 60,000.  Samples for DS2 were measured using an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo), using the same HPLC setup as outlined above. Gradient; 5-30% B over 15 min, 30-90% B over 10 min, 15 min wash. Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, capillary temperature to 275°C, and RF level to 40%. Full scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 300 to 1,750 m/z, a maximum injection time of 120 ms, and an AGC target of “100”. Isolation was performed at a width of 1.3 m/z, an AGC target of “100”, and precursor fragmentation was accomplished using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 25 NCE. Precursors with charge state 2-7 were isolated for MS/MS analysis, and a dynamic exclusion of 2 seconds was used. MS/MS spectra were measured in the Orbitrap, with a loop count setting of 5, a maximum precursor injection time of 120 ms, and a scan resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the MS raw data was performed using MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011), version 1.5.3.30. MaxQuant default settings were used, with exceptions outlined below. Three separate computational searches were performed, one for each separate MS dataset (DS1,2,3). For generation of the theoretical spectral library (DS1,3), a HUMAN.fasta database was downloaded from UniProt on the 24th of May, 2019. For DS1, recombinant protein sequences (SEQUENCES.fasta) including epitope tags were co-searched along with the HUMAN.fasta. For DS2, only the bovine serum albumin sequence (P02769) was searched. N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and ADP-ribosylation on all amino acid residues known to potentially be modified (C, D, E, H, K, R, S, T, and Y), were included as variable modifications (DS1,3). For DS2, N-terminal acetylation, oxidation (M,N,Q), deamidation (N,Q), and hydroxamic acid modification (D,E,M), were set as variable modifications. Up to 3 (DS2), 6 (DS1), or 10 (DS3) missed cleavages were allowed, a maximum allowance of 3 (DS3) or 4 (DS1,2) variable modifications per peptide was used, and maximum peptide mass was set to 4,600 Da. Second peptide search was enabled (DS3). Matching between runs was enabled with an alignment time window of 10 min (DS1,2) or 20 min (DS3), and a match time window of 30 s (DS1,2) or 60 s (DS3). A first search precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm (DS1,3) or 20 ppm (DS2) was used, and a main search precursor mass tolerance of 3 ppm (DS1,3) or 4.5 ppm (DS2) was used. For fragment ion masses, a tolerance of 20 ppm was used. Modified peptides were filtered to have an Andromeda score of >40 (default), and a delta score of >20. Data was automatically filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1% (default), at the peptide-spectrum match and the protein assignment levels. A site decoy fraction of 2% was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the involvement of Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1) in many important biological pathways, the target residues of PARP1-mediated ADP-ribosylation remain ambiguous. To explicate the ADP-ribosylation regulome, we analyze human cells depleted for key regulators of PARP1 activity, histone PARylation factor 1 (HPF1) and ADP-ribosylhydrolase 3 (ARH3). Using quantitative proteomics, we characterize 1,596 ADP-ribosylation sites, displaying up to 1000-fold regulation across the investigated knockout cells. We find that HPF1 and ARH3 inversely and homogenously regulate the serine ADP-ribosylome on a proteome-wide scale with consistent adherence to lysine-serine-motifs, suggesting that targeting is independent of HPF1 and ARH3. Notably, we do not detect an HPF1-dependent target residue switch from serine to glutamate/aspartate under the investigated conditions. Our data support the notion that serine ADP-ribosylation mainly exists as mono-ADP-ribosylation in cells, and reveal a remarkable degree of histone co-modification with serine ADP-ribosylation and other post-translational modifications.

### Keywords
Par, Adp-ribosylation, Hpf1, Arh3, Parg, Parp1, Af1521, Adpr, Mar

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, University of Copenhagen


