### Accession
PXD011924

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush)

### Description
Lake trout are used as bioindicators for toxics exposure in the Great Lakes ecosystem. However, there is no knowledge about lake trout proteome. Here we performed the first lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush) liver proteomics and searched the databases against (NCBI and UniProtKB) Salvelinus, Salmonidae, Actinopterygii and the more distant Danio rerio. In the NCBI search, we identified 4371 proteins in 1252 clusters. From these proteins, we found 2175 proteins in Actinopterygii 1253 in Salmonidae, 69 in Salvelinus and 901 in Danio rerio NCBI searches. In the UniProtKB search, we identified 2630 proteins in 1100 clusters. From these proteins, we found 317 in Actinopterygii, 1653 in Salmonidae, 37 in Salvelinus and 666 in Danio rerio UniProtKB searches. A similar outcome was also obtained from a technical replicate experiment. A large number of lake trout liver proteins were not in any Salvelinus databases, suggesting that lake trout liver proteins have homologues to some proteins from the Salmonidae family and Actinopterygii class, as well as to the species Danio rerio, a more highly studied Cypriniformes fish. Therefore, our study not only builds the first comprehensive lake trout protein database, but also establishes protein homology-based evolutionary relationships between the fish within their family and class, as well as distant-related fish (lake trout and zebrafish). In addition, this study opens the possibility of identifying evolutionary relationships (i.e. adaptive mutations) between various groups (i.e. zebrafish, Salmonidae, Salvelinus and lake trout) through evolutionary proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissue lysis was performed and the resulting supernatant was separated by a large, homemade, 1 mm thick, 12% acrylamide by SDS-PAGE.  Wells were overloaded with sample to optimize identification of proteins.  Proteins were separated (according to their molecular mass) under denaturing and reducing conditions, and the resulting gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The SDS-PAGE gel lane was divided into 62 gel bands and digested by trypsin using in-gel digestion procedure. The resulting peptide mixtures were then extracted, concentrated and purified using Zip-Tip reversed phase chromatography (C18 Ziptip™; Millipore, Billerica, MA). All 62 samples from the liver were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a nanoAcuity UPLC (Waters Corp, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q-TOF Xevo G2 (Waters Corp, Milford, MA).  The peptides were loaded onto a 150mm x 100 mm NanoAquity BEH130 C18 1.7 um UPLC column (Waters, Milford, MA) and eluted over a 150 minute gradient at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. The gradient proceeded as follows: 1-8% organic solvent B (ACN containing 0.1% FA) over 1-10 minutes, 8-35% B (10-120 minutes), 35-90% B (120-140 minutes), and finally 90% B constant (140-150 minutes).  The aqueous solvent A was 0.1%FA in HPLC water.  The column was coupled to a Picotip Emitter Silicatip nano-electrospray needle with a 360 µm tube OD, 75 µm tube ID, 15±1.5 µm nominal tip ID, and a flow range of 200-500 nL/min (New Objective, Woburn, MA). The MS data acquisition consisted of survey 0.5 second MS scans in the m/z range 350-2000 and automatic data dependent analysis (DDA) of the top 8 highest intensity ions with charge of 2+, 3+, 4+, 5+, and 6+.  The MS/MS, which was obtained over m/z 50-2000, was triggered when MS signal intensity exceeded 500 counts/second.  In the survey MS scans, the top 8 most intense peaks were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) and were fragmented until the total MS/MS ion counts reached above 6000 intensity/second or for up to 7.0 seconds per cycle (maximum 1 second per MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to peak list files using Protein Links Global Server 2.4 (PLGS 2.4, Waters Corp, Milford, MA). The following parameters were used: background subtraction of polynomial order 5 adaptive, a threshold of 30%, two smoothings with a window of three channels in Savitzky-Golay mode and centroid calculation of top 80% of peaks based on a minimum peak width of 4 channels at half height. The resulting pkl files were submitted to Mascot Daemon 2.5.1 for database search and protein identification (Matrix Science, London, UK) against several different NCBI and UniProtKB databases including: Actinopterygii NCBI (3857507 entries), Actinopterygii UniprotKB (1474908 entries), Salmonidae NCBI (443813 entries), Salmonidae UniProtKB (143306 entries), Salvelinus NCBI (118814 entries), Salvelinus UniProtKB (1720 entries), Danio rerio NCBI (153401 entries), and Danio rerio UniProtKB (62363 entries). The following parameters were used: The assumed digestive enzyme was trypsin. The fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.80 Da and the parent ion mass tolerance was 0.80 Da. Propionamide C was listed as a fixed modification and oxidation M was listed as a variable modification. The search was capped a maximum number of 3 missed cleavages. Scaffold_4.7.5, (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications using the .dat files supplied through the previous Mascot Daemon database search. Each database searched against in Mascot Daemon was its own sample in Scaffold so that the databases could be compared. The peptide identifications were validated if their ion scores were above 50 - as specified in a specific peptide threshold parameter. Protein identifications were validated if they contained at least one identified peptide and the protein threshold was set at 99%. Any number of proteins sharing multiple peptides, and thus, could not specify which protein is there, were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Lake trout are used as bioindicators for toxics exposure in the Great Lakes ecosystem. Here the first lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush) liver proteomics study is performed and searched against specific databases: (NCBI and UniProtKB) Salvelinus, Salmonidae, Actinopterygii, and Oncorhynchus mykiss, and the more distant relative, Danio rerio. In the biological replicate 1 (BR1), technical replicate 1 (TR1), (BR1TR1), a large number of lake trout liver proteins are not in the Salvelinus protein database, suggesting that lake trout liver proteins have homology to some proteins from the Salmonidae family and Actinopterygii class, and to Oncorhynchus mykiss and Danio rerio, two more highly studied fish. In the NCBI search, 4194 proteins are identified: 3069 proteins in Actinopterygii, 1617 in Salmonidae, 68 in Salvelinus, 568 in Oncorhynchus mykiss, and 946 in Danio rerio protein databases. Similar results are observed in the UniProtKB searches of BR1RT1, as well as in a technical replicate (BR1TR2), and then in a second biological replicate experiment, with two technical replicates (BR2TR1 and BR2TR2). This study opens the possibility of identifying evolutionary relationships (i.e., adaptive mutations) between various groups (i.e., zebrafish, rainbow trout, Salmonidae, Salvelinus and lake trout) through evolutionary proteomics. Data are available via the PRIDE Q2 (PXD011924).

### Keywords
Great lakes, Evolutionary proteomics, Proteogenomics, Protein database, Fish, Lake trout

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Biomolecular Science, Biochemistry & Proteomics Group, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY
Clarkson University

### Submitter
Emmalyn Dupree

### Lab Head
Dr Costel C. Darie
Department of Chemistry & Biomolecular Science, Biochemistry & Proteomics Group, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY


