### Accession
PXD024436

### Title
Proteomic of Chaihu-Shugan-San (CSS), Rou Gan, and Shu Gan treat chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) rat with Tandem Mass Tags

### Description
Chaihu-Shugan-San (CSS) is a classical prescription used to treat depression. According to the traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) principle, the 2 decomposed recipes in CSS exert synergistic effects, including Shu Gan (stagnated Gan-Qi dispersion) and Rou Gan (pain alleviation). However, the specific mechanism and compatibility rule remain to be explored. We aimed to analyze the advantage of TCM compatibility in CSS prescriptions and explore its anti-depression mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
The RIPA lysate was thoroughly mixed with a protease inhibitor and precooled on ice to obtain the working liquid. Samples with 1000 μL working liquid were sonicated on ice for 5 min to fully dissolve. Centrifugation was performed using 14000 rpm/min at 4°C for 15 min. Finally, the supernatant was transferred to new EP tubes. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA Quantification kit (Thermo Scientific, USA) according to the instruction of manufacturers.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw data were searched and quantitatively analyzed from the protein sequence database (Uniprot_RAT_2016_09) using MaxQuant (Version 1.5.6.0). The parameters were set as follows: specific enzyme was trypsin; maximum missed cleavage number was 2; the quantification type was secondary reporter ion MS2 with 3-plex; the labeled sites were peptide N-terminal and Lys (K); PIF was 0.75; fixed modification was Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modification included Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (protein N-term); the minimum length of polypeptide length was 7, the maximum molecular weight of polypeptide was 4600 Da; FDR≤0.01, only quantified unmodified unique peptide. Other parameters were default.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> Chaihu-Shugan-San is a classical prescription to treat depression. According to the traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) principle, the 2 decomposed recipes in Chaihu-Shugan-San exert synergistic effects, including Shu Gan (stagnated Gan-Qi dispersion) and Rou Gan (Gan nourishment to alleviate pain). However, the specific mechanism of Chaihu-Shugan-San on depression and its compatibility rule remain to be explored. <b>Objective:</b> We aimed to explore the anti-depression mechanisms and analyze the advantage of TCM compatibility of Chaihu-Shugan-San. <b>Methods:</b> The chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) rat model was established. Antidepressant effects were evaluated by sucrose preference test (SPT), and forced swimming test (FST). Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics of the hippocampus was used to obtain differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Bioinformatics analysis including Gene Ontology (GO), pathway enrichment, and protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks was utilized to study the DEPs connections. At last, the achieved key targets were verified by western blotting. <b>Results:</b> Chaihu-Shugan-San increased weight gain and food intake, as well as exhibited better therapeutic effects including enhanced sucrose preference and extended immobility time when compared with its decomposed recipes. Proteomics showed Chaihu-Shugan-San, Shu Gan, and Rou Gan regulated 110, 12, and 407 DEPs, respectively. Compared with Shu Gan or Rou Gan alone, the expression of 22 proteins was additionally changed by Chaihu-Shugan-San treatment, whereas the expression of 323 proteins whose expression was changed by Shu Gan or Rou Gan alone were not changed by Chaihu-Shugan-San treatment. Bioinformatics analysis demonstrated that Chaihu-Shugan-San affected neurotransmitter's release and transmission cycle (e.g., &#x3b3;-aminobutyric acid (GABA), glutamate, serotonin, norepinephrine, dopamine, and acetylcholine). GABA release pathway is also targeted by the 22 DEPs. Unexpectedly, only 2 pathways were enriched by the 323 DEPs: Metabolism and Cellular responses to external stimuli. Lastly, the expression of Gad2, Vamp2, and Pde2a was verified by western blotting. <b>Conclusions:</b> Chaihu-Shugan-San treats depression <i>via</i> multiple targets and pathways, which may include regulations of 110 DEPs and some neurotransmitter's transmission cycle. Compared with Shu Gan and Rou Gan, the 22 Chaihu-Shugan-San advanced proteins and the affected GABA pathway may be the advantages of Chaihu-Shugan-San compatibility. This research offers data and theory support for the clinical application of Chaihu-Shugan-San.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Depression, Chaihu-shugan-san, Traditional chinese medicine, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Institute of Integrative Medicine,Xiangya Hospital,Central South University,Changsha,China (lab head)
Institute of Integrative Medicine, Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western
Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University

### Submitter
Xiaofei Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaofei Zhu
Institute of Integrative Medicine,Xiangya Hospital,Central South University,Changsha,China (lab head)


