### Accession
PXD027332

### Title
Hepatic steatosis contributes to the development of muscle atrophy via inter-organ crosstalk

### Description
Individuals with hepatic steatosis often display several metabolic abnormalities including insulin resistance and muscle atrophy. Previously, we found that hepatic steatosis results in an altered hepatokine secretion profile, thereby inducing skeletal muscle insulin resistance via inter-organ crosstalk. In this study, we aimed to investigate whether the altered secretion profile in the state of hepatic steatosis also induces skeletal muscle atrophy via effects on muscle protein turnover. To investigate this, eight-week-old male C57BL/6J mice were fed a chow (4.5% fat) or a high-fat diet (HFD; 45% fat) for 12 weeks to induce hepatic steatosis, after which the livers were excised and cut into ~200 µm slices. Slices were cultured to collect secretion products (conditioned medium; CM). Differentiated L6-GLUT4myc myotubes were incubated with chow or HFD CM to measure glucose uptake. Differentiated C2C12 myotubes were incubated with chow or HFD CM to measure protein synthesis and breakdown, and gene expression via RNA sequencing. Furthermore, proteomics analysis was performed in chow and HFD CM. It was found that HFD CM caused insulin resistance in L6-GLUT4myc myotubes compared with chow CM, as indicated by a blunted insulin-stimulated increase in glucose uptake. Furthermore, protein breakdown was increased in C2C12 cells incubated with HFD CM, while there was no effect on protein synthesis. RNA profiling of C2C12 cells indicated that 197 genes were differentially expressed after incubation with HFD CM, compared with chow CM, and pathway analysis showed that pathways related to anatomical structure and function were enriched. Proteomic analysis of the CM showed that 32 proteins were differentially expressed in HFD CM compared with chow CM. Pathway enrichment analysis indicated that these proteins had important functions with respect to insulin-like Growth Factor transport and uptake, and affect post-translational processes, including protein folding, protein secretion and protein phosphorylation. In conclusion, the results of this study support the hypothesis that secretion products from the liver contribute to the development of muscle atrophy in individuals with hepatic steatosis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein identification using LC-MS/MS Proteomic analysis was performed in HFD and chow CM. After acetone precipitation, a total of 10 µg protein in 25 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) with 5 M urea was used. 2.5 µL of dithiothreitol (DTT) solution (20 mM final) was added and incubated at room temperature for 45 min. The proteins were alkylated by adding 3 µL of indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) solution (40 mM final). The reaction took place at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. The alkylation was stopped by adding 5 µL of DTT solution (to consume any unreacted IAA) and incubated at room temperature for 45 min. For the digestion, 1 µg trypsin/LysC was added to the protein and incubated at 37 °C for 2 h. 100 µL of 50 mM ABC was added to lower the urea concentration, and samples were further incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. The digestion mix was centrifuged at 2,500 g for 5 min and the supernatant was collected for liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. A nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography instrument (Dionex UltiMate 3000) was coupled online to a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) with a nano-electrospray Flex ion source (Proxeon). 5 μL of the digest was loaded onto a C18-reversed phase column (Thermo Scientific, Acclaim PepMap C18 column, 75 μm inner diameter × 15 cm, 2 μm particle size). The peptides were separated with a 90 min linear gradient of 4-68% buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top-10 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (280-1400 m/z) in positive ion mode. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 30 s. Isolation of precursors was performed with a 1.8 m/z window and a maximum injection time of 200 ms. Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 30,000 and the Normalized Collision Energy was 32 eV. The under-fill ratio was defined as 1.0%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled, but with exclusion of singly charged and charge states of more than five.

### Data Protocol
Database search and Quantification The MS data was searched using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 Sequest HT search engine (Thermo Scientiﬁc), against the UniProt mouse database. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides, which had to have a minimum length of 6 amino acids. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and the fragment tolerance at 0.02 Da. One miss-cleavage was tolerated, and oxidation of methionine was set as a dynamic modification. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. Label-free quantification was conducted using the Minora Feature Detector node in the processing step and the Feature Mapper node combined with the Precursor Ions Quantifier node in the consensus step with default settings within Proteome Discoverer 2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Individuals with hepatic steatosis often display several metabolic abnormalities including insulin resistance and muscle atrophy. Previously, we found that hepatic steatosis results in an altered hepatokine secretion profile, thereby inducing skeletal muscle insulin resistance <i>via</i> inter-organ crosstalk. In this study, we aimed to investigate whether the altered secretion profile in the state of hepatic steatosis also induces skeletal muscle atrophy <i>via</i> effects on muscle protein turnover. To investigate this, eight-week-old male C57BL/6J mice were fed a chow (4.5% fat) or a high-fat diet (HFD; 45% fat) for 12 weeks to induce hepatic steatosis, after which the livers were excised and cut into ~200-&#xb5;m slices. Slices were cultured to collect secretion products (conditioned medium; CM). Differentiated L6-GLUT4myc myotubes were incubated with chow or HFD CM to measure glucose uptake. Differentiated C2C12 myotubes were incubated with chow or HFD CM to measure protein synthesis and breakdown, and gene expression <i>via</i> RNA sequencing. Furthermore, proteomics analysis was performed in chow and HFD CM. It was found that HFD CM caused insulin resistance in L6-GLUT4myc myotubes compared with chow CM, as indicated by a blunted insulin-stimulated increase in glucose uptake. Furthermore, protein breakdown was increased in C2C12 cells incubated with HFD CM, while there was no effect on protein synthesis. RNA profiling of C2C12 cells indicated that 197 genes were differentially expressed after incubation with HFD CM, compared with chow CM, and pathway analysis showed that pathways related to anatomical structure and function were enriched. Proteomics analysis of the CM showed that 32 proteins were differentially expressed in HFD CM compared with chow CM. Pathway enrichment analysis indicated that these proteins had important functions with respect to insulin-like growth factor transport and uptake, and affect post-translational processes, including protein folding, protein secretion and protein phosphorylation. In conclusion, the results of this study support the hypothesis that secretion products from the liver contribute to the development of muscle atrophy in individuals with hepatic steatosis.

### Keywords
Inter-organ crosstalk, Muscle atrophy, Nafld, Insulin resistance, Metabolism, Liver steatosis

### Affiliations
Maastricht University
Department of Human Biology, School of Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism (NUTRIM), Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Ruth Meex

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Meex
Department of Human Biology, School of Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism (NUTRIM), Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands


