### Accession
PXD008451

### Title
Comparative phosphoproteomic analysis reveals signaling networks regulating monopolar and bipolar cytokinesis 

### Description
Successful completion of cytokinesis requires the coordinated activities of diverse cellular components including membranes, cytoskeletal elements and chromosomes. Biochemical analysis of cytokinesis is challenging due to its dynamic and rapid nature that necessitates the establishment of robust methodologies. Our comparative proteomic approach suggests that monopolar cytokinesis is a good surrogate for cytokinesis and it is a well-suited system for global biochemical analysis in mammalian cells. We established a phosphoproteomic signature of cytokinesis.  More than 10,000 phosphorylation sites were systematically screened and monitored; around 800 of these phosphosites were up-regulated during cytokinesis.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa S3 cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (Lonza) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma) and 1%w/v L-glutamine at 37°C. To arrest at interphase, cells were first treated with 2mM thymidine (Santa Cruz, 296542A), released for 8 hours and then treated again with 2mM thymidine for 17 hours. For mitosis synchronization, cells were treated with 10 µM STC (Sigma, 164739-5G164739) for 12 hours. To induce monopolar cytokinesis, cells were subsequently treated with 30 µM Purvalanol A (Tocris Bioscience, 1580) for 15 minutes and then washed immediately and extensively with PBS.  To induce bipolar cytokinesis, following double thymidine blocking, cell were released for 7 hours, then incubated with 0 ng/ml, 10 ng/ml and 25 ng/ml of Nocodazole (Calbiochem, 487928) for 4 or 5 hours. Next, cells were extensively washed out with PBS and mitotic cells were collected by gently shaking and incubated for 50 or 60 minutes in the new plate. The peptides were subjected to a reversed phase Nano LC-MS/MS (EASY-nLC, Thermo) connected to a Q Exactive quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). Samples were directly loaded onto an in-house packed 100 μm i.d. × 17 cm C18 column (Reprosil-Gold C18, 5 μm, 200Å, Dr. Maisch) and separated at 300 nL/min with 75 or 97 minutes linear gradients, increasing from 5% to 40% or 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, respectively. Survey spectra were acquired on the Orbitrap with the resolution of 70,000; mass range 350−1500 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 1e6; maximum injection time 250 ms at positive mode. Ten most intense ions were selected and then fragmented for the analysis in the Orbitrap. For the full scan of phosphopeptide enriched samples, the resolution and AGC target were set to 35,000 and 3e6, respectively. MS2 analysis consisted of collision-induced dissociation (Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD)) with the parameters: resolution 17,500; AGC 2e5; maximum injection time 120ms; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; charge exclusion unassigned, 1, 7, 8, >8; dynamic exclusion 30, 0s. The isolation window for MS/MS was 2 m/z and fixed first mass was 100 m/z. For MS2 analysis of phosphopeptide enriched samples, the AGC target and NCE were set to 5e4 and 25, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was 20, 0s. The isolation window for MS/MS was 1, 5 m/z and fixed first mass was 180 m/z.

### Data Protocol
All raw data files were processed and quantified with Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific). The search was done against a Swissprot database version 2014_08 with taxonomy Homo sapiens (21,051 sequences) using Mascot software (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK). Settings for PD search were as following: Mass tolerance of ±20 ppm for precursor masses, and ±0.05 Da for fragment ions, two missed cleavages were allowed, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Light, medium and heavy dimethylation of peptide N termini and lysine residues; methionine oxidation; and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. The identification of the phosphorylation site localization was done by the phosphoRS 3.0 node in Proteome Discoverer. A probability threshold of at least 0.75 was used for the confident phosphosite localization. The 3plex or duplex dimethyl-based quantitation method was chosen in Proteome Discoverer, with a mass precision requirement of 2 ppm. We allowed spectra with a maximum of 1 missing channel to be quantified with the integrated Percolator-based filter using a false discovery rate of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The successful completion of cytokinesis requires the coordinated activities of diverse cellular components including membranes, cytoskeletal elements and chromosomes that together form partly redundant pathways, depending on the&#xa0;cell type. The biochemical analysis of this process is challenging due to its dynamic and rapid nature. Here, we systematically compared monopolar and bipolar cytokinesis and demonstrated that monopolar cytokinesis is a good surrogate for cytokinesis and it is a well-suited system for global biochemical analysis in mammalian cells. Based on this, we established a phosphoproteomic signature of cytokinesis. More than 10,000 phosphorylation sites were systematically monitored; around 800 of those were up-regulated during cytokinesis. Reconstructing&#xa0;the kinase-substrate interaction network revealed 31 potentially active kinases during cytokinesis. The kinase-substrate network connects proteins between cytoskeleton, membrane and cell cycle machinery. We also found consensus motifs of phosphorylation sites that can serve as biochemical markers specific to cytokinesis. Beyond the kinase-substrate network, our reconstructed signaling network suggests that combination of sumoylation and phosphorylation may regulate monopolar cytokinesis specific signaling pathways. Our analysis provides a systematic approach to the comparison of different cytokinesis types to reveal alternative ways and a global overview, in which conserved genes work together and organize chromatin and cytoplasm during cytokinesis.

### Keywords
Cell cycle, Phosphoproteome, Cytokinesis, Monopolar cytokinesis

### Affiliations
Koc University
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics Koç University  Istanbul, Turkey

### Submitter
Erdem Sanal

### Lab Head
Dr Nurhan Özlü
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics Koç University  Istanbul, Turkey


