### Accession
PXD008788

### Title
A Novel QconCAT-Based Proteomics Method for Determining Allele-Specific Protein Expression (ASPE)

### Description
In the present study, we developed a novel targeted proteomics approach for quantification of allele-specific protein expression (ASPE) based on scheduled high resolution multiple reaction monitoring (sMRM-HR) with a heavy stable isotope-labeled quantitative concatamer (QconCAT) internal protein standard. This strategy was applied to the determination of the ASPE of UGT2B15 in human livers using the common UGT2B15 nonsynonymous variant rs1902023 (i.e. Y85D) as the marker to differentiate expressions from the two alleles. This novel ASPE approach has the potential to be widely utilized for the identification of cis-genetic variants capable of regulating gene expression at the protein level.

### Sample Protocol
A previous reported Lys-C/Trypsin combinatorial digestion protocol was utilized for protein digestion, with some modifications. An aliquot of 80 μg microsome protein was mixed with a 10-fold volume of pre-cooled acetone. The mixture was briefly vortexed and incubated at -20 °C for at least 2 hours, followed by centrifugation at 17,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. After removing the supernatants, the precipitated proteins were washed with 200 μL ice-cold 80% ethanol, and centrifuged again at 17,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were discarded, and the precipitated proteins were air-dried at room temperature before being resuspended in 92.5 μL of freshly prepared 4 mM dithiothreitol in 8 M urea solution containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Next, the heavy stable isotope-labeled QconCAT UGT2B15 internal standard (75 ng) was added. Samples were then briefly vortexed and sonicated, and incubated at 37 °C for 45 min. After samples were cooled down to room temperature, 100 μL of freshly prepared 20 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution was added. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 30 min in the dark for alkylation. Following incubation, the urea concentration was adjusted to 6 M by adding 64.6 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Chemicals, Richmond, VA) was then added for the first step digestion at 37 °C for 6 h (protein to lysyl endopeptidase ratio = 100:1). Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to further decrease urea concentration to 1.6 M, and then subjected to the second step of digestion with trypsin overnight at 37 °C at a protein to trypsin ratio of 50:1. Digestion was terminated by the addition of 1 μL trifluoroacetic acid. Digested peptides were extracted and purified using Waters Oasis HLB columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides eluted from the columns were dried in a SpeedVac SPD1010 concentrator (Thermo Scientific, Hudson, NH), and reconstituted in 80 μL of 3% acetonitrile solution containing 0.1% formic acid. The peptide samples were centrifuged at 17,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, and 40 μL of the supernatant was collected and supplemented with 1 μL of the synthetic iRT standards solution (Biognosys AG, Cambridge, MA) for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The sMRM-HR data were analyzed using the Skyline software (version 3.7.1.11271, University of Washington, Seattle, WA) with automatic detections of MS/MS chromatographic peaks against the spectral library generated from the data obtained inthe Information Dependent Acquisition mode. The selected peaks were reviewed manually after the automated analysis. Both MS1 and MS/MS filtering were set as a “TOF” mass analyzer with the resolution power of 30,000 and 15,000, respectively. Peak areas of the top five fragment ions were summed up and normalized to the isotope-labeled QconCAT internal standards for peptide quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Measuring allele-specific expression (ASE) is a powerful approach for identifying cis-regulatory genetic variants. Here, we developed a novel targeted proteomics method for the quantification of allele-specific protein expression (ASPE) based on scheduled parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) with a heavy stable isotope-labeled quantitative concatamer (QconCAT) internal protein standard. This strategy was applied to the determination of the ASPE of UGT2B15 in human livers using the common UGT2B15 nonsynonymous variant rs1902023 (i.e., Y85D) as the marker to differentiate expressions from the two alleles. The QconCAT standard contains both the wild-type tryptic peptide and the Y85D mutant peptide at a ratio of 1:1 to ensure accurate measurement of the ASPE of UGT2B15. The results from 18 UGT2B15 Y85D heterozygotes revealed that the ratios between the wild-type Y allele and the mutant D allele varied from 0.60 to 1.46, indicating the presence of cis-regulatory variants. In addition, we observed no significant correlations between the ASPE and mRNA ASE of UGT2B15, suggesting the involvement of different cis-acting variants in regulating the transcription and translation processes of the gene. This novel ASPE approach provides a powerful tool for capturing cis-genetic variants involved in post-transcription processes, an important yet understudied area of research.

### Keywords
Human, Allele-specific protein expression, Liver

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of Michigan College of Pharmacy

### Submitter
Jian Shi

### Lab Head
Dr Hao-Jie Zhu, Ph.D.
Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of Michigan College of Pharmacy


