### Accession
PXD033621

### Title
A Comparative Proteomic Study of Decellularized Extracellular Matrix Biomaterials Derived from Porcine Vocal Fold and Small Intestinal Submucosa Tissue Source

### Description
Decellularized extracellular matrix (dECM) is used to make regenerative biomaterials. As the ECM markups vary across organs, derived dECM products may possess different molecular and biological profiles as well.  This study aims to compare the proteomic profiles of dECM biomaterials derived from small intestinal submucosa (SIS) and vocal fold (VF) tissue using mass spectrometry-based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics was performed on three sample types: native VF tissue, VF dECM, and a commercially sourced SIS dECM. To prepare the VF dECM, VF were dissected from a porcine larynx. Cell lysis was performed in sodium chloride. Repeated incubation was performed with nucleases and Isopropanol for 24 hr. Cryomilling was used to produce the dECM powders for subsequent MS analysis. For each sample, tissue lysates were loaded onto a single stacking gel band to remove lipids, detergents and salts. The single gel band containing all proteins was reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetic acid and digested with trypsin. 2 ug of extracted peptides were re-solubilized in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and loaded onto a Thermo Acclaim Pepmap (Thermo, 75uM ID X 2cm C18 3uM beads) precolumn and then onto an Acclaim Pepmap Easyspray (Thermo, 75uM X 15cm with 2uM C18 beads) analytical column separation using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 uHPLC at 250 nl/min with a gradient of 2-35% organic (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 3 hours. Peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer operating at 120,000 resolution (FWHM in MS1) with HCD sequencing (15,000 resolution) at top speed for all peptides with a charge of 2+ or greater.

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.6.2 search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.2) was used to perform a database search against porcine protein sequences (Uniprot 2020; 49571 entries). Assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin, Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.100 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 5.0 PPM. Carboxymethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine as well as oxidation of methionine and proline were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. A maximum of 1 missed cleavage was also used and a decoy search was performed. The database search results were loaded into Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications and to perform statistical tests. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Decoy peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was determined to be 0.08% and decoy protein FDR was 0.8%. The statistical significance of the data were determined with ANOVA test, p-value < 0.05, and Benjamini-Hochberg correction, resulting in a corrected p-value < 0.02177. The data were also normalized. All protein duplicates as well as proteins with incomplete identification information, including missing names and alternate IDs, were removed. The total spectra of the remaining proteins were then log10 transformed.

### Publication Abstract
Decellularized extracellular matrix (dECM) is a promising material for tissue engineering applications. Tissue-specific dECM is often seen as a favorable material that recapitulates a native-like microenvironment for cellular remodeling. However, the minute quantity of dECM derivable from small organs like the vocal fold (VF) hampers manufacturing scalability. Small intestinal submucosa (SIS), a commercial product with proven regenerative capacity, may be a viable option for VF applications. This study aims to compare dECM hydrogels derived from SIS or VF tissue with respect to protein content and functionality using mass spectrometry-based proteomics and in vitro studies. Proteomic analysis reveals that VF and SIS dECM share 75% of core matrisome proteins. Although VF dECM proteins have greater overlap with native VF, SIS dECM shows less cross-sample variability. Following decellularization, significant reductions of soluble collagen (61%), elastin (81%), and hyaluronan (44%) are noted in VF dECM. SIS dECM contains comparable elastin and hyaluronan but 67% greater soluble collagen than VF dECM. Cells deposit more neo-collagen on SIS than VF-dECM hydrogels, whereas neo-elastin (~50 &#x3bc;g/scaffold) and neo-hyaluronan (~ 6 &#x3bc;g/scaffold) are comparable between the two hydrogels. Overall, SIS dECM possesses reasonably similar proteomic profile and regenerative capacity to VF dECM. SIS dECM is considered a promising alternative for dECM-derived biomaterials for VF regeneration.

### Keywords
Decellularized, Porcine, Small intestine submucosa, Core matrisome, Lc-ms/ms, Extracellular matrix, Vocal fold, Decm

### Affiliations
School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, McGill University, Canada
McGill University - Voice and Upper Airway Research Lab

### Submitter
Voice Lab McGill

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole Li-Jessen
School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, McGill University, Canada


