### Accession
PXD014572

### Title
Extracellular vesicles from therapeutic grade allogeneic human placental stromal cells induce angiogenesis and modulate immunity

### Description
Allogeneic regenerative cell therapy has shown surprising results despite lack of engraftment of the transplanted cells. Their efficacy was so far considered to be mostly due to secreted trophic factors. We hypothesized that extracellular vesicles (EVs) can also contribute to their mode of action. Here we provide evidence that EVs derived from therapeutic placental-expanded (PLX) stromal cells are potent inducers of angiogenesis and modulate immune cell proliferation in a dose dependent manner. Crude EVs were enriched >100-fold from large volume PLX conditioned media via tangential flow filtration (TFF) as determined by tunable resistive pulse sensing (TRPS). Additional TFF purification was devised to separate EVs from cell-secreted soluble factors. EV identity was confirmed by western blot, calcein-based flow cytometry and electron microscopy. Surface marker profiling of tetraspanin-positive EVs identified expression of cell- and matrix-interacting adhesion molecules. Quantitative proteomics using isobaric labeling comparing PLX-EVs to PLX-derived soluble factors revealed significant differential enrichment of 495 proteins in purified PLX-EVs involved in angiogenesis, cell movement and immune system signaling. At the functional level, PLX-EVs and cells but not the corresponding soluble factors inhibited T cell mitogenesis. PLX-EVs and soluble factors displayed dose-dependent proangiogenic potential by enhancing tube-like structure formation in vitro. Our findings indicate an alternative mode of PLX action based on EV-mediated proangiogenic function and immune response modulation that may help explaining clinical efficacy beyond presence of the transplanted allogeneic cells.

### Sample Protocol
Reagents included acetonitrile (≥ 99.9%) and methanol (≥ 99.9%; both VWR, Austria), Dithiothreitol (≥ 99.5%), formic acid (98.0-100%), iodoacetamide (≥ 99.0%), sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS; ≥ 99.5%), triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, 1 mol·L-1) and trifluoroacetic acid (≥ 99.0%; all Sigma-Aldrich, Austria), ortho-phosphoric acid (85%; Merck, USA), sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA). Deionized water was purified with a MilliQ® Integral 3 instrument (Millipore, USA).  To determine protein content, samples were adjusted to 5% SDS and 50 mmol·L-1 TEAB (pH 7.55) and incubated at 95°C for 10 min to lyse the EVs. Samples were analyzed by a Pierce™ bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) according to the manufacturer´s instructions. S-Trap™ mini columns (Protifi, Huntington, NY, USA) were utilized for preparing 100 μg of protein according to the manufacturer´s instructions with minor adjustments: Lysis of EVs as well as denaturation and reduction of proteins were performed in 5% SDS and 50 mmol·L-1 TEAB (pH 7.55) supplemented with 40 mM DTT at 95°C for 10 min. Cysteines were alkylated by the addition of IAA to a final concentration 80 mM and incubated in the dark for 30 min at 21 °C. Proteins were digested within the S-Trap matrix with trypsin at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:10 w/w at 37°C for 18 h. Peptides were eluted and subsequently dried using a vacuum centrifuge. These samples were re-suspended in H2O + 0.10% FA to a concentration of 3.33 mg mL-1. Peptides of each sample (20 μg) were labeled by a TMT 10-plex™ kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Labeled samples were pooled and desalted using 100 μl Pierce™ C18 tips (Thermo Fisher) and dried again using a vacuum centrifuge. These samples were re-suspended by addition of 40 µl H2O + 0.10% FA. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation was carried out on a nanoHPLC instrument (UltiMate™ U3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column oven temperature of 50°C. Separation of unlabeled samples was performed on an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 column (500 mm x 75 μm i.d., 3.0 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher). Samples (3.3 mg/mL; 0.15 μL) were injected using a microliter pick-up mode (loop volume 1 μL). A multi-step linear gradient of mobile phase solutions A (H2O + 0.10% FA) and B (acetonitrile + 0.10% FA) was applied as follows: 1.0% - 22.0% B for 200.0 min, 22.0% - 30.0% B for 40.0 min, 30.0% - 55.0% for 30.0 min, 90.0% B for 20.0 min and 1.0% B for 40.0 min. Each sample was measured once.  Separation of TMT-labeled samples was performed on a 2000 mm μPAC™ C18 column (PharmaFluidics, Ghent, Belgium). The sample (1μL) was injected using a microliter pick-up mode (5 μL loop volume). A multi-step linear gradient of mobile phase solutions A and B was applied as follows: 1.0% - 22.0% B for 500.0 min, 22.0% - 40.0% B for 100.0 min, 90.0% B for 30.0 min and 1.0% B for 100.0 min. Five technical replicates were measured.  All mass spectrometry measurements were conducted in positive ion mode on a hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific™ QExactive™ Plus benchtop quadrupole-Orbitrap® mass spectrometer) equipped with a Nanospray Flex™ ion source (both Thermo Fisher) and a SilicaTip™ emitter with 360 μm outer diameter, 20 μm inner diameter, and a 10 μm inner tip diameter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). Mass spectrometric data were acquired with the following instrument settings: spray voltage of 1.5 kV, capillary temperature of 320°C, S-lens, radio frequency level 55.0, MS1 AGC target 3 x 10e6, m/z range 400-2000, maximum injection time of 100 ms, resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. Data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry (ddMS2) was carried out in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell at a normalized collision energy (NCE) setting of 28.0 and a resolution setting of 17,500 at m/z 200 for unlabeled samples and at a resolution of 35,000 at m/z 200 for TMT-labeled samples. For MS2, the top 15 signals were chosen for fragmentation with a 2.0 m/z isolation window, an automatic gain control target of 1 x 10e5 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds. The instrument was calibrated using Pierce™ LTQ Velos ESI Positive Ion Calibration Solution (Life Technologies, Vienna, Austria).

### Data Protocol
All data were evaluated using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) using default settings. A protein list was obtained from the Uniprot database including both Swiss-Prot as well as TrEMBL entries for homo sapiens (access: 10.03.2019) and was provided for MaxQuant searches (Cox and Mann, 2008; The UniProt Consortium, 2017). TMT-labeled data were further processed using Perseus software package (version 1.6.1.1)(Tyanova et al., 2016). Only protein groups with 10 quantified channels were included for analysis, log2-transformed and normalized by subtraction of the median. Analysis of the TMT-labeled samples was conducted using Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (IPA; version 47547484; Qiagen Bioinformatics, Redwood City. CA, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Nanoparticles can acquire a plasma protein corona defining their biological identity. Corona functions were previously considered for cell-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs). Here we demonstrate that nano-sized EVs from therapy-grade human placental-expanded (PLX) stromal cells are surrounded by an imageable and functional protein corona when enriched with permissive technology. Scalable EV separation from cell-secreted soluble factors via tangential flow-filtration (TFF) and subtractive tandem mass-tag (TMT) proteomics revealed significant enrichment of predominantly immunomodulatory and proangiogenic proteins. Western blot, calcein-based flow cytometry, super-resolution and electron microscopy verified EV identity. PLX-EVs partly protected corona proteins from protease digestion. EVs significantly ameliorated human skin regeneration and angiogenesis in vivo, induced differential signalling in immune cells, and dose-dependently inhibited T cell proliferation in vitro. Corona removal by size-exclusion or ultracentrifugation abrogated angiogenesis. Re-establishing an artificial corona by cloaking EVs with fluorescent albumin as a model protein or defined proangiogenic factors was depicted by super-resolution microscopy, electron microscopy and zeta-potential shift, and served as a proof-of-concept. Understanding EV corona formation will improve rational EV-inspired nano-therapy design.

### Keywords
Ev, Cli, Pad, Cell therapy, Tff, Trps, Plx stromal cells

### Affiliations
Department of Biosciences, University of Salzburg

### Submitter
Constantin Blöchl

### Lab Head
Dr Christian G. Huber
Department of Biosciences, University of Salzburg


