### Accession
PXD033332

### Title
Increasing cell size remodels the proteome and promotes senescence

### Description
Here, we measure the proteome as a function of G1 cell size in primary and immortalized cultured human cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
RIPA lysis. 1% SDS and DTT for 10min at 65C. Iodoacetimide for 15min at room temp. 50:50 Acetone:Ethanol precipitation. Resuspention in 8M Urea (plus Tris). Digestion overnight in 2M Urea. 1:50 trypsin:protein. SEP-PAK C18 desalting.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant. Standard settings for TMT and SILAC labels.

### Publication Abstract
Cell size is tightly controlled in healthy tissues, but it is unclear how deviations in cell size affect cell physiology. To address this, we measured how the cell's proteome changes with increasing cell size. Size-dependent protein concentration changes are widespread and predicted by subcellular localization, size-dependent mRNA concentrations, and protein turnover. As proliferating cells grow larger, concentration changes typically associated with cellular senescence are increasingly pronounced, suggesting that large size may be a cause rather than just a consequence of cell senescence. Consistent with this hypothesis, larger cells are prone to replicative, DNA-damage-induced, and CDK4/6i-induced senescence. Size-dependent changes to the proteome, including those associated with senescence, are not observed when an increase in cell size is accompanied by an increase in ploidy. Together, our findings show how cell size could impact many aspects of cell physiology by remodeling the proteome and provide a rationale for cell size control and polyploidization.

### Keywords
Senescence, High-accuracy proteomics, Cell size

### Affiliations
Stanford University

### Submitter
Michael Lanz

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Skotheim
Stanford University


