### Accession
PXD024292

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of FLAG-NEK9 immunoprecipitates

### Description
Immunoprecipitates of FLAG-NEK9 was analyzed to detect interacting proteins under serum starvation conditions.

### Sample Protocol
MEFs stably expressing FLAG or FLAG-NEK9 were incubated to confluency, serum-starved for 24 h, and lysed with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, and complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor [03969-21; Nacalai Tesque]). After centrifugation at 17,700 x g for 10 min, the supernatants were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads for 3 h at 4°C with gentle rotation. The eluted proteins were enzymatically digested according to a phase-transfer surfactant (PTS) protocol. Then, 50-μL eluted samples were mixed with 85 μL of PTS buffer. Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for 30 min and alkylated with 50 mM 2-iodoacetamide (804744; Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 30 min. Next, samples were diluted five-fold by adding 50 mM NH4HCO3 solution followed by digestion with 1 μg of Lysyl Endopeptidase (LysC; 121-05063; Wako Pure Chemical Industries) at 37°C for 4 h. Samples were further digested with 1 μg of trypsin at 37°C for 8 h. An equal volume of ethyl acetate acidified with 0.5% TFA was added to the digested samples. After centrifugation at 10,000 x g for 10 min twice at room temperature, the aqueous phase containing peptides was collected and dried using a SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The dried peptides were solubilized in 100 μL of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA, and the peptide mixture was trapped on a hand-made C18 STAGE tip prepared as previously reported. The trapped peptides were subjected to a previously reported dimethyl-labeling procedure87. Subsequently, 13CH2O and NaBH3CN (light label) were added to the FLAG-only sample. Similarly, 13CD2O and NaBD3CN (heavy label) were added to the FLAG-NEK9 sample. The dimethyl-labeled peptides left on the tip were eluted with 100 μL of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. The light/heavy-labeled eluents were mixed and dried using a SpeedVac concentrator.

### Data Protocol
The sample was dissolved in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA and loaded onto the LC-MS system with a Q-Exactive MS instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano HPLC system (Advance UHPLC; Bruker Daltonics) and an HTC-PAL autosampler (CTC Analytics) with a trap column (0.3 x 5 mm, L-column, ODS, Chemicals Evaluation and Research Institute). Samples were separated by a gradient using mobile phases A (0.1% formic acid/H2O) and B (0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min (4% to 32% B for 190 min, 32% to 95% B for 1 min, 95% B for 2 min, 95% to 4% B for 1 min, and 4% B for 6 min) with a home-made capillary column (length of 200 mm and inner diameter of 100 μm) packed with 2-μm C18 resin (L-column2, Chemicals Evaluation and Research Institute). Then, the eluted peptides were electrosprayed (1.8–2.3 kV) and introduced into the MS equipment (positive ion mode, data-dependent MS/MS). The obtained raw data were subjected to database search (UniProt, reviewed mouse database as of September 13th, 2018) with Sequest HT algorithm running on Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The parameters for database searches were as follows: peptide cleavage was set to trypsin; missed cleavage sites were allowed to be up to two residues; peptide lengths were set to 6–144 amino acids; and mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. For modification conditions, carbamidomethylation at cysteine and dimethylation [H(4)C(2), or H(-2)D(6)13C(2)] at lysin and peptide N-terminus were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation at methionine was set as a variable modification. A significance threshold of p < 0.05 was applied. Abundances of precursor ions were calculated based on the area of the precursors with Proteome Discoverer 2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Autophagy regulates primary cilia formation, but the underlying mechanism is not fully understood. In this study, we identify NIMA-related kinase 9 (NEK9) as a GABARAPs-interacting protein and find that NEK9 and its LC3-interacting region (LIR) are required for primary cilia formation. Mutation in the LIR of NEK9 in mice also impairs in vivo cilia formation in the kidneys. Mechanistically, NEK9 interacts with MYH9 (also known as myosin IIA), which has been implicated in inhibiting ciliogenesis through stabilization of the actin network. MYH9 accumulates in NEK9 LIR mutant cells and mice, and depletion of MYH9 restores ciliogenesis in NEK9 LIR mutant cells. These results suggest that NEK9 regulates ciliogenesis by acting as an autophagy adaptor for MYH9. Given that the LIR in NEK9 is conserved only in land vertebrates, the acquisition of the autophagic regulation of the NEK9-MYH9 axis in ciliogenesis may have possible adaptive implications for terrestrial life.

### Keywords
Mouse, Mouse embryonic fibroblast

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Graduate School and Faculty of Medicine The University of Tokyo
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Graduate School and Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

### Submitter
Yasuhiro Yamamoto

### Lab Head
Dr Noboru Mizushima
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Graduate School and Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan


