### Accession
PXD022204

### Title
Intronic tRNAs of mitochondrial origin regulate constitutive and alternative splicing

### Description
Background: The presence of nuclear mitochondrial DNA (numtDNA) has been reported within several nuclear genomes. Next to mitochondrial protein coding genes, numtDNA sequences also encode for mitochondrial tRNA genes. However, the biological roles of numtDNA, remain elusive.  Results: Employing in silico analysis we identify 281 mitochondrial tRNA homologs in the human genome, which we term nimtRNAs (nuclear intronic mitochondrial-derived tRNAs), being contained within introns of 76 nuclear host genes. Despite base changes in nimtRNAs when compared to their mtRNA homologs, a canonical tRNA cloverleaf structure is maintained. To address potential functions of intronic nimtRNAs, we insert them into introns of constitutive and alternative splicing reporters and demonstrate that nimtRNAs promote pre-mRNA splicing, dependent on number and positioning of nimtRNA genes and splice site recognition efficiency. A mutational analysis reveals that the nimtRNA cloverleaf structure is required for the observed splicing increase. Utilizing a CRISPR/Cas9 approach we show that a partial deletion of a single endogenous nimtRNALys within intron 28 of the PPFIBP1 gene decreases inclusion of the downstream located exon 29 of the PPFIBP1 mRNA. By employing a pull-down approach followed by mass spectrometry, a 3’-splice site associated protein network is identified, including KHDRBS1, which we show directly interacts with nimtRNATyr by an electrophoretic mobility shift assay.   Conclusions: We propose that nimtRNAs, along with associated protein factors, can act as a novel class of intronic splicing regulatory elements in the human genome by participating in the regulation of splicing.

### Sample Protocol
Employing streptavidin beads, proteins associated with nimtRNAs were isolated and subsequently separated by SDS-PAGE (Fig. 6A). Bands which predominantly appeared in the nimtRNA pull-down approach, but not in the control lacking nimtRNAs (designated as scrbl), were excised from the gel and subsequently analyzed by LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
By a STRING protein-protein interaction network analysis of proteins identified by MS, we determined a highly significant network of proteins being bound to the nimtRNA transcript (p<1.0e-16). An inherent GO analysis determined “RNA processing” and “RNA splicing” as the biological processes, and “mRNA Splicing-Major Pathway” in the Reactome, enriched significantly (Fig. 6B). The top 10 most abundant nimtRNA-transcript interacting proteins are listed in Fig. 6C.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intronic splicing enhancer (ise), Alternative splicing, Splicing, Trna, Trna-lookalikes, Constitutive splicing, Splicing regulatory element, Nimtrna, Numtdna, Mitochondrial trna

### Affiliations
Institute of Genomics and RNomics, Medical University of Innsbruck
Division of Genomics and RNomics, Biocenter, Medical University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.

### Submitter
Simon Hoser

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Huettenhofer
Division of Genomics and RNomics, Biocenter, Medical University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.


