### Accession
PXD013346

### Title
SUMOylation proteomic analysis of renal cortical collecting duct cells

### Description
We profiled SUMO1 and SUMO2 modified proteins in cortical collecting duct (mpkCCD) as a precursor to targeted approaches to assess SUMO function. SUMO levels in cells following heat shock and treatment with deSUMOylation inhibitors were assessed.

### Sample Protocol
A modified form of SUMO1 or SUMO2, with a histidine tag and a T to K mutation preceding the carboxyl-terminal GG motif was expressed in mpkCCD cells. SUMO-conjugated proteins were purified using the histidine tag, and after cleavage with the endoproteinase Lys-C followed by Glu-C, a di-glycine specific antibody was used to enrich SUMOylated peptides.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification were done by MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1). All the raw files from one SUMO family (SUMO1 or SUMO2) were searched together, with Lys-C/P as enzyme for group0 (Lys-C digested peptides) and LysC/P plus GluC for group1 (Lys-C, followed by GluC digested peptides). The raw files were searched against mouse Uniprot database downloaded on 10th of October 2017, plus normal contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Acetylation of Protein N-term, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and most importantly, di-glycine modification of lysine were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. All other parameters were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
Protein post-translational modification by the small&#xa0;ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) is a mechanism that allows a diverse response of cells to stress. Five SUMO family members, SUMO1-5, are expressed in mammals. We hypothesized that because kidney epithelial cells are often subject to stresses arising from various physiological conditions, multiple proteins in the kidney will be SUMOylated. Here, we profiled SUMO1- and SUMO2-modified proteins in a polarized epithelial cell model of the renal cortical collecting duct (mpkCCD14 cells). Modified forms of SUMO1 or SUMO2, with a histidine tag and a Thr to Lys mutation preceding the carboxyl-terminal di-gly motif, were expressed in mpkCCD14 cells, allowing SUMO-conjugated proteins to be purified and identified. Protein mass spectrometry identified 1428 SUMO1 and 1957 SUMO2 sites, corresponding to 741 SUMO1 and 971 SUMO2 proteins. Gene ontology indicated that the function of the majority of SUMOylated proteins in mpkCCD14 cells was related to gene transcription. After treatment of the mpkCCD14 cells for 24 h with aldosterone, the levels of SUMOylation at a specific site on the proton and oligopeptide/antibiotic cotransporter protein Pept2 were greatly increased. In conclusion, the SUMOylation landscape of mpkCCD14 cells suggests that protein modification by SUMOylation is a mechanism within renal epithelial cells to modulate gene transcription under various physiological conditions.

### Keywords
Renal, Sumoylation, Collecting duct, Kidney

### Affiliations
InterPrET Center, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus DK-8000, Denmark
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University

### Submitter
Qi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Robert A. Fenton
InterPrET Center, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus DK-8000, Denmark


