### Accession
PXD014707

### Title
Synthetic essentiality of metabolic regulator PDHK1 in PTEN-deficient cells and cancer

### Description
PTEN is a tumor suppressor that is often inactivated in cancer and possesses both lipid and protein phosphatase activities. We report the metabolic regulator PDHK1 (pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase1) is a synthetic-essential gene in PTEN-deficient cancer and normal cells. The predominant mechanism of PDHK1 regulation and dependency is the PTEN protein phosphatase dephosphorylates NFkB activating protein (NKAP) and limits NFkB activation to suppress expression of PDHK1, a NFkB target gene. Loss of the PTEN protein phosphatase upregulates PDHK1 to drive aerobic glycolysis and induce PDHK1 cellular dependence. PTEN-deficient human tumors harbor increased PDHK1, which is a biomarker of decreased patient survival, establishing clinical relevance. This study uncovers a PTEN-regulated signaling pathway and reveals PDHK1 as a potential target in PTEN-deficient cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed and digested with trypsin. Phosphopeptides were enriched by FE3+-IMAC.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant to identify phosphopeptides and extract ion intensities. MSstats was subsequently implemented to estimate log2fold-change and adjusted p-values for each phosphosite.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) is a tumor suppressor and bi-functional lipid and protein phosphatase. We report that the metabolic regulator pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase1 (PDHK1) is a synthetic-essential gene in PTEN-deficient cancer and normal cells. The PTEN protein phosphatase dephosphorylates nuclear factor &#x3ba;B (NF-&#x3ba;B)-activating protein (NKAP) and limits NF&#x3ba;B activation to suppress expression of PDHK1, a NF-&#x3ba;B target gene. Loss of the PTEN protein phosphatase upregulates PDHK1 to induce aerobic glycolysis and PDHK1 cellular dependence. PTEN-deficient human tumors harbor increased PDHK1, a biomarker of decreased patient survival. This study uncovers a PTEN-regulated signaling pathway and reveals PDHK1 as a potential target in PTEN-deficient cancers.

### Keywords
Signaling, Nkap, Protein phosphatase, Nfkb, Pten, Synthetic lethality, Metabolism, Pdhk1, Cancer

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, USA

### Submitter
Jeffrey Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Trever Bivona
Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, USA


