### Accession
PXD033151

### Title
Hypoxia shapes the immune landscape in lung injury and promotes the persistence of inflammation

### Description
Hypoxemia is a defining feature of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), an often-fatal complication of pulmonary or systemic inflammation, yet the resulting tissue hypoxia, and its impact on immune responses, is often neglected. Here we showed that ARDS patients were hypoxaemic and monocytopenic within the first 48 hours of ventilation. Monocytopenia was also observed in mouse models of acute lung injury, in which tissue hypoxia drove the suppression of type I interferon signalling in the bone marrow. This impaired monopoiesis, resulted in reduced accumulation of monocyte-derived macrophages and enhanced neutrophil-mediated inflammation in the lung. Administration of CSF1 in mice with hypoxic lung injury rescued the monocytopenia, altered the nature of circulating monocytes, increased monocyte-derived macrophages in the lung and limited injury. Thus, tissue hypoxia altered the dynamics of the immune response to the detriment of the host and interventions to address the aberrant response offer new therapeutic strategies for ARDS.

### Sample Protocol
Sorted monocytes were processed for proteomics using the ‘in cell digest”, as described by Kelly et al. bioRxiv 202064, resuspended in digestion buffer (0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate + 1 30 mM MgCl2) and digested with benzonase (>99%, Millipore) for 30 min at 37 °C, followed by trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 1:50 w/w protein) overnight at 37 °C. A second aliquot of trypsin (1:50) was subsequently added and incubated at 37 °C for 4 hours. A minimum of 25 ng of trypsin was added. Digests were acidified and desalted using StageTips and either subjected to tip-based fractionation or direct analysis by LC-MS/MS. Following digestion, and in order to generate the reference spectral library, peptides were subjected to reverse phase high pH tip fractionation following the general guidelines as described by Rappsilber et al. In brief, tips for fractionation were made using three SDB-XC disks (Merck, UK) per tip. The tip was cleaned and conditioned using sequentially methanol, 80% acetonitrile (MeCN) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) in 0.1% NH4OH (v/v) and 0.1% NH4OH (52mM) (v/v). Peptides, resuspended also 0.1% NH4OH (pH=10), were spun through the SDB-XC disks and the flow-through was collected, acidified and concentrated on C-18 stage-Tips before subjected to MS analysis. Fractionation was then achieved by sequential elution with 7%, 14%, 21%, 28%, 35%, 55%, and 80% MeCN in 0.1% NH4OH. Fractions were then dried at ambient temperature (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK) and prepared for MS analysis by resuspension in 6uL of 0.1% TFA. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) LC-MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm (2 μm particle size) EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific, UK), which was assembled on an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific, UK) and operated constantly at 50oC. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 120 min and then to 95% in 11 min. Mobile phase B was retained at 95% for 5 min and returned back to 2% a minute after until the end of the run (160 min in total). The spray voltage was set at 2.2kV and the ion capillary temperature at 280oC. Survey scans were recorded at 60,000 resolution (scan range 400-1600 m/z) with an ion target of 1.0E6, and injection time of 50ms. MS2 was performed in the orbitrap (resolution at 15,000), with ion target of 5.0E4 and HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27. The isolation window in the quadrupole was 1.4 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 6 were selected for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s. The cycle time was set at 3 seconds.  Samples subjected to Data Independent Acquisition (DIA), were prepared for MS analysis by resuspension in 0.1% TFA. MS Analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). LC conditions (instrumentation, column, and gradient) were the same as described above. Survey scans were performed at 15,000 resolution, with scan range at 350-1500 m/z, maximum 5 injection time at 50ms and AGC target at 4.5E5. MS/MS DIA was performed in the orbitrap at 30,000 resolution with a scan range of 200-2000 m/z. The mass range was set to “normal” the maximum injection time to 54ms and the AGC target to 2.0E5. For the inclusion mass list, isolation windows were set to 20m/z for the scanning range of 400-1200, from 400-800 m/z and then to 40  from 800-100 and to 60 until the end. Data for both survey and MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode. A blank sample (0.1% TFA, 80% MeCN 1:1 v/v) was injected in between of each sample to avoid carryover.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were processed using Spectronaught v14.7.201007.47784 using either a human or mouse reference FASTA sequence from UniProt using default search parameters. The resulting protein-level data were analysed using R v3.5.0. Protein parts-per-million (ppm) intensities were calculated by dividing the mean ppm intensities between conditions (e.g. for the human monocyte samples, ARDS and healthy control), P-values were calculated using a t-test on log-transformed ppm intensities. Proteins were designated as significantly changing if they showed p-values <0.05 and fold changes exceeding 1.96 standard deviations away from the mean (i.e. z-score >1.96). Only proteins that were quantitated in all samples are shown in the volcano plot.

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxemia is a defining feature of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), an often-fatal complication of pulmonary or systemic inflammation, yet the resulting tissue hypoxia, and its impact on immune responses, is often neglected. In the present study, we have shown that ARDS patients were hypoxemic and monocytopenic within the first 48&#x2009;h of ventilation. Monocytopenia was also observed in mouse models of hypoxic acute lung injury, in which hypoxemia drove the suppression of type I interferon signaling in the bone marrow. This impaired monopoiesis resulted in reduced accumulation of monocyte-derived macrophages and enhanced neutrophil-mediated inflammation in the lung. Administration of colony-stimulating factor 1 in mice with hypoxic lung injury rescued the monocytopenia, altered the phenotype of circulating monocytes, increased monocyte-derived macrophages in the lung and limited injury. Thus, tissue hypoxia altered the dynamics of the immune response to the detriment of the host and interventions to address the aberrant response offer new therapeutic strategies for ARDS.

### Keywords
Hypoxia, Classical monocytes, Dia, Ards

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
CIR, Queen’s Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Ananda Mirchandani

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Walmsley
CIR, Queen’s Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh


