### Accession
PXD010479

### Title
Architecture and structural dynamics of the AROM complex

### Description
Cross-linking/mass spectrometry was used to study inter-domain interactions in the multifunctional AROM complex from Chaetomium thermophilum.

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking using the lysine reactive DSS was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). The cross-linked complex was digested using endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin, and the digest was analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Elite system after fractionation by size exclusion chromatography. Duplicate injections for each SEC fraction were performed for precursors with a charge state of 3 and above. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of the target protein and several contaminants. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 5 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. All candidate spectra were manually evaluated. For details, see the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
With the advance of experimental procedures obtaining chemical crosslinking information is becoming a fast and routine practice. Information on crosslinks can greatly enhance the accuracy of protein structure modeling. Here, we review the current state of the art in modeling protein structures with the assistance of experimentally determined chemical crosslinks within the framework of the 13th meeting of Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction approaches. This largest-to-date blind assessment reveals benefits of using data assistance in difficult to model protein structure prediction cases. However, in a broader context, it also suggests that with the unprecedented advance in accuracy to predict contacts in recent years, experimental crosslinks will be useful only if their specificity and accuracy further improved and they are better integrated into computational workflows.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; hybrid structural biology

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


