### Accession
PXD018761

### Title
Proteome changes upon modulation of eIF2α phosphorylation in  Trypanosoma cruzi epimastigotes

### Description
Trypanosomatids regulate gene expression mainly at the post-transcriptional level through processing, exporting and stabilizing mRNA and control of translation. In most eukaryotes, protein synthesis is regulated by phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) at serine 51. Phosphorylation halts overall translation by decreasing availability of initiator tRNAmet to form translating ribosomes. In trypanosomatids the N-terminus of eIF2α is extended with threonine 169 the homologous phosphorylated residue and eIF2α phosphorylation increases in proliferative intracellular forms prior to differentiation into trypomastigotes. Here we analyse the proteome changes in epimatigotes upon eIF2αT169A mutation and knock-out of the kinase TcK11, an ortolog of the general control nonderepressible 2 (GCN2)kinases which have been implicated in eukaryotic eIF2α ser51 phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
Parasites (CRISPR/Cas9 parental, eIF2αT169A mutant and TcK1 knockout cell) were maintained in LIT-10% FBS up to 1 x 107 mL in four independent cultures at 28 oC performed in different weeks. The parasites were collected by centrifugation at 2000 g, 10 min, washed once in PBS and stored at -80 o. The samples containing 2 x 107 parasites resuspended, boiled in 20 µL of SDS-PAGE sample buffer containing 5 mM DTT and loaded in precast Novex Value 4-12% Tris-Glycine gels. The electrophoresis was performed in 50 mM MOPS, 50 mM Tris Base, 3.5 mM SDS, 1 mM EDTA at 100 V for 10 min. The migration portion of each lane were cut, and the gel pieces were fixed for 10 min at room temperature in 1 volume of 40% ethanol, 10% acetic acid. The fixative was removed, and the fixation repeated twice more. The bands were kept frozen at -80oC until processing for mass spectrometry analysis. The gel slices were submitted to reductive alkylation and in gel tryptic digest using routine procedures. The eluted peptides were then analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS2) on a ultimate3000 nano rapid separation LC system (Dionex) coupled to a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) at the University of Dundee FingerPrints Proteomics facility.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed using the intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) method of MaxQuant (PMID:19029910; PMID: 24942700)searching the T. cruzi YC6 annotated proteome from TriTrypDB (PMID:19843604). Minimum peptide length was set at six amino acids, isoleucine and leucine were considered indistinguishable and false discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. When the identified peptide sequence set of one protein contained the peptide set of another protein, these two proteins were assigned to the same protein group. Sample layout: CRISPR/Cas9 parental (experiment 11-15); eIF2αT169A mutant (experiment 21-25); TcK1 knockout (experiment 31-36)

### Publication Abstract
Trypanosomatids regulate gene expression mainly at the post-transcriptional level through processing, exporting and stabilising mRNA and control of translation. In most eukaryotes, protein synthesis is regulated by phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) at serine 51. Phosphorylation halts overall translation by decreasing availability of initiator tRNA<sup>met</sup> to form translating ribosomes. In trypanosomatids, the N-terminus of eIF2&#x3b1; is extended with threonine 169 the homologous phosphorylated residue. Here, we evaluated whether eIF2&#x3b1; phosphorylation varies during the Trypanosoma cruzi life cycle, the etiological agent of Chagas' disease. Total levels of eIF2&#x3b1; are diminished in infective and non-replicative trypomastigotes compared with proliferative forms from the intestine of the insect vector or amastigotes from mammalian cells, consistent with decreased protein synthesis reported in infective forms. eIF2&#x3b1; phosphorylation increases in proliferative intracellular forms prior to differentiation into trypomastigotes. Parasites overexpressing eIF2&#x3b1;<sup>T169A</sup> or with an endogenous CRISPR/Cas9-generated eIF2&#x3b1;<sup>T169A</sup> mutation were created and analysis revealed alterations to the proteome, largely unrelated to the presence of &#x3bc;ORF in epimastigotes. eIF2&#x3b1;<sup>T169A</sup> mutant parasites produced fewer trypomastigotes with lower infectivity than wild type, with increased levels of sialylated mucins and oligomannose glycoproteins, and decreased galactofuranose epitopes and the surface protease GP63 on the cell surface. We conclude that eIF2&#x3b1; expression and phosphorylation levels affect proteins relevant for intracellular progression of T. cruzi.

### Keywords
Eif2, Phosphorylation, Translation, Virulence, Differentiation, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
Departmento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Schenkman
Departmento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia, Escola Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil


