### Accession
PXD019924

### Title
Biomarkers of Cholangiocarcinoma and Pancreatic adenocarcinoma

### Description
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) and pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC) may lead to the development of extrahepatic obstructive cholestasis. However, biliary stenoses can also be caused by benign conditions, and the identification of their etiology still remains a clinical challenge. We performed metabolomic and proteomic analyses of bile from patients with benign (n=36) and malignant conditions, CCA (n=36) or PDAC (n=57), undergoing endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography with the aim of characterizing bile composition in biliopancreatic disease and identifying biomarkers for the differential diagnosis of biliary strictures. Comprehensive analyses of lipids, bile acids and small molecules were carried out using mass spectrometry (MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-NMR) in all patients. MS analysis of bile proteome was performed in five patients per group. We implemented artificial intelligence tools for the selection of biomarkers and algorithms with predictive capacity. Our machine-learning pipeline included the generation of synthetic data with properties of real data, the selection of potential biomarkers (metabolites or proteins) and their analysis with neural networks (NN). Selected biomarkers were then validated with real data. We identified panels of lipids (n=10) and proteins (n=5) that when analyzed with NN algorithms discriminated between patients with and without cancer with an unprecedented accuracy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion in the S-TrapTM filter (Protifi, Huntington, NY, USA) was performed following the manufacturer’s procedure with slight modifications. Briefly, 30 µL of bile were first mixed with 5% SDS and 5 mM TCEP (final concentrations), reduced at 37 °C for 60 min, followed by addition of 1 µL of 200 mM cysteine-blocking reagent MMTS (SCIEX) for 10 min at room temperature. Afterwards, 12% phosphoric acid and then seven volumes of binding buffer (90% methanol; 100 mM TEAB) were added to the sample (final phosphoric acid concentration: 1.2%). After mixing, the protein solution was loaded to an S-TrapTM filter in two consecutive steps, separated by a 2 min centrifugation at 3,000 g. Then the filter was washed 3 times with 150 μL of binding buffer. Finally, 1.5 µg of MS-grade trypsin was added to a 100 mM TEAB solution and spun through the S-Trap prior to digestion. Flow-through was then reloaded to the top of the S-TrapTM column and allowed to digest o/n at 37 °C. To avoid liquid leakage from the S-TrapTM column, a customized yellow tip with 9 Empore 3M C18 disks (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was placed at the bottom tip of the S-Trap column during digestion. To elute peptides, two step-wise buffers were applied (1) 40 μL of 25 mM TEAB and 2) 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid in H2O), separated by a 2 min centrifugation at 3,000 g in each case. Eluted peptides were pooled and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Digested samples were cleaned-up/desalted using SEP-PAK C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). After desalting, peptide concentration was carried out by Qubit™ Fluorometric Quantitation (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). A 1 µg aliquot of each digested sample was subjected to 1D-nano LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) with a Nanospray III source. The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase Acquity UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 Column, 75 µm × 150 mm, 1.7 µm particle size and 130 Å pore size (Waters). The trap column was a C18 Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (Thermo Scientific), 100 µm × 2 cm, 5 µm particle diameter, 100 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 µL/min. The nano-pump provided a flow-rate of 250 nl/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions. Peptides were separated using a 250 min gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Injection volume was 5 µL.  Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA). Data was acquired using an ion-spray voltage floating (ISVF) 2300 V, curtain gas (CUR) 35, interface heater temperature (IHT) 150, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 25, declustering potential (DP) 100 V. All data were acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (SCIEX). For IDA parameters, 0.25s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 Da were followed by 35 MS/MS scans of 100ms in the mass range of 100–1800 (total cycle time: 4 s). Switching criteria were set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 15s. IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameters script was used for automatically controlling the CE.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data obtained were processed using PeakView® 2.2 Software (SCIEX) and exported as mgf files. Proteomics data analyses were performed by using 4 search engines (Mascot Server v.2.6.1, OMSSA, X!Tandem and Myrimatch) and a target/decoy database built from sequences in the Homo sapiens proteome at Uniprot Knowledgebase. All search engines were configured to match potential peptide candidates to recalibrated spectra with mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites and a maximum isotope error (13C) of 1, considering fixed MMTS modification of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine, pyroglutamic acid from glutamine or glutamic acid at the peptide N-terminus. Score distribution models were used to compute peptide-spectrum match p-values, and spectra recovered by a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 (peptide-level) filter were selected for quantitative analysis. Differential regulation was measured using linear models, and statistical significance was measured using q-values (FDR). All analyses were conducted using software from Proteobotics S.L. (Madrid, Spain). Functional analyses were performed with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, IPA (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany).

### Publication Abstract
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) and pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC) may lead to the development of extrahepatic obstructive cholestasis. However, biliary stenoses can also be caused by benign conditions, and the identification of their etiology still remains a clinical challenge. We performed metabolomic and proteomic analyses of bile from patients with benign (<i>n</i> = 36) and malignant conditions, CCA (<i>n</i> = 36) or PDAC (<i>n</i> = 57), undergoing endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography with the aim of characterizing bile composition in biliopancreatic disease and identifying biomarkers for the differential diagnosis of biliary strictures. Comprehensive analyses of lipids, bile acids and small molecules were carried out using mass spectrometry (MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (<sup>1</sup>H-NMR) in all patients. MS analysis of bile proteome was performed in five patients per group. We implemented artificial intelligence tools for the selection of biomarkers and algorithms with predictive capacity. Our machine-learning pipeline included the generation of synthetic data with properties of real data, the selection of potential biomarkers (metabolites or proteins) and their analysis with neural networks (NN). Selected biomarkers were then validated with real data. We identified panels of lipids (<i>n</i> = 10) and proteins (<i>n</i> = 5) that when analyzed with NN algorithms discriminated between patients with and without cancer with an unprecedented accuracy.

### Keywords
Human bile; cholangiocarcinoma; pancreatic adenocarcinoma; lipidomics; proteomics; machine learning

### Affiliations
Professor of Biochemistry  Proteomics Unit Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CSIC) Darwin 3, 28049, Madrid
Proteobotics S.L.

### Submitter
Antonio Ramos Fernández

### Lab Head
Dr Fernando J. Corrales
Professor of Biochemistry  Proteomics Unit Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CSIC) Darwin 3, 28049, Madrid


