### Accession
PXD022514

### Title
Omics Analysis of Pancreatic Cancer Platelets Reveals Active “Education”, including Dysregulation of Splicing Signature and Inhibition of SPARC by Modified Forms of miRNAs

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is associated with hypercoagulation, but molecular mechanisms underlying PDAC/platelets interaction remain controversial. PDAC cells can activate platelets and change their RNA and protein content, thus, we performed an integrative study investigating the biological processes of differentially spliced mRNAs and expressed miRNAs, as well as proteins. To focus on these “dangerous liaisons”, we used benign disease as a background noise correction for putative inflammatory signals. Gene set enrichment analysis on differential miRNAs, RNA transcripts and proteins revealed an enrichment of RNA splicing, mRNA processing and translation initiation on miRNAs and proteins and depletion on RNA transcripts, as previously described. Moreover, correlation analyses revealed a specific regulation on SPARC RNA transcripts by isomiRs involved in cancer signaling, suggesting a specific modulation/”education” in PDAC platelets. We identified HBA1, HBD, CA1 and AGT as protein markers in PDAC platelets. In conclusion, our data show that platelets change their biological repertoire in the presence of PDAC, through dysregulation of miRNAs and splicing factors, supporting the presence of a clear de novo protein machinery that can “educate” the platelet.

### Sample Protocol
After RNA removal proteins were precipitated and loaded on SDS-PAGE. Image J analysis was used to enable equal loading on a subsequent SDS-PAGE (12%). Proteins were allowed to run just into the running gel before the voltage was stopped and stained with Coomassie R-250. After washing in MQ, each stained protein blob was cut from the gel as a single band and subjected to tryptic (Promega, Madison WI, USA) digestion. Peptides were extracted CAN and formic acid and the volume of the peptide fractions was reduced to ~50 µl in a vacuum centrifuge to eliminate ACN from the solution. Peptide extracts were desalted using Oasis HLB cartridges (30 mg, Waters). Peptide eluates were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and re-dissolved in 20µl loading solvent (4% ACN + 0.5% TFA) + 0.5 I.E. retention time peptides (iRT, Biognosys) per 5 µl injection.  Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands), equipped with a 50 cm x 75 µm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 µm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch,Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid in ultrapure water; buffer B: 80% ACN + 0.5% acetic acid in ultrapure water) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B linear gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject).  DDA MS Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 60 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s. DIA MS Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Data was measured using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) protocol. The DIA-MS method consisted of an MS1 scan from 400 to 1000 m/z at 15,000 resolution (AGC target of 3E6 and 50 ms injection time). For MS2, 24 variable size DIA segments were acquired at 30,000 resolution (AGC target 3E6 and auto for injection time). The DIA-MS method included 20 windows of 20 m/z, 2 x 40 m/z and 2 x 60 m/z (m/z range: 400-1000). Collision energy was set at 28%. MS2 spectra were recorded in centroid mode and the default charge state was set to 3+.

### Data Protocol
DDA MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot FASTA file (release September  2015, 20197  entries, canonical and isoforms) using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. DIA Spectronaut version 13.14.200423.43655 was used with default settings in peptide-centric mode using a project-specific library (20200424_170701_TP200424_20200424_170701.kit, 30,981 precursors) and a Swissprot human FASTA file (cannonical_and_isoform downloaded April 2020, 42,348) with parsing rule: UniProt FASTA and decoy method: mutated. Fixed and variable modifications were tha same as for DDA. Identifications were filtered to a Q-value of 1% (which is equivalent to an FDR of 1% in the DDA experiments).

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is traditionally associated with thrombocytosis/hypercoagulation and novel insights on platelet-PDAC "dangerous liaisons" are warranted. Here we performed an integrative omics study investigating the biological processes of mRNAs and expressed miRNAs, as well as proteins in PDAC blood platelets, using benign disease as a reference for inflammatory noise. Gene ontology mining revealed enrichment of RNA splicing, mRNA processing and translation initiation in miRNAs and proteins but depletion in RNA transcripts. Remarkably, correlation analyses revealed a negative regulation on SPARC transcription by isomiRs involved in cancer signaling, suggesting a specific "education" in PDAC platelets. Platelets of benign patients were enriched for non-templated additions of G nucleotides (#ntaG) miRNAs, while PDAC presented length variation on 3' (lv3p) as the most frequent modification on miRNAs. Additionally, we provided an actionable repertoire of PDAC and benign platelet-ome to be exploited for future studies. In conclusion, our data show that platelets change their biological repertoire in patients with PDAC, through dysregulation of miRNAs and splicing factors, supporting the presence of <i>de novo</i> protein machinery that can "educate" the platelet. These novel findings could be further exploited for innovative liquid biopsies platforms as well as possible therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Liquid biopsy; platelets; omics integration; regulatory mechanisms; gene expression; mirnas; proteins

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


