### Accession
PXD024308

### Title
Exercise prevents substrate overload of liver mitochondria by modification of the compensatory responses during chronic overnutrition

### Description
Exercise training is a potent treatment of NAFLD and hepatic insulin resistance. Here we provide molecular information about the hepatic mitochondrial metabolism in mice when chronic overnutrition (high-energy diet (HED) for 6 weeks) is combined with exercise training. Training reduced the hepatic triacylglycerol content, fasting insulin, and reversed glucose intolerance. Training modified the hepatic mitochondrial proteome with a decrease in enzymes related to pyruvate metabolism and entry of acetyl-CoA into the TCA cycle. Transcriptome data revealed down-regulation of glucose oxidation and lipogenesis. The mitochondrial respiratory capacity of trained HED-fed mice is increased despite reduced content of complex I. Training decreased diacylglycerol species and JNK phosphorylation, both of which can induce insulin resistance. Increased mitochondrial mass and oxidative capacity of the trained muscle further unburdens the liver from substrate overload. Together, when high fat and carbohydrate intake in mice is accompanied by exercise, the decline of mitochondrial function and insulin resistance can be prevented by modification of mitochondrial acetyl-CoA metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen, purified mitochondria were solubilised in 50 mM Tris-Cl, 1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl (pH 7.8) containing Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Switzerland). After centrifugation at 18,000 g for 30 min, supernatants were transferred to LoBind tubes. Aliquots of 45 µg of protein were reduced (10 mM DTT;56°C for 30 min) and alkylated (30 mM iodoacetamide; room temperature for 30 min). Purification and proteolysis were performed using filter aided sample preparation (Manza et al., 2005; Wisniewski et al., 2009). starting with 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 (Kollipara and Zahedi, 2013), next using 100 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8, followed by incubation with digestion buffer (1:20 (w/w enzyme/substrate) trypsin, 0.2 M GuHCl, 2 mM CaCl2 in 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer, pH 7.8) at 37°C for 14 h. Tryptic peptides were recovered by centrifugation followed by flushing first with 50 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, then with 50 µL of water, followed by acidified to pH < 3 with 10% TFA. Subsequent, samples were desalted by solid phase extraction (C18, 4 mg, Varian, USA) and eluted tryptic peptides were dried in a SpeedVac. Peptides were resolubilized in 0.1% TFA and quality controlled on a monolithic HPLC column was performed as described previously (Burkhart et al., 2012).

### Data Protocol
The acquired DDA MS data of all 16 fractions were processed together with Proteome Discoverer (PD) 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Germany) and searched against the mouse Uniprot database (downloaded on 22nd of July 2015, containing 16,750 target sequences plus 11 iRT peptide sequences (Escher et al., 2012)). To maximize the number of peptide spectrum matches, 3 different search algorithms were included, namely Mascot (Perkins et al., 1999), Sequest (Eng et al., 1994), and MS Amanda (Dorfer et al., 2014) using the same set of parameters, i.e. precursor and fragment ion tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively; trypsin as enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification and oxidation of Met as variable modification.  Spectral library generation and DIA measurements The data analysis of all DIA runs was performed with Spectronaut Pulsar software version 11.0.15038.12.33511 (Biognosys).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Exercise, Mouse, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Lipidomics, Dia

### Affiliations
Leibniz – Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V.
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200 albert.sickmann@isas.de www.isas.de twitter.com/isas_Leibniz

### Submitter
Laxmikanth Kollipara

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften – ISAS – e.V. Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b 44227 Dortmund, Germany  P: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-100  F: +49 (0)2 31.13 92-200 albert.sickmann@isas.de www.isas.de twitter.com/isas_Leibniz


