### Accession
PXD014083

### Title
Human placental tissue LC-MS/MS

### Description
This project aimed at missing protein identification from human placental tissue, combining sample preparation and mass spectrometry technology development.For sample preparation, low molecular proteins were enriched by C18 solid phase extraction, SDS-PAGE and MWCO filter. For LC-MS/MS analysis, micro-HPLC fractionation was carried out coupled with LUMOS instrument. Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software was used for data analysis to identify missing proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from placental tissue by tissue lyser with lysis buffer (8M urea, pH 8.0). Some of the proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and the low molecular protein region was cut and digested in gel. Some of the proteins were filtered by ultracentrifuged using vivacon 500 (50kDa cutoff) to get the low molecular protein in flow-through. Both of the low molecular proteins enriched were digested and fractionated by micro-HPLC fractionation system, then analyzed by LUMOS instrument.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was loaded to Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software with the processing workflow parameters as below: full trypsin and semi trypsin mode; maximum cleavage site 2; MS1 tolerance 20 ppm; MS2 tolerance 0.05 Da; database Swiss-Prot human;fixed modification carbamidomethy (C); variable modification oxidation (M) and diamidation (NQ).The PSM result was filtered by Percolator and 1% FDR. experiment type

### Publication Abstract
Identifying more missing proteins (MPs) is an important mission of C-HPP. With the number of identified MPs being attenuated year by year (2,949 to 2,129 MPs from 2016 to 2019), we have realized that the difficulty of exploring the remaining MPs is a challenge in technique. Herein, we propose a comprehensive strategy to effectively enrich, separate, and identify proteins with low molecular weights, aiming at the discovery of MPs. Basically, a protein extract from human placenta was passed through a C18 SPE column, and the bound proteins that were eluted were further separated with an SDS-PAGE gel or a 50 kDa cutoff filter. The separated proteins were subjected to trypsin digestion, and the MS/MS signals were searched against data sets with two different digestion modes (full-trypsin and semitrypsin). The strategy was adopted, resulting in the identification of 4 MPs with 8 unique peptides (&#x2265;2 non-nested unique peptides with &#x2265;9 amino acids). Importantly, the identification of 6 out of 8 of the unique peptides derived from the MPs was further supported by parallel reaction monitoring, which confirmed the identification of 3 MPs from human placenta tissues (Q6NT89: TMF-regulated nuclear protein 1; A0A183: late cornified envelope protein 6A; and Q6UWQ7: insulin growth factor-like family member 2, mapped to chromosomes 1, 1, and 19, respectively). The three proteins ranged in length from 80 aa to 227 aa. The study not only establishes a feasible strategy for analyzing proteins with low molecular weights but also fills a small part of a large gap in the list of MPs. The data obtained in this study are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD014083) and PeptideAtlas (PASS01389).

### Keywords
Human, Placenta, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
+86 18594239452
Professor and Director Center of Proteomic Analysis BGI-Shenzhen

### Submitter
yuanliang zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Siqi Liu
Professor and Director Center of Proteomic Analysis BGI-Shenzhen


