### Accession
PXD041682

### Title
Yeast eIF4G homogenic whole cell oxidative stress LC-MSMS

### Description
Translation initiation factor 4G (eIF4G) is an integral component of the eIF4F complex which is key to translation initiation for most eukaryotic mRNAs. Many eIF4G isoforms have been described in diverse eukaryotic organisms but we currently have a poor understanding of their functional roles and whether they regulate translation in an mRNA specific manner. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae expresses two eIF4G isoforms, eIF4G1 and eIF4G2, that have previously been considered as functionally redundant with any phenotypic differences arising due to alteration in eIF4G expression levels. Using homogenic strains that express eIF4G1 or eIF4G2 as the sole eIF4G isoforms at comparable expression levels to total eIF4G, we show that eIF4G1 is specifically required to mediate the translational response to oxidative stress. We use quantitative proteomics to show that eIF4G1 promotes oxidative stress-specific proteome changes.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell extracts were prepared by basic bead-beating protocol. Protein samples were prepared for MS by adding equal volumes of sample and protein loading buffer (2× NuPAGE LDS sample buffer [Invitrogen], 715 mM 2-mercaptoethanol) and incubating for 5 min at 95°C. Samples were briefly run on NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen) and then excised from gels. Samples were dehydrated using acetonitrile and centrifuged under vacuum. Dried gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, then twice washed alternately with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile. Gel pieces were dried by vacuum centrifugation and samples digested using trypsin overnight at 37°C. Liquid chromatography was carried out using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation Binary System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were concentrated using an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column (180 μm inner diameter, 20 mm length [Waters]) and then separated using an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 Column (75 μm inner diameter, 250 mm length, 1.7 μm particle size [Waters]). A gradient starting with 99% Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 1% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) and increasing to 75% Buffer A and 25% Buffer B was used to separate the peptides over 45 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Label-free tandem MS was performed using an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were selected for fragmentation and MS2 analysis automatically by data-dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0. A peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm was used for the first search, 4.5 ppm for the main search, and 0.5 Da for the MS/ MS fragment ions. The ‘match between runs’ feature was used. The peak list was searched against the Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae database (accessed 10 February 2017) using the built-in Andromeda search engine.  Data from the ‘proteinGroups’ file produced by MaxQuant were imported into R (RStudio 2021.09.2+382). Proteins identified as potential contaminants, reverse proteins, and only identified by site were filtered out. Proteins without a gene name were filtered out. Proteins with only one razor and unique peptide were filtered out. Normalisation was performed using the limma package. The normalizeQuantiles function was used to normalise the LFQ intensities by the mean of each quantile yielding the same empirical distribution for each sample. All protein intensities (‘LFQ.intensity’ columns) were log2-transformed and filtered by >2 valid values in a condition using Perseus (version 1.6.15.0).

### Publication Abstract
Translation initiation factor 4G (eIF4G) is an integral component of the eIF4F complex which is key to translation initiation for most eukaryotic mRNAs. Many eIF4G isoforms have been described in diverse eukaryotic organisms but we currently have a poor understanding of their functional roles and whether they regulate translation in an mRNA specific manner. The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae expresses two eIF4G isoforms, eIF4G1 and eIF4G2, that have previously been considered as functionally redundant with any phenotypic differences arising due to alteration in eIF4G expression levels. Using homogenic strains that express eIF4G1 or eIF4G2 as the sole eIF4G isoforms at comparable expression levels to total eIF4G, we show that eIF4G1 is specifically required to mediate the translational response to oxidative stress. eIF4G1 binds the mRNA cap and remains associated with actively translating ribosomes during oxidative stress conditions and we use quantitative proteomics to show that eIF4G1 promotes oxidative stress-specific proteome changes. eIF4G1, but not eIF4G2, binds the Slf1 LARP protein which appears to mediate the eIF4G1-dependent translational response to oxidative stress. We show similar isoform specific roles for eIF4G in human cells suggesting convergent evolution of multiple eIF4G isoforms offers significant advantages especially where translation must continue under stress conditions.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Yeast, Lc-msms, Whole cell, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester

### Submitter
Declan Creamer

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Grant
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester


