### Accession
PXD027995

### Title
Functional Assessment of US SARS-CoV-2 L452R Epsilon Variant

### Description
The  multiple mutations comprising the epsilon variant demonstrates the independent convergent evolution of SARS-CoV-2 with its spike protein mutation L452R also present in the delta variant.   Cells infected with live viral samples of the epsilon viral variant compared to non-epsilon variant displayed increased sensitivity to neutralization antibodies (NAb) suggesting an intact humoral response (P< 1.0 e-4). The ability for SARS-CoV2 to become more infectious but less virulent is supported mechanistically in the downregulation of viral processing pathways seen by multiomic analyses. Importantly, this paired transcriptomics and proteomic profiling of cellular response to live virus revealed an altered leukocyte response and metabolic mRNA processing in cells upon live viral infection of the epsilon variant. To ascertain host response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, primary COVID-19 positive nasopharyngeal samples were transcriptomically profiled a differential innate immune response (P<2.0 e-12)  but, a relatively unaltered T cell response in the patients carrying the epsilon variant (P< 2.0 e-3). In fact, patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 and those vaccinated with the BNT162b2 vaccine have comparable CD4+/CD8+ T-cell immune responses to the B.1.429 variant (P<5 e-2). The epsilon variant alters viral processing response in infected cells, and the host innate immune response in COVID-19 positive nasopharyngeal swabs,  but generates a protective host T cell response molecular signature in both vaccinated and unvaccinated patients.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were lysed and protein solubilized and denatured with 1M ammonium bicarbonate in 8M urea, and subsequent ultrasonicated with 5 successive 10 seconds pulses.  Thirty-five micrograms of protein, based on Pierce BCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific), underwent Cys reduction using 10mM DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide (100 mM) and trypsin digestion at a ratio of 1 ug to 35 ug of trypsin to total protein for 16 hrs at 37 ºC  and desalted on a 96-well HLB micro-elution plate (Waters) after acidification. Data independent acquisition-MS (DIA-MS) was carried out on a Orbitrap Lumos Fusion MS with a FAIMS front end (Thermo) coupled to  a stainless-steel emitter (EvoSep) and EasySpray source (Thermo) adapter from EvoSep. The trapping column (75 µm ID x length 3 µm Luna particles, Phenomenex) was run with 0.1% aqueous formic acid for 7 minutes at 5 µL/min. Samples were diverted on to a 200 cm micro pillar array column (µPAC, PharmaFluidics) and peptides separated using a gradient of mobile phases A and B composed of 0.1% aqueous formic acid and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. The gradient consisted of 4% B for the first 5 minutes with a step increased to 8% at 5.2 minutes followed by a 90 minute linear gradient up to 30% B. During this time, the flow rate which started at 1200 nL/min was then linearly decreased to 1000 nL/min.  Subsequently, the %B was linearly increased to 50% over 30 minutes at a flow rate of 1000 nL/min  for a total gradient run time of 120 mins. Following each analysis, a 20-minute equilibration was performed, during which the trap was back flushed at 5 µL/min while the analytical column was washed with 95% B and equilibrated to 2% B at 1200nL/min. Both separation and equilibration were carried out at 55° C.    The FAIMS module was used to separate the electro sprayed peptides by collisional cross section into three populations by cycling the compensation voltage (CV) between -40, -52, and -65. At each compensation voltage a precursor scan spanning 400-1000 m/z was acquired at 60,000 (at m/z=200) resolution with AGC target set to 1000000 and 50 ms maximum injection time followed by data independent acquisition (DIA) spanning the same range using 20 m/z wide windows (30 windows at each FAIMS CV). Each DIA scan was acquired at 15,000 (at m/z=200) resolution with AGC set to 150000 and 35 ms maximum injection time.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were analyzed in DIA-NN 1.7.16 (REF - PMID: 31768060) using the spectral library free search against the Human Uniprot database (REF - PMID: 33237286). In the library free search, neural network algorithms are used to accurately predict hypothetical spectra and retention times for each potential tryptic peptide in the database. The search was conducted with the second-pass and match between runs (MBR) options enabled. The quantitation at the protein levels was summed between the different CV fractions. Statistical Analysis and Software Data was filtered by interquartile range and normalized to the median. One-way ANOVA with post-hoc Fisher’s LSD test was used to compare datasets with more than two groups. An unpaired t-test was used to analyze the rest of the datasets. A p value of ≤0.05 was considered significant. MetaboAnalyst 5.0 (https://www.metaboanalyst.ca/) was used for statistical analysis and data visualization (REF - PMID: 34019663).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vero, Covid19, Faims

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Smidt Heart Institute Cedars Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Aleksandr Stotland

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Van Eyk
Smidt Heart Institute Cedars Sinai Medical Center


