### Accession
PXD006097

### Title
Identification of thioredoxin targets in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii using an affinity purification approach

### Description
Thiol-based redox post-translational modifications have emerged as important mechanisms of signaling and regulation in all organisms. In this context, the small ubiquitous oxido-reductase thioredoxin plays a key role by controlling the thiol-disulfide status of target proteins. Recent redox proteomic studies revealed hundreds of proteins regulated by glutathionylation and nitrosylation in the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii while much less is known about the thioredoxin interactome in this photosynthetic model organism. Using an affinity purification strategy, we identified 980 thioredoxin targets. They participate in a wide variety of metabolic pathways and cellular processes. This study broadens not only the redox regulation to new enzymes involved in metabolic pathways already known to be regulated by thioredoxins (carbon, lipid and energy metabolism) but also shed light on cellular processes for which data supporting a putative redox regulation in these processes are scarce (aromatic amino-acid biosynthesis, nuclear transport,…).

### Sample Protocol
Chlamydomonas cultures and protein extraction -  Conditions used for Chlamydomonas D66 cell-wall-less strain (CC-4425 cw nit2- 203mt+ strain) were similar as those described in (Rochaix et al. 1998 Biochim Biophys Acta). Briefly, Chlamydomonas cells were grown at 25°C under mixotrophic conditions in Tris-Acetate-Phosphate (TAP) medium under continuous fluorescent white light (80 µE.m-2.s-1) and constant agitation (120 rpm). Cells in exponential growth phase (3-5 x 106 cells/mL) were harvested by centrifugation (4,200 g; 5 min), washed with 10 mL of fresh TAP medium and centrifuged again. Cells were resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 1 mM EDTA supplemented with a cocktail of antiproteases (SigmaFast, EDTA-free, Sigma) and broken by at least three freeze/thaw cycles in liquid nitrogen. After centrifugation (25,500 g; 30 min; 4°C), pellets were discarded and concentration of total soluble protein extracts was determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay using bovine serum albumin as standard (Smith Klenk 1985. Anal. Biochem. 150 (1): 76–85). Two independent cell cultures were prepared for affinity chromatography.  Trx affinity chromatography -  30 mg of cytosolic CrTRXh1-C39S mutant was covalently coupled to CNBr-activated Sepharose by its amino groups following the recommendations of the supplier and the precautions described previously (Goyer et al 2002 Eur J Biochem; Marchand et al. 2010 Proteomics). The column, connected to a peristaltic pump and a UV detector allowing protein detection at 280 nm, was equilibrated with 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9 containing 1 mM EDTA and 200 mM NaCl (TEN-200 buffer). 100 mg of total protein extract in 28 mL of TEN-200 were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 25 mL/h. After extensive washing with TEN-200, retained proteins were eluted with 2 mM DTT in TEN-200. The non-retained proteins (flow-through) were concentrated by ultrafiltration under nitrogen pressure in a stirred Amicon cell equipped with a nitrocellulose YM-10 membrane (MWCO 10 kDa) and then reloaded onto the affinity column as described above. The DTT-eluted protein fractions were dialyzed against 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 1 mM EDTA and concentrated separately by ultrafiltration as described above (final NaCl concentration below 4 mM).

### Data Protocol
Identification of Trx interacting proteins -  Peptide mixtures were analyzed in duplicate by a LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA,USA) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano reversed phase chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a binary solvent system consisting of solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a C18 reverse phase Acclaim Pepmap 100 precolumn (5 mm x 300 µm i.d., 5 µm, 100 Å) and separated on a C18 reverse phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC (25 cm x 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å) using a gradient rising from 90% solvent A to 40% solvent B in 100 min followed by a column regeneration step (increase to 80% solvent B in 9 min followed by a decrease to 10% solvent B in 9 min). Tandem mass spectrometry data were acquired in a data-dependent manner as described in (Morisse et al. 2014 ARS) and processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher scientific, San Jose, CA) connected to an in-house Mascot search server (Matrix Science, Boston, MA; version 2.4). Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Dalton for fragments. Methionine oxidation and asparagine/glutamine deamidation were taken into account as variable modifications whereas cysteine carbamidomethylation was considered as fixed modification. The maximum number of missed cleavages by trypsin was limited to 2. MS/MS data from duplicate analyses were searched as MUDPIT against NCBInr database restricted to the Chlamydomonas reinhardtii taxonomy (31,910 entries, downloaded in September 2014). For each analysis, peptide false discovery rates (FDRs) were determined by searching against a reversed decoy database and only proteins identified with 2 unique peptides having a FDR < 0.01 were taken into account.

### Publication Abstract
Thiol-based redox post-translational modifications have emerged as important mechanisms of signaling and regulation in all organisms, and thioredoxin plays a key role by controlling the thiol-disulfide status of target proteins. Recent redox proteomic studies revealed hundreds of proteins regulated by glutathionylation and nitrosylation in the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, while much less is known about the thioredoxin interactome in this organism. By combining qualitative and quantitative proteomic analyses, we have comprehensively investigated the Chlamydomonas thioredoxome and 1188 targets have been identified. They participate in a wide range of metabolic pathways and cellular processes. This study broadens not only the redox regulation to new enzymes involved in well-known thioredoxin-regulated metabolic pathways&#xa0;but also sheds light on cellular processes for which data supporting redox regulation are scarce (aromatic amino acid biosynthesis, nuclear transport, etc). Moreover, we characterized 1052 thioredoxin-dependent regulatory sites and showed that these data constitute a valuable resource for future functional studies in Chlamydomonas. By comparing this thioredoxome with proteomic data for glutathionylation and nitrosylation at the protein and cysteine levels, this work confirms the existence of a complex redox regulation network in Chlamydomonas and provides evidence of a tremendous selectivity of redox post-translational modifications for specific cysteine residues.

### Keywords
Redox proteomics, Disulfide bonds, Thioredoxin targets, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Redox regulation

### Affiliations
Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, UMR8226, CNRS, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris

### Submitter
Christophe H. MARCHAND

### Lab Head
Dr Stéphane Lemaire
Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, UMR8226, CNRS, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris


