### Accession
PXD020235

### Title
Comparison of Rheumatoid Arthritis Patient and Control Sample Serum Proteomes

### Description
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune inflammatory joint condition which primarily affects the synovium of joints, characterised by synovial inflammation as well as articular cartilage and underlying bone destruction. Within this study, the proteomes of serum obtained from rheumatoid arthritis patients, and appropriate human controls, were analysed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. ProteoMiner™ equalisation columns were used to deplete high abundant proteins and reduce the protein concentration dynamic range.

### Sample Protocol
Serum Processing and Protein Assay   Serum was thawed on ice and centrifuged at 4°C at 14,000g for 10 min. A Pierce® 660 nm protein assay (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) was used to determine serum protein concentrations.  ProteoMinerTM Column Processing  10 mg of protein was loaded onto ProteoMiner™ Small Capacity bead columns (Bio-Rad Laboratories Ltd., Hemel Hempstead, UK) to achieve peptide-based depletion of the most abundant proteins. Serum samples were rotated for 2 hr at room temperature and centrifuged at 1,000g for 60 s. ProteoMinerTM beads were then washed in phosphate buffered saline (Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, UK), rotated for 5 min and centrifuged at 1,000g for 60 s. The wash step was repeated two further times.  Protein Digestion  25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Fluka Chemicals Ltd., Gillingham, UK) containing 0.05% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters, Elstree, Hertfordshire, UK) was added to peptide bound ProteoMinerTM beads to produce a final volume of 160 µl and heated at 80°C for 10 min. DL-Dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) was added (3 mM final concentration) and incubated at 60°C for 10 min. Iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) was added (9 mM final concentration) and incubated at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. 2 µg of proteomics grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to all samples and rotated for 16 hr at 37°C, followed by a second trypsin supplementation for 2 hr incubation. Digests were centrifuged at 1,000g for 1 min, supernatant removed, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) added (0.5% (v/v) final concentration) and rotated for 30 min at 37°C. Digests were then centrifuged at 13,000g for 15 min at 4°C. To ensure complete protein digestion, 5 µl of each digest was analysed by 1D SDS PAGE and stained with Coomassie Blue (Bio-Rad) following manufacturer instructions.  Label Free LC-MS/MS  Serum digest samples were individually analysed using LC-MS/MS on an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC System (Dionex/Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q ExactiveTM Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Scientific). Tryptic peptides, which were equivalent to 150 ng of protein, were loaded onto the column and run over a 90 min LC gradient.  Sample file Identifications  1-5: Rheumatoid Arthritis (RF positive, Anti-CCP positive) 6-10: Rheumatoid Arthritis (RF positive, Anti-CCP negative) 11-15: Rheumatoid Arthritis (RF negative, Anti-CCP positive) 16-18: Rheumatoid Arthritis (RF negative, Anti-CCP negative) 19-23: Control

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Spectra Processing and Protein Identification Progenesis™ QI 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters) software was used to process raw spectral files and undertake spectral alignment, peak picking, total protein abundance normalisation and peptide/protein quantification. The top five spectra for each feature were exported with peptide and protein identifications carried out with an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.6.2) using the reviewed Homo sapiens database. Search parameters included: peptide mass tolerance, 10.0 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.01 Da; enzyme, trypsin; missed cleavages allowed, one; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) and variable modifications; oxidation (methionine). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% with only proteins identified with > 2 unique peptides used for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disorder of complex disease etiology. Currently available serological diagnostic markers lack in terms of sensitivity and specificity and thus additional biomarkers are warranted for early disease diagnosis and management. We aimed to screen and compare serum proteome profiles of rheumatoid arthritis serotypes with healthy controls in the Pakistani population for identification of potential disease biomarkers. Serum samples from rheumatoid arthritis patients and healthy controls were enriched for low abundance proteins using ProteoMinerTM columns. Rheumatoid arthritis patients were assigned to one of the four serotypes based on anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies and rheumatoid factor. Serum protein profiles were analyzed via liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. The changes in the protein abundances were determined using label-free quantification software ProgenesisQITM followed by pathway analysis. Findings were validated in an independent cohort of patients and healthy controls using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. A total of 213 proteins were identified. Comparative analysis of all groups (false discovery rate &lt; 0.05, &gt;2-fold change, and identified with &#x2265;2 unique peptides) identified ten proteins that were differentially expressed between rheumatoid arthritis serotypes and healthy controls including pregnancy zone protein, selenoprotein P, C4b-binding protein beta chain, apolipoprotein M, N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase, catalytic chain, oncoprotein-induced transcript 3 protein, Carboxypeptidase N subunit 2, Apolipoprotein C-I and Apolipoprotein C-III. Pathway analysis predicted inhibition of liver X receptor/retinoid X receptor activation pathway and production of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species pathway in macrophages in all serotypes. A catalogue of potential serum biomarkers for rheumatoid arthritis were identified. These biomarkers can be further evaluated in larger cohorts from different populations for their diagnostic and prognostic potential.

### Keywords
Rheumatoid arthritis, Proteomics, Serum, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom

### Submitter
James Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Mandy Jayne Peffers
Institute of Life Course and Medical Sciences, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom


