### Accession
PXD015279

### Title
Misfolded SOD1 binds the ubiquitin ligase TRAF6

### Description
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal disease, characterized by the selective loss of motor neurons. Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) are the second most common cause of ALS and it is now well accepted that they result in a gain of toxicity due to protein misfolding. We previously demonstrated in the SOD1G93A rat model that misfolded SOD1 exists as distinct conformers and deposits on mitochondrial subpopulations. Here, using SOD1G93A rats coupled with conformation-restricted antibodies for misfolded SOD1 (AMF7-63 and B8H10), we identified the interactomes of the mitochondrial pools of misfolded SOD1. This strategy identified binding partners that uniquely interacted with either AMF7-63- or B8H10-reactive SOD1 conformers as well as a high proportion of interactors common to both conformers. Of this latter set, we identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) and determined that exposure of the SOD1 functional loops facilitates this interaction. However, this conformational criterion is not universally fulfilled by all SOD1 mutants and differentiates TRAF6-interacting from non-interacting SOD1 mutants. Functionally, TRAF6 stimulates mutant SOD1 polyubiquitination and aggregation. While TRAF6 E3 ubiquitin ligase activity is required for the former, it is dispensable for the latter, indicating that the polyubiquitination and aggregation of mutant SOD1 mediated by TRAF6 are independent events. We propose that misfolded SOD1 binding to TRAF6 may be relevant to ALS disease.

### Sample Protocol
Rabbit anti-AMF7-63 (concentration 1.54 µg/µl) was coupled to Protein A Dynabeads (Invitrogen, 10002D) at full saturation according to bead binding capacity given by the manufacturer (6.15 µl per 40 µl beads). Mouse anti-B8H10 (concentration not provided by the manufacturer) was coupled to Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen, 10004D) at equivalent volume to AMF7-63. Beads coupled to isotype-matched ChromPure whole molecule IgGs (Jackson ImmunoResearch, 015-000-003 or 011-000-003) at full saturation were used as control. B8H10 and AMF7-63-coupled beads were crosslinked with BS3 (ThermoFisher Scientific, 21580), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Beads were then tumbled with 150 µg spinal cord mitochondria isolated from symptomatic SOD1G93A rats at 1 µg/µl final protein concentration in co-immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% v/v NP-40) overnight at 4°C. The antigen-bound beads were washed three times with co-IP buffer and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. For MS analysis , all samples were reduced on-bead with 5 mM DTT for 10 min at 95°C, alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 1hr at ambient temperature and trypsin-digested on-column for 18 hours at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS and data was analyzed as previously published (84)

### Data Protocol
MGF data was submitted to Mascot to create .dat results file.

### Publication Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal disease, characterized by the selective loss of motor neurons leading to paralysis. Mutations in the gene encoding superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) are the second most common cause of familial ALS, and considerable evidence suggests that these mutations result in an increase in toxicity due to protein misfolding. We previously demonstrated in the SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> rat model that misfolded SOD1 exists as distinct conformers and forms deposits on mitochondrial subpopulations. Here, using SOD1<sup>G93A</sup> rats and conformation-restricted antibodies specific for misfolded SOD1 (B8H10 and AMF7-63), we identified the interactomes of the mitochondrial pools of misfolded SOD1. This strategy identified binding proteins that uniquely interacted with either AMF7-63 or B8H10-reactive SOD1 conformers as well as a high proportion of interactors common to both conformers. Of this latter set, we identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) as a SOD1 interactor, and we determined that exposure of the SOD1 functional loops facilitates this interaction. Of note, this conformational change was not universally fulfilled by all SOD1 variants and differentiated TRAF6 interacting from TRAF6 noninteracting SOD1 variants. Functionally, TRAF6 stimulated polyubiquitination and aggregation of the interacting SOD1 variants. TRAF6 E3 ubiquitin ligase activity was required for the former but was dispensable for the latter, indicating that TRAF6-mediated polyubiquitination and aggregation of the SOD1 variants are independent events. We propose that the interaction between misfolded SOD1 and TRAF6 may be relevant to the etiology of ALS.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Aggregation, Mitochondria, Protein misfolding, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als), Superoxide dismutase 1 (sod1), Tnf receptor-associated factor 6 (traf6)

### Affiliations
National Research Council Ottawa, Canada
National Research Council of Canada

### Submitter
Arsalan Haqqani

### Lab Head
Dr Arsalan Haqqani
National Research Council Ottawa, Canada


