### Accession
PXD001256

### Title
Diethylation

### Description
In this study we compared diethylation using acetaldehyde-13C2/13C1 and acetaldehyde-2H4/1H4. Light and heavy labeled samples were combined in a ratio of 1:1 and analyzed on a LC-MSMS system using an OrbitrapXL. We analyzed ten techical replicates of each labeling version (13C/12C and 2H/1H) and compared them in regards of labeling yield, quantification accuracy and precision.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cell lyastes were preicpitated with ice cold acedified acetone/methanlol. Resuspended proteins were reduced and aclylated followed by trypsin digestion over night. Peptides were split in half and diethylated using acetaldehyde-13C2 and 13C1 (or acetaldehyde-2H4/1H4) and combined again, resulting in a 1:1 ratio.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed, identified and quantified using MaxQant 1.3.0.5. In MaxQuant, labels for N-terminal and lysine diethylation were light (H(8) C(4); 56.063 Da) and heavy (H(8) Cx(4); 60.076 Da). Oxidation of methionines and protein N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification. The UniProt human Complete proteome set (X sequences, 2014_02) including reversed sequences and common contaminants were used for protein identification. Further settings in MaxQuant were left with default parameters with FDR < 1%, except that the option ‘Calculate peak properties’ was checked.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diethylation, Reductive amination, Orbitrapxl, Retention time shift, Stable isotope labeling

### Affiliations
UiO
University of Oslo, The Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Christian Koehler

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Bernd Thiede
University of Oslo, The Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, Norway


