### Accession
PXD035568

### Title
Secreted larval antigens from N. brasiliensis

### Description
In this study, we performed mass spectrometry of secreted proteins from infective N. brasiliensis (Nb) L3 stage larvae (NES) to identify new antigens with the potential to elicit protective immunity against Nb infection. Also, immune serum of Nb infected mice was used to precipitate NES antigen.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing for LC-MS/MS analysis NES samples (1-10 µg) were prepared in 5x Laemmli buffer without β-mercaptoethanol (non-reducing condition), heated (95°C, 5 min) and analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Following visualization of proteins using colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue, gel lanes were cut into 6 slices covering approx. the mass range between 10 to 95 kDa. Slices were washed and destained by alternatingly incubating them with 10 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN)/10 mM NH4HCO3 (10 min at room temperature (RT) each). Cysteine residues were reduced (5 mM TCEP/10 mM NH4HCO3, 30 min at RT) and alkylated (50 mM 2-chloroacetamid/10 mM NH4HCO3; 30 min at RT) followed by proteolytic digestion of proteins using trypsin (60 ng per slice; overnight at 37°C). Peptides were eluted with 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/50% (v/v) ACN, dried in vacuo, resuspended in 30 μl 0.1% TFA and desalted with in-house prepared STAGE tips prior to LC-MS analysis. If immunoprecipitation (IP) was applied, NES antigen was precipitated by IgG1 antibodies from serum of naïve, primary, secondary, or three times N. brasiliensis infected mice, or an experimental Nb-antibody, by crosslinking to magnetic Protein A/G Beads (Thermo Fischer Scientific), prior to above described sample processing for LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis  Reversed-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was performed using the UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex LC Packings/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) coupled online to a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) instrument. The UHPLC system was equipped with two C18 μ-precolumns (Ø 0.3 mm × 5 mm; PepMap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an Acclaim PepMap™ analytical column (ID: 75 μm x 500 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Dionex LC Packings/Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides eluting from the LC column were transferred to a fused silica emitter for electrospray ionization using a Nanospray Flex ion source with DirectJunctionTM adaptor (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and applying a spray voltage of 1.5 kV and a capillary temperature of 200°C. The MS instrument was externally calibrated using standard compounds and equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source and a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Fischer Scientific). MS parameters were as follows: MS scan range, m/z 375–1,700; resolution, 70,000 (at m/z 200); target value, 3 x 106 ions; max injection time, 60 ms; TOP12-higher-energy collisional dissociation of multiply charged peptides; NCE of 28%; target value of 1 x 105, maximum injection time of 120 ms; dynamic exclusion time of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
For this study, the MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 was used with the UniProt database for Nippostrongylus brasiliensis, Taxonomy ID 27835, (release 2020_05; 22636 protein entries). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. Trypsin was set as proteolytic enzyme (≤2 missed cleavages). Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus was allowed as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied on both peptide (on modified peptides separately) and protein lists.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hookworms, Basophils, Cap domain, Scp/taps protein

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Functional Proteomics Lab, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Germany


