### Accession
PXD020676

### Title
The catalytic mechanism of vitamin K epoxide reduction in a cellular environment

### Description
Vitamin K epoxide reductases (VKOR) constitute a major family of integral membrane thiol oxidoreductases. In humans, VKOR sustains blood coagulation and bone mineralization through the vitamin K cycle. Previous chemical models assumed that the catalysis of human VKOR (hVKOR) starts from a fully reduced active site. This state, however, constitutes only a minor cellular fraction (5.6%). Thus, how hVKOR catalysis is carried out in the cellular environment remains largely unknown. Here we use quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) and electrophoretic mobility analysis to show that KO forms a covalent complex with a cysteine mutant mimicking hVKOR in a partially oxidized state. Trapping of this covalent reaction intermediate suggests that the partially oxidized state is catalytically active in cells. To investigate this activity, we analyze the correlation between the cellular activity and the cellular cysteine status of hVKOR. We find that the partially oxidized hVKOR has a considerably lower activity than hVKOR with a fully reduced active site. Although there are more partially oxidized hVKOR than fully reduced hVKOR in cells, these two reactive states contribute about equally to the overall hVKOR activity, and hVKOR catalysis can initiate from either of these states. Overall, the combination of MS quantification and biochemical analyses reveal the catalytic mechanism of this integral membrane enzyme in a cellular environment.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for MS quantification were prepared as previously described . Cells stably expressing wild-type and mutant hVKOR were grown on 15 cm plates, and each MS sample required the amount of cells from approximately five plates. At 90-100% cell confluence, KO (10 μM final concentration) was added to the medium and incubated with the cells for 5 h. The cells were washed once with ice-cold PBS buffer. Subsequently, 1.8 mL labeling buffer (20 mM NEM, 1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, and protease inhibitor cocktail) was added. The plates were left on ice for 20 min with frequent shaking to facilitate the NEM reaction with free cysteines. The cell lysate was collected to a new tube, and 1 M DTT (100 mM final concentration) was added to quench the NEM reaction. This mixture was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was loaded onto a G-25 desalting column to remove DTT and NEM. The wild-type or mutant hVKOR proteins were purified with anti-flag M2 resin (Sigma), precipitated by trichloroacetic acid, and applied to reducing SDS-PAGE. The hVKOR protein band was excised for in-gel digestion.  In-gel digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis were performed as previously described . Briefly, hVKOR was in-gel reduced with 5 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at 56°C. After acetone washing, the gel pieces were incubated with 10 mM NEM-d5 for 60 min at room temperature to label the cysteines not blocked by NEM. The isotopically labeled protein was subjected to in-gel protease digestion by chymotrypsin. The peptides released from the in-gel digestion were directly used for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
An Eksigent 2D nano LC system (Eksigent Technilogies, Dublin, CA) and a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) were used for LC-MS/MS analysis of the chymotryptic peptides. The parameters were modified from those described previously (13). Briefly, the peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100 µm x 2 cm, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific Dionex) at a flow rate of 4.5 µL/min with 0.1% formic acid in water. Subsequently, the peptides were separated on a reversed-phase column (0.0075 mm x 180 mm) packed in house using Michrom Magic C18 material (5 µm particle size and 200 Å pore size). An LC gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) was delivered at a flow rate of 260 nL/min for 0-10% in 5 min and 10-40% in 95 min. Mass spectra (m/z range 350-2000) of the eluted peptides were acquired at high mass resolving power (50,000 for ions of m/z 400). The seven most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap without charge state rejection. Cysteine-containing peptides were selected for the analysis of NEM isotopic modification, as previously described (13,14). Briefly, the ion chromatogram was extracted for each peptide m/z, and the peak area was measured using Xcalibur Qualbrowser. The peak area of NEM-d5 modified peptide was divided by the summed peak areas of NEM and NEM-d5 modified peptides (i.e., NEM-d5 / (NEM-d5 + NEM)).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human vkor, Lc/ms/ms, Catalytic mechanism

### Affiliations
Henan University of Science and Technology
Washington University in Saint Louis

### Submitter
Guomin Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Weikai Li
Washington University in Saint Louis


