### Accession
PXD021084

### Title
A novel pathway for inositol conversion into propionate by Anaerostipes supports its potential health impact.

### Description
A novel propionate production pathway from inositol by commensal Anaerostipes which is known as intestinal butyrate producer was studied. The physiological relevance of this pathway was explored in human gut as well as potential health impact of Anaerostipes species to the human host.

### Sample Protocol
A. rhamnosivorans was grown in YCFA medium supplemented with either 40mM myo-inositol or 40mM rhamnose, and each condition was performed in 4 biological replicates. After 17 hours, cells (100 mL) were pelleted by centrifugation at 4700g at 4 °C for 20 min, washed and re-suspended in 0.5 mL Tris buffer (pH 8.0). Cells were sonicated and proteins were reduced (dithiothreitol), unfolded (urea), alkylated (acrylamide) and digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were measured by nLC - Q Exactive HF-X MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
We describe the anaerobic conversion of inositol stereoisomers to propionate and acetate by the abundant intestinal genus Anaerostipes. A inositol pathway was elucidated by nuclear magnetic resonance using [<sup>13</sup>C]-inositols, mass spectrometry and proteogenomic analyses in A. rhamnosivorans, identifying 3-oxoacid CoA transferase as a key enzyme involved in both 3-oxopropionyl-CoA and propionate formation. This pathway also allowed conversion of phytate-derived inositol into propionate as shown with [<sup>13</sup>C]-phytate in fecal samples amended with A. rhamnosivorans. Metabolic and (meta)genomic analyses explained the adaptation of Anaerostipes spp. to inositol-containing substrates and identified a propionate-production gene cluster to be inversely associated with metabolic biomarkers in (pre)diabetes cohorts. Co-administration of myo-inositol with live A. rhamnosivorans in western-diet fed mice reduced fasting-glucose levels comparing to heat-killed A. rhamnosivorans after 6-weeks treatment. Altogether, these data suggest a potential beneficial role for intestinal Anaerostipes spp. in promoting host health.

### Keywords
Human microbiome, Inositol, Propionate, Anaerostipes

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


