### Accession
PXD004933

### Title
Analysis of FAM65A interactions

### Description
We identified FAM65A as a novel interactor of RHOA. To reveal other binding partners of FAM65A, we carried out a quantitative IP-MS, using SILAC labelled HeLa cells ectopically expressing GFP-FAM65A or GFP alone as control. Experiments were performed in duplicate with switched labelling and specific interactors of FAM65A were revealed from background binders using the heavy to light SILAC enrichments.

### Sample Protocol
Heavy and light SILAC labelled HeLa cells were each seeded on 4 x 10cm dishes (to be 50% confluent the next day). The next day, two dishes from each label were transfected with GFP-only or GFP-FAM65A expression vector DNAs. After 24 hours, cells were washed with PBS and lysed (0.5ml per dish)using the lysis buffer from µMACS GFP Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) supplemented with 10mM MgCl2 and protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche). The lysates were spun and cleared(8000g for 20 minutes), before being subjected to immunoprecipitation (IP) using the µMACS GFP Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec). IPs were each washed with 1ml of lysis buffer before being eluted in (2%SDS, 50mM Tris pH 7.5, 100mM DTT). Eluates from opposing labels of GFP-FAM65A and GFP IPs were then mixed together and Trypsin digested using Filter Assisted Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Following digestion, peptides were desalted using zip-tip C18 clean-up tips (Millipore) and analysed by LC-MS/MS in duplicate (two injections per IP mix)as described before (Mardakheh et al., 2015). Briefly, 40% of each fraction was analysed as 4μL injections using HP1200 reversed phase chromatography platform (Agilent) coupled with an Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were resolved on a 75 μm I.D. C18 Pepmap column with 3 μm particle size (LC Packings/Dionex) over 90 min using a linear gradient of 96:4 to 50:50 buffer A:B (buffer A: 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) at 300nL/min. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization using 1.9 kV applied directly to the post-column LC eluent via a microtee built into the nanospray source. Sample was infused into the mass spectrometer using a 20 μm I.D., 10 μm tapered tip non-coated SilicaTip emitter (New Objectives). The ion transfer tube was heated to 200°C and the S-lens set to 60%. MS/MS were acquired using data dependent acquisition to sequence the top 20 most intense ions using standard ion trap scans. Automatic gain control was set to 1,000,000 for FT-MS and 30,000 for IT-MS/MS, full FT-MS maximum inject time was 500ms and normalized collision energy was set to 35% with an activation time of 10ms. Wideband activation was used to co-fragment precursor ions undergoing neutral loss of up to -20 m/z from the parent ion, including loss of water/ammonia. MS/MS was acquired for selected precursor ions with a single repeat count followed by dynamic exclusion with a 10ppm mass window for 15s based on a maximal exclusion list of 500 entries.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometry raw files were searched and quantified by Maxquant software (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011), as described previously (Mardakheh et al., 2015). Briefly, the search was performed using the Andromeda search engine, against the Human IPI database (version 3.68). Mass tolerance filters of 6ppm and 0.5Da were used for precursor and fragment masses, respectively. A minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids was used. Second-peptide search, and match between runs (2 minutes window), and the re-quantify option, were all enabled. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, Asparagine deamidation, and di-Glycine(K) were added as variable modifications while carbamidomethylation was considered as a fixed modification on Cysteine. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed, and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications. An overall minimum ratio count (H/L) of 2 per protein was used. iBAQ absolute quantification was also performed. Only razor or unique unmodified peptides as well as Methionine oxidized and N-terminally acetylated peptides were used for SILAC quantifications. Data analysis on the search results was performed by Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016), using the Maxquant 'protein groups' output file as input. The median subtracted normalized ratios were used for all downstream data analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms; silac; fam65a; rho

### Affiliations
Division of Cancer Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, The United Kingdom.
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J Marshall
Division of Cancer Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London SW3 6JB, The United Kingdom.


