### Accession
PXD032918

### Title
Operation of a TCA cycle subnetwork in the mammalian nucleus

### Description
Nucleic acid and histone modifications critically depend on central metabolism for substrates and co-factors. Although a few enzymes related to the formation of these required metabolites have been reported in the nucleus, the corresponding metabolic pathways are considered to function elsewhere in the cell. Here we show that a substantial part of the mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, the biosynthetic hub of epigenetic modification factors, is operational also in the nucleus. Using 13C-tracer analysis, we identified activity of glutamine-to-fumarate, citrate-to-succinate, and glutamine-to-aspartate routes in the nuclei of HeLa cells. Proximity labeling mass-spectrometry revealed a spatial vicinity of the involved enzymes with core nuclear proteins, supporting their nuclear location. We further show nuclear localization of aconitase 2 and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase in mouse embryonic stem cells. Together, our results demonstrate operation of an extended metabolic pathway in the nucleus warranting a revision of the canonical view on metabolic compartmentalization and gene expression regulation. This dataset includes the data relating to the use of LOPIT to determine the subcellular localisation of succinylated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments to determine the subcellular localization of unmodified and succinylated peptides were performed using the LOPIT-DC protocol (Geladaki et al 2019, Nature Communications  doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-08191-w), with the following modifications. Cell lysis buffer consisted of 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM magnesium acetate, cOmplete mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor (Roche), Phosphatase Inhibitor (PhosStop Roche) and Deacetylation Inhibition Cocktail (Santa Cruz) supplemented with 5 μM suramin sodium (Sigma). Cell lysis was performed with ball bearing homogenizer (isobiotec) where each 1.5 mL of cells was passed through homogenizer chamber 25 times with 12 μm ball-bearing clearance size. No ‘clearance’ spin at 200 x g was performed. Instead, cell lysates were immediately subjected to the following centrifugation speeds at 4oC, with supernatants removed and subjected to further centrifugations to yield 9 pellet fractions and one final supernatant fraction: 100 x g (10 min), 500 x g (5 min), 1000 x g (10 min), 3000 x g (10 min), 5000 x g (10 min), 9,000 x g (15 min), 15,000 x g (15 min), 30,000 x g (20 min), 120,000 x g (45 min). Collected fractions were stored at -20oC. Pellets were solubilized using a membrane solubilization buffer which contained 8M Urea, 0.2 % (wt/vol) SDS, 50mM HEPES (pH 8.5). Protein concentration quantitation was performed with BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer instructions and precipitated with ethanol/acetone overnight to remove urea and protease inhibitors that could interfere with protein digestion by addition of ice-cold ethanol and ice-cold acetone at 4:4:1 ratio (v:v:v) to the fraction, vortex and incubation at -20oC overnight. Samples were then centrifuged at 16000 x g for 15 min (4oC) and the supernatant discarded. Precipitated subcellular fractions were solubilised in 100-400 μL of 100 mM TEAB, reduced with 15 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour at 37°C followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Two step digestion was performed, first with 3 μg of trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C followed by further digestion with 1 μg of trypsin for 4 h. Fractions were acidified with TFA (0.1% final concentration), centrifuged to pellet any debris and peptide supernatant desalted. For peptide clean-up, peptide desalting spin columns (Pierce) were used, according to the manufacturer's guideline. Collected peptides from the ten subcellular fractions were quantified with Qubit (manufacturers details) and 80 μg of peptides from each fraction were taken and dried before TMT labelling according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. TMT-labelled fractions were combined in equal proportions (multiplexed). 10% of each multiplex was removed for the total proteome analysis. Succinylated peptides were enriched from the remaining 90%. Peptides were first desalted with Peptide Desalting Spin Column (Pierce) according to manufacturer’s guideline and dried, before enrichment using PTMScan Succinyl-Lysine Motif kit (Cell Signalling Technologies; batch number 13605BC) following manufacturer’s guidelines except that sample and antibody-bead were incubated for 24 hours instead of 2 hours. Alkaline reverse-phase pre-fractionation of the total proteome was performed as detailed in (Geladaki et al 2019). For downstream MS analysis, the fractions corresponding to each TMT 10-plex set were orthogonally combined into 15 samples by combining pairs of fractions which eluted at different time points during the gradient. These fractions were dried down and solubilised in 0.1 % formic acid where approximately 1.5 μg of peptides were loaded per mass spectrometry run, Fractions were dried down and solubilized in 0.1 % formic acid. 1.5 μg of peptides was loaded per mass spectrometry run.  For the total proteome fractions, peptide quantification by SPS-MS3 on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was performed as described in Geladaki et al 2019 , except that the orbitrap resolution for SPS ions was set to 50,000 and the AGC target was set to 200,000. For the succinyl-enriched sample, data was acquired in a positive ion mode, with a 240 minutes run, using the following chromatography gradient: 3 min at 2 % solvent B, 212 min linear gradient 2 % to 40 % solvent B, 0.3 min linear gradient 40 % to 90 % solvent B, 9.7 min at 9 0%solvent B, 0.3 min linear gradient 90 % to 2 % buffer B and 14.7 min at 2 % buffer B, where solvent A was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid and solvent B was 8 0% (v/v) acetonitrile + 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. Ions were measured as per the total proteome fractions except that the MS1 scan range was m/z 400-1400 Da and precursor ions were fragmented using Higher Energy Collisional-Induced Dissociation (HCD) (Normalised Collision Energy of 32 %). The succinyl enriched sample was injected twice in the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data processing was performed as described in (Geladaki et al 2019) except using Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 (Thermo Scientific), except that MS/MS accuracy was set to 0.5 Da and for succinyl peptide enriched sample, succinylation of lysine was included as variable modifications. Raw files were searched against the reference Homo sapiens database (UP000005640; downloaded from https://www.uniprot.org, April 2018) and common contaminant from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) v1.0 (48 sequences, adapted from the Global Proteome Machine repository, https://www.thegpm.org/crap/), using Proteome Discoverer with SequestHF algorithm. The succinyl enriched sample technical replicas were combined into a single output

### Publication Abstract
Nucleic acid and histone modifications critically depend on the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle for substrates and cofactors. Although a few TCA cycle enzymes have been reported in the nucleus, the corresponding pathways are considered to operate in mitochondria. Here, we show that a part of the TCA cycle is operational also in the nucleus. Using <sup>13</sup>C-tracer analysis, we identified activity of glutamine-to-fumarate, citrate-to-succinate, and glutamine-to-aspartate routes in the nuclei of <i>HeLa</i> cells. Proximity labeling mass spectrometry revealed a spatial vicinity of the involved enzymes with core nuclear proteins. We further show nuclear localization of aconitase 2 and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase in mouse embryonic stem cells. Nuclear localization of the latter enzyme, which produces succinyl-CoA, changed from pluripotency to a differentiated state with accompanying changes in the nuclear protein succinylation. Together, our results demonstrate operation of an extended metabolic pathway in the nucleus, warranting a revision of the canonical view on metabolic compartmentalization.

### Keywords
Subcellular localisation, Spatial proteomics, Succinylation, Lopit

### Affiliations
MRC Toxicology Unit Gleeson Building Tennis Court Road Cambridge  CB2 1QR
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Kathryn Lilley

### Lab Head
Dr Kiran Patil
MRC Toxicology Unit Gleeson Building Tennis Court Road Cambridge  CB2 1QR


