### Accession
PXD014374

### Title
Proteomic assessments of  muscle tissues in cattle that are diet restricted and subsequently undergo compensatory growth

### Description
Compensatory growth is a naturally occurring accelerated growth phenomenon observed in cattle upon re-alimentation following a prior period of dietary restriction (Hornick et al., 2000). It is incorporated into man production systems as a method to reduce feed costs and consequently is economically important for animal production systems. The goal of our research project is to identify biomarkers for cattle with a superior ability to display compensatory growth. Transcriptional profiling studies of liver and muscle tissues in cattle have shown large numbers of differentially expressed genes in animals undergoing dietary restriction and subsequent compensatory growth when compared to a continuously-fed ad libitum control group of cattle (Connor et al., 2010; Keogh et al., 2016a,b). Given the identification of differential expression at the transcript level, the intended project aims to evaluate potential differences in protein abundance between animals that are diet restricted and subsequently undergo compensatory growth compared to a continuously-fed ad libitum control group of cattle. Differences in genes that are apparent at both the protein and the transcript level are more likely to be transferable across breed type (Snelling et al., 2013) and consequently have more utility for incorporation within genomic selection breeding programs for cattle evaluations.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen samples (100 mg) were removed with a scalpel blade and placed in tubes containing 0.5 g of beads. Samples were homogenized with a Percellys 24 homogenizer at 2 x 20 seconds at 6500 × g with 1 ml of extraction buffer. Samples were then vortexed for 1 minute and subsequently mixed, following which samples were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 10 minutes. After centrifugation, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and protein concentrations determined using the 2D Quant kit.The isolated proteins were solubilized and this process was enhanced by using High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 1 minute. Proteins were then diluted with water in a 1:10 dilution. Samples were then prepared using a commercial iSt Kit (PreOmics, Germany). In brief, 100 µg of protein was solubilized in the ‘Lyse’ buffer. This solution was then boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes, after which it was then processed with HIFU for 30 seconds. Resulting solution was then transferred to the cartridge. The proteins were then digested by adding 50 µl of the ‘Digest’ solution. The samples were then incubated with the ‘digest’ solution at 37 °C for 60 minutes following which 100 µl of ‘Stop’ solution was added to stop the digestion process. The peptides in the cartridge were retained by the iST-filter and the solutions were removed by centrifuging at 3800 g. Lastly, the resulting peptides were washed, eluted, dried and re-solubilised in 20 µl of buffer containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid for subsequent Liquid Chromotrophy (LC) -Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis.All MS analysis was performed in random order on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective, USA) and attached to an M-Class Ultra Performance Liquid Chromotogrphy (Waters, Milford, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The raw data from MS was subsequently processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3). Protein identification was then carried out using the integrated Andromeda search engine. In the muscle study resulting spectra were scanned against a Uniprot Bos Taurus reference proteome, (taxonomy 9913, canonical version from 17-08-2017) concatenated to its reversed decoyed FASTA database and common protein contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
Compensatory growth (CG) is a naturally occurring physiological process whereby an animal has the ability to undergo enhanced growth following a period of restricted feeding. This studies objective was to identify key proteins involved in the expression of CG. Forty Holstein Friesian bulls were equally assigned to one of four groups. R1 and R2 groups were subjected to restricted feed allowance for 125 days (Period 1). A1 and A2 animals had ad libitum access to feed in Period 1. Following Period 1, all animals from R1 and A1 were slaughtered. Remaining animals (R2 and A2) were slaughtered following ad libitum access to feed for successive 55 days (Period 2). M. longissimus dorsi samples were collected at slaughter from all animals. Proteins were isolated from samples and subjected to label-free mass spectrometry proteomic quantification. Proteins which were differentially abundant during CG (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;39) were involved in cellular binding processes, oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial function. There was also evidence for up regulation of three pathways involved in nucleotide biosynthesis. Genetic variants in or regulating genes pertaining to proteins identified in this study may hold potential for use as DNA based biomarkers for genomic selection of animals with a greater ability to undergo CG.

### Keywords
Compensatory growth, Bovine, Lc/ms-ms

### Affiliations
Teagasc Grange
Animal Bioscience Department, Teagasc

### Submitter
Yvonne Mullins

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Sinead Waters
Animal Bioscience Department, Teagasc


