### Accession
PXD024745

### Title
Comparison of in-gel digestion methods for histone PTM analysis

### Description
In order to optimize the histone digestion procedure for low-abundance clinical samples, we compared different in-gel digestion protocols. Histones are usually digested in-gel using “Arg-C-like” strategies, which involve chemical acylation of lysines followed by trypsin digestion (17). Acylated lysines are not recognized by trypsin, which -as a consequence- cuts only at the C-terminus of arginines and generates peptides of suitable length for MS analysis. We compared four Arg-C-like protocols: 1) D3 protocol (deuterated acetic anhydride as acylating agent); 2) PRO protocol (propionic anhydride as acylating agent); 3)   PRO-PRO protocol (propionic anhydride as acylating agent and peptide N-terminal derivatization); 4) PRO-PIC protocol (propionic anhydride as acylating agent and phenyl-isocyanate as peptide N-terminal derivatization). We also used an Arg-C in solution digestion as a reference, and tested the performance of the methods with decreasing sample amounts.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture. The breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-468 was grown in in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) (Lonza) supplemented with 10% South American (SA) FBS (Lonza). Human glioblastoma cells were obtained as previously described. In some cases, MDA-MB-468 were treated with DMSO or 15 nM Panobinostat (Sigma-Aldrich, in DMSO) for 4 hours.  Histone enrichment. Histones were enriched from primary glioblastoma cells by resuspending 0.5-2*106 cells in 1 ml of PBS buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors. Nuclei were isolated through a 10-min centrifugation at 2300×g, resuspended in 100 ul of the same buffer containing 0.1% SDS and incubated for few minutes at 37°C in the presence of 250 U of benzonase to digest nucleic acids. Histones were purified from the MDA-MB-468  cell line through the same protocol, with the addition of  an acidic extraction step.  Histone digestion. About 5 μg of histones per run per sample were mixed with an approximately equal amount of super-SILAC mix and separated on a 17% SDS-PAGE gel. For in-gel digestions, a band corresponding to the histone octamer (H3, H4, H2A, H2B) was excised, chemically alkylated with D6-acetic anhydride (D3-Ac protocol) or propyonic anydride (PRO, PRO-PRO and PRO-PIC protocols) and in-gel digested with trypsin. In addition, for the PRO-PRO and PRO-PIC protocol, after elution the samples were concentrated to a volume below 3 ul, diluted to 9 ul with water and derivatized with PIC or propionic anhydride. The samples were buffered to pH 8.5 by adding 1 μl of 1 M Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer, 3 μl of a freshly prepared 1% v/v PIC solution in acetonitrile were added (17 mM final concentration) and the mixture was incubated for 60 min at 37 °C. Finally, the samples were acidified by addition 8 μl of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Derivatization with propionic anhydride was performed by adding 1 μl of a 1:100 dilution of propionic anhydride in ddH2O, vortexing and incubating for 2 min at room temperature. The reaction was stopped by adding 1 μl of 80 Mm hydroxylamine for 20 min at room temperature and the samples acidified with TFA as described above. Arg-C in-solution digestions were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol, overnight at 37°C. All samples were desalted on handmade StageTips.  LC-MS/MS analysis of histone PTMs. Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientic), 25-cm long (inner diameter 75 µm, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles), which was connected online to a Q Exactive HF or a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) instrument through an EASY-Spray™ Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN plus 0.1% FA. Peptides were injected in an aqueous 1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and were separated with a 50-min linear gradient of 0–35% solvent B for in-gel digested samples, a 50-min linear gradient of 10–45% for PRO-PIC digested samples, and a 70-min linear gradient of 0–40% for Arg-C digested samples, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The Q Exactive instruments were operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1350) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector with a resolution of 60,000-70,000 at m/z 200. The 10-12 most intense peptide ions with charge states comprised between 2 and 4 were sequentially isolated to a target value for MS1 of 3×106 and fragmented by HCD with a normalized collision energy setting of 28%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 msec for full scans and 80 msec for MS/MS, and the target value for MS/MS was set to 1×105. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 10 sec, and the standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were as follows: spray voltage of 1.8 kV, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow.

### Data Protocol
Histone PTM data analysis. Acquired RAW data were analyzed using the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.5.2.8. The Uniprot HUMAN_histones 1502 database was used for histone peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to Arg-C. The estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set at a maximum of 1%.  The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor and fragment ions. One missed cleavage was allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Variable modifications for in-solution Arg-C digestions were lysine monomethylation (+14.016), dimethylation (+28.031 Da), trimethylation (+42.046 Da), and acetylation (+42.010 Da). Variable modifications for the D6-Ac and PRO protocols include D3-acetylation/propionylation (+45.0294 /+56.0262 Da), lysine monomethylation with D3-acetylation/propionylation (+59.0454/+70.0422), dimethylation, trimethylation and lysine acetylation. Variable modifications for the PRO-PIC and PRO-PRO protocols include lysine propionylation, monomethylation-propionylation, dimethylation, trimethylation and acetylation, and N-terminal PIC labeling (+119.0371 Da) or N-terminal propyonilation (+56.0262 Da), respectively. To reduce the search time and the rate of false positives, which increase with increasing the number of variable modifications included in the database search, the raw data were analyzed through multiple parallel MaxQuant jobs, setting different combinations of variable modifications. Data from PRO-PIC experiments were searched using EpiProfile 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone post-translationa modification, Epigenetics

### Affiliations
European Institute of Oncology
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology


