### Accession
PXD010822

### Title
Stress-induced changes in the S-palmitoylation and S-nitrosylation of proteins involved in synaptic plasticity

### Description
Summary The precise regulation of synaptic integrity is critical for neuronal network connectivity and proper brain function. Essential aspects of the activity and localization of synaptic proteins are regulated by posttranslational modifications. S-palmitoylation is a reversible covalent modification of the cysteine with palmitate. It modulates affinity of the protein for cell membranes and membranous compartments. Intracellular palmitoylation dynamics are regulated by other posttranslational modifications, such as S-nitrosylation. Still unclear, however, are the ways in which this crosstalk is affected in brain pathology, such as stress-related disorders. Using a newly developed mass spectrometry-based approach (Palmitoylation And Nitrosylation Interplay Monitoring), we analyzed the endogenous S-palmitoylation and S-nitrosylation of postsynaptic density proteins at the level of specific single cysteines in a mouse model of chronic stress. Our results suggest that atypical mechanism of crosstalk between the S-palmitoylation and S-nitrosylation of synaptic proteins might be one of the major events associated with chronic stress disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptosomes were prepared from the brains of control and stressed mice as previously describe (Zareba-Koziol et al., 2014). After euthanasia by cervical dislocation, the mice were decapitated. The brains were immediately removed and homogenized using a Dounce homogenizer in 6 ml of buffer A that contained 5 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 0.32 M sucrose, 0.2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 50 mM NEM (a free thiol blocking reagent), and protease inhibitor cocktail. The homogenate was centrifuged at 2,500  g for 5 min, yielding a pellet and supernatant fractions. The supernatant was then centrifuged at 12,000  g for 5 min. The pellet was resuspended in buffer A, placed on a discontinuous Ficoll gradient (4%, 6%, and 13%), and centrifuged at 70,000  g for 45 min. The synaptosomal fraction was collected in buffer A and centrifuged at 20,000  g for 20 min. The pellet corresponded to the synaptoneurosome fraction.  Postsynaptic density fraction isolation Isolated synaptoneurosomes were further diluted with 5 ml of 1% TritonX-100 in 32 mM sucrose and 12 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.1). The sample was stirred for 15 min in the same open-top tube in a 4C cold room and then centrifuged at 33,000  g for 20 min. The pellet was resuspended with 500 l of buffer solution and layered onto a sucrose gradient that contained 4 ml of 1.5 M sucrose and 4 ml of 1.0 M sucrose. The sample was spun in a swing rotor at 200,000  g for 2 h. The streak-like cloudy band between 1.0 M sucrose and 1.5 M sucrose that containing PSDs was carefully removed and resuspended in 600 µl of buffer solution. An equal amount of 1% Triton X-100 and 150 mM KCl was added to the sample for resuspension. The sample was then centrifuged at 200,000  g for 30 min. The resulting pellet contained the PSD fraction.  Biotin switch method/Acyl Biotin Exchange The substitution of S-nitrosylated Cys (S-NO-Cys) sites or S-palmitoylated Cys sites with S-biotinylated Cys in PSD protein lysates was based on a previously described biotin switch method and ABE procedure (Jaffrey and Snyder, 2001, Wan et al., 2007). Postsynaptic density protein fractions that were obtained in the previous steps were dissolved in HEN buffer that contained 250 mM HEPES (pH 7.7), 1 mM EDTA, and 0.1 mM neocuproine. To avoid rearrangements of thiol-modifying groups, the protein mixture was treated with blocking buffer solution that contained 250 mM HEPES (pH 7.7), 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM neocuproine, 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and 50 mM N-ethylmaleimide at 4ºC for 16 h with agitation. To remove excess reagent, the protein extracts were precipitated with 96% of ethanol and resuspended in the same volume of HEN buffer with 2.5% SDS. The obtained protein solutions were then divided into two equal parts. One part was treated with a mixture of 400 µM Biotin-HPDP and 5 mM sodium ascorbate for S-NO and 1 M hydroxylamine for S-PALM. The other part was used as a negative control for the experiments and treated with 400 µM biotin-HPDP without sodium ascorbate or hydroxylamine. All of the samples were incubated in the dark for 1.5 h at room temperature.  SNO Site Identification (SNOSID)/ Palmitoyl protein identification and site characterization (PalmPISC) The biotin labeling of S-nitrosylated or S-palmitoylated proteins in lysates was based on previously described procedures (biotin switch method and ABE, respectively). Postsynaptic density protein fractions that contained biotinylated proteins were digested using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega V 5111) for 16 h at 37ºC. Digestion was terminated using protease inhibitor cocktail. The tryptic peptide mixture was incubated with 100 μl of neutravidin beads at room temperature for 1 h. The neutravidin beads were washed five times in 1 ml of wash buffer. Neutravidin-bound peptides were eluted with 150 μl of elution buffer (25 mM NH4CO3 [pH 8.2] and 5 mM TCEP) and concentrated in a SpeedVac. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to the peptide solution to achieve a final concentration of 0.1%. The samples were analyzed by nanoLC-MS and nanoLC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
LC-MS and LC-MS/MS analysis For each enriched S-PALM peptide- or S-NO peptide-containing sample, separate LC-MS (profile type, peak amplitude data) and LC-MS/MS (peptide identification data) runs were performed. Thermo Orbitrap Elite coupled with Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 was used. S-PALM or S-NO peptides in 0.1% formic acid/water were loaded from a cooled (10ºC) autosampler tray to a pre-column (Symmetry C18, 180 µm  20 mm, 5 µm; Waters) and resolved on a BEH130 column (C18, 75 mm  250 mm, 1.7 mm; Waters) in a gradient of 5-30% acetonitrile/water for 70 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. The ultra-performance LC system was directly connected to the ion source of the mass spectrometer. All MS runs were separated by blank runs to reduce the carry-over of peptides from previous samples. All MS runs were performed in triplicate (for both control and stressed mice). The spectrometer resolution was set to 50.000 for MS acquisitions, with an m/z measurement range of 300-2000 Th. Raw LC-MS data were converted to the data format of NMRPipe software (http://spin.niddk.nih.gov/NMRPipe) using an in-house-designed finnigan2Pipe data conversion tool (Bakun et al., 2009, Sikora et al., 2009). MSparky (http://www.ire.pw.edu.pl/~trubel/soft/ms/msparky), an in-house-modified version of Sparky NMR software (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/home/sparky), was used to convert the LC-MS data into 2D heat maps, in which the peptide’s m/z is one dimension and its LC retention time is the other dimension. MSparky allows interactive validation and inspection of the data. In the LC-MS/MS runs, up to 10 fragmentation events were allowed for each parent ion. Datasets of parent and daughter ions were processed using MascotDistiller 2.5.1 software (MatrixScience). The Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1) was used to survey data against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Swissprot 2017_02; 16,905 sequences). The Mascot search parameters were set to the following: taxonomy (Mus musculus), variable modifications (cysteine carbamidomethylation or N-malemideidation, methionine oxidation, peptide tolerance (5 ppm), fragment mass tolerance (0.01 Da). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin. The lists of the peptide sequences that were identified in all of the LC-MS/MS runs from control and stressed PSD fractions were merged into one selected peptide list (SPL) using in-house-developed MascotScan software (http://www.ire.pw.edu.pl/~trubel/soft/ms/mascotscan). The SPL consists of sequences of peptides with Mascot scores > 20 and unique m/z and LC retention time values. The SPL list of sequences was used to label peaks in all 2D heat maps (profile data) with the same LC, m/z, and z coordinates using in-house-developed TagProfile software. The software allows for the correction of differences in peptide retention times that are caused by changes in the quality of LC columns and slight differences in LC mobile phase content. Acceptance criteria included deviations in m/z values (20 ppm), retention times (10 min), envelope root mean squared error (i.e., a deviation between the expected isotopic envelope of the peak heights and their experimental values, 0.7), and charge state values in accordance with the SPL value. As a result, selected monoisotopic peaks on the 2D heat map were tagged with a peptide sequence. Peptides from the SPL list that were not automatically assigned by TagProfile to appropriate signals on 2D heat maps or those that did not meet all of the acceptance criteria were manually verified using MSparky software. The list of assigned MS sequences was simplified so that a single sequence was assigned for peptides with parent entries that differed only by the charge state (z).

### Publication Abstract
The precise regulation of synaptic integrity is critical for neuronal network connectivity and proper brain function. Essential aspects of the activity and localization of synaptic proteins are regulated by posttranslational modifications. S-palmitoylation is a reversible covalent modification of the cysteine with palmitate. It modulates affinity of the protein for cell membranes and membranous compartments. Intracellular palmitoylation dynamics are regulated by crosstalk with other posttranslational modifications, such as S-nitrosylation. S-nitrosylation is a covalent modification of cysteine thiol by nitric oxide and can modulate protein functions. Therefore, simultaneous identification of endogenous site-specific proteomes of both cysteine modifications under certain biological conditions offers new insights into the regulation of functional pathways. Still unclear, however, are the ways in which this crosstalk is affected in brain pathology, such as stress-related disorders. Using a newly developed mass spectrometry-based approach <u>P</u>almitoylation <u>A</u>nd <u>N</u>itrosylation <u>I</u>nterplay <u>Moni</u>toring (PANIMoni), we analyzed the endogenous S-palmitoylation and S-nitrosylation of postsynaptic density proteins at the level of specific single cysteine in a mouse model of chronic stress. Among a total of 813 S-PALM and 620 S-NO cysteine sites that were characterized on 465 and 360 proteins, respectively, we sought to identify those that were differentially affected by stress. Our data show involvement of S-palmitoylation and S-nitrosylation crosstalk in the regulation of 122 proteins including receptors, scaffolding proteins, regulatory proteins and cytoskeletal components. Our results suggest that atypical crosstalk between the S-palmitoylation and S-nitrosylation interplay of proteins involved in synaptic transmission, protein localization and regulation of synaptic plasticity might be one of the main events associated with chronic stress disorder, leading to destabilization in synaptic networks.

### Keywords
Nitrosylation palmitoylation, Ptm's interplay, Mass spectrometry, Postsynaptic density synapse, Cell signaling

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cell Biophysics, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology,Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
Laboratory of Cell Biophysics, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, PAS

### Submitter
Monika Zareba-Koziol

### Lab Head
Dr Jakub M Wlodarczyk
Laboratory of Cell Biophysics, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology,Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


