### Accession
PXD022203

### Title
Proteomics analysis on COE inhibiting vasculogenic mimicry in hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
New strategies and drugs are urgently needed to improve the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Vasculogenic mimicry (VM) has been elucidated being associated with the progression of HCC and anti-VM could be a promising strategy. Celastrus orbiculatus extract (COE), a mixture of 11 terpenoids isolated from the Chinese Herb Celastrus Orbiculatus Vine, has been elucidated to be able to disrupt VM formation in HCC. This study aims to dissect and identify the potential targets of COE on anti-VM formation both in vitro and in vivo that are distinct from our previous study.  Proteomics analysis was used to identify differential proteins in HCC cells treated with or without COE.  Cells invasion was examined using Transwell. Matrigel was used to establish a 3-D culture condition for VM formation in vitro. RT-PCR and Western Blot were used to examine changes of mRNA and protein respectively. Clinical resected samples were applied to confirm association between VM formation and identified targets. Subcutaneous xenograft tumor model was established to observe tumor growth and VM formation in vivo. PAS-CD34 dual staining was used to detect VM in vivo.  A total of 194 proteins were identified to be differentially expressed in HCC cells treated with or without COE. In the 93 down-regulated proteins EphA2 stood out to be regulated on both RNA and protein level. Disruption EphA2 using COE or NVP inhibited VM formation and decreased VM associated biomarkers. In xenograft mouse model, COE inhibited tumor growth and VM formation via down-regulating EphA2.  Taken together, our results indicate that COE could be used in HCC treatment because of its promising anti-VM effect.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analysis  Protein extraction and trypsin digestion MHCC97-H cells treated with and without COE were sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first round of digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. TMT/iTRAQ Labeling and HPLC Fractionation After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase concentration from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein data analysis Protein data analysis was performed according to previous description[26]. Briefly, the raw data were converted into mgf files via Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo, American), the mgf data were further analyzed with Protein Pilot 5.0 (AB Sciex, USA). Database searching were processed using Paragon algorithm integrated in Protein Pilot 5.0. The custom database consisted of protein sequences predicted from RNA data. To increase confidence levels, proteins with iTRAQ ratios above 20 or below 0.05 were excluded, and only proteins with a reasonable ratio in all channels were considered quantifiable. Further functional analysis was performed for differential protein expression analysis, including whether the proteins were downregulated or upregulated. The change was determined compared to the CK, and p < 0.05 in the t test was used to indicate a significant difference between Spica Prunellae cultivated under salt stress and its blank control. The protein showing an average fold change of ≥ 1.3 or ≤ 0.77 in the experiment and with a minimum of two peptide matches were considered significantly differentially expressed. QuickGO software was used for Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs); the software searched the databases most commonly used in bioinformatics research to generate biological process, molecular function and cellular composition information for Spica Prunellae. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to exploit the current biochemical pathways and other types of molecular interactions.

### Publication Abstract
New strategies and drugs are urgently needed to improve the treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Vasculogenic mimicry (VM) has been elucidated being associated with the progression of HCC and anti-VM could be a promising strategy. <i>Celastrus orbiculatu</i> <i>s</i> extract (COE), a mixture of 26 compounds isolated from the Chinese Herb <i>Celastrus Orbiculatus</i> Vine, has been elucidated to be able to disrupt VM formation in HCC. This study aims to dissect and identify the potential targets of COE on anti-VM formation both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> that are distinct from our previous study. Proteomics analysis was used to identify differential proteins in HCC cells treated with or without COE (Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022203). Cells invasion was examined using Transwell. Matrigel was used to establish a 3-D culture condition for VM formation <i>in vitro</i>. RT-PCR and Western Blot were used to examine changes of mRNA and protein respectively. Clinical resected samples were applied to confirm association between VM formation and identified targets. Subcutaneous xenograft tumor model was established to observe tumor growth and VM formation <i>in vivo</i>. PAS-CD34 dual staining was used to detect VM <i>in vivo</i>. A total of 194 proteins were identified to be differentially expressed in HCC cells treated with or without COE. In the 93 down-regulated proteins EphA2 stood out to be regulated on both RNA and protein level. Disruption EphA2 using COE or NVP inhibited VM formation and decreased VM associated biomarkers. In xenograft mouse model, COE inhibited tumor growth and VM formation via down-regulating EphA2. Taken together, our results indicate that COE could be used in HCC treatment because of its promising anti-VM effect.

### Keywords
Epha2; hepatocellular carcinoma; proteomics; vasculogenic mimicry; cancer treatment

### Affiliations
Yangzhou University
Institution of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Medical College, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu, China

### Submitter
CHEN JUE

### Lab Head
Dr Jue Chen
Institution of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Medical College, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu, China


