### Accession
PXD003000

### Title
Chemoproteomic profiling of host and pathogen enzymes active in cholera

### Description
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) is a chemoproteomic tool for detecting active enzymes in complex biological systems. We used ABPP to identify secreted bacterial and host serine hydrolases that are active in animals infected with the cholera pathogen Vibrio cholerae. Four V. cholerae proteases were consistently active in infected rabbits, and one, VC0157 (renamed IvaP), was also active in human cholera stool. Inactivation of IvaP influenced the activity of other secreted V. cholerae and rabbit enzymes in vivo, while genetic disruption of all four proteases increased the abundance and binding of an intestinal lectin—intelectin—to V. cholerae in infected rabbits. Intelectin also bound to other enteric bacterial pathogens, suggesting it may constitute a previously unrecognized mechanism of bacterial surveillance in the intestine that is inhibited by pathogen-secreted proteases. Our work demonstrates the power of activity-based proteomics to reveal host-pathogen enzymatic dialogue in an animal model of infection.

### Sample Protocol
Probe labeling and affinity purification of labeled proteins for ABPP-MudPIT.  Cellfree supernatants from biofilm cultures (300 μL, 1 mg/mL), human cholera stool (650 μL, 0.25 mg/mL), and cell lysates from exponential and stationary phase V. cholerae cultures (500 μL, 1 mg/mL) were labeled with FP-biotin (5 μM; synthesized as previously described55) or DMSO for 1 h at rt. Pooled cecal fluid isolates from wild-type V. cholerae-infected rabbits (A: 245 μL, 0.5 mg/mL; B: 1.9 mL, 0.3 mg/mL; C: 210 μL, 0.4 mg/mL; Fig. 2) and individual isolates for comparative analyses of wild-type and S361A V. cholerae-infected rabbits (450 μL, 0.3 mg/mL; Fig. 4) were similarly labeled with probe. A NAP-5 column (GE Healthcare) was used to remove the unreacted probe from each sample. The resulting probe-labeled protein (eluted in 1 mL PBS) was added to a solution of SDS/PBS (1.2% (w/v) final SDS concentration), heated for 5 min at 90 °C, and then diluted to a final SDS concentration of 0.2% with PBS. The solutions were incubated with 100 μL streptavidin-agarose beads (Thermo Scientific) at 4 °C for 16 h, and then at rt for 3 h. The beads were washed with 0.2% SDS/PBS (5 mL), PBS (3 x 5 mL), and water (3 x 5 mL). The beads were pelleted by centrifugation (1400 x g, 4 °C, 3 min) between washes.  On-bead trypsin digestion.  The washed beads were suspended in 6 M urea in PBS (500 μL) and dithiothreitol (10 mM final concentration, diluted from a 20X stock in water) and incubated at 65 °C for 15 min. Iodoacetamide (20 mM final concentration, diluted from a 20X stock in water) was then reacted with the samples at 37 °C for 30 min. Following reduction and alkylation, the beads were pelleted by centrifugation (1400 x g, 4 °C, 3 min) and suspended in 200 μL of 2 M urea, 1 mM CaCl2 (diluted from a 100X stock in water), and sequencing-grade modified trypsin (2 μg; Promega) in PBS. The digestion was allowed to proceed overnight at 37 °C. The digested peptides were separated from the beads using a Micro Bio-Spin column (BioRad). The beads were washed twice with 50 μL ultrapure water, and formic acid (15 μL) was added to the eluted peptides, which were stored at -20 °C until MS analysis. In-solution trypsin digestion. Unfractionated cecal fluid and human cholera stool samples were vortexed with 1/10 volume of 100% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid in PBS and frozen overnight at -80 °C. Samples were thawed on ice, centrifuged (20,817 x g, 4 °C, 10 min), and washed 3 times with cold acetone (500 μL). Samples were sonicated and centrifuged (2655 x g, 4 °C, 10 min) between washes. Acetone-washed pellets were airdried and resuspended by sonication in 100 μL PBS containing 2.4 M urea and 70 mM ammonium bicarbonate, treated with 15 mM dithiothreitol, and incubated at 65 °C for 15 min. Iodoacetamide (12.5 mM final concentration) was then reacted with the samples for 30 min at rt. PBS (120 μL) was added to each sample, and protein concentrations were measured using the Pierce Coomassie Plus (Bradford) Assay Kit (Life Technologies). Samples were adjusted to 0.5 mg/mL in PBS and divided into 2 technical replicates of equal volume (90 μL). Samples were incubated with sequencinggrade modified trypsin (2 μg; Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2 and digested overnight at 37 °C. Digested peptides were treated with formic acid (5 μL) and centrifuged (100,000 x g, 4 °C, 1 h) to remove any remaining particulates. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes and stored at -20 °C until MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography-MS (LC-MS) analysis.  LC-MS analysis was performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) coupled to an Agilent 1200 series HPLC. Digests were pressure-loaded onto a 250-μm fused silica desalting column packed with 4 cm of Aqua C18 reverse phase resin (Phenomenex). Digests of affinity-purified samples were loaded in their entirety, whereas unfractionated sample digests were centrifuged (16,873 x g, 4 °C, 2 min) before loading half of each sample onto the column. The peptides were eluted onto a biphasic column (100-μm fused silica with a 5 μm tip, packed with 10 cm C18 and 3 cm Partisphere strong cation exchange resin (SCX, Whatman)). The peptides were eluted from the SCX onto the C18 resin and into the mass spectrometer as previously described56.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis.  Tandem-MS data were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm against a combined rabbit and V. cholerae (or human and V. cholerae) UniProt database using the V. cholerae serotype O1 (strain ATCC 39315/El Tor Inaba N16961) proteome (UniProt proteome ID UP000000584). A static modification of +57 on Cys was specified to account for iodoacetamide alkylation. The SEQUEST output files generated from the digests were filtered using DTASelect (v2.0.39). Proteins identified by DTASelect were manually filtered for proteins with ≥2 spectral counts. MS data are presented in the form of spectral counts, which is standard for ABPP-MudPIT analyses with FP-biotin.

### Publication Abstract
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) is a chemoproteomic tool for detecting active enzymes in complex biological systems. We used ABPP to identify secreted bacterial and host serine hydrolases that are active in animals infected with the cholera pathogen Vibrio cholerae. Four V. cholerae proteases were consistently active in infected rabbits, and one, VC0157 (renamed IvaP), was also active in human choleric stool. Inactivation of IvaP influenced the activity of other secreted V. cholerae and rabbit enzymes in vivo, and genetic disruption of all four proteases increased the abundance of intelectin, an intestinal lectin, and its binding to V. cholerae in infected rabbits. Intelectin also bound to other enteric bacterial pathogens, suggesting that it may constitute a previously unrecognized mechanism of bacterial surveillance in the intestine that is inhibited by pathogen-secreted proteases. Our work demonstrates the power of activity-based proteomics to reveal host-pathogen enzymatic dialog in an animal model of infection.

### Keywords
Vibrio cholerae; rabbit

### Affiliations
Boston College

### Submitter
Eranthie Weerapana

### Lab Head
Dr Eranthie Weerapana
Boston College


