### Accession
PXD019676

### Title
The interplay between GTP cyclohydrolase and the HSP90 chaperone machinery induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition through epidermal growth factor receptor signaling in breast cancer

### Description
GTP cyclohydrolase (GTPCH) is encoded by the GCH1 gene. Its physiological activity is tightly regulated for neurotransmission, immune and vascular functions. We have shown previously that GTPCH is highly expressed in breast tumors. However, the protumorigenic mechanisms of GTPCH remain unknown. Here we show that GTPCH transforms the immortalized MCF10A breast epithelia and induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). GTPCH-induced EMT is mediated by epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), through HSP90 and activator of HSP90 ATPase1 (AHA1). The GCH1 knockout or inhibition attenuates breast tumor growth in vitro and in vivo, and sensitizes the cells to hormone therapy in cultures. High GCH1 expression is significantly correlated with worse prognosis, chiefly ER+, PR+ and tamoxifen-treated tumors. Thus, GTPCH is an emerged cancer target.

### Sample Protocol
Gel slices were prepared for in-gel digest using standard protocols (https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/ac950914h .) Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was performed using an Q-Exactive HF mass spectromter, coupled to a Dionex Ultra 3000 UPLC. Peptides were separated on a Easy Spray column (50cm x 75µm) with a linear gradient of 2%-35% ACN in 0.1% Formic acid / 5% DMSO and a flow rate of 250nl/min. Survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 and a AGC target of 3E6 for up to 45ms. Fragmentation spectra of 12 most intense precursors selected in each duty cycle were generated at a resolution of 30,000 and with an AGC target of 5E4 for up to 45ms. Selected precursors were excluded for 27 seconds after fragmentation with 28% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
MS data was searched against Swissprot (12/2017, Homo sapiens) in Mascot 2.5 (Matrix science) with Carbamidomethylation (Cys) as fixed and Deamidation (Gln, Asn)/Oxidation (Met) as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10ppm (Fragment 0.05 Da) and peptide FDR was adjusted to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gtp cyclohydrolase stimulation

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility, University of Oxford


