### Accession
PXD012727

### Title
Novel proteomic approach (PUNCH-P) reveals cell cycle-specific fluctuations in mRNA translation

### Description
Monitoring protein synthesis is essential to our understanding of gene expression regulation, as protein abundance is thought to be predominantly controlled at the level of translation. Mass-spectrometric and RNA sequencing methods have been recently developed for investigating mRNA translation at a global level, but these still involve technical limitations and are not widely applicable. In this study, we describe a novel system-wide proteomic approach for direct monitoring of translation, termed puromycin-associated nascent chain proteomics (PUNCH-P), which is based on incorporation of biotinylated puromycin into newly synthesized proteins under cell-free conditions followed by streptavidin affinity purification and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Using PUNCH-P, we measured cell cycle-specific fluctuations in synthesis for >5000 proteins in mammalian cells, identified proteins not previously implicated in cell cycle processes, and generated the first translational profile of a whole mouse brain. This simple and economical technique is broadly applicable to any cell type and tissue, enabling the identification and quantification of rapid proteome responses under various biological conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Ribosome pelleting from cultured cells For each sample, 3.5 × 107 HeLa cells were washed once, harvested in PBS (Gibco), centrifuged at 1000g for 5 min at 4°C, and then frozen at −80°C for subsequent use. To purify ribosomes, cells were thawed on ice and lysed for 20 min in 500 μL of polysome buffer (18 mM Tris at pH 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl, 10 mM NaF, 10 mM α-glycerolphosphate, 1.4 μg/mL pepstatin, 2 μg/mL leupeptin, Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche], 1.25 mM dithiothreitol, 40 U RNase inhibitor [Invitrogen]) supplemented with Triton X-100 and deoxycholate to a final concentration of 1% each. Following centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C, the supernatant was removed and layered on 500 μL of 2 M sucrose in polysome buffer. The sucrose cushion was centrifuged at 37,000 rpm for 4 h at 4°C in a Beckman Coulter TLA120.2 rotor, and the ribosome pellet was resuspended in 100 μL of polysome buffer and processed directly for puromycylation.  Reagents and antibodies Biot-PU was custom-synthesized by Dharmacon according to Starck et al. (2004). Streptavidin agarose beads were from Pierce Biotechnology. HRP-conjugated streptavidin for Western blotting was from R&D Systems or Vector Laboratories (Vectastain Elite ABC). Anti-puromycin antibody (12D10) was from Millipore. Control antibodies were rabbit anti-RPL26 (Abcam) and rabbit anti-tubulin (Cell Signaling Technology). HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody was from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories. SILAC amino acids were purchased from Cambridge Isotopes Laboratories. All other reagents were from Sigma Aldrich unless otherwise specified.   Puromycylation and streptavidin capture Resuspended ribosomes were incubated for the indicated times at 37°C either with or without Biot-PU at a ratio of 100 pmol per 1 OD254 ribosomes. The reaction was terminated by the addition of Laemmli sample buffer for direct Western blotting or high-stringency wash buffer (100 mM Tris HCl at pH 7.5, 2% SDS, 8 M urea, 150 mM NaCl) for streptavidin capture. The mix was tumbled overnight at room temperature with 50 μL of streptavidin agarose slurry. The beads were then washed four times with 1 mL of high-stringency buffer followed by one 30-min wash in the same buffer at room temperature and then washed for 30 min in 1 mL of high-salt buffer (100 mM Tris HCl at pH 7.5, 1 M NaCl) and five times with ultrapure water. The beads were then incubated for 30 min in 1 mM DTT and then 50 mM iodoacetamide (in the dark) and washed twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. For MS analysis, beads were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and proteins were digested overnight with 0.4 μg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). After overnight incubation, digests were acidified with 0.1% TFA and purified on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al. 2007). For Western blot analysis, proteins were released from washed streptavidin beads by boiling in elution buffer (2% SDS, 3 mM biotin, 8 M urea in PBS) for 30 min at 96°C, as previously described (Rybak et al. 2004).  PUNCH-P samples were analyzed using single 4-h runs (including loading, gradient, and wash duration) and in replicates as indicated for each experiment. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC1000 ultrahigh-performance LC (UHPLC) (Thermo Scientific) coupled on line to the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50-cm column with 2-μm pepmap beads (Dionex) and connected to the MS through an EASY-spray ionization source. Peptides were loaded onto the column in buffer A (0.5% acetic acid) and separated with a 200-min gradient of 5%–30% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid) followed by a 10-min wash with 95% buffer B. MS analysis was performed using a data-dependent top 10 method. MS spectra were acquired at 70,000 resolution (at 200 Th) with a target value of 106 ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 17,500 resolution with a target value of 105 ions. Dynamic exclusion option was enabled, with exclusion duration of 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann 2008) and the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011). MS/MS were searched against the UniProt human database and an additional list of common contaminants, including avidin. Data were filtered with a 1% FDR on the peptide level and the protein level. The “match between runs” option was enabled to transfer identification between runs based on their accurate mass and retention time. Protein abundance was determined as the summed peptide intensities. Bioinformatic analysis was performed using the Perseus program in the MaxQuant environment. t-tests and ANOVA were performed with 5% FDR and S0 = 0.5 (Tusher et al. 2001). Prior to the t-test, data were filtered to have a minimum of two values in at least one of the triplicate noncontrol samples. The missing values were then replaced by a constant value (around the lowest-intensity value). Hierarchical clustering of proteins was performed on logarithmized intensities after Z-score normalization of the data using Euclidean distances.

### Publication Abstract
Monitoring protein synthesis is essential to our understanding of gene expression regulation, as protein abundance is thought to be predominantly controlled at the level of translation. Mass-spectrometric and RNA sequencing methods have been recently developed for investigating mRNA translation at a global level, but these still involve technical limitations and are not widely applicable. In this study, we describe a novel system-wide proteomic approach for direct monitoring of translation, termed puromycin-associated nascent chain proteomics (PUNCH-P), which is based on incorporation of biotinylated puromycin into newly synthesized proteins under cell-free conditions followed by streptavidin affinity purification and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis. Using PUNCH-P, we measured cell cycle-specific fluctuations in synthesis for &gt;5000 proteins in mammalian cells, identified proteins not previously implicated in cell cycle processes, and generated the first translational profile of a whole mouse brain. This simple and economical technique is broadly applicable to any cell type and tissue, enabling the identification and quantification of rapid proteome responses under various biological conditions.

### Keywords
Translatome, Ribosome, Punch-p

### Affiliations
Tel Aviv Universtiy
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Tel Aviv Universtiy


