### Accession
PXD045837

### Title
Structural mechanisms of  autoinhibition and substrate recognition  by the ubiquitin ligase HACE1

### Description
Ubiquitin ligases (E3s) are pivotal specificity determinants in the ubiquitin system by selecting substrates and decorating them with distinct ubiquitin signals. Structure determination of the underlying, specific E3-substrate complexes, however, has proven challenging due to their transient nature. In particular, it is incompletely understood how members of the catalytic cysteine-driven class of HECT-type ligases position substrate proteins for modification. Here we report a cryo-EM structure of the full-length human HECT-type ligase HACE1, along with solution-based conformational analyses by small-angle X-ray scattering and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. Structure-based functional analyses in vitro and in cells reveal that the activity of HACE1 is stringently regulated by dimerization-induced autoinhibition. The inhibition occurs at the first step of the catalytic cycle and is thus substrate-independent. We employ mechanism-based chemical crosslinking to reconstitute a complex of activated, monomeric HACE1 with its major substrate, RAC1, visualize its structure by cryo-EM, and validate the binding mode by solution-based analyses. Our findings explain how HACE1 achieves selectivity in ubiquitinating the active, GTP-loaded state of RAC1 and establish a framework for interpreting mutational alterations of the HACE1-RAC1 interplay in disease. More broadly, this work illuminates central unexplored aspects in the architecture, conformational dynamics, regulation, and specificity of full-length HECT-type ligases.

### Sample Protocol
For HDX-MS analyses of HACE1 apo, samples contained 50 µM protein (Dataset S1). Samples for the analysis of HACE1 ΔN-RAC1 Q61L interactions contained either 50 µM RAC1 +/- 100 µM HACE1 or 50 µM HACE1 +/- 100 µM RAC1 (Dataset S2). For the corresponding analyses of HACE1 S14E or I694D, samples contained 25 µM of HACE1 +/- 50 µM RAC1 (Dataset S3). All samples were prepared by a two-arm autosampler (LEAP Technologies). Reactions were initiated by adding 58.5 µL of a D2O-based buffer (Dataset S1: 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT; Datasets S2 and S3: 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.8), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 5 mM DTT) to 6.5 µL of protein solution. After incubation at 25 °C for the indicated time points, HDX was stopped by mixing 55 µL of the reaction with 55 µL of 400 mM KH2PO4/H3PO4, 2 M guanidine-HCl (pH 2.2) at 1 °C. 100 μL of the quenched reaction was injected into an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system with HDX Technology. Non-deuterated samples were generated analogously with an H2O-based buffer. The samples were washed from a 50-μL injection loop with water + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (100 μL/min) into an immobilized porcine pepsin-loaded column at 12 °C. Peptides were collected on a trap column (2 mm x 2 cm; 0.5 °C) filled with POROS 20 R2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After 3 min, the column was placed in line with an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 1.7 μm 1.0 x 100 mm column (Waters) at 0.5 °C and the peptides were eluted with a gradient of water + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (eluent A) and acetonitrile + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (eluent B) at 30 μL/min, as follows: 0-7 min/95-65% A, 7-8 min/65-15% A, 8-10 min/15% A. The peptides were guided to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters) and ionized by electrospray ionization (capillary temperature: 250 °C; spray voltage: 3.0 kV). Mass spectra were acquired with MassLynX MS 4.1 (Waters) over 50 to 2,000 m/z in enhanced high-definition MS (HDMSE) or high-definition MS (HDMS) mode for non-deuterated and deuterated samples, respectively. Lock-mass correction was conducted with [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B standard (Waters). During peptide separation on the ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 column, the pepsin column was washed 3 times with 80 μL of 0.5 M guanidine-HCl in 4% (v/v) acetonitrile. Blank runs (double-distilled H2O) were performed between each sample. All measurements were performed in triplicates (separate HDX reactions).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified ProteinLynx Global SERVER 3.0.1 (PLGS, Waters) and DynamX 3.0 (both Waters) from the non-deuterated samples acquired with HDMSE, employing low-energy, elevated-energy and intensity thresholds of 300, 100 and 1,000 counts, respectively and matched, using a database containing the amino acid sequences of RAC1 Q61L, HACE1, porcine pepsin, and their reversed sequences (peptide tolerance = automatic; fragment tolerance = automatic; min fragment ion matches per peptide = 1; min fragment ion matches per protein = 7; min peptide matches per protein = 3; maximum hits to return = 20; maximum protein mass = 250,000; primary digest reagent = non-specific; missed cleavages = 0; false discovery rate = 100). For quantification of deuterium incorporation with DynamX, peptides had to fulfil the following criteria: identification in at least one third of the non-deuterated samples; minimum intensity: 5,000 counts; maximum length: 40 residues; at least two products and 0.05 products per residue; maximum mass error: 25 ppm; retention time tolerance: 0.5 min. All spectra were manually inspected and omitted, if necessary, e.g., for low signal-to-noise ratios or overlapping peptides prohibiting correct assignment of the isotopic clusters. Residue-specific deuterium uptake of peptides was calculated with DynamX. If a residue was covered by a single peptide, the residue-specific deuterium uptake was equal to that of the whole peptide. In the case of overlapping peptides for a given residue, the residue-specific deuterium uptake was determined by the shortest peptide covering that residue. When multiple peptides were of the shortest length, the peptide with the residue closest to the C-terminus was utilized.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitin ligases (E3s) are pivotal specificity determinants in the ubiquitin system by selecting substrates and decorating them with distinct ubiquitin signals. However, structure determination of the underlying, specific E3-substrate complexes has proven challenging owing to their transient nature. In particular, it is incompletely understood how members of the catalytic cysteine-driven class of HECT-type ligases (HECTs) position substrate proteins for modification. Here, we report a cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structure of the full-length human HECT HACE1, along with solution-based conformational analyses by small-angle X-ray scattering and hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry. Structure-based functional analyses in vitro and in cells reveal that the activity of HACE1 is stringently regulated by dimerization-induced autoinhibition. The inhibition occurs at the first step of the catalytic cycle and is thus substrate-independent. We use mechanism-based chemical crosslinking to reconstitute a complex of activated, monomeric HACE1 with its major substrate, RAC1, determine its structure by cryo-EM and validate the binding mode by solution-based analyses. Our findings explain how HACE1 achieves selectivity in ubiquitinating the active, GTP-loaded state of RAC1 and establish a framework for interpreting mutational alterations of the HACE1-RAC1 interplay in disease. More broadly, this work illuminates central unexplored aspects in the architecture, conformational dynamics, regulation and specificity of full-length HECTs.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms

### Affiliations
Philipps-Universität Marburg Zentrum für Synthetische Mikrobiologie (SYNMIKRO) Karl-von-Frisch-Straße 14 35043 Marburg
Philipps-University Marburg, Department of Chemistry & SYNMIKRO, Karl-von-Frisch-Straße 14, 35043 Marburg, GERMANY

### Submitter
Wieland Steinchen

### Lab Head
Dr Wieland Steinchen
Philipps-Universität Marburg Zentrum für Synthetische Mikrobiologie (SYNMIKRO) Karl-von-Frisch-Straße 14 35043 Marburg


