### Accession
PXD018079

### Title
IgA transcytosis and tumor antigen recognition govern anti-tumor immunity in ovarian cancer

### Description
Although most ovarian cancers show prognostically relevant activated T-cell infiltrates, response rates to immune checkpoint inhibitors are very modest4. Memory B-cell and plasma cell infiltrates have been associated with better outcome in ovarian cancer, but the nature and functional relevance of these responses are controversial. Using 3 independent cohorts totaling 575 high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) patients, we show that robust humoral responses are heavily dominated by the production of polyclonal IgA, which binds to Polymeric IgA Receptors universally expressed on ovarian cancer cells. Notably, all tertiary  lymphoid structures identified in ~21% of HGSOCs contain IgA-producing oligoclonal B-cells. Strikingly, tumor Bcell-derived IgAs effectively target extracellular oncogenic drivers, whereas IgA transcytosis through malignant epithelial cells elicits transcriptional changes that antagonize the RAS pathway and that sensitize tumor cells to T-cell cytolytic killing, hindering malignant progression. Thus, tumor antigen-specific and antigen-independent IgA responses antagonize ovarian cancer growth by governing coordinated tumor cell, T-cell and B-cell responses. These findings provides a platform for the identification of novel targets spontaneously recognized by intratumoral B-cell-derived antibodies, and suggest that immunotherapies that augment B-cell responses may be more effective than T-cell-centric approaches, particularly for malignancies resistant to checkpoint inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
pIgR Detection and Quantification: To detect and quantify the secretory component of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (pIgR), conditioned media from different cell lines exposed to IgA or control IgG, in the presence or the absence of the inhibitors of IgA transcytosis, Brefeldin A and Wortmannin, were analyzed using LC-MS/MS with 8 targeted parallel reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (PRM) scans for peptides from pIgR.  Data were acquired for the figure in the manuscript (files dated 20190723) and for additional cell lines (files dated 20191220).  Samples were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin.  A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph and an electrospray bench top orbitrap mass spectrometer (RSLC and Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo, San Jose, CA) were used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments.  The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5µm particle size, 100Å pore size, C18PepMap100, Thermo) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid.  The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100Å pore size, C18PepMap100, Thermo).  The 120-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 5 minutes, solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 5 minutes and held at 90% for 3 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 2 minutes and re-equilibrated for 10 minutes.  The flow rate on analytical column was 300 nl/min. Twenty-four tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner plus 8 PRM scans to target the following pIgR peptides in the specific charge states: GGCITLISSEGYVSSK 829.4087(2+), VYTVDLGR 461.7533(2+), GSVTFHCALGPEVANVAK 928.9698(2+), QSSGENCDVVVNTLGK 853.9043(2+),GVAGGSVAVLCPYNR 760.3879(2+), YWCLWEGAQNGR 770.3435(2+), DAGFYWCLTNGDTLWR 987.9438(2+), AFVNCDENSR 606.2591(2+), LVSLTLNLVTR 614.8848(2+), ADEGWYWCGVK 685.7953(2+).  pIgR Secretory Component Detection and Quantification: The secretory component of pIgR contains only the first 585 amino acids; therefore, LC-MS/MS was used to verify detection of N-terminal peptides without the detection of C-terminal peptides in conditioned cell culture media (samples dated 20200117).  Secreted proteins in conditioned media (control, treated with the inhibitors of IgA transcytosis Brefeldin A or Wortmannin) were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin.   A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph interfaced with an electrospray bench top orbitrap mass spectrometer (RSLC and Q Exactive Plus, Thermo) were used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments.  The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5µm particle size, 100Å pore size, C18PepMap100, Thermo) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid.  The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100Å pore size, C18PepMap100, Thermo).  The 120-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 5 minutes, solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 90 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 5 minutes and held at 90% for 3 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 2 minutes and re-equilibrated for 10 minutes.  The flow rate on analytical column was 300 nl/min. Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner.  J-Chain Detection: A third experiment was conducted to verify that the commercial IgA antibody is a dimer (files dated  20191213) by detection of peptides specific to the J-chain.  An aliquot of the protein was reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin and analyzed with LC-MS/MS peptide sequencing containing two parallel reaction monitoring scans for doubly protonated SSEDPNEDIVER and IIVPLNNR peptides using a nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph and electrospray bench top orbitrap mass spectrometer (RSLC and Q-Exactive HF-X, Thermo), as decribed above.  The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5µm particle size, 100Å pore size, C18PepMap100, Thermo) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid.  The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100Å pore size, C18PepMap100, Thermo), as described above.  Twenty-four tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner with the two PRM scans in every cycle.  Sample preparation and data acquisition were completed by Kiah Bowers and Bin Fang, PhD.

### Data Protocol
pIgR Detection and Quantification: Relative quantitation of pIgR peptides was performed using Skyline to quantify levels of each of the 8 pIgR peptides from the PRM scans.  The ion signal for GGCITLISSEGYVSSK is used for quantification across the samples, and other peptides are used for confirmation.  LC-MS/MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant to confirm quantification and peptide identification through the Andromeda search results.  Data were searched against human entries in the UniProt database with trypsin digestion allowing up to 2 missed cleavages and considering carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a modification. pIgR Secretory Component Detection and Quantification: Relative quantitation was performed using MaxQuant software, as described above. J-Chain Detection Protein identification was performed using Mascot searches in Protein Discoverer searching UniProt human entries with trypsin digestion allowing up to 2 missed cleavages and considering carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a modification.  PRM data were used solely to guarantee detection of the two peptide representing the sequence of interest and did not require any additional analysis. For deposition into PRIDE/ProteomeXchange, LC-MS/MS data were submitted for Mascot database searches using the parameters described above. Kiah Bowers and Bin Fang, PhD, contributed to data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Most ovarian cancers are infiltrated by prognostically relevant activated T cells<sup>1-3</sup>, yet exhibit low response rates to immune checkpoint inhibitors<sup>4</sup>. Memory B&#xa0;cell and plasma cell infiltrates have previously been associated with better outcomes in ovarian cancer<sup>5,6</sup>, but the nature and functional relevance of these responses are controversial. Here, using 3&#xa0;independent cohorts that in total comprise 534&#xa0;patients with high-grade serous ovarian cancer, we show that robust, protective humoral responses are dominated by the production of polyclonal IgA, which binds to polymeric IgA receptors that are universally expressed on ovarian cancer cells. Notably, tumour B-cell-derived IgA redirects myeloid cells against extracellular oncogenic drivers, which causes tumour cell death. In addition, IgA transcytosis through malignant epithelial cells elicits transcriptional changes that antagonize the RAS pathway and sensitize tumour cells to cytolytic killing by T cells, which also contributes to hindering malignant progression. Thus, tumour-antigen-specific and -antigen-independent IgA responses antagonize the growth of ovarian cancer by governing coordinated tumour cell, T cell and B&#xa0;cell responses. These findings provide a platform for identifying targets that are spontaneously recognized by intratumoural B-cell-derived antibodies, and suggest that immunotherapies that augment B&#xa0;cell responses may be more effective than approaches that focus on T cells, particularly for malignancies that are resistant to checkpoint inhibitors.

### Keywords
Immunotherapy, Lc-ms/ms, Prm, Transcytosis, Immunoglobulin a, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Immunology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Jose Conejo-Garcia, MD/PhD
Immunology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL


