### Accession
PXD001251

### Title
Identification of long-lived proteins retained in cells undergoing repeated asymmetric divisions

### Description
To identify long-lived proteins that are retained in yeast mother cells, we combined a method developed in our lab with a pulse-chase protocol using total proteome analysis. Cells were initially grown in medium with stable heavy-isotope amino acids to label proteins. The cells were then switched into media containing light-isotope amino acids and cultured for an additional ~18 cell divisions with the MEP engaged. Finally, we determined whether any of the original heavy-labeled proteins were still present in the aged mother cells

### Sample Protocol
We did this by purifying these aged mother cells, extracting total cellular proteins and separating them by SDS-PAGE. The gel was cut into slices spanning apparent molecular weights of ~200 - 6 kDa, and each slice was treated with trypsin and the eluted peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The X! Tandem search engine was used with a custom scoring function and parameters appropriate for SILAC labeled spectra acquired on the LTQ Orbitrap.  This included trypsin cleavage, up to two missed cleavage sites, monoisotopic masses, and ±2Da precursor mass tolerance. Variable modification of 6.02013 Da was allowed on arginine & lysine residues to accommodate dual SILAC labels, and variable modification of 15.994915 Da on methionine was allowed to accommodate a common oxidation artifact. PeptideProphet was used to evaluate the likelihood of each peptide assignment. To assess relative abundance of light- and heavy-labeled species of a given peptide, quantitation was performed with the Q3 algorithm for only those peptides assigned with high confidence, and falling within 20 ppm of the measured precursor mass.

### Publication Abstract
Long-lived proteins have been implicated in age-associated decline in metazoa, but they have only been identified in extracellular matrices or postmitotic cells. However, the aging process also occurs in dividing cells undergoing repeated asymmetric divisions. It was not clear whether long-lived proteins exist in asymmetrically dividing cells or whether they are involved in aging. Here we identify long-lived proteins in dividing cells during aging using the budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast mother cells undergo a limited number of asymmetric divisions that define replicative lifespan. We used stable-isotope pulse-chase and total proteome mass-spectrometry to identify proteins that were both long-lived and retained in aging mother cells after &#x223c; 18 cells divisions. We identified &#x223c; 135 proteins that we designate as long-lived asymmetrically retained proteins (LARPS). Surprisingly, the majority of LARPs appeared to be stable fragments of their original full-length protein. However, 15% of LARPs were full-length proteins and we confirmed several candidates to be long-lived and retained in mother cells by time-lapse microscopy. Some LARPs localized to the plasma membrane and remained robustly in the mother cell upon cell division. Other full-length LARPs were assembled into large cytoplasmic structures that had a strong bias to remain in mother cells. We identified age-associated changes to LARPs that include an increase in their levels during aging because of their continued synthesis, which is not balanced by turnover. Additionally, several LARPs were posttranslationally modified during aging. We suggest that LARPs contribute to age-associated phenotypes and likely exist in other organisms.

### Keywords
Replicative aging, Silac, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA USA
FHCRC

### Submitter
Nathaniel Thayer

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel E. Gottschling
Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA USA


