### Accession
PXD010585

### Title
A large-scale proteomic identification of targets of cellular miR-197 downregulated by enterovirus A71

### Description
MicroRNAs are noncoding RNA species comprising 18–23 nucleotides that regulate host-virus interaction networks. Here, we showed that enterovirus A71 infection in human rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) involved miR-197 expression. miR-197 can regulate virus replication in the context of viral RNA synthesis via the transfection of its mimic into RD cells. We employed a mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomic stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) approach for the identification of miR-197 target genes by transfecting mimetic miR-197 into RD cells, and the differential expression of prospective target proteins was identified. A total of 1,822 genes were repeatedly and considerably downregulated in miR-197-transfected RD cells, 106 of which were predicted to have seed sites by TargetScan. Seven of the selected 8 genes potentially related to viral replication and immune response were confidently validated as direct miR-197 targets using a luciferase (untranslated region (3'-UTR)) reporter assay. The expression of three selected endogenous molecules (ITGAV, ETF1, and MAP2K1 (MEK1)) was significantly reduced when RD cells were transfected with an miR-197 mimic. Our results provide a database of miR-197 targets, which is potentially of interest in the area of viral pathogenesis and other research fields.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC Labeling of Cells We used Pierce SILAC Protein Quantitation Kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, lL, USA) to label the RD cells with stable isotopes. The labeling of RD cells with amplified for six to eight doublings in SILAC DMEM supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS and labeled either with L-arginine and L-lysine (referred to as light cells) or with 13C6L-lysine (Thermo) and 13C6L-arginine (referred to as heavy cells) (Sigma) at 37 °C with 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. The light cells were then transfected with miR-197 mimic (Dharmacon, Lafayette, CO, USA) and the heavy cells were transfected with or reagent alone, using Lipofectamine 2000. Cells were collected and lysed with 0.1% SDS and sonication after 3 days, and the nuclei were pelleted by spinning at 12,000  g for 10 min at 4 °C. Equal amount (50 g each) of resulting lysates was then mixed and treated with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 30 min, and then with 30 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Tryptic digestion was carried out at 37 °C overnight and tryptic peptides were then desalted and vacuum-dried. The Online 2D LC System The comprehensive 2D SCX-RP (reverse phase) LC system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was equipped with one gradient pump for strong cation exchange (SCX), one additional gradient pump for RP, one isocratic pump for online dilution, one 10-port valve with two RP-trapping columns for alternating trapping, one six-port valve for controlling the trapping column in either washing or eluting mode, and a manual injector for sample loading. Such a combination allowed us to introduce an organic solvent (acetonitrile) in the first-dimensional SCX separation without affecting the second-dimensional RP separations, by using an online dilution design. Briefly, a tryptic digest dissolved in 50% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid was loaded onto the SCX column (0.5150 mm, packed with Luna-SCX particles from Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) using a manual injector. The first-dimensional separation was operated at a flow rate of 1.5–0.5 L/min, and peptides were eluted using a continuous ammonium chloride gradient in the presence of 0.1% formic acid and 30% acetonitrile. The salt gradient was segmented in 44 steps, 65 min for each, and matched with the second-dimensional reverse-phase separations. The flow rate and slope of the gradient of each segment were tuned to prevent the overloading of the RP-trapping column. A flow of solvent A (50 L/min, 0.1% formic acid in water) delivered by an isocratic loading pump was used to dilute the effluent of the SCX column through a T union and a mixing tube before it reached the trapping column (0.55 mm, packed with Source 15RPC particles). Concomitantly, the other RP-trapping column, which was installed on the same 10-port valve, was connected with the RP-separating column, and its contents were analyzed using a mass spectrometer. Five minutes before each salt gradient step was completed, the binary pump used for SCX separation was stopped, and the six-port valve was switched to allow the loading pump to wash away the residual salt solution in the flow path of the RP-trapping column. After the trapping column was switched to the RP analytical column again, the bound peptides were eluted using a complete acetonitrile gradient (elution, regeneration, and reequilibration) in the presence of 0.05% formic acid over 65 min. MS All data were acquired using an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The instrument was calibrated using standard compounds, and the lock mass function was enabled using a cyclosiloxane signal of m/z 445.120025 as an internal standard over the whole data acquisition time. Mass spectrometric data were acquired in a data-dependent mode and controlled by the Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7 SR 2). Each full MS spectrum scan (m/z, 420–2000; resolution, 30,000 at m/z 400) was acquired using the Orbitrap system, from which the six most intense ions (with intensities higher than 20,000) were selected for fragmentation using low-energy collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap. The preview scan function was disabled. The repeat count was set to 1, and the dynamic exclusion limit was set to 45 s. Fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 39% with an activation q of 0.25 and an activation time of 30 ms. Other mass spectrometric parameters were set as follows: spray voltage, 1.8 kV; capillary voltage, 49 V; capillary temperature, 200°C; and tube lens voltage, 120 V. The automatic gain control was set to 1  106 ions with a maximum fill time of 1000 ms for the Orbitrap full scan, and 4000 ions with a maximum fill time of 150 ms for the LTQ MS/MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The identification and quantification of proteins were carried out using the MaxQuant v1.0.13.13 software package developed by Jürgen Cox and Matthias Mann (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz, Planegg, Germany). SILAC doublets were extracted, recalibrated, and quantified in the raw data files with Quant.exe using the following parameters: Arg6 and Lys6 were set as labels; maximum of three labeled amino acids per peptide; carbamidomethylcysteine was set as a fixed modification; and methionine oxidation, protein amino-terminal acetylation, and N-terminal modification of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid were set as variable modifications. Two missed cleavages were allowed, enzyme specificity was trypsin/P, and the MS/MS tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions was set to 7 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The generated peak lists (msm files) were submitted to a MASCOT search engine (Daemon.exe version 2.2.2, MatrixScience) and searched against a database which contains 20,294 human protein sequence entries extracted from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Database, Release 2010_06, 262 commonly observed contaminants provided by the MaxQuant and the reversed sequences of all proteins. Peptide lists were further used by Identify.exe to identify and to quantify proteins relatively using the following parameters: peptide and protein false-discovery rates were set to 0.01; the maximum peptide posterior error probability (PEP) was set to 1; the minimum peptide length was set to 6; PEP was based on Mascot score; the minimum number of peptides for identification and quantification of proteins was set to 2, of which at least one must be unique; and identified proteins were requantified. Protein groups containing matches to proteins from the reversed database or contaminants were discarded. For correcting the effects of arginine-to-proline conversion on protein quantification, peptide ratios of non- and single-proline-containing peptides were extracted from the Evidence.txt files and the median ratios of these two populations were used to estimate the overall conversion rate of each heavy isotope labeled sample. The conversion rates of all the experiments were found to fall in the range of 14.7–17.3%. The ratio of each peptide was then recalculated using the following equation: Rcorr = Robs / (1-r)n, where Rcorr is the corrected ratio, Robs is the observed ratio, r is the arginine-to-proline conversion rate, and n is the number of proline residues in the peptide sequence. Finally, the protein ratios were recalculated and normalized using the same methods as in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
MicroRNAs are noncoding RNA species comprising 18-23 nucleotides that regulate host-virus interaction networks. Here, we show that enterovirus A71 infection in human rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) is regulated by miR-197 expression. Transfection of miR-197 mimic into RD cells inhibited virus replication by interfering with the viral RNA synthesis. We employed a combination of mass-spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics with the stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) approach for the identification of the miR-197 target genes in RD cells and to investigate the differential expression of the prospective target proteins. A total of 1822 proteins were repeatedly identified in miR-197-transfected RD cells, 106 of which were predicted to have seed sites by TargetScan. Notably, seven of eight selected genes potentially related to viral replication and immune response were validated as direct miR-197 targets, using a luciferase 3'-untranslated region (UTR) reporter assay. The expression levels of three selected endogenous molecules (ITGAV, ETF1, and MAP2K1/MEK1) were significantly reduced when RD cells were transfected with a miR-197 mimic. Our results provide a comprehensive database of miR-197 targets, which might provide better insights into the understanding of host-virus interaction.

### Keywords
Mir-197, Microrna, Silac, Viral replication, Enterovirus a71, Targetscan

### Affiliations
CGU
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, No.259, Wenhua 1st Rd., Guishan Dist., Taoyuan City 33302, Taiwan (R.O.C.)

### Submitter
WEN-FANG TANG

### Lab Head
Dr Jim-Tong Horng
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, No.259, Wenhua 1st Rd., Guishan Dist., Taoyuan City 33302, Taiwan (R.O.C.)


