### Accession
PXD017645

### Title
Metformin impairs cisplatin effects in cell size and proliferation of A549 lung cancer cells, modulating the mTOR and other metabolic pathways.

### Description
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death worldwide and reports innate and acquired therapeutic resistance to cisplatin. Metformin (MET), an antidiabetic agent with potential antitumor activity, overcomes cisplatin resistance in some cancers through AMPK-dependent and independent mechanisms. MET is a potential treatment in cells with LKB1 mutation,  even with the impairment of AMPK and overactivation of mTOR signaling. The present study investigated the role of mTOR signaling and other signaling pathways after MET treatment in control and resistant A549 cells, mapping pathways and possible targets for cisplatin sensitivity induced by metformin.

### Sample Protocol
For heavy (H)- or light (L)-Lysine labeling experiments, A549 cells were maintained in a T25 well flask with SILAC™ HAMF12 medium (Thermo Scientific, #) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS without Lysine and Arginine. Both media were supplemented with 13C6 L-Lysine-2HCl (H) or 12C6 L-Lysine-2HCl (L) and 12C6 L-Arginine-2HCl (H and L). The mixed H-/L-labeled protein sample was separated by electrophoresis in reducing 10% SDS-PAGE, heated for 10 seconds in microwave in Coomassie Brilliant Blue stain (Sigma, USA; 2% Coomassie in 50% ethanol and 2.5% acetic acid) and incubated for 1 hour. After overnight first de-staining, each gel lane was sliced into 10 pieces. The excised sections were unstained twice with a de-staining solution (50% ethanol and 2.5% acetic acid in purified water) in 1.5mL microtubes to start the gel digestion protocol.

### Data Protocol
The protein bands were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin overnight.  An aliquot of the the peptide mixture were separated by a 2-40% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using an analytical column PicoFrit Column (20 cm x ID75 μm, 5 μm particle size, New Objective), at a flow of 300 nL/min over 35 min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos were set up in the data-dependent acquisition mode. For SILAC data analyses, the raw files were processed using the MaxQuant version 1.2.7.4  and the MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot Human Protein Database (release 17 February 2016; 91974 sequences, 36693332 aminoacid residues). The initial maximal allowed mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for precursor and then it was set to 6 ppm in the main search and to 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (set with cleavage after lysine only) with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine(57.021464 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (15.994915 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (42.010565 Da) were selected as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids, including heavy label Lys6. For protein quantification, a minimum of two ratio counts was set and the requantify’ and ‘match between runs’ functions were enabled. The false discovery rates (FDRs) of peptide and protein were both set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer&#x2011;associated death worldwide and exhibits intrinsic and acquired therapeutic resistance to cisplatin (CIS). The present study investigated the role of mTOR signaling and other signaling pathways after metformin (MET) treatment in control and cisplatin&#x2011;resistant A549 cells, mapping pathways and possible targets involved in CIS sensitivity. MTT, flow cytometry, clonogenic assay, western blotting, proteomic analysis using the Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) approach and reverse transcription&#x2011;quantitative PCR were performed. The results revealed that CIS treatment induced mTOR signaling pathway overactivation, and the mTOR status was restored by MET. MET and the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin (RAPA) decreased the viability in control and resistant cells, and decreased the cell size increase induced by CIS. In control cells, MET and RAPA decreased colony formation after 72&#xa0;h and decreased IC<sub>50</sub> values, potentiating the effects of CIS. Proteomics analysis revealed important pathways regulated by MET, including transcription, RNA processing and IL&#x2011;12&#x2011;mediated signaling. In CIS&#x2011;resistant cells, MET regulated the apoptotic process, oxidative stress and G<sub>2</sub>/M transition. Annexin 4 (ANXA4) and superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2), involved in apoptosis and oxidative stress, respectively, were chosen to validate the SILAC analysis and may represent potential therapeutic targets for lung cancer treatment. In conclusion, the chemosensitizing and antiproliferative effects of MET were associated with mTOR signaling and with potential novel targets, such as ANXA4 and SOD2, in human lung cancer cells.

### Keywords
Proteomic, Silac, Nsclc; cisplatin resistance; metformin; mtor pathway

### Affiliations
CNPEM
Laboratorio de Espectrometria de Massas, Laboratorio Nacional de Biociencias (LNBio), Centro Nacional de Pesquisa em Energia e Materiais (CNPEM), Campinas, Brazil.

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
Laboratorio de Espectrometria de Massas, Laboratorio Nacional de Biociencias (LNBio), Centro Nacional de Pesquisa em Energia e Materiais (CNPEM), Campinas, Brazil.


