### Accession
PXD017732

### Title
Bioinformatic analysis of membrane and associated proteins in murine cardiomyocytes and human myocardium

### Description
In the current study we examined several proteomic- and RNA-Seq-based datasets of cardiac-enriched, cell-surface and membrane-associated proteins in human fetal and mouse neonatal ventricular cardiomyocytes. By integrating available microarray and tissue expression profiles along with MGI phenotypic analysis, we identified 173 membrane-associated proteins that are cardiac-enriched, conserved amongst eukaryotic species, and have not yet been linked to a ‘cardiac’ Phenotype-Ontology. To highlight the utility of this dataset, we selected several proteins to investigate more carefully, including FAM162A, MCT1, and COX20, to show cardiac enrichment, subcellular distribution and expression patterns in disease. Three-dimensional imaging was used to validate subcellular localization and expression in adult mouse ventricular cardiomyocytes. FAM162A, MCT1, and COX20 were differentially expressed at the transcriptomic and proteomic levels in multiple models of mouse and human heart diseases and may represent potential diagnostic and therapeutic targets for human dilated and ischemic cardiomyopathies. Altogether, we believe this comprehensive cardiomyocyte membrane proteome dataset will prove instrumental to future investigations aimed at characterizing heart disease markers and/or therapeutic targets for heart failure.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane fractions from primary neonatal cardiomyocytes were isolated using a modified cationic silica-bead plasma membrane isolation procedure8,59. Plated cardiomyocytes were first washed three times with MES-buffered saline (MBS; 25 mM 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES), pH 6.5 and 150 mM NaCl) and then coated with 1% ice-cold silica beads for 10 min, washed three times in MBS and then incubated in 0.1% polyacrylic acid to block the free cationic groups on the silica beads. The cells were then harvested in 1 ml of sucrose/HEPES solution and were centrifuged at 1,000g for 5 min. The homogenate was removed and labelled the ‘H’ fraction. The pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of sucrose/HEPES solution. An aliquot of this pellet at this step was removed and labelled as crude pellet (P1). The remaining P1 fraction was mixed with 50% Nycodenz solution and overlayed on a 27–40% discontinuous Nycodenz gradient and was centrifuged at 110,000g for 1 h. The resulting pellet containing the membrane fraction bound to the silica beads (termed P2) was then eluted before mass spectrometry analysis. Plasma membrane fraction analysis (from isolated human fetal cardiomyocytes) was carried out as described for the mouse neonatal cells, but with the cells in solution and pelleted at 1,000g after incubation with 1% silica-bead solution and each MBS wash, and later incubated in 0.1% polyacrylic acid. Homogenization and purification on the Nycodenz gradient were carried out identically to the plated mouse neonatal cells.  Silica beads/membrane pellicles were resuspended in NET Buffer (400 mM NaCl, 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1% Trition X-100) for 1 h at 4 °C. This was followed by centrifugation at 21,000g for 30 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and precipitated in 10% trichloroacetic acid in acetone overnight at −20 °C and then centrifuged at 5,510g at 4 °C for 20 min. The pellet was resuspended in 8 M urea and 2 mM dithiothreitol and then carboxyamidomethylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 37 °C in the dark. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5 to ∼1.5 M urea and trypsinized overnight at 37 °C.

### Data Protocol
Previously, we enriched for membrane fractions from mouse neonatal ventricular cardiomyocytes and human fetal cardiomyocytes using cationic colloidal silica beads 10, 11. In those experiments, a membrane-depleted homogenate (removed after centrifugation at 1000g for 5 min, labelled ‘H’) as well as a membrane-enriched fraction (pellet resuspended in NET buffer (400mM NaCl, 25mM Hepes pH7.4, and 1% Triton-X100) for 2 hours at 4 oC). were then subjected MudPIT 42 (Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology) analysis with stringent statistical filtering (<1% false discovery rate) as previously described 10. This resulted in the identification of 2,762 human and 3,033 mouse proteins. MudPIT excel output files obtained from the Supplementary Table files of Sharma et al. 10 containing original unique peptides and total spectra detected files (labelled as “Sharma et al. ncomms_2015_peptides and spectra in human ventricular cardiomyocytes” and “Sharma et al. ncomms_2015_peptides and spectra in mouse ventricular cardiomyocytes”) were uploaded to figshare (https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.11844972.v9).Raw mass spectrometry files were searched using X!TANDEM (version 2010.12.01.1; ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/projects/tandem/source/2010-12-01/) against human or mouse UniProt database (version 2011_03; ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/previous_releases/release-2011_01/) with the following search parameters: Parent ion -mass of 4Da, fragment mass error of 0.4 Da, and complete carbaminomethyl modification of cysteine by iodoacetic acid. The resulting tryptic peptides matching these criteria made up the final list of identified proteins. Next, to identify conserved membrane-associated proteins, orthology mapping analysis of all identified human and mouse proteins was performed using the MGI orthology database (http://www.informatics.jax.org) taking into account only one-to-one orthology to yield the identification of human and mouse one-to-one orthologues 43. We then performed comparative proteomics analysis using Qspec to identify proteins that are enriched in the TX-100 fraction compared to the homogenate fraction. This resulted in the identification of 550 membrane-enriched orthologue proteins.  To rank the 550 membrane-enriched proteins identified, we first carried out prediction of transmembrane domains of the 550 identified proteins using TMHMM version 2 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM) to identify membrane localized protein clusters. To further select novel cardiac membrane-enriched proteins, MGI phenotypic analysis (http://www.informatics.jax.org/phenotypes.shtml) was performed to individually map against our datasets to select and rank novel cardiac membrane proteins. Finally, we manually annotated the 550 protein clusters to select cardiac enriched transcripts by employing the publicly available microarray database, BioGPS microarray data (http://biogps.org/) to complete the rank ordered analysis of the 550 identified proteins. Excel output file containing full ranking criteria along with step-by-step ranking of the 550 identified proteins was uploaded to figshare (https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.11844972.v9).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart disease, Therapeutics, Cardiomyocytes, Bioinformatics, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
University of Toronto Translational Biology and Engineering Program, Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Frank Shin-Haw Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Gramolini
University of Toronto Translational Biology and Engineering Program, Ted Rogers Centre for Heart Research


