### Accession
PXD019387

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of Serum Exosomes from Patients with Metastatic Gastric Cancer

### Description
Clinical management of metastatic gastric cancer (mGC) remains a major challenge due to a lack of specific biomarkers and effective therapeutic targets. Recently, accumulating evidence has suggested that exosomes play an essential role in cancer metastasis and can be an excellent reservoir of novel biomarkers and candidate therapeutic targets for cancer. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to reveal the proteomic profile of mGC-derived exosomes.Exosomes were isolated from pooled serum samples of 20 mGC patients and 40 healthy controls (HCs) by ultracentrifugation. Next, quantitative proteomic analyses were applied to analyze the protein profiles of the exosomes, and bioinformatic analyses were conducted on the proteomic data. Finally, the expression of exosomal protein candidates was selectively validated in individual subjects by western blot analysis. We isolated exosomes from serum samples. The size of the serum derived exosomes ranged from 30 to 150 nm in diameter. The exosomal markers CD9 and CD81 were observed in the serum exosomes. However, the exosomal negative marker calnexin, an endoplasmic reticulum protein, was not detected in exosomes. Overall, 443 exosomal proteins, including 110 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified by quantitative proteomics analyses. The bioinformatics analyses indicated that the upregulated proteins were enriched in the process of protein metabolic, whereas the downregulated proteins were largely involved in cell-cell adhesion organization. Surprisingly, ten highly vital proteins (UBA52, PSMA1, PSMA5, PSMB6, PSMA7, PSMA4, PSMA3, PSMB1, PSMA6, and FGA) were filtered from DEPs, most of which are proteasome subunits. Moreover, the validation data confirmed that PSMA3 and PSMA6 was explicitly enriched in the serum derived exosomes from patients with mGC. The present study provided a comprehensive description of the serum exosome proteome of mGC patients, which could be an excellent resource for further studies of mGC.

### Sample Protocol
1.Exosomal Protein Lysis and Digestion Exosomes from the two sample groups (mGC and HC) were solubilized in lysis buffer (8 M urea and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail). Then, the protein concentration was determined with the BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Equal amounts of protein (100 μg) from the two groups were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Then, the protein samples were diluted until the urea concentration was less than 2 M by adding 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB). Subsequently, trypsin was added to the sample at a 1:50 (w/w) trypsin-to-protein ratio for the first overnight digestion and a 1:100 (w/w) trypsin-to-protein ratio for the second 4 h digestion. 2.Peptide Fractionation The peptides were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) with an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm diameter, 4.6 mm inner diameter, and 250 mm length). Briefly, the peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into four fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  3.Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass analysis (LC-MS/MS) The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and then separated by an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high-performance liquid system. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. After separation, the peptides were injected into the NSI source for ionization and then analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion MS (Thermo Scientific, USA). The electrospray voltage was set at 2.0 kV. The scanning range for primary mass spectrometry was set to 350-1550 m/z, and the scanning resolution was set to 60000; the fixed starting point of the scanning range for secondary mass spectrometry was 100 m/z, and the scanning resolution for secondary mass spectrometry was set to 15000. Data acquisition mode used a data-dependent scanning (DDA) program.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8 http://www.maxquant.org/). The tandem mass spectra were queried against the Human UniProt/SwissProt database combined with the reverse decoy database. And the Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance value for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search. The mass tolerance value for the fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. The FDR was set to less than 1%. Proteins were quantified using label-free quantification, and the relative protein abundances are presented as the mGC/HC ratios. The differential expression threshold was set to a 2-fold change.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metastatic gastric cancer; serum exosomes; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Jian Hua Tong

### Lab Head
Dr Jian Hua Tong
Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China


