### Accession
PXD004203

### Title
Mimivirus Replication Factories

### Description
Proteomic analysis of isolated viral factories along a timeline after infection of the amoeba Acanthamoeba polyphaga by the giant Mimivirus

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were initially reduced through incubation with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT; Sigma) for 30 min at 60°C and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in the dark for 30 min at 21C. Proteins were then subjected to trypsin digestion (Promega; Madison, WI, USA) at 1:50 tryptisn:protein ratio for 16h at 37°C. Digestion was stopped with trifluroacetic acid (1%). Detergents were removed using commercial detergent removal columns (Pierce, Rockford, IL USA), and samples were desalted using solid-phase extraction columns (Oasis HLB, Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Liquid-chromatography high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC/MS). LC/MS-grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was loaded using split-less Nano-Ultra-Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: solution A: H2O+0.1% formic acid and solution B: acetonitrile+0.1% formic acid. Sample desalting was performed using a reversed-phase C18 trapping column (180μm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5μm particle size; Waters). Peptides were separated using a HSS T3 nano-column (7μm internal diameter, 250mm length, 1.8μm particle size; Waters) at 0.3μL/min. Peptides were injected into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 35% solution B in 95min, 35% to 90% solution B in 5 min, then maintained at 95% B for 5 min. The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive; Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Thermo Scientific,Proxeon). Data were acquired in DDA mode, using a Top12 method.

### Data Protocol
Quantification was based on label-free, MS1 peptide intensity . Raw data was imported into the Expressionist® software (Genedata). The software was used for retention time alignment and peak detection of precursor peptides. A master peak list was generated from all MS/MS events and sent for database searching using Mascot v2.4 (Matrix Sciences). Data was searched against a protein database  containing protein sequences downloaded from UniprotKB (http://www.uniprot.org/) of Acanthamoeba castellanii str. Neff, Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus and 125 common laboratory contaminant proteins. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modification was set to oxidation of methionines. Identifications were filtered such that the global false discovery rate was maximum 1%. Data were normalized based on the total ion current. Peptide identifications were imported back to Expressionist to annotate identified peaks. Data was normalized base on the total ion current. Protein abundance was obtained by summing the three most intense peptides per protein. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of geometric means of the different sample groups.

### Publication Abstract
The recent discovery of multiple giant double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) viruses blurred the consensual distinction between viruses and cells due to their size, as well as to their structural and genetic complexity. A dramatic feature revealed by these viruses as well as by many positive-strand RNA viruses is their ability to rapidly form elaborate intracellular organelles, termed "viral factories," where viral progeny are continuously generated. Here we report the first isolation of viral factories at progressive postinfection time points. The isolated factories were subjected to mass spectrometry-based proteomics, bioinformatics, and imaging analyses. These analyses revealed that numerous viral proteins are present in the factories but not in mature virions, thus implying that multiple and diverse proteins are required to promote the efficiency of viral factories as "production lines" of viral progeny. Moreover, our results highlight the dynamic and highly complex nature of viral factories, provide new and general insights into viral infection, and substantiate the intriguing notion that viral factories may represent the living state of viruses. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Large dsDNA viruses such as vaccinia virus and the giant mimivirus, as well as many positive-strand RNA viruses, generate elaborate cytoplasmic organelles in which the multiple and diverse transactions required for viral replication and assembly occur. These organelles, which were termed "viral factories," are attracting much interest due to the increasing realization that the rapid and continuous production of viral progeny is a direct outcome of the elaborate structure and composition of the factories, which act as efficient production lines. To get new insights into the nature and function of viral factories, we devised a method that allows, for the first time, the isolation of these organelles. Analyses of the isolated factories generated at different times postinfection by mass spectrometry-based proteomics provide new perceptions of their role and reveal the highly dynamic nature of these organelles.

### Keywords
Mimivirus, Viral factories

### Affiliations
The Weizmann Institute of Science
Weizmann Institute of Science Department of Structural Biology Faculty of Chemistry

### Submitter
Alon Savidor

### Lab Head
Dr Abraham Minsky
Weizmann Institute of Science Department of Structural Biology Faculty of Chemistry


