### Accession
PXD044809

### Title
SEPepQuant enhances the detection of possible isoform regulations in shotgun proteomics

### Description
Shotgun proteomics is essential for protein identification and quantification in biomedical research, but protein isoform characterization is challenging due to the extensive number of peptides shared across proteins, hindering our understanding of protein isoform regulation and their roles in normal and disease biology. We systematically assess the challenge and opportunities of shotgun proteomics-based protein isoform characterization using in silico and experimental data, and then present SEPepQuant, a graph theory-based approach to maximize isoform characterization. Using published data from one induced pluripotent stem cell study and two human hepatocellular carcinoma studies, we demonstrate the ability of SEPepQuant in addressing the key limitations of existing methods, providing more comprehensive isoform-level characterization, identifying hundreds of isoform-level regulation events, and facilitating streamlined cross-study comparisons. Our analysis provides solid evidence to support a widespread role of protein isoform regulation in normal and disease processes, and SEPepQuant has broad applications to biological and translational research.

### Sample Protocol
The tissues were from a published study (Gao, et al., Cell 2019) and were lysed in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1 M DTT, pH 7.6) previously. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure was used for peptide preparation with all centrifugation steps at 12,000 g at 25℃. Briefly, a total of 50 μg proteins for each sample were loaded in 10 kDa centrifugal filter tubes (Millipore), washed twice with 200 μL UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5), alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 200 μL UA buffer for 30 min in the darkness, washed thrice with 200 μL UA buffer again and finally washed thrice with 200 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were digested at 37℃ for 18 hr with trypsin (Promega) at a concentration of 1:50 (w/w) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. After digestion, peptides were eluted by centrifugation and acidated by trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) with a final concentration of 1%. Then the peptides were purified using C18 stage-tips and the elutes were subjected to vacuum centrifugation dryness. The peptides were resolved in 20 μL 0.1% formic acid (FA) and the concentration was determined using NanoDrop. Six standard peptides were synthesized with heavy-isotope labeled lysine in the C-terminal in GL Biochem (Shanghai) Ltd. The synthetic peptides were firstly resolved in 20% ACN and diluted using 0.1% FA for further use. For the PRM experiment, 1 μg peptides of each sample were mixed with the six standard peptides (1 pmol for each peptide). The peptides were separated using a home-made micro-tip C18 column (75 μm × 200 mm) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3.0 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) on a nanoflow HPLC Easy-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 60 min LC gradient at 300 nL/min. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) FA in H2O and Buffer B consisted of 0.1% (v/v) FA in 80% acetonitrile. The gradient was set as follows: 1%–32% B in 43 min; 32%–45% B in 7 min; 45%–100% B in 2 min; 100% B in 8 min. The PRM analyses were performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a scheduled mode to monitor both the “light” and “heavy” parent ions of the six peptides. The retention time of each peptide was determined in a preliminary experiment and the ±3min of the retention time for each peptide was targeted for analysis.  The MS parameters were set as follows: The spray voltage was 1,800 V in positive ion mode and the ion transfer tube temperature was set at 320℃. MS data acquisition was performed using Xcalibur software in profile spectrum data type. The MS1 full scan was set at a resolution of 120,000 @ m/z 200, AGC target 3e6 and maximum IT 50 ms by orbitrap mass analyzer (350-1500 m/z). The MS/MS scans of the target peptide were generated by HCD fragmentation at a resolution of 15,000 @ m/z 200, AGC target 1e5 and maximum IT 100 ms. Isolation window was set at 1.0 m/z. The normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at NCE 27%, and the loop count was set at 12.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were processed using the Skyline software. The chromatographic peak of each peptide was manually checked. For each peptide, five product ions with the top intensities were selected for quantification analysis. The ratios of light to heavy peptides were reported and used to perform the quantification comparison among samples.

### Publication Abstract
Shotgun proteomics is essential for protein identification and quantification in biomedical research, but protein isoform characterization is challenging due to the extensive number of peptides shared across proteins, hindering our understanding of protein isoform regulation and their roles in normal and disease biology. We systematically assess the challenge and opportunities of shotgun proteomics-based protein isoform characterization using in silico and experimental data, and then present SEPepQuant, a graph theory-based approach to maximize isoform characterization. Using published data from one induced pluripotent stem cell study and two human hepatocellular carcinoma studies, we demonstrate the ability of SEPepQuant in addressing the key limitations of existing methods, providing more comprehensive isoform-level characterization, identifying hundreds of isoform-level regulation events, and facilitating streamlined cross-study comparisons. Our analysis provides solid evidence to support a widespread role of protein isoform regulation in normal and disease processes, and SEPepQuant has broad applications to biological and translational research.

### Keywords
Quantification, Shotgun proteomics, Protein isoform

### Affiliations
Baylor college of medicine
Baylor College of Medicine

### Submitter
Yongchao Dou

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Zhang
Baylor College of Medicine


