### Accession
PXD038413

### Title
Automated proteomics workflows for consistent library generation and label-free protein quantitation in 96-well format and across different samples types

### Description
Automated workflows for high-throughput library generation and biomarker detection using data-independent acquisition

### Sample Protocol
For library preparation, all samples were reduced, alkylated and digested and further fractionated (SCX and HpH ) using automated library workflow. For quantitative proteomics, all samples reduced and alkylated and digested using automated quantitative workflow

### Data Protocol
Pan Bovid spectral libarary was generated using OneOmics tool (SCIEX)and SWATH data extraction was done uisng Skyline. MSstats was used to generate PCA  plot in sheep.

### Publication Abstract
Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra-mass spectrometry underpinned by advanced bioinformatics offers a framework for comprehensive analysis of proteomes and the discovery of robust biomarkers. However, the lack of a generic sample preparation platform to tackle the heterogeneity of material collected from different sources may be a limiting factor to the broad application of this technique. We have developed universal and fully automated workflows using a robotic sample preparation platform, which enabled in-depth and reproducible proteome coverage and characterization of bovine and ovine specimens representing healthy animals and a model of myocardial infarction. High correlation (<i>R</i><sup>2</sup> = 0.85) between sheep proteomics and transcriptomics datasets validated the developments. The findings suggest that automated workflows can be employed for various clinical applications across different animal species and animal models of health and disease.

### Keywords
Myocardial infacrction, Cattle, Sheep

### Affiliations
The Florey Institute
Assist Professor  CARF, QUT Proteomics Lab Head

### Submitter
Selvam Paramasivan

### Lab Head
Dr Pawel Sadowski
Assist Professor  CARF, QUT Proteomics Lab Head


