### Accession
PXD000924

### Title
Vibrio parahaemolyticus LC-MS/MS

### Description
The lysine acetylation of proteins is a major post-translational modification that plays an important regulatory role in almost every aspect of cells, both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Vibrio parahaemolyticus, a model marine bacterium, is a worldwide cause of bacterial seafood-borne illness. Here, we conducted the ﬁrst lysine acetylome in the bacterium through combination of highly sensitive immune-affinity purification and high-resolution LC-MS/MS. Overall, we identified 1413 lysine acetylation sites in 656 proteins, which account for 13.6% of the total proteins in the cells and is the highest ratio of acetyl proteins that has so far been identified in bacteria. The bioinformatics analysis of the acetylome showed that the acetylated proteins are involved in a wide range of cellular functions and exhibit diverse subcellular localizations. More specifically, proteins related to protein biosynthesis and carbon metabolism are the preferential targets of lysine acetylation. Moreover, two types of acetylation motifs, a lysine or arginine at the +4/+5 position and a tyrosine, histidine, or phenylalanine at the +1/+2 position, were revealed from the analysis of the acetylome. Additionally, the protein interaction network analysis demonstrates that a wide range of interactions are modulated by protein acetylation. This study provides a significant beginning for the in-depth exploration of the physiological role of lysine acetylation in V. parahaemolyticus.

### Sample Protocol
The cultured bacterial cells were lysed in 8 M urea supplemented with 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, protease inhibitor cocktail (Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set III; Calbiochem), and HDAC inhibitor (50 mM sodium butyrate, 30 mM nicotinamide, and 3 μM Trichostatin A) and then sonicated via 12 short 10 s bursts with 30 s cooling intervals. Unbroken cells and debris were removed by centrifugation at 4°C and 20,000 g for 10 min. The protein content in the supernatant was determined using the 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and precipitated with 20% trichloroacetic acid overnight at 4°C. The resulting precipitate was washed three times with ice-cold acetone. The air-dried precipitate was resuspended in 100 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 for 12 h at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 45 min and then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The reaction was terminated by incubation with 30 mM cysteine at ambient temperature for 20 min. To ensure complete digestion, additional trypsin at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 was added, and the mixture was incubated for an additional 4 h. The digested peptides were lyophilized in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The peptides were resuspended in buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 2 min. The supernatant was transferred into a sample tube and loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column (Dionex, 75 µm × 2 cm) by EASY nLC1000 nano-UPLC (Thermo Scientific), and the peptide was eluted onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (Dionex, 50 μm × 15 cm). A 34-min gradient was run at 300 nl/min; the mobile phase was changed from 5 to 30% B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA), to 48% B over a 2-min period, and then to 80% B over a 2-min period and then maintained at 80% B for 4 min.  The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using a Q Exactive instrument (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC instrument. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. The peptides were selected for MS/MS using 25% NCE with 4% stepped NCE, and ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan and 15 continuous MS/MS scans was applied for the analysis of the top 15 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 4E4, as determined through an MS survey scan with a dynamic exclusion of 2.5 s. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.8 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap, and 2E5 ions were accumulated for the generation of their MS/MS spectra. For the MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1,800 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation of proteins is a major post-translational modification that plays an important regulatory role in almost every aspect of cells, both eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Vibrio parahemolyticus, a model marine bacterium, is a worldwide cause of bacterial seafood-borne illness. Here, we conducted the first lysine acetylome in this bacterium through a combination of highly sensitive immune-affinity purification and high-resolution LC-MS/MS. Overall, we identified 1413 lysine acetylation sites in 656 proteins, which account for 13.6% of the total proteins in the cells; this is the highest ratio of acetyl proteins that has so far been identified in bacteria. The bioinformatics analysis of the acetylome showed that the acetylated proteins are involved in a wide range of cellular functions and exhibit diverse subcellular localizations. More specifically, proteins related to protein biosynthesis and carbon metabolism are the preferential targets of lysine acetylation. Moreover, two types of acetylation motifs, a lysine or arginine at the +4/+5 positions and a tyrosine, histidine, or phenylalanine at the +1/+2 positions, were revealed from the analysis of the acetylome. Additionally, protein interaction network analysis demonstrates that a wide range of interactions are modulated by protein acetylation. This study provides a significant beginning for the in-depth exploration of the physiological role of lysine acetylation in V. parahemolyticus.

### Keywords
Acetylome, Lysine acetylation motif, V. parahaemolyticus, Interaction network, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Proteomics and Molecular Enzymology, School of Life Sciences, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University

### Submitter
Jianyi Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Jianyi Pan
Institute of Proteomics and Molecular Enzymology, School of Life Sciences, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University


