### Accession
PXD035884

### Title
Unbiased undepleted malignant pleural effusion proteomics study

### Description
Pleural effusion (PE) occurs as a consequence of various pathologies. Malignant effusion due to lung cancer is one of the most frequent causes. Methods for accurate differentiation of malignant from benign PE cases are an unmet clinical need. Proteomics profiling of PE has shown promising results. However, mass spectrometry (MS) analysis typically involves the tedious elimination of abundant proteins before analysis, and clinical annotation of proteomics profiled cohorts is limited. In this study, PE from 97 patients was investigated by applying label-free state-of-the-art liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) to find potential novel biomarkers that correlate with immunohistochemistry assessment of tumor biopsy or survival data. The data set consists of 214 LC-MS runs.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide preparation:
The frozen PE specimens were thawed and then centrifuged at 3200 xg, 10 min, 4°C to pellet cell debris. Next, PE were precipitated with ice cold acetone and proteins re-suspended in solution containing RIPA buffer, 4% SDS. Proteins were reduced with 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT) and loaded onto 30K spin columns and washed with 8 M Urea 0.1 M HEPES, pH 8.0. Then proteins were alkylated with 50 mm iodoacetamide. Previous to trypsin digestion overnight at 37°C, proteins were equilibrated with ammonium bicar-bonate buffer.
Protein Measurements:
Protein concentrations in PE were measured by using a Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufac-turer’s instructions. Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) was used as the reference standard to generate the standard curve of the BCA protein assay. Additionally, the protein quanti-fications were validated by SDS-PAGE Coomassie staining. 
Mass Spectrometry Analysis:
Samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics using a nano-LC-MSMS (Dionex RSLCnano 3000) coupled to an Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) as previously described [1]. In brief, samples were loaded onto a custom made fused capillary pre-column (2 cm length, 360 µm OD, 75 µm ID, flowrate 5 µL per minute for 6 minutes) packed with ReproSil Pur C18 5.0 µm resin (Dr. Maish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany), and separated using a capillary column (25 cm length, 360 µm outer diameter, 75 µm inner diameter) packed with ReproSil Pur C18 1.9-µm resin (Dr. Maish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) at a flow of 250 nL per minute. A 56 min linear gradient from 89% A (0.1% formic acid) to 32% B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) was applied. Mass spectra were acquired in pos-itive ion mode in a data-dependent manner by switching between one Orbitrap survey MS scan (mass range m/z 350 to m/z 1200) followed by the sequential isolation and higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation and Orbitrap detection of fragment ions of the most intense ions with a cycle time of 2 s between each MS scan. MS and MSMS settings: maximum injection times were set to “Auto”, normalized collision energy was 30%, ion selection threshold for MSMS analysis was 10,000 counts, and dy-namic exclusion of sequenced ions was set to 30 s.

1) Carvalho, A.S.; Baeta, H.; Henriques, A.F.A.; Ejtehadifar, M.; Tranfield, E.M.; Sousa, A.L.; Farinho, A.; Silva, B.C.; Cabecadas, J.; Gameiro, P., et al. Proteomic Landscape of Extracellular Vesicles for Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphoma Subtyping. International journal of molecular sciences 2021, 22, doi:10.3390/ijms222011004.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data from the 214 LC-MS runs of 97 PE samples were searched using VEMS [1] and MaxQuant [2]. The MSMS spectra were searched against a standard human proteome database from UniProt (3AUP000005640). Permutated protein se-quences, where Arg and Lys were not permutated, were included in the database for VEMS. Trypsin cleavage allowing a maximum of 4 missed cleavages was used. Car-bamidomethyl cysteine was included as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, lysine and N-terminal protein acetylation, deamidation of asparagine, serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation, diglycine on lysine, methylation on lysine and glutamine were included as variable modifications. 5 ppm mass accuracy was specified for precursor ions and 0.01 m/z for fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) for protein identification was set at 1% for peptide and protein identifications. No restriction was applied for minimal peptide length for VEMS search.    1) Carvalho, A. S. et al. Global mass spectrometry and transcriptomics array based drug profiling provides novel insight into glucosamine induced endoplasmic reticulum stress. Molecular & cellular proteomics: MCP 13, 3294–3307, doi: 10.1074/mcp. M113.034363 (2014). 2) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Cox, J. and Mann, M., Nat Biotechnol, 2008, 26, pp 1367-72.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Biomarker, Real life clinical cohort, Pleural effusion, Malignant

### Affiliations
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC

NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS

UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA

Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa

Portugal
Computational and Experimental Biology Group  NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS  UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA  Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa  Portugal

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head
Dr Rune Matthiesen
Computational and Experimental Biology Group  NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS  UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA  Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa  Portugal


