### Accession
PXD037034

### Title
Identification and functional characterization of proteins interacting with cohesin complex in yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

### Description
To ensure equal separation of DNA, sister chromatids are held together from S phase to metaphase–anaphase transition by a multiprotein complex called cohesin. This makes it possible to establish chromosome biorientation, counteracts the pulling force of mitotic spindle microtubules, preventing premature sister chromatid separation, and ensures precise segregation of sister DNAs into daughter cells In order to better understand how the sister chromatid cohesion process is regulated we looked for new cohesin interacors. We constructed a yeast strain endogenously expressing TAP-tagged Scc1 (Scc1-TAP). Next, we performed a single-step TAP purification using an untagged strain (mock sample) or a strain expressing Scc1-TAP, followed by identification of co-purifying proteins by MS.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 1011 of logarithmically growing untagged or Scc1-TAP cells were harvested by centrifugation, extensively washed with water and YEB buffer (100 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.9, 200 mM KCl, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 2 mM DDT, protease inhibitors [Sigma-Aldrich, P8215], 1 mM PMSF) and then snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were lysed by grinding in the presence of dry ice. Lysed powders were reconstituted in YEB buffer on ice followed by 15 min centrifugation at 4000 rpm. Next, supernatants were transferred to new tubes and centrifuged for 30 min at 15 000 rpm. Resulting protein extracts were incubated with IgG Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare, 17-0969-01) for 2 h at 4°C with rotation and then centrifuged for 1 min at 1500 rpm. Next, beads were washed several times with IPP buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.9, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X) and then with TEV buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.9, 0.2 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X, 1 mM DDT). To release Scc1, IgG Sepharose beads were incubated overnight at 4°C in TEV buffer containing 400 U of TEV protease. Next day, beads were separated from the buffer and the released proteins were precipitated with the methanol-chloroform procedure.  Protein pellet was resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to standard procedure of trypsin digestion, during which proteins were reduced with 0.5 M (5 mM f.c.) TCEP for 1 h at 60°C, blocked with 200mM MMTS (10mM f.c.) for 10 min at RT and digested overnight with 10 ul of 0.1 ug/ul trypsin. The resulting peptide mixtures were applied in equal volumes of 20 ul to RP-18 pre-column (Waters, Milford, MA) using water containing 0.1% FA as a mobile phase and then transferred to a nano-HPLC RP-18 column (internal diameter 75 µM, Waters, Milford MA) using ACN gradient (0 – 35% ACN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column outlet was coupled directly to the ion source of the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp., San Jose, CA) working in the regime of data-dependent MS to MS/MS switch. A blank run ensuring absence of cross-contamination from previous samples preceded each analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were preprocessed with Mascot Distiller software (v. 2.6, MatrixScience, London, UK) and a search was performed with the Mascot Search Engine (MatrixScience, London, UK, Mascot Server 2.6) against the SGD database (6,713 sequences). To reduce mass errors, the peptide and fragment mass tolerance settings were established separately for individual LC-MS/MS runs after a measured mass recalibration. The rest of search parameters were as follows: enzyme, Trypsin; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, Methylthio (C); variable modifications, Oxidation (M); instrument, HCD. The Decoy Mascot functionality was used for keeping FDR for peptide identifications below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Cohesin is a highly conserved, multiprotein complex whose canonical function is to hold sister chromatids together to ensure accurate chromosome segregation. Cohesin association with chromatin relies on the Scc2-Scc4 cohesin loading complex that enables cohesin ring opening and topological entrapment of sister DNAs. To better understand how sister chromatid cohesion is regulated, we performed a proteomic screen in budding yeast that identified the Isw1 chromatin remodeler as a cohesin binding partner. In addition, we found that Isw1 also interacts with Scc2-Scc4. Lack of Isw1 protein, the Ioc3 subunit of ISW1a or Isw1 chromatin remodeling activity resulted in increased accumulation of cohesin at centromeres and pericentromeres, suggesting that ISW1a may promote efficient translocation of cohesin from the centromeric site of loading to neighboring regions. Consistent with the role of ISW1a in the chromatin organization of centromeric regions, Isw1 was found to be recruited to centromeres. In its absence we observed changes in the nucleosomal landscape at centromeres and pericentromeres. Finally, we discovered that upon loss of RSC functionality, ISW1a activity leads to reduced cohesin binding and cohesion defect. Taken together, our results support the notion of a key role of chromatin remodelers in the regulation of cohesin distribution on chromosomes.

### Keywords
Cohesion, Cohesin complex, Scc1

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
University of Wrocław, Faculty of Biological Sciences

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Ireneusz Litwin
University of Wrocław, Faculty of Biological Sciences


