### Accession
PXD011582

### Title
Human platelet proteome LC-MS/MS

### Description
This study aims to elucidate the extent of ex-vivo aspirin-induced acetylation on human platelet proteome from poorly controlled diabetic patients through a shotgun proteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
Platelet protein extracts from healthy controls and poorly controlled diabetic patients were incubated with 500 uM aspirin for 30 minutes and then remaining aspirin was washed out by ultrafiltration. Protein samples were reduced and alkylated and subsequently digested with trypsin. Peptide mixtures were desalted and concentrated using C18 spin columns prior to LC-MS/MS acquisition. Peptide elution was carried out with a 120 minutes gradient at 250 nL/min. DDA acqusitions were performed with a QExactive Plus. A maximum of 15 precursor ions were selected in the survey scan for further fragmentation with HCD (27% NCE). A resolving power of 70.000 and 17.500 were used for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively. A dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds was enabled and precursor ions with a charge state equal to 1+ were excluded from the data-dependent selection.

### Data Protocol
DDA (raw) data from control and patient groups  were converted into peak lists (mgf) and queried against the human proteome database (20203 sequences) using Mascot as search algorithm. Database search was carried out using trypsin as endoprotease with a maximum of 4 missed cleavages. Cysteine alkylation was selected as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and acetylation at lysine, serine, threonine and tyrosine residues were used as variable modifications. An error tolerance of 10 and 6 ppm were chosen for precursor and fragment ion matches, respectively. False positive matches were filtered out using a FDR value below 1%. Precursor ion features (m/z and Rt) were used to extract the area under the curve of each identified peptide using Progenesis QI as label-free quantification tool.

### Publication Abstract
This data article associated with the manuscript "A high glucose levels is associated with decreased aspirin-mediated acetylation of platelet cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 at serine 529: a pilot study" (Finamore et al., 2018) refers to the shotgun proteomics approach carried out on platelet protein extracts from diabetic patients and healthy controls. Platelet proteins were <i>in vitro</i> incubated with 500&#x202f;&#xb5;M aspirin for 30&#x202f;min at 37&#x202f;&#xb0;C to enhance the acetylation process. After protein digestion with trypsin, DDA data were acquired on a Thermo QExactive plus using 3 technical replicate injections per sample. Here, we were able to elucidate the preferential sites of aspirin-induced acetylation on a significant fraction of the platelet proteome and to quantify the impact of diabetes on the effect of aspirin on several platelet proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011582.

### Keywords
Human, Aspirin-mediated acetylation, Platelets

### Affiliations
Translational Biomarker Group, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
University of Geneva

### Submitter
Francesco Finamore

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Charles Sanchez
Translational Biomarker Group, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland


