### Accession
PXD014316

### Title
Nicotiana benthamiana cell pH mitigation

### Description
We assessed the off-target effects of M2 expression on the leaf proteome of Nicotiana benthamiana infiltrated with the bacterial gene vector Agrobacterium tumefaciens. A iTRAQ quantitative proteomics procedure was followed to compare the leaf proteomes of plants agroinfiltrated with either an ‘empty’ vector or an M2-encoding vector. Leaves infiltrated with the empty vector had a low soluble protein content compared to non-infiltrated control leaves, associated with increased levels of stress-related proteins but decreased levels of photosynthesis-associated proteins. M2 expression partly compromised these effects of agroinfiltration to restore soluble protein content in leaf tissue, associated with restored levels of photosynthesis-associated proteins and reduced levels of stress-related proteins in the apoplast. These data illustrate the cell-wide influence of Golgi lumen pH homeostasis on the leaf proteome of N. benthamiana responding to microbial challenge.

### Sample Protocol
Whole-cell protein extracts (see above) from three biological replicates were used for iTRAQ proteomics. Similar volumes of the three replicates were pooled and the resulting mixture incubated overnight at –20°C in five volumes of pre-chilled acetone. Precipitated proteins were centrifuged at 20˚C for 15 min at 16,000 g, and the protein pellets resuspended in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)–0.5% w/v sodium deoxycholate (DOC) following air drying at 20˚C. Protein concentration in each sample was determined according to Bradford (1976), and 50 µg of protein was taken apart for iTRAQ labeling. TEAB and DOC were added to the samples at final concentrations of 0.5 M and 0.5% w/v, respectively. The proteins were reduced with Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) according to the iTRAQ kit manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems), and then digested overnight at 37˚C with sequence grade-trypsin (Promega) at a protease–protein ratio of 1:30. The resulting peptides were acidified to precipitate the DOC detergent, purified with an Oasis HLB cartridge (1 cc, 10 mg; Waters), SpeedVac-dried and dissolved in 30 µl of 0.5 M TEAB. Four-plex labeling was performed for 2 h in the dark at 20˚C with the iTRAQ reagent (Applied Biosystems), and the labeled peptides combined in a single tube. The samples were SpeedVac-dried, cleaned up using an HLB cartridge (Waters) and separated in 14 fractions on a high pH (pH 10) reversed-phase chromatography column using the Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent). Peptide fractions were SpeedVac-dried and resuspended in 0.1% v/v formic acid prior to MS/MS analysis. Peptide fractions containing approximately 900 ng of peptides were separated by online reversed-phase nanoscale capillary LC and analyzed by electrospray mass spectrometry. Separations were performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific/Dionex Softron GmbH) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. The peptides were trapped in loading solvent (2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.05% v/v trifluoroacetic acid) for 5 min at 20 μL.min–1 on a 5 mm x 300 μm C18 pepmap cartridge pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific/Dionex Softron GmbH). The pre-column was switched online to a self-made 50 cm x 75 µm internal diameter separation column packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3-μm resin (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH). The peptides were eluted over 90 min at 300 nL.min–1 along a 5–40% linear gradient of solvent B (80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid) against 0,1% v/v formic acid (solvent A). Mass spectra were acquired under a data-dependent acquisition mode using the Thermo XCalibur software, v. 3.0.63. Full scan mass spectra in the 350–1800 m/z range were acquired in the Orbitrap spectrometer using an AGC target of 4e5, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, a resolution of 120,000 and an internal lock mass calibration on m/z 445.12003 (siloxane ion). Each MS scan was followed by the acquisition of fragmentation MS/MS spectra of the most intense ions for a total cycle time of 3 s (top speed mode). Selected ions were isolated using a quadrupole analyzer in a window of 1.6 m/z, and fragmented by higher energy collision-induced dissociation with collision energy set at 45. Resulting fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000, with an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Dynamic exclusion of previously fragmented peptides was set at a tolerance of 10 ppm for a period of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed with the Proteome Discover program, v. 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) set up to search the Solanaceae protein database of UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/4070; 117,836 proteins). Search parameters for matching were as follows: MMTS-alkylated Cys residues and iTRAQ-modified Lys, Tyr and peptide N-terminus as static modifications; oxidized Met residues and deamidated Asn and Gln residues as variable modifications; a mass search tolerance of 10 ppm for MS or 25 atomic mass units for MS/MS; and a maximum of two missed trypsin cleavages allowed. Protein identifications were deemed as valid when a False Discovery Rate of 1% was determined at the peptide and protein levels based on the target-decoy approach (Elias and Gygi, 2007). Protein Discoverer outputs were exported to the Microsoft Excel spreadsheet software, v. 2016 (Microsoft Inc.) for further analysis. A protein was considered as underexpressed when a ratio value of 0.5, or lower than 0.5, was calculated compared to the control; or as overexpressed when this ratio was equal to, or higher than, 2.0. The BLAST (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) and Blast2GO (https://www.blast2go.com) (Conesa et al., 2005) programs were used online to identify and classify the most downregulated, and most upregulated, proteins in leaves under the different experimental treatments. GO enrichment analyses were undertaken to compare the tested proteomes, based on the Gene Ontology system for gene and gene product classification (The Gene Ontology Consortium, 2008). A minimal E-value of 1 was set in Blast2GO for the BLASTP analysis, and the first 20 BLAST hits were selected for further analysis. Several genes with no annotations in the custom database were annotated, wherever possible, using the GenBank UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org).

### Publication Abstract
Partial neutralization of the Golgi lumen pH by the ectopic expression of influenza virus M2 proton channel is useful to stabilize acid-labile recombinant proteins in plant cells, but the impact of pH gradient mitigation on host cellular functions has not been investigated. Here, we assessed the unintended effects of M2 expression on the leaf proteome of <i>Nicotiana benthamiana</i> infiltrated with the bacterial gene vector <i>Agrobacterium tumefaciens</i>. An isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification quantitative proteomics procedure was followed to compare the leaf proteomes of plants agroinfiltrated with either an "empty" vector or an M2-encoding vector. Leaves infiltrated with the empty vector had a low soluble protein content compared to noninfiltrated control leaves, associated with increased levels of stress-related proteins but decreased levels of photosynthesis-associated proteins. M2 expression partly compromised these effects of agroinfiltration to restore soluble protein content in the leaf tissue, associated with restored levels of photosynthesis-associated proteins and reduced levels of stress-related proteins in the apoplast. These data illustrate the cell-wide influence of the Golgi lumen pH homeostasis on the leaf proteome of <i>N. benthamiana</i> responding to microbial challenge. They also underline the relevance of assessing the eventual unintended effects of accessory proteins used to modulate specific cellular or metabolic functions in plant protein biofactories.

### Keywords
Agroinfiltration, Ph, Itraq, M2 ion channel, Nicotiana benhtamiana

### Affiliations
Centre de recherche et d’innovation sur les végétaux, Université Laval, Québec, Canada
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Philippe Jutras

### Lab Head
Dr Dominique Michaud
Centre de recherche et d’innovation sur les végétaux, Université Laval, Québec, Canada


