### Accession
PXD013326

### Title
Proteomics Analysis of Evolved Escherichia coli Populations from Cyclic Antibiotic Treatment

### Description
When the survivors of antibiotic treatment (persisters) are repeatedly regrown and retreated with the same antibiotic for several cycles, the new population will soon adapt to the treatment condition and become tolerant to the drug. Here, we did evolution experiments on Escherichia coli populations by treating it with daily high concentration of different antibiotics (ampicillin, ciprofloxacin and apramycin) approximating clinical dosage, during the rapid growth-exponential phase. After a few cycles, we observed that the evolved populations exhibit extremely high tolerance to the drug, which are achieved by single point mutations in one of several genes. Interestingly, treatment with different antibiotics led to the selection of different mutants despite the shared persistence phenotype. Here, we applied spectral counting-based quantitative proteomics to study the proteome profile of the evolved E. coli populations from different cyclic antibiotic treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Mid-exponential phase culture was exposed to 100 µg/ml ampicillin (10× MIC), 5 µg/ml ciprofloxacin (100× MIC) or 150 µg/ml apramycin (10× MIC) antibiotic for 3 h, and the antibiotic-containing medium was removed by washing twice in LB medium (10 min centrifugation at 4,500 g). Finally, the culture was resuspended in 3 ml fresh LB and grown overnight at 37⁰C with shaking at 220 r.p.m. After several cycles of antibiotic treatment and the tolerance phenotype was observed, we collected the new population as the evolved population. The evolved population from ampicillin, ciprofloxacin and apramycin treatments were collected after 4, 6, and 4 cycles respectively.  The ancestral and evolved populations were grown to stationary phase, harvested, and then subjected to standard shotgun proteomic technique. Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method was used for sample preparation and the resulting digest was analyzed by LC-MS/MS without any prefractionation.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, the raw data acquired from LC-MS/MS were converted to mzML files using msconvert and searched using two search engines to improve accuracy and reliability. We used both database searching (Comet) and library searching (SpectraST) methods, and subsequently processed the data together by the Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP). The differentially expressed proteins in the evolved populations were determined by using label-free quantification technique by spectral counting.

### Publication Abstract
Persisters are a subpopulation of cells that have enhanced abilities to survive antibiotics and other stressful conditions. Recently, it was found that when persisters were repeatedly regrown and retreated with the same antibiotic for several cycles, the new population will become tolerant to the drug. In this study, we applied such cyclic antibiotic treatment on <i>Escherichia coli</i> populations using different classes of antibiotics (ampicillin, ciprofloxacin, and apramycin) during the exponential phase. After a few cycles, we observed that the evolved populations exhibit high tolerance to the specific class of antibiotic used during the evolution experiments, which are achieved by single-point mutations in one or several genes. Interestingly, all evolved populations show multidrug tolerance at the stationary phase, indicating that they have higher triggered persister fraction. Proteomic analysis and cross-comparison of the regulated proteomes of the tolerant populations during the stationary phase identified protein candidates with similar expression profiles that might be important for the tolerance phenotype. Susceptibility tests of mutants lacking gene coding for these protein candidates showed that they have significantly reduced survival toward antibiotics not only during the stationary phase, but also during the exponential phase. We demonstrated how proteomics, combined with cyclic antibiotic treatment as a means to enrich tolerant populations, is a promising avenue to obtain fresh insights into the phenomenon of persistence.

### Keywords
Persistence, Evolved populations, Antibiotic, Proteomics, Persisters

### Affiliations
Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)

### Submitter
Jordy Evan Sulaiman

### Lab Head
Dr Henry Lam
Chemical and Biological Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong


