### Accession
PXD012574

### Title
Proteomic and Genomic Signatures of Repeat-instability in Cancer and Adjacent Normal Tissues

### Description
Repetitive sequences are hotspots of evolution at multiple levels. However, due to technical difficulties involved in their assembly and analysis, the role of repeats in tumor evolution is poorly understood. We developed a rigorous motif-based methodology to quantify variations in the repeat content of proteomes and genomes, directly from proteomic and genomic raw sequence data, and applied it to analyze a wide range of tumors and normal tissues. We identify high similarity between the repeat-instability in tumors and their patient-matched normal tissues, but also tumor-specific signatures, both in protein expression and in the genome, that strongly correlate with cancer progression and robustly predict the tumorigenic state. In a patient, the hierarchy of genomic repeat instability signatures accurately reconstructs tumor evolution, with primary tumors differentiated from metastases. We find an inverse relationship between repeat-instability and point mutation load, within and across patients, and independently of other somatic aberrations. Thus, repeat-instability is a distinct, transient and compensatory adaptive mechanism in tumor evolution.

### Sample Protocol
An original dataset of 27 ovarian cancer patients, including 13 high grade serous ovarian cancer tumors and 14 unmatched normal tissues, fallopian tube fimbriae tissues (since fimbrial epithelium is accepted as the tissue-of-origin of serous high grade ovarian cancer was also analyzed. Ovarian cancer tumors were macrodissected. Normal fimbriae sections were selected based on epithelial cell content greater than 50%.  The proteins were extracted using trifluoroethanol (TFE) and subjected to overnight digestion into peptides using sequencing-grade modified trypsin. Digested peptides were labelled using 10-plex TMT tags (Thermo Fisher) for 60 mins at room temperature followed by quenching with 5% hydroxylamine for 15 mins. Here, the normal tissues are not patient-matched. TMT proteomic labeling, relative to a internal reference, was performed for all samples, in 3 different experimental pools. The labelled peptides were multiplexed and fractionated into eight fractions with triethylamine using high pH reverse phase columns. The peptides were vaccum concentrated and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid over a gradient of 120mins.  MS acquisition was performed in a data-dependent manner, positive-ion mode with selection of the top 15 peptides from each MS spectrum for fragmentation and MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed in the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.6.9 ) and Andromeda search engine .  The proteomic raw data included ~27K identified peptides. The intensity of each peptide wi was taken as the measured normalized TMT intensity ratio in each sample, relative to a reference.

### Publication Abstract
Repetitive sequences are hotspots of evolution at multiple levels. However, due to difficulties involved in their assembly and analysis, the role of repeats in tumor evolution is poorly understood. We developed a rigorous motif-based methodology to quantify variations in the repeat content, beyond microsatellites, in proteomes and genomes directly from proteomic and genomic raw data. This method was applied to a wide range of tumors and normal tissues. We identify high similarity between repeat instability patterns in tumors and their patient-matched adjacent normal tissues. Nonetheless, tumor-specific signatures both in protein expression and in the genome strongly correlate with cancer progression and robustly predict the tumorigenic state. In a patient, the hierarchy of genomic repeat instability signatures accurately reconstructs tumor evolution, with primary tumors differentiated from metastases. We observe an inverse relationship between repeat instability and point mutation load within and across patients independent of other somatic aberrations. Thus, repeat instability is a distinct, transient, and compensatory adaptive mechanism in tumor evolution and a potential signal for early detection.

### Keywords
Proteomic signatures, Repeat-instability, Tumor evolution

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel


