### Accession
PXD040272

### Title
The predatory stink bug Arma chinensis (Hemiptera: Pentatomidae) produces a complex proteinaceous venom to overcome caterpillar prey

### Description
Predatory bugs capture prey by injecting venom from their salivary glands using specialized stylets. Understanding venom function has been impeded by a scarcity of knowledge of their venom composition. We therefore examined the proteinaceous components of the salivary venom of the predatory stink bug Arma chinensis (Hemiptera: Pentatomidae). Using gland extracts and venoms from 5th-instar nymphs or adult females, we performed shotgun proteomics combined with venom gland transcriptomics. We found that the venom of A. chinensis comprised a complex suite of over a hundred individual proteins, including oxidoreductases, transferases, hydrolases, ligases, protease inhibitors, and recognition, transport and binding proteins. Besides the uncharacterized proteins, hydrolases such as venom serine proteases, cathepsins, phospholipase A2, phosphatases, nucleases, alpha-amylases, and chitinases constitute the most abundant protein families. However, salivary proteins shared by and unique to other predatory heteropterans were not detected in A. chinensis venom. Injection of the proteinaceous (> 3 kDa) venom fraction of A. chinensis gland extracts or venom into its prey, the larvae of the Oriental armyworm Mythimna separata (Walker, 1865), revealed insecticidal activity against lepidopterans. Our data expands the knowledge of heteropteran salivary proteins and suggests predatory asopine bugs as a novel source for bioinsecticides.

### Sample Protocol
We used two methods to harvest the venom from the 5th-instar stink bug nymphs. To extract venom directly by dissecting the salivary glands, the nymphs were anesthetized on ice for 5 min and dissected under a dissecting stereomicroscope in a pre-cooled 0.1 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution. The dissected salivary glands were immediately transferred to 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes containing 30 µL of PBS and then centrifuged at 5,000 g for 1 min at 4℃ to empty the gland lumens. The glandular tissues were then removed with tweezers and the crude homogenate was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 12 min at 4℃, and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. A total of 268 pairs of dissected salivary glands were collected. The second method for harvesting venom from 5th-instar stink bug nymphs was based on a non-invasive method known as sucrose solution diet-feeding, which was described by Huang et al., with slight modifications. Briefly, a sterile diet with 2.5% sucrose was prepared and filtered through a 0.22 µm syringe filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) to eliminate microorganisms. Then 2 mL of the sterile diet was contained between two layers of Parafilm TM membrane (Bemis, Neenah, WI, USA) stretched over a sterile petri dish (9 cm in diameter). Six starved 5th-instar A. cusots nymphs were trapped in each petri dish for 24 h to feed on the sterile diet and release saliva. After this period, the mixture of the sucrose solution and venom was retrieved from the space between the parafilm layers with a pipette and transferred to a pre-cooled tube. A total of 700 nymphs were used for venom collection, with each being used only once. We also harvested the venom from adult stink bugs by dissecting their salivary glands. A total of 207 pairs of salivary glands from both female (101 pairs) and male (106 pairs) adults were collected. Additionally, we harvested venom from 392 adults of both sexes (185 males and 207 females) 1 week after their final molt through a non-lethal electrostimulation method, as described by Walker et al., with slight modifications. Briefly, the stink bug was restrained on a foam platform with a rubber band, and its stylet was manually everted with a sterile pin. Clips connected to a power adaptor set to 24 V were placed on the thorax of the stink bug to induce the release of venom, which was then collected with a pipette and immediately transferred to a pre-cooled tube containing 20 μL of ultrapure water. The process was repeated until no more venom could be collected. The gland extracts from A. chinensis 5th-instar nymphs (GE-n), venom samples from A. chinensis 5th-instar nymphs obtained by sucrose solution diet-feeding method (VS-n), gland extracts from A. chinensis adults (GE-a), and venom samples from A. chinensis adults obtained by electrostimulation (VS-a) were concentrated using a 3-kDa molecular-weight cutoff centrifugal filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) by centrifuging at 5,000 g for 1 h at 4°C. The concentrated samples were then immediately stored at – 80℃ to prevent auto-degradation until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, the MS/MS spectra data were searched using MaxQuant v.1.5.1.0 software (https://maxquant.org/maxquant/) against the deduced amino acid sequence library translated from the glandular transcriptome. The parameters for database searching included trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme for cleavage, allowance for two missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was also estimated. Peptides were filtered at a 1% FDR at the peptide spectrum match level. Then the identified proteins were classified based on their annotation results in the Nr database. The homology searches of the proteins in A. chinensis venom against venom proteins in the assassin bug P. plagipennis were performed using Blast search. The relative quantity of each protein in the different samples was quantified using the label-free quantification (LFQ) value calculated by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Predatory stink bugs capture prey by injecting salivary venom from their venom glands using specialized stylets. Understanding venom function has been impeded by a scarcity of knowledge of their venom composition. We therefore examined the proteinaceous components of the salivary venom of the predatory stink bug <i>Arma custos</i> (Fabricius, 1794) (Hemiptera: Pentatomidae). We used gland extracts and venoms from fifth-instar nymphs or adult females to perform shotgun proteomics combined with venom gland transcriptomics. We found that the venom of <i>A. custos</i> comprised a complex suite of over a hundred individual proteins, including oxidoreductases, transferases, hydrolases, ligases, protease inhibitors, and recognition, transport and binding proteins. Besides the uncharacterized proteins, hydrolases such as venom serine proteases, cathepsins, phospholipase A<sub>2</sub>, phosphatases, nucleases, alpha-amylases, and chitinases constitute the most abundant protein families. However, salivary proteins shared by and unique to other predatory heteropterans were not detected in the <i>A. custos</i> venom. Injection of the proteinaceous (&gt;3 kDa) venom fraction of <i>A. custos</i> gland extracts or venom into its prey, the larvae of the oriental armyworm <i>Mythimna separata</i> (Walker, 1865), revealed insecticidal activity against lepidopterans. Our data expand the knowledge of heteropteran salivary proteins and suggest predatory asopine bugs as a novel source for bioinsecticides.

### Keywords
Predatory stink bugs, Venom, Proteomic, Bioactivity, Transcriptomic

### Affiliations
Department of Entomology School of Plant Protection Nanjing Agricultural University Nanjing, Jiangsu province  China
Nanjing Agriculture University

### Submitter
Yuli Qu

### Lab Head
Dr Baoping Li
Department of Entomology School of Plant Protection Nanjing Agricultural University Nanjing, Jiangsu province  China


