### Accession
PXD019203

### Title
Actin Methionine Methylation HPLC-MS/MS analysis

### Description
HPLC-MS/MS analysis of actin peptide with methionine methylation

### Sample Protocol
Actin peptides were desalted, dried and resuspended with buffer A (2% ACN,0.1% FA), resulting in a final concentration of 10 µM. High performance liquid chromatography was performed on a Dionex U-3000 Pro-flow HPLC. A 20-minute gradient from 1% buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) to 35% B was used. 1µL of sample was loaded onto 100µm diameter 10 cm long, C-18 column (Waters XBridge™ C18 3.5µm 130Å). Acquisition was performed by a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. A static spray voltage of 2000V and an ion transfer tube temperature of 320 °C were set for the source. MS1 was performed by the orbitrap in positive mode, 60,000 resolution setting, a scan window of 400-1500 m/z, 80% RF lens, an AGC target of 5.0e5 and a maximum injection time of 200ms. Two m/z peaks were targeted for MS2 fragmentation: 714.8508 (for the unmodified actin peptide) and 718.3551 (for the modified actin peptide) both are +4 ions. Two different ETD parameters were used, resulting in 2 different ETD fragment spectra per duty-cycle per precursor. The first setting involved a 1 m/z isolation window, calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters, orbitrap acquisition, a 30,000 resolution setting, a scan window of 150-2000 m/z, 5.0e5 AGC, and 100ms maximum injection time. The second ETD fragmentation event was identical, except an ETD reaction time of 14ms, ETD reagent target of 5.0e5 and max ETD reagent injection time of 200ms were used. Multiple other mass spectrometry settings were tested, most notably CID and HCD for MS2 fragmentation and MS3 using ETD and CID/HCD. These attempts did not yield sufficient coverage, or interpretable data, and are not presented.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were initially analyzed by our in-house software and confirmed with ProSight 4.0 (Thermo). Final analysis for presented spectra was performed manually and all annotation were manually made.

### Publication Abstract
Most characterized protein methylation events encompass arginine and lysine <i>N</i>-methylation, and only a few cases of protein methionine thiomethylation have been reported. Newly discovered oncohistone mutations include lysine-to-methionine substitutions at positions 27 and 36 of histone H3.3. In these instances, the methionine substitution localizes to the active-site pocket of the corresponding histone lysine methyltransferase, thereby inhibiting the respective transmethylation activity. SET domain-containing 3 (SETD3) is a protein (<i>i.e.</i> actin) histidine methyltransferase. Here, we generated an actin variant in which the histidine target of SETD3 was substituted with methionine. As for previously characterized histone SET domain proteins, the methionine substitution substantially (76-fold) increased binding affinity for SETD3 and inhibited SETD3 activity on histidine. Unexpectedly, SETD3 was active on the substituted methionine, generating <i>S</i>-methylmethionine in the context of actin peptide. The ternary structure of SETD3 in complex with the methionine-containing actin peptide at 1.9 &#xc5; resolution revealed that the hydrophobic thioether side chain is packed by the aromatic rings of Tyr<sup>312</sup> and Trp<sup>273</sup>, as well as the hydrocarbon side chain of Ile<sup>310</sup> Our results suggest that placing methionine properly in the active site-within close proximity to and in line with the incoming methyl group of SAM-would allow some SET domain proteins to selectively methylate methionine in proteins.

### Keywords
Actin methionine methylation

### Affiliations
BCM

### Submitter
Matthew Holt

### Lab Head
Dr Nicolas L. young
BCM


