### Accession
PXD004960

### Title
Quantitative Myogenesis C2C12 Proteome with Dimethyl-Labelling

### Description
The Z-disc is a protein-rich structure critically important for myofibril development and integrity. In order to monitor the quantiative changes in C2C12 myoblast during myogenesis, a quantitative dimethyl-labelling approach was performed with d0 myoblasts, d5 myotubes and electrical puls stimulated d5 myotubes.

### Sample Protocol
C2C12 myoblasts were cultured in high glucose DMEM medium supplemented with 15% FCS , 1% non-essential amino acids, 1% penicillin/streptomycin and 1% sodium pyruvate in six well plates to a confluency of approximately 90%. Differentiation was induced by reduction of the FCS content to 2%  in the absence of sodium pyruvate. Differentiation medium was changed every 48 h until complete myotube formation was observed (day 5-6). After myotube development, sarcomere formation was improved by electrical pulse stimulation (0.5 Hz, 4 ms, 10   12 V) with a C-Pace EP Culture Pacer for 16 24 h. Triple dimethyl-labeling was performed as previously described (Boersema et al). To this end  100 µg tryptic digests of day 0 myoblasts, day 5 myotubes and EPS stimulated myotubes at day 5 were resolved in 100 mM TEAB buffer and incubated for 1 h with the chemicals for triple dimethyl-labeling. A label switch was performed for each replicate and incorporation of labels was tested with a 10 g aliquot before mixing. Labeled samples were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio, desalted as described before and dried in vacuo until fractionation by high-pH reversed-phase chromatography. 300 µg of total peptide were resolved in 200 µl buffer A (10 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10.5), sonicated for 3 min, centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 4 min and filtrated into a sample vial by using a 0.2 µm syringe filter. High-pH reversed phase (hpH-RP) chromatography was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 equipped with a RP Gemini C18 column (∅ 4.6 mm × 15 mm, 3 µ, 110 Å, Phenomenex) and operated at a flow rate of 200 µl/min. Peptide separation was carried out using a binary solvent system (A: 10 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10.5; B: 10 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10.5, 90% acetonitrile) at a temperature of 40°C. Peptide loading and binding was performed at 1% B for 5 min, followed by peptide elution by increasing buffer B to 20% in 35 min and further to 45% in 20 min. Ninety fractions were collected in a 96 well plate at 50 s intervals from minute 2 to 77. Every 30th fraction was pooled and acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 1%. For quantitative proteome analyses on a Q Exactive Plus, peptide mixtures from hpH RP fractions were separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (FA, solvent A, "A") and 0.1% FA/86% ACN (solvent B, "B"). Samples were washed and pre-concentrated on a C18 -precolumn with 0.1% TFA for 5 min before switching the column in line with the analytical column. Replicates were analyzed applying a gradient of 78 min at a flow rate of 250 l/min. Peptide samples were eluted with a gradient of 5-30% B in 60 min, 30-50% B in 20 min and 50-95% B in 5 min. After each gradient, the analytical column was washed with 95% B for 3 min and re-equilibrated for 5 min with 5% B. The instrument parameters were as follows: spray voltage 1.5 kV, capillary voltage 44, capillary temperature 200°C, tube lens voltage 100 V. Data dependent acquisition was performed using the software XCalibur 2.1.0 SP1.1160. Mass spectra were acquired in a m/z range of 370-1,700 with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 2 x 105 (CID) and 5 x 105 ions (MSA) and a maximum (max.) fill time of 500 ms. Multiply charged ions were selected for fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap (LIT) using a TOP5 method with the following parameters: dynamic exclusion time: 45 s, AGC: 10,000 ions, max. fill time: 400 ms.

### Data Protocol
For quantitative dimethyl labeled data, Andromeda integrated in MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 was used to search peak lists against the UniProt ProteomeSet mouse database (release 01.12.2015, 57,276 protein entries). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. Trypsin was set as proteolytic enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and DimethlyLys0, DimethylNter0, DimethlyLys4, DimethylNter4, DimethlyLys8 and DimethylNter8 were set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Protein identification was based on at least one unique peptide with a minimum length of seven amino acids and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied on both peptide and protein lists. The options 're-quantify' and 'match between runs' were enabled. Proteins quantified in at least two biological replicates per experiment were considered for further bioinformatics and statistical data analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The Z-disc is a protein-rich structure critically important for the development and integrity of myofibrils, which are the contractile organelles of cross-striated muscle cells. We here used mouse C2C12 myoblast, which were differentiated into myotubes, followed by electrical pulse stimulation (EPS) to generate contracting myotubes comprising mature Z-discs. Using a quantitative proteomics approach, we found significant changes in the relative abundance of 387 proteins in myoblasts <i>versus</i> differentiated myotubes, reflecting the drastic phenotypic conversion of these cells during myogenesis. Interestingly, EPS of differentiated myotubes to induce Z-disc assembly and maturation resulted in increased levels of proteins involved in ATP synthesis, presumably to fulfill the higher energy demand of contracting myotubes. Because an important role of the Z-disc for signal integration and transduction was recently suggested, its precise phosphorylation landscape further warranted in-depth analysis. We therefore established, by global phosphoproteomics of EPS-treated contracting myotubes, a comprehensive site-resolved protein phosphorylation map of the Z-disc and found that it is a phosphorylation hotspot in skeletal myocytes, underscoring its functions in signaling and disease-related processes. In an illustrative fashion, we analyzed the actin-binding multiadaptor protein filamin C (FLNc), which is essential for Z-disc assembly and maintenance, and found that PKC&#x3b1; phosphorylation at distinct serine residues in its hinge 2 region prevents its cleavage at an adjacent tyrosine residue by calpain 1. Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching experiments indicated that this phosphorylation modulates FLNc dynamics. Moreover, FLNc lacking the cleaved Ig-like domain 24 exhibited remarkably fast kinetics and exceedingly high mobility. Our data set provides research community resource for further identification of kinase-mediated changes in myofibrillar protein interactions, kinetics, and mobility that will greatly advance our understanding of Z-disc dynamics and signaling.

### Keywords
Dimethyl, Myotubes, Muscle differentiation, C2c12 cells, Myoblasts

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany


### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg


