### Accession
PXD032166

### Title
Exposure of a bovine rumen microbiome model to glyphosate

### Description
We evaluated the effects of pure glyphosate and the formulations Durano TF and Roundup® LB plus in different concentrations on rumen microbiota bioreactor model using the Rumen Simulation Technique (RUSITEC). Application of the compounds in three concentrations (0.1 mg/L, 1.0 mg/L or 10 mg/L, n = 4 each).

### Sample Protocol
For metaproteome analysis, 10 mL of fermenter liquid were collected at day LAM 16 and SAM were collected 15. Bacteria pellets were thawed and lysed, followed by protein extraction. Samples were resuspended in 1 mL lysis-buffer (50 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA, 0.4% SDS, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM PMSF, pH=8). This was followed by lysis using a Fastprep 24 (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA, USA) set to three cycles, with each cycle consisting of 1 min disruption at a speed of 5.5 m/s and 1 min at rest. The resulting extract was heated in a thermomixer (Thermomixer comfort 5355, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at 60°C with shaking at 1400 rpm for 15 min and spun at 10,000 x g at 4°C for 10 min. Supernatants, containing and protein content, were stored at -20°C. The concentration of protein in the supernatants from the protein extraction was determined with bicinchoninic acid assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Then, 100 µg protein were precipitated in acetone 1:5 (V/V) at -20 °C overnight and then centrifuged (10 min, 14,000 x g). The precipitate was dissolved in Laemmli buffer and used for SDS-PAGE analysis, in-gel tryptic digestion and peptide purification with ZipTip® treatment. The peptide lysate concentration was determined by Nanodrop (NanoDrop2000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA and 2 µg peptide lysate were injected into nanoHPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Peptides were separated on a C18-reverse phase trapping column (C18 PepMap100, 300 µm x 5 mm, particle size 5 µm, nano viper, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, USA), followed by a C18-reverse phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® 100, 75 µm x 25 cm, particle size 3 µm, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) (Haange et al., 2019). Mass spectrometric analysis of peptides was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) coupled to a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode. LC gradient, ionization mode, and mass spectrometry mode are described in Haange et al. (2019).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer (v 2.2, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, USA). Parameters for Sequest HT search engine were set to: Trypsin (Full), Max. Missed Cleavage: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da. Protein identification was done as previously described using a protein sequence data base constructed from all protein coding sequences of microbial genera identified in the 16S rRNA gene profiling of samples as well as from plants commonly found in animal feed available on the UniProt (23.10.2017) data repository. A FDR of 0.01 was set for Protein identification. Protein grouping was enabled, with protein group requiring at least one unique peptide. Relative abundance of protein groups was calculated as normalized intensity divided by the sum of all protein group intensities in the sample

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioreactor, Bovine rumen model, Intestinal microbiome, Glyphosate

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Systems Biologie, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Department of Molecular Systems Bioloy

### Submitter
Sven Haange

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Department of Molecular Systems Bioloy


