### Accession
PXD017471

### Title
New label free methods for protein relative quantification applied to the investigation of animal model of Huntington Disease.

### Description
Spectral Counts approaches (SpCs) are largely employed for the comparison of protein expression profiles in label free differential proteomics applications. Similarly, to other comparative methods, also SpCs based approaches require a normalization procedure before Fold Changes (FC) calculation. Here, we propose new Complexity Based Normalization (CBN) methods that introduced a variable adjustment factor (f), related to the complexity of the sample, both in terms of total number of identified proteins (CBN(P)) and as total number of spectral counts (CBN(S)). Both these new methods were compared with the Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) and the Spectral Counts log Ratio (Rsc), by using standard protein mixtures. Finally, to test the robustness and the effectiveness of the CBNs methods, they were employed for the comparative analysis ofcortical protein extract fromzQ175 mouse brains, model of Huntington Disease (HD), and control animals. On standard mixtures, both CBN methods showed an excellent behavior in terms of reproducibility and coefficients of variation (CVs) in comparison to the other SpCs approaches. Moreover, the CBN(S) was demonstrated to be more sensitive in detecting small difference in proteins amount when applied on biological samples in comparison to CBN(P).

### Sample Protocol
Animals were euthanized by dislocation and the brains were rapidly removed and the cerebral cortices were immediately excised from the brain, frozen in liquid nitrogen and smashed. The samples were then lysed by combining chemical and mechanical methods. Cortical tissues were crushed and repeatedly pipetted in the lysis buffer (50 mMTris HCl pH 7.4, 150 mMNaCl, 0.1 % v/vSodium Dodecyl Sulphate (SDS), 1 mM Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 1% v/v Nonidet P-40 (NP40), protease inhibitors EDTA-free), then passed ten times each through syringe. Following these mechanical processes, they were put on stirring wheel, (20 minutes at 4°C), and then centrifuged, (13200 rpm, 30 minutes, 4°C).

### Data Protocol
Quantitative data were collected on an LTQ Orbitrap XL (ThermoScientific, Waltham, MA). All peptide mixtures were analyzed using the same chromatographic conditions, i.e.3 microlitersof each sample were injected onto a nanoLC system (nanoEasy II); alinear gradientof eluent B (0.2% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) in A (0.2% formic acid and 2%acetonitrile in MilliQ water) from 5% to 40% in 80 minutes was run.Peptide mixtures analyses were performed using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode: oneMS scan (mass range from 400 to 1800 m/z) was followed by MS/MS scans of the five most abundant ions in eachMS scan, applying a dynamic exclusion window of 40 seconds. All samples were run in duplicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label free methods; spectral counts normalization; complexity-based correction factor; huntington disease mice models

### Affiliations
University of Naples 'Federico II'
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples 'FedericoII', Naples, Italy; CEINGE scarl Advanced Biotechnology, Facility of Proteomics, Naples, Italy

### Submitter
Marianna Caterino

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Monti
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples 'FedericoII', Naples, Italy; CEINGE scarl Advanced Biotechnology, Facility of Proteomics, Naples, Italy


