### Accession
PXD002144

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomics reveals a role for the Mycobacterium tuberculosis SecA2 pathway in exporting solute binding proteins and Mce transporters to the cell wall

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is an example of a bacterial pathogen with a specialized SecA2-dependent protein export system that contributes to its virulence. Our understanding of the mechanistic basis of SecA2-dependent export and the role(s) of the SecA2 pathway in M. tuberculosis pathogenesis has been hindered by our limited knowledge of the proteins exported by the pathway. Here, we set out to identify M. tuberculosis proteins that use the SecA2 pathway for their export from the bacterial cytoplasm to the cell wall. Using label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics involving spectral counting, we compared the cell wall and cytoplasmic proteomes of wild type M. tuberculosis to that of a ΔsecA2 mutant. This work revealed a role for the M. tuberculosis SecA2 pathway in the cell wall localization of solute binding proteins (SBPs) that work with ABC transporters to import solutes. Another discovery was a profound effect of SecA2 on the cell wall localization of the Mce1 and Mce4 lipid transporters, which contribute to M. tuberculosis virulence. In addition to the effects on SBP and Mce transporter export, our LFQ analysis revealed an unexpected relationship between SecA2 and the hypoxia-induced DosR regulon, which is associated with M. tuberculosis latency. Nearly half of the transcriptionally controlled DosR regulon of cytoplasmic proteins were detected at higher levels in the ΔsecA2 mutant versus wild type M. tuberculosis. By increasing the list of M. tuberculosis proteins known to be affected by the SecA2 pathway, this study expands our appreciation of the types of proteins exported by this pathway and guides our understanding of the mechanism of SecA2-dependent protein export in mycobacteria. At the same time, the newly identified SecA2-dependent proteins are helpful for understanding the significance of this pathway to M. tuberculosis virulence and physiology

### Sample Protocol
Cell wall proteins (34 μg) and cytoplasmic proteins (91 μg) from three biological replicates each of H37Rv and the ΔsecA2 mutant were separated on individual lanes of a precast 12% SDS-PAGE gel.  Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) and each lane was cut into 32 gel slices for cell wall samples and 10 gel slices for cytoplasmic samples.  In-gel trypsin digestion was performed, with each gel slice being processed individually in a single well of a 96-well polypropylene plate. Peptides were stored at -80°C until lyophilized. Peptides were desalted using PepClean C18 spin columns (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and re-suspended in an aqueous solution of 0.1% formic acid.  Samples were analyzed by reversed phase LC-MS/MS using a 2D-nanoLC ultra system (Eksigent Inc, Dublin, CA) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL system with ETD (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA).  The Eksigent system was configured to trap and elute peptides in 1D mode of operation via a sandwiched injection of ~ 250 fmol of sample. The trapping was performed on a 3 cm long 100 m i.d. C18 column while elution was performed on a 15 cm long 75 m i.d., 5 m, 300Å particle; ProteoPep II integraFrit C18 column (New Objective Inc, Woburn, MA).  Analytical separation of tryptic peptides was achieved with a linear gradient of 2-40% over 120 min at a 200 nL/min flow rate, where buffer A is aqueous solution of 0.1% formic acid and buffer B is a solution of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Mass spectrometric data acquisition was performed in a data dependent manner. A full scan mass analysis on an LTQ-Orbitrap (externally calibrated to a mass accuracy of < 1 ppm, and resolution of 60 000 at 400 Th) was followed by intensity dependent MS/MS of the 10 most abundant peptide ions. The dynamic exclusion time window was set to 60 s. with monoisotopic precursor ion selection (MIPS) and charge state screening enabled for charges ≥ +2  for triggering data dependent MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed, and peptide identification was performed using Mascot ver. 2.3 (Matrix Science Inc.) implemented on Proteome Discoverer ver. 1.3 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). All searches were performed against the National Center for Biotechnology (NCBI) M. tuberculosis H37Rv protein sequence database (RefSeq NC_000962 uid 57777, 3906 protein entries). Peptides were identified using a target-decoy approach with a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. A precursor ion mass tolerance of 200 p.p.m. and a product ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da were used during the search to increase search space and reduce false positive identifications with a maximum of two missed trypsin cleavage sites and oxidation of methionine residues as dynamic modification.  Peptide and protein validation and label-free spectral count-based quantitation was performed using ProteoIQ: ver 2.3.02 (PREMIER Biosoft international, Palo Alto, CA).  Mascot search engine results against forward and decoy M. tuberculosis databases were obtained for all RAW data. Both forward and decoy search results were imported as DAT files into ProteoIQ to asses FDR.  A peptide FDR of 1% and protein FDR of 5% were used to filter valid spectra. Peptide assignment to proteins was achieved by considering Occam’s Razor principle that takes into account the presence of protein groups and penalizes proteins containing peptides identified in multiple proteins. The PROVALT algorithm in ProteoIQ was used to determine ion score thresholds and protein FDR.  Mascot protein identifications were also subjected to probability-based confidence measurements using an independent implementation of the statistical models commonly known as peptide and protein Prophet deployed in ProteoIQ (35, 36). All protein hits were filtered with peptide Prophet using a minimum probability threshold of 0.5. Evaluation of sensitivity and error rates in this filtered data set for the cell wall proteome demonstrated a sensitivity of 95% with a 4.8% error rate while the filtered data for the cytoplasm had 90% sensitivity with a 6.2% error rate.   From a total of 2194 proteins detected in the cell wall and 2226 detected in cytoplasmic samples the data was filtered for proteins identified by a minimum of 2 peptides resulting in 1729 cell wall and 1810 cytoplasmic proteins identified, reported and used in all further analysis in this study. Relative protein quantitation was performed using spectral count-based LFQ.  For each biological sample, data from the individual gel slices were combined. Statistical analysis was performed on all proteins identified with average spectral counts of >4 among the three replicates of at least one strain. The spectral count data was normalized by total spectral counts in each sample, using ProteoIQ, to adjust for differences in overall protein levels between samples. The normalized spectral count data was then used to calculate a ratio of the average spectral counts obtained for each strain ΔsecA2/H37Rv.  Proteins were considered to have a significant difference in abundance if there was a difference of 2-fold or greater in average spectral counts between strains and a p value ≤ 0.01 using an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis is an example of a bacterial pathogen with a specialized SecA2-dependent protein export system that contributes to its virulence. Our understanding of the mechanistic basis of SecA2-dependent export and the role(s) of the SecA2 pathway in M. tuberculosis pathogenesis has been hindered by our limited knowledge of the proteins exported by the pathway. Here, we set out to identify M. tuberculosis proteins that use the SecA2 pathway for their export from the bacterial cytoplasm to the cell wall. Using label-free quantitative proteomics involving spectral counting, we compared the cell wall and cytoplasmic proteomes of wild type M. tuberculosis to that of a &#x394;secA2 mutant. This work revealed a role for the M. tuberculosis SecA2 pathway in the cell wall localization of solute binding proteins that work with ABC transporters to import solutes. Another discovery was a profound effect of SecA2 on the cell wall localization of the Mce1 and Mce4 lipid transporters, which contribute to M. tuberculosis virulence. In addition to the effects on solute binding proteins and Mce transporter export, our label-free quantitative analysis revealed an unexpected relationship between SecA2 and the hypoxia-induced DosR regulon, which is associated with M. tuberculosis latency. Nearly half of the transcriptionally controlled DosR regulon of cytoplasmic proteins were detected at higher levels in the &#x394;secA2 mutant versus wild type M. tuberculosis. By increasing the list of M. tuberculosis proteins known to be affected by the SecA2 pathway, this study expands our appreciation of the types of proteins exported by this pathway and guides our understanding of the mechanism of SecA2-dependent protein export in mycobacteria. At the same time, the newly identified SecA2-dependent proteins are helpful for understanding the significance of this pathway to M. tuberculosis virulence and physiology.

### Keywords
Seca2, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Spectral counting, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
UNC Chapel Hill
Microbiology and Immunology UNC Chapel Hill Chapel Hill, NC USA

### Submitter
Kate Zulauf

### Lab Head
Dr Miriam Braunstein
Microbiology and Immunology UNC Chapel Hill Chapel Hill, NC USA


