### Accession
PXD021488

### Title
Different protein cargo of extracellular vesicles from yeast or hyphal Candida albicans cells

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are shed from cells of almost every type of cell or organism. These nano- to micrometer scaled lipid bilayer delimited spheres shuttle a set of bioactive molecules involved in many processes including cell-cell communication, host-pathogen interactions and even the sharing of microbial community resources. On the other hand, the yeast-to hypha transition is the most studied morphology transition in C. albicans and one of the most important traits of C. albicans to invade host tissue during infection. In this context, we have undergone the isolation and protein cargo characterization of EVs secreted by both major C. albicans morphologies by means, LC- MS analysis. A total of 2546 different proteins were identified from hyphal EVs in the 3 biological replicates carried out dropping this number to only 414 proteins identified in the 3 biological replicates from yeast EVs. Comparing the identified proteins of both EVs, 241 proteins were common to both type of vesicles.  In terms of biological significance, we only took into consideration proteins that were identified in at least two biological replicates with at least two peptides and a q-value< 0.01.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent experiments were done with Yeast and Hyphal cultures according to Rodrigues et al. (Rodrigues et al.) with some modifications updated in our lab (Gil-Bona et al., 2015). In brief, the supernatants of 1 L of yeast andhyphal specific cultures media were centrifuged and subsequently filtrated using a 0,45µm filter to ensure the elimination of cells and cell debris. Supernatants were concentrated afterwards using a Centricon Plus-70 filter (cutofffilter 100 kDa, Millipore). The concentrated supernatants were ultracentrifuged at 100 000g for 1 h at 4 °C in a Beckman Optima XL-90 using 90Ti rotor. Isolated EVs were washed in PBS twice, and samples were solubilized in 50 µl of triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer 0.5 M. Twenty-five micrograms of each protein extract were concentrated in a stacking gel and protein bands were cut from the acrylamide gel for gel trypsin digestion. Briefly, cut protein bands were first DTT reduced (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) to be subsequently treated with Iodacetamide for protein alkylation  (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and ultimately digested with 1.25 µg of recombinant Trypsin (sequencing grade; Roche, Mannheim, Germany) overnight at 37 ºC (Sechi and Chait, 1998). A C18 reverse phase chromatography was used for desalting and concentration of the peptides from the digested proteins).  ( POROS R2 (Applied Bioystems), being afterwards eluted with 80% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Elution buffer was then evaporated in Speed-vac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), and the freeze-dried samples resuspended in 2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) before the Nano LC–MS/MS analysis. The desalted peptides were analysed by a reversed phase liquid chromatography electrospray ionisation tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC-ESI-MS/MS) in an an Ultimate 3000 nLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion® Lumos® Tribrid® (Thermo Fisher), (an ultrahigh-field mass orbitrap analyzer) through the Nano-Easy spray source (all from Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded first onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 Trapping column (Thermo Scientific, 20 mm 75 lm inner diameter (ID), 3 lm of C18 resin with 100 Å pore size, Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany) using buffer A (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and then separated and eluted on a C18 resin analytical column NTCC (50 cm 75 lm ID, 3 lm C18 resin with 100 Å pore size, Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) with an integrated spray tip. A 95 min gradient of 5–27% Buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), from 27% to 44% in 5 min and finally 10 min more until 95% in Buffer A at a constant flow rate of 0,3 µl/min.

### Data Protocol
All data were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and in positive mode with Xcalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA).Peptide identifications from raw data were carried out using the Mascot v. 2.6.1 (MatrixScience, London, UK) search engine through the Protein Discoverer 2.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). A database search was performed against Candida albicans CGD21  (6209 sequences) from http://www.candidagenome.org  The following parameters were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage, up to two missed cleavage sites allowed, and tolerances of 10 p.p.m. for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS fragment ions, and the searches were performed allowing optional methionine oxidation and acetyl protein N-terminal and fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine. A search against the decoy database (integrated decoy approach) was used to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR). The Mascot Scores were adjusted by a percolator algorithm. The acceptance criteria for protein identification were an FDR <0.01).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, C. albicans, Hyphae, Proteome, Dimorphic transition, Extracelullar vesicles

### Affiliations
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
UCM

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Concha Gil
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain


