### Accession
PXD022759

### Title
ULK1 on-bead in vitro kinase assay

### Description
Label-free phosphoproteomics of in vitro kinase assays. Three sets of bottom-up proteomics experiments were performed.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse embryonic fiboblasts were lysed under native conditions. Protein complexes were immobilzed on NHS beads and in vitro kinase assays were performed. Proteins were digested in solution and peptides fractionated by high-pH RP prior phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2 beads.

### Data Protocol
Data was analysed by MaxQuant Version 1.6.2.10. Phospho(STY) was chosen as variable PTM. A full-length UNIPROT mouse database was used.

### Publication Abstract
The evolutionarily conserved ULK1 kinase complex acts as gatekeeper of canonical autophagy and regulates induction of autophagosome biogenesis. To better understand control of ULK1 and analyze whether ULK1 has broader functions that are also linked to the later steps of autophagy, we perform comprehensive phosphoproteomic analyses. Combining in&#xa0;vivo with in&#xa0;vitro data, we identify numerous direct ULK1 target sites within autophagy-relevant proteins that are critical for autophagosome maturation and turnover. In addition, we highlight an intimate crosstalk between ULK1 and several phosphatase complexes. ULK1 is not only a PP2A target but also directly phosphorylates the regulatory PP2A subunit striatin, activating PP2A and serving as positive feedback to promote autophagy-dependent protein turnover. Thus, ULK1 and phosphatase activities are tightly coordinated to robustly regulate protein degradation by autophagy.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Mouse, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch


