### Accession
PXD002057

### Title
Proteomic analysis identifies novel pathways linking epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition with resistance to HER2-targeted therapy

### Description
Resistance to Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (HER)-targeted cancer therapies appear to be occurring via common pathways, despite differences in their mechanism of action. This suggests that combination therapies targeting alternative pathways will be needed to overcome resistance. We have used a global proteomics approach to identify common signaling nodes that are required for driving HER2-independent resistance mechanisms to the pan-HER family kinase inhibitors AZD8931 and lapatinib. A novel set of epithelial–to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) associated proteins linked to resistance to pan-HER family targeted therapy was identified. We demonstrate that a sub-set of these genes are predictive of prognosis within the ERBB2 subtype of breast cancers and are worthy of further study in the context of preventing resistance to anti-HER family agents. Furthermore, targeting these pathways, perhaps via combination with galectin-1 or Axl inhibitors may provide additional strategies for the treatment of resistant tumours.

### Sample Protocol
Parental SKBR3 and AZ8931 R-SKBR3c cell pellets (i.e. 1mg protein extract equivalent) were reconstituted in 8 M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) to denature and reduce the samples (30 minutes), followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide (1 hour). Samples were digested with 10 µg trypsin overnight at room temperature. Peptide extracts were then cleaned on an SPE reverse-phase Bond Elut LMS cartridge (Agilent) and evaporated to dryness. Peptides were re-suspended in 2.5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water to give a final concentration of 1 µg/µL. 4 µg peptides were subjected to nano-scale high-performance liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (nano-HPLC-MS) using a nano-pump (Dionex Ultimate 3000; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 300 µm x 5 mm pre-column (5 µm particle size, Acclaim PepMap; Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a 75 µm x 50 cm column (3 µm particle size, Acclaim PepMap; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The HPLC is coupled on-line to a Q Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were analyzed on a two-hour gradient using data-dependent analysis with one 70-k–resolution survey scan followed by the top five MS/MS scans at 17.5 k resolution.

### Data Protocol
MS data were searched against the Uniprot protein database (Homo sapiens and Mus musculus) using MASCOT software (version 2.4; Matrix Science). Up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites per peptide were permitted. Variable methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation modifications were allowed. Precursor and product ion mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 amu, respectively. The significance threshold (p) was below 0.05 (MudPIT scoring), and a final peptide score of at least 20 was required. Label-free quantification was performed using Progenesis (version 4.1; Nonlinear Dynamics). Only MS peaks with a charge of 2+, 3+ or 4+ and the five most intense spectra within each feature were included in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Resistance to human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-targeted therapies in the treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer is a major clinical problem. To identify pathways linked to resistance, we generated HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines which are resistant to either lapatinib or AZD8931, two pan-HER family kinase inhibitors. Resistance was HER2 independent and was associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), resulting in increased proliferation and migration of the resistant cells. Using a global proteomics approach, we identified a novel set of EMT-associated proteins linked to HER2-independent resistance. We demonstrate that a subset of these EMT-associated genes is predictive of prognosis within the ERBB2 subtype of human breast cancers. Furthermore, targeting the EMT-associated kinases Src and Axl potently inhibited proliferation of the resistant cells, and inhibitors to these kinases may provide additional options for the treatment of HER2-independent resistance in tumors.

### Keywords
Acquired resistance, Proteomics, Breast cancer, Emt, Her2

### Affiliations
SynthSys University of Edinburgh
SynthSys – Synthetic and Systems Biology

### Submitter
Thierry Le Bihan

### Lab Head
Dr Thierry Le Bihan
SynthSys University of Edinburgh


