### Accession
PXD003214

### Title
Ixodes Scapularis tick saliva proteins sequentially secreted every 24h during blood feeding

### Description
Ixodes scapularis is the most medically important tick species and transmits five of the 14 reportable human tick borne diseases (TBD) in the USA. This study describes LC-MS/MS identification of 582 tick- and 83 rabbit proteins in saliva of I. scapularis ticks that fed for 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120h, those that engorged but were not detached from the host (BD), and replete fed and detached (SD).

### Sample Protocol
Saliva of I. scapularis ticks for each specific feeding time point was digested in solution with trypsin. Saliva were diluted in 8 M urea/0.1 M Tris, pH 8.5, reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and alkylated with 25 mM iodoaceamide. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C in 2 M urea/0.1M Tris pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2 with trypsin with a final ratio of 1:20 (enzyme:substrate). Digestion reactions, in a final concentration of 0.15 µg/mL, were quenched with formic acid (5 % final concentration) and centrifuged for debris removal. Peptide mixtures were analyzed in an Easy NanoLC II coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptides eluted from the analytical column were electrosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. Buffer A and B consisted of 5 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid and 80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid, respectively. The flow rate was set to 400 nL/min. Feeding time saliva samples (~1.5 µg per injection) were separated in 155-min chromatographic runs, as follows: 1-10 % gradient of buffer B in 10 minutes, 10-40 % of buffer B in 100 minutes, 40-50 % of buffer B in 10 minutes and 50-90 % of buffer B in 10 minutes. Column was held at 90 % of buffer B for 10 minutes, reduced to 1 % of buffer B and re-equilibrated prior to next injection. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent mode, collecting a full MS scan from 400 to 1,200 m/z at 70,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1 x 106. The 10 most abundant ions per scan were selected for MS/MS at 17,500 resolution and AGC target of 2 x 105 and an underfill ratio of 0.1 %. Maximum fill times were 20 and 120 ms for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively, with dynamic exclusion of 15 s. Normalized collision energy was set to 25.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Thermo RAW files using RawExtract 1.9.9.2 and searched with ProLuCID against a non-redundant database containing an Ixodidae database from National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) (62,246 entries) concatenated with an Oryctolagus cuniculus Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) reference database (21,148 entries) and reverse sequences of all entries. Searches were done using Integrated Proteomics Pipeline – IP2. The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as static modification. Data was searched with 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 20 ppm fragment ion tolerance. The validity of the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) generated by ProLuCID was assessed using Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module from PatternLab for Proteomics platform. A cutoff score was established to accept a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% based on the number of decoys. Additionally, a minimum sequence length of six residues per peptide was required. Results were post processed to only accept PSMs with <10ppm precursor mass error.

### Publication Abstract
Fasciola hepatica is the agent of fasciolosis, a foodborne zoonosis that affects livestock production and human health. Although flukicidal drugs are available, re-infection and expanding resistance to triclabendazole demand new control strategies. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the complex interaction with the mammalian host could provide relevant clues, aiding the search for novel targets in diagnosis and control of fasciolosis. Parasite survival in the mammalian host is mediated by parasite compounds released during infection, known as excretory/secretory (E/S) products. E/S products are thought to protect parasites from host responses, allowing them to survive for a long period in the vertebrate host. This work provides in-depth proteomic analysis of F. hepatica intra-mammalian stages, and represents the largest number of proteins identified to date for this species. Functional classification revealed the presence of proteins involved in different biological processes, many of which represent original findings for this organism and are important for parasite survival within the host. These results could lead to a better comprehension of host-parasite relationships, and contribute to the development of drugs or vaccines against this parasite.

### Keywords
Tick saliva proteome, Tick feeding physiology, Ixodes scapularis

### Affiliations
Texas A&M University
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology College of Veterinary Medicine Texas A & M University College Station Texas USA ( lab head )

### Submitter
Albert Mulenga

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Mulenga
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology College of Veterinary Medicine Texas A & M University College Station Texas USA ( lab head )


