### Accession
PXD010927

### Title
microRNA-222 Attenuates Mitochondrial Dysfunction Induced by Transmissible Gastroenteritis Virus via Targeting Thrombospondin-1 and Inhibiting Cluster of Differentiation 47

### Description
Transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV) is a member of Coronaviridae family. Our previous research showed that TGEV infection could induce mitochondrial dysfunction and up-regulat miR-222 level. Therefore, we presumed that miR-222 might be implicated in regulating mitochondrial dysfunction induced by TGEV infection. To verify the hypothesis, the effect of miR-222 on mitochondrial dysfunction was detected and showed that miR-222 attenuated TGEV-induced mitochondrial dysfunction. To investigate the underlying molecular mechanism of miR-222 in TGEV-induced mitochondrial dysfunction, a quantitative proteomic analysis of PK-15 cells that were transfected with miR-222 mimics and infected with TGEV was performed. In total, 4151 proteins were quantified and 100 differentially expressed proteins were obtained (57 up-regulated, 43 down-regulated), among which thrombospondin-1 (THBS1) and cluster of differentiation 47 (CD47) were down-regulated. THBS1 was identified as the target of miR-222. Knockdown of THBS1 and CD47 increased mitochondrial Ca2+ level and decreased mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) level. Together, our data establish a significant role of miR-222 in regulating mitochondrial dysfunction in response to TGEV infection.

### Sample Protocol
Cells, Virus, and Antibodies——PK-15 cells were purchased from ATCC (CCL-33) and grown in Dulbecco’s Minimal Essential Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, US), 100 IU of penicillin, and 100 mg of streptomycin per ml, at 37 ℃ in a 5% CO2 atmosphere incubator. The TGEV Shaanxi strain was isolated from TGEV-infected piglets 15. Anti-THBS1 antibody was obtained from Thermo (Thermo, US). Anti-CD47 antibody was purchased from Abcam (Abcam, UK). The monoclonal β-actin was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, US).  Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale for Proteomics—In order to investigate the effect of miR-222 on TGEV-induced mitochondrial dysfunction, PK-15 cells were transfected with miR-222 mimics (experimental samples) or mimics control (control samples) using Lipofectamine 3000 and infected with TGEV at an MOI of 1.0 at 24 h post-transfection (hpt). The cells were collected for quantitative proteomic analysis at 24 h post-infection (hpi). Two biological replicates preparations labeled with TMT were analyzed. The two control samples transfected with miRNA mimics control was respectively labeled with TMT-126 and TMT-129. The two experimental samples treated with miR-222 mimics were respectively labeled with TMT-128 and TMT-131. To assess the transfection efficiency, miR-222 level was measured by qRT-PCR. The sequences of miR-222 mimics, mimics control, and primers are shown in supplementary Table S1. Quantification of miRNA and mRNA by qRT-PCR——Total RNA was isolated using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, US) from PK-15 cells. qRT-PCR was performed as previously described 16. 2 μg of total RNA was treated with DNase I (Fermentas, Germany) for 30 min at 37 ℃ and reversely transcribed using the First-strand cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen, US). The cDNA was used as the template for qRT-PCR. qRT-PCR was performed using the AccuPower 2×Greenstar qPCR Master mix (Bioneer, Korea) on Bio-Rad iQ5 Real-Time PCR System (Bio-Rad, USA). The relative fold change of miRNA and mRNA was calculated using two-ddCt method (respectively normalized to U6 and β-actin) 17. The primers are shown in supplemental S1. Protein Isolation and Labeling with TMT Reagents——Samples were sonicated three times on ice and centrifuged at 20,000 g at 4 ℃ for 20 min. The supernatant was treated with cold 15% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 2 h at -20 ℃ and centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000 g at 4 ℃. The precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was dissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 100 μg protein for each sample were digested with trypsin for following experiments. The two control samples transfected with miRNA mimics control was respectively labeled with TMT-126 and TMT-129. The two experimental samples treated with miR-222 mimics were respectively labeled with TMT-128 and TMT-131.  LC−MS/MS Analysis——The samples were fractionated by high pH reverse-phase High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). Briefly, peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, and then directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100), (Thermo Scientific, US). Subsequently, peptides were separated using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC) (Thermo Scientific, US) and analyzed by Q ExactiveTM hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, US).  The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM (Thermo Scientific, US) coupled online to the HPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70, 000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 32. Ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17, 500. A data-dependent procedure that alternates between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 2E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap. 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of LC-MS/MS Data——MS/MS data were analyzed using Mascot search engine (version 2.3.0) following a previously described protocol 18. Briefly, raw MS data files were processed using the LC/MS software Proteome Discoverer (version 1.3.0.339) (Thermo scientific, US) and converted into the Mascot generic format (mgf) files. Mascot software performed peak generation, precursor mass recalibration, extraction of TMT 6-plex reporter ions intensity, and calculation of TMT 6-plex reporter ions intensity ratios. For each MS/MS spectra, top 10 most intense peaks in every 100 Da window were extracted for database search. Then Tandem mass spectra data were searched against Uniprot_Sus scrofa database (UniProt release 2sd015_04, 26054 sequences) (http://www.uniprot.org) concatenated with reversed decoy database and protein sequences of common contaminants using Mascot. Cleavage enzyme was specified as trypsin/P. Maximum number of missing cleavages was set to 2. Mass tolerance for precursor ion was set to 10 ppm and mass tolerance for MS/MS ions was set to 0.02 Da. Carbamyiodomethylation on Cys, TMT6plex (N-term), and TMT6plex (K) were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met. Acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification site were specified at 1%. Mascot software was used to assemble the peptide/protein groups, calculate false discovery rates, and filter the identifications. Protein quantification was set to use only unique peptides bearing any modification. The median ratio of TMT 6-plex reporter intensity of unique peptides was set as protein relative abundance changes. In this study, we prepared two duplicate samples. For each protein, we set the average ratio calculated from two duplicate samples as the final quantitation of protein. Student’s test was exploited to calculate differential significance degree of protein relative abundance changes. T test p value less than 0.05 was considered significantly differentially. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008174 and 10.6019/PXD008174 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/) 19.  GO and KEGG Analysis of Differential-expressed Proteins——GO annotations of proteome were derived from the UniProt-GOsA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA). KEGG database was used to annotate proteins pathways. The Wolf Psort database (https://wolfpsort.hgc.jp/) was used to predict subcellular localization.  Protein-protein Interaction Analysis——All differentially expressed protein identifiers (Uniprot accession) were searched against STRING database (version 10.0) for protein-protein interactions 20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microrna-222, Mitochondrial dysfunction, Proteomics, Transmissible gastroenteritis virus, Thrombospondin-1 (thbs1), Cluster of differentiation 47 (cd47)

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, P.R. China
PTM Biolabs Inc.

### Submitter
lihuan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Dewen Tong
College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, P.R. China


