### Accession
PXD022440

### Title
Identification of Plk1 interacting proteins by XChIP-MS

### Description
Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) is an important protein kinase for checkpoint recovery and adaptation in response to DNA damage and replication stress. However, although Plk1 is present in S phase, little is known about its localization and function during unperturbed DNA replication. Using Xenopus laevis egg extracts, mimicking early embryonic replication, we developed a Plk1 chromatin immunoprecipitation approach followed by a proteomic shotgun analysis (XChIP-MS) to identify Plk1 interactions with chromatin and with specific nuclear proteins. We purified and cross-linked nuclei after pre-RC assembly before the start of DNA replication, or later during DNA replication. The DNA was fractionated by sonication and immunoprecipited using anti Plk1 or control antibodies then proteins were analyzed by nanoLC/MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
For Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to Mass Spectrometry (XChIP-MS), sperm nuclei (4000 nuclei/µl) were incubated in fresh extracts and allowed to replicate for 15 and 60 minutes. Reactions were stopped by a 1/5 dilution in nuclear isolation buffer (NIBS) (50 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 10 % sucrose). Nuclei were pelleted through 150 µl of a 20 % sucrose cushion in NIBS buffer for 5 min at 5 000 g (4°C). The purification was repeated once and the pellet resuspended in 100 µl ChIP buffer (50 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA). Crosslinking was performed using 1% formaldehyde for 8 min, reaction was quenched by 250 mM Glycine and nuclei were pelleted for 5 min at 5 000 g (4°C), then lysed in 200 µl ChIP buffer containing 0.5% triton X100 (ChIP lysis buffer). The DNA was sheared into fragments of 100-300 bp using Bioruptor Plus sonicator in 1.5ml TPX tubes; 30 cycles 30sec/30sec ON/OFF (high power) then the soluble DNA was clarified by centrifugation for 15 min at 19 000 g (4°). Sample was divided threefold; One third was reversed cross-linked in 50 mM Tris pH 8 10 mM EDTA 1% SDS at 65°C overnight, treated with 1µg/µl RNAse A for 1h at 37°C, then with 1µg/µl proteinase K for 2h at 55°C, extracted with phenol-chloroform, ethanol precipitated for DNA shredding control on agarose gel electrophoresis. The two other thirds were diluted two-fold and incubated overnight at 4°C with either anti-Plk1 or control pre-immune serum DMP-crosslinked cross-linked to protein A Sepharose. Beads were washed twice with 200 µl ChIP lysis buffer, once in 200 µl ChIP buffer containing 500 mM NaCl and then once in 200 µl ChIP buffer. Finally, the beads were resuspended in 20 μl 2X Laemmli loading buffer. Proteins eluted from the immune complexes were concentrated in a short migration on a SDS-PAGE gel and visualized by Coomassie Blue staining. The bands containing the whole sample were cut and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion using standard conditions including reduction and alkylation. After overnight tryptic digestion, peptides were extracted with 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Tryptic peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid prior to nanoLC-MS/MS mass spectrometry analyses. Tryptic peptides from the four conditions were analysed separately by TripleTOF 4600 mass spectrometer (ABSciex) coupled to the nanoRSLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100C18, 75 µm i.d.×2 cm, 3µm) and an analytical column (Acclaim PepMapRSLCC18, 75 µm i.d.× 75 cm, 2µm, 100 Å). Peptides were loaded at 5 µl.min-1 with 0.05% TFA in 5% acetonitrile and peptides separation was performed at a flow rate of 300nl.min-1 with a 5 to 35% solvent B gradient in 180 min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile. MS/MS spectra were acquired by a data-dependent acquisition method involving selection of the 20 precursors giving the most intense signals, CID fragmentation with the Q1 quadrupole set at low resolution to improve sensitivity.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed with MS Data Converter and PeakView softwares softwares (AB Sciex) for generating .mgf data files and protein identifications were performed using the MASCOT search engine (Matrix science, London, UK) against the Xenbase database (peptides release V9.2) with carbamidomethylation of cysteines set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines as variable modification. Peptide and fragment tolerance were respectively set at 20 ppm and 0.05 Da. Results were analysed with Scaffold 3.6.5 software (Proteome Software). Proteins were validated when identified with at least two unique peptides. Only ions with a score higher than the identity threshold and a false-positive discovery rate of less than 1% (Mascot decoy option) were considered. Mass spectrometry based-quantification was performed using MS/MS spectral count values from Scaffold software. Identified proteins enriched more than 3 fold (spectral counts) in Plk1 pull-down versus mock pull-down are classified into various functional groups in the nucleus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Xenopus laevis

### Affiliations
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
SICaPS, Institute of Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Univ. Paris-Saclay 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France

### Submitter
David Cornu

### Lab Head
Dr David Cornu
Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France


