### Accession
PXD020233

### Title
IIdentification of GmLMM1-interacting protein in Arabidopsis

### Description
GmLMM1-FLAG was expressed in Arabidopsis protoplasts and GmLMM1-interacting protein was identified byprotein immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometric analysis

### Sample Protocol
To identify GmLMM1-interacting proteins, GmLMM1-FLAG was expressed in Arabidopsis protoplasts, resuspended in 15 ml IP buffer (50 mM HEPES [pH 7.5], 50 mM NaCl, 0.2% Triton X-100, 1 mM DTT, 1 3 protease inhibitor cocktail). Debris was removed from the lysate by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was filtered through a 0.22 mm low-protein binding filter (Millipore) and incubated with 50 ml anti-FLAG agarose beads (Sigma). The mixture was incubated for 4 hr, and the immunocomplex was washed essentially. Immunocomplexes were eluted in 100 ml 1 mg/ml 3 3 FLAG peptide (Sigma). The eluted proteins were loaded onto a single lane on a 4%–10% SDS-PAGE gel (Invitrogen). Proteins were run 5 mm into the separating gel and stained with colloidal. Protein bands on the SDS-PAGE gel were destained and digested in-gel with sequencing grade trypsin (10 ng/mL trypsin, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate [pH 8.0]) at 37℃ overnight. Peptides were sequentially extracted with 5% formic acid/ 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid/75% acetonitrile and then concentrated to 20μL.

### Data Protocol
The eluted peptides were sprayed into a LTQ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-ESI ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with one MS scan followed by five MS/MS scans for each cycle. Database searches were performed on an in-house Mascot server (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) against IPI (International Protein Index) Arabidopsis protein database. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Plant cells can sense conserved molecular patterns through pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) and initiate pattern-triggered immunity (PTI). Details of the PTI signaling network are starting to be uncovered in Arabidopsis, but are still poorly understood in other species, including soybean (Glycine max). In this study, we perform a forward genetic screen for autoimmunity-related lesion mimic mutants (lmms) in soybean and identify two allelic mutants, which carry mutations in Glyma.13G054400, encoding a malectin-like receptor kinase (RK). The mutants exhibit enhanced resistance to both bacterial and oomycete pathogens, as well as elevated ROS production upon treatment with the bacterial pattern flg22. Overexpression of GmLMM1 gene in Nicotiana benthamiana severely suppresses flg22-triggered ROS production and oomycete pattern XEG1-induced cell death. We further show that GmLMM1 interacts with the flg22 receptor FLS2 and its co-receptor BAK1 to negatively regulate flg22-induced complex formation between them. Our study identifies an important component in PTI regulation and reveals that GmLMM1 acts as a molecular switch to control an appropriate immune activation, which may also be adapted to other PRR-mediated immune signaling in soybean.

### Keywords
Gmlmm1, Ip-ms, Arabidopsis, Protoplast, Soybean

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Soybean Molecular Design Breeding, Northeast Institute of Geography and Agroecology, The Innovative Academy of Seed Design, Chinese Academy of Sciences,  China
Key Laboratory of Soybean Molecular Design Breeding, Northeast Institute of Geography and Agroecology, The Innovative Academy of Seed Design, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, 130102, China

### Submitter
Dongmei Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xianzhong Feng
Key Laboratory of Soybean Molecular Design Breeding, Northeast Institute of Geography and Agroecology, The Innovative Academy of Seed Design, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, 130102, China


