### Accession
PXD011518

### Title
Localization of functionally distinct CDC42 isoforms in neurons requires alternative 3'UTR usage

### Description
The proper subcellular localization of RNAs and local translational regulation is crucial in highly compartmentalized cells, such as neurons. RNA localization is mediated by specific cis-regulatory elements usually found in mRNA 3'UTRs. Therefore, processes that generate alternative 3'UTRs – alternative splicing and polyadenylation – have the potential to diversify mRNA localization patterns in neurons. Here, we performed mapping of alternative 3'UTRs in neurites and soma isolated from mESC-derived neurons. Our analysis identified 593 genes with differentially localized 3'UTR isoforms. In particular, we have shown that two isoforms of Cdc42 gene with distinct functions in neuronal polarity are differentially localized between neurites and soma of mESC-derived and mouse primary cortical neurons, at both mRNA and protein level. Using reporter assays and 3'UTR swapping experiments, we have identified the role of alternative 3’UTRs and mRNA transport in differential localization of alternative CDC42 protein isoforms. Moreover, we used SILAC to identify isoform-specific Cdc42 3'UTR-bound proteome with potential role in Cdc42 localization and translation. Our analysis points to usage of alternative 3'UTR isoforms as a novel mechanism to provide for differential localization of functionally diverse alternative protein isoforms.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare heavy (H) and light (L) lysates from mESC-derived neurons for SILAC experiments {Ong, 2002 #5371}, mESCs were grown in light (L) or heavy (H: Arg +10 Da, Lys +8 Da) SILAC 80% 2i/20% mESC medium for six passages to ensure complete proteome labeling (> 97%). Labelled mESCs were further differentiated into neurons in SILAC-customized differentiation media (L or H).  GRNA chromatography {Czaplinski, 2005 #316} was performed as described earlier {Chekulaeva, 2006 #594} with some modifications. Per 60 mg of GST-lambda N fusion peptide, 20 ml of a 50% slurry of Glutathione-Sepharose 4B (Amersham, 17075601) in binding buffer (BB: 20 mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 9% Glycerol, 0.05% NP-40, 12 mg/ml heparin) were incubated on an orbital rocker for 30 min at room temperature. Glutathione-Sepharose beads were washed twice in 1 ml of BB to remove the unbound GST-lambda N, and incubated with 18 pmol RNA (boxB-Cdc42E7 or boxB-Cdc42E6) in 200 ml BB for 1 hr at 4ºC. The beads were washed twice with 1 ml BB and incubated with protein lysate prepared from heavy (H) or light (L) mESC-induced neurons (2.9 mg total protein, lysis buffer: 50mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 0.5% Triton, 0.4 mM Pefabloc) for 2 hr at 4ºC. The samples were pooled together according to the scheme in Figure 4A (H Cdc42E7 + L Cdc42E6 for fw and L Cdc42E7+ H Cdc42E6 for rev experiment), washed 3 times with 1 ml BB, and bound proteins were eluted with 0.15 mg RNAse A in 60 ml BB for 30 min at 30ºC orbital shaker. Eluates were supplemented with 70 µl 2.5 M NaOAC pH 5.0, 1 µl Glycoblue (Ambion) and absolute EtOH up to 2 ml and incubated at 4ºC overnight. Proteins were recovered by centrifugation at 18000g at 4°C for 30 min and subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS and SILAC-based protein quantification were done as previously described {Zappulo, 2017 #6881}. In short, LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with in-solution digested protein samples on a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) according to {Sander, 2015 #5381}. The averages of H/L (fw) and L/H (rev) ratios were used to measure relative protein abundance in boxB-cdc42E7 versus boxB-cdc42E7 complexes.

### Publication Abstract
The proper subcellular localization of RNAs and local translational regulation is crucial in highly compartmentalized cells, such as neurons. RNA localization is mediated by specific cis-regulatory elements usually found in mRNA 3'UTRs. Therefore, processes that generate alternative 3'UTRs-alternative splicing and polyadenylation-have the potential to diversify mRNA localization patterns in neurons. Here, we performed mapping of alternative 3'UTRs in neurites and soma isolated from mESC-derived neurons. Our analysis identified 593 genes with differentially localized 3'UTR isoforms. In particular, we have shown that two isoforms of Cdc42 gene with distinct functions in neuronal polarity are differentially localized between neurites and soma of mESC-derived and mouse primary cortical neurons, at both mRNA and protein level. Using reporter assays and 3'UTR swapping experiments, we have identified the role of alternative 3'UTRs and mRNA transport in differential localization of alternative CDC42 protein isoforms. Moreover, we used SILAC to identify isoform-specific Cdc42 3'UTR-bound proteome with potential role in Cdc42 localization and translation. Our analysis points to usage of alternative 3'UTR isoforms as a novel mechanism to provide for differential localization of functionally diverse alternative protein isoforms.

### Keywords
Isoforms, Silac, Localization, Cdc42

### Affiliations
Kyoto University
MDC

### Submitter
Koshi Imami

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
MDC


