### Accession
PXD010912

### Title
Label-Free Absolute Protein Quantification with Data-Independent Acquisition

### Description
Label-free absolute quantitative proteomics is commonly used for absolute quantification of the proteome or specific proteins of interest in various biological samples. Current label-free absolute protein quantification (APQ) methods determine MS1 intensities, MS2 spectral counts or intensities to absolutely quantify protein concentrations from data obtained from data-dependent acquisition (DDA). In recent years, label-free data-independent acquisition (DIA) has seen increasing use as a powerful tool for relative protein quantification. Here we present a novel label-free DIA-based absolute protein quantification (DIA-APQ) method for the absolute quantification of protein expressions from DIA data. To validate this method, both DDA and DIA experiments were performed on 36 individual human liver microsome and S9 samples. The DIA-APQ assay was able to quantify approximately twice as many proteins as the DDA MS1-based APQ method whereas protein concentrations determined by the two methods were comparable. To evaluate the accuracy of the DIA-APQ method, we absolutely quantified carboxylesterase 1 concentrations in human liver samples using an established SILAC internal standard-based proteomic assay; the SILAC results were consistent with those obtained from DIA-APQ analysis. Finally, we employed a unique algorithm in DIA-APQ to distribute the MS signals from shared peptides to different protein isoforms and successfully applied the DIA-APQ method to the absolute quantification of several drug-metabolizing enzyme isoforms in human liver microsomes. This novel DIA-based APQ method not only provides a powerful approach for absolutely quantifying entire proteomes and specific candidate proteins, but also has with the capacity differentiating protein isoforms. 

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of human liver S9 fractions and microsomes  Normal human liver samples were obtained from several sources including the University of Minnesota Liver Tissue Cell Distribution System, Cooperative Human Tissue Network (CHTN), and XenoTech LLC (Lenexa, KS, USA). Human liver S9 fractions (HLS9) and human liver microsomes (HLM) were prepared from about 200 mg of frozen liver tissues using a previously published method [13, 14]. Briefly, liver tissues were cut into small pieces (1×1×1 mm) and homogenized in 0.5 mL ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) in 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes using a microcentrifuge pestle. The homogenates were centrifuged at 9,000 g at 4 °C for 20 min. Following centrifugation, the top layer containing fats was carefully removed, and the remaining samples were centrifuged again at 9000 g at 4 °C for 20 min to remove the remaining fats. The resulting supernatants (S9 fractions) were collected. To prepare microsomes, S9 fractions were transferred to a Beckman ultracentrifuge tube and centrifuged at 300,000 g (80,000 rpm) for 20 min. Microsomes were obtained by resuspending the pellets in PBS using a microtube homogenizer. Protein concentrations of S9 fractions and microsomes were determined using a PierceTM BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The S9 fraction and microsome samples were stored at -80 °C until use. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) analysis Proteomic sample preparation procedures including digestion and peptide extraction were similar to those we previously reported [13, 14]. To generate a reference spectral library for DIA analysis, DDA was performed for 36 individual human liver S9 (HLS9) samples on a TripleTOF 5600 plus mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) coupled with an Eksigent 2D plus LC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA). The DDA experiment consisted of a 250 ms TOF-MS scan from 400 to 1250 Da, followed by an MS/MS scan in a high sensitivity mode from 100 to 1500 Da for the top 30 precursor ions from the TOF-MS scan (50 ms accumulation time, 10 ppm mass tolerance, charge state from +2 to +5, rolling collision energy, and dynamic accumulation). Former target ions were excluded from MS/MS scan for 15 s.   Data-independent acquisition (DIA) analysis DIA analysis was performed on the same Sciex TripleTOF 5600 plus system, and the experiment was comprised of a 250 ms TOF-MS scan from 400 to 1250 Da, followed by MS/MS scans from 100 to 1500 Da of all precursors in a cyclic manner using a 100-variable isolation window scheme [14]. The accumulation time was 25 ms per isolation window resulting in a total cycle time of 2.8 s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) was used for the analysis of DDA data with default settings and a human reference proteome FASTA file containing 21,010 protein entries downloaded from Uniprot on 2/1/2018.  Spectronaut™ Pulsar software (version 11.0, Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) was used to obtain MS2 signal intensities of fragment ions from DIA data with a reference spectral library generated from the DDA analysis of 36 HLM samples.  The quantification was calculated using scripts written in Perl.

### Publication Abstract
Despite data-independent acquisition (DIA) has been increasingly used for relative protein quantification, DIA-based label-free absolute quantification method has not been fully established. Here we present a novel DIA method using the TPA algorithm (DIA-TPA) for the absolute quantification of protein expressions in human liver microsomal and S9 samples. To validate this method, both data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and DIA experiments were conducted on 36 individual human liver microsome and S9 samples. The MS2-based DIA-TPA was able to quantify approximately twice as many proteins as the MS1-based DDA-TPA method, whereas protein concentrations determined by the two approaches were comparable. To evaluate the accuracy of the DIA-TPA method, we absolutely quantified carboxylesterase 1 concentrations in human liver S9 fractions using an established SILAC internal standard-based proteomic assay; the SILAC results were consistent with those obtained from DIA-TPA analysis. Finally, we employed a unique algorithm in DIA-TPA to distribute the MS signals from shared peptides to individual proteins or isoforms and successfully applied the method to the absolute quantification of several drug-metabolizing enzymes in human liver microsomes. In sum, the DIA-TPA method not only can absolutely quantify entire proteomes and specific proteins, but also has the capability quantifying proteins with shared peptides. SIGNIFICANCE: Data independent acquisition (DIA) has emerged as a powerful approach for relative protein quantification at the whole proteome level. However, DIA-based label-free absolute protein quantification (APQ) method has not been fully established. In the present study, we present a novel DIA-based label-free APQ approach, named DIA-TPA, with the capability absolutely quantifying proteins with shared peptides. The method was validated by comparing the quantification results of DIA-TPA with that obtained from stable isotope-labeled internal standard-based proteomic assays.

### Keywords
Human, Dda, Absolute protein quantification, S9, Liver, Microsome, Dia

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of Michigan

### Submitter
Bing He

### Lab Head
Dr Hao-Jie Zhu
Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of Michigan


