### Accession
PXD005503

### Title
N-glycosylated Proteins of Cryptosporidium parvum

### Description
Here, we used mass spectrometry to identify the glycoproteins, localize the position of modification, and determine in detail the structures of the N-glycans. Using whole oocyst lysates we identified the most abundant N-glycosylated proteins, including some of the previously identified immunodominant antigens.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction: [2 Techniques. 1.)Mechanical: bead beating, followed by CHAPS extraction;2.)Chemical: phenol/water extraction ]  Mechanical: One billion C. parvum oocysts were first concentrated by centrifugation, at 1,000 x g, 10-min, at 4 °C, resuspended in PBS with EDTA-free protease inhibitor, then broken with 0.5-mm glass beads in a bead beater, 4 x 5 min. cycles, at 4°C. (placed into an ice bath between cycles) Proteins were extracted using a buffer containing protease inhibitor (10 mM HEPES, 25 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 10 mM MgCl2, 2% CHAPS, 6 M Guanidine, 50 mM dithiothreitol HCl, pH 7.4) . Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation (21,130 x g, 5 min.,4°C) in a microcentrifuge. The proteins in the supernatant were precipitated by the addition of -20 °C acetone (acetone/sample v/v 8:1), and the tube was allowed to sit undisturbed, ≥18 h,  -80 °C. The proteins were concentrated by centrifugation (21,130 x g, 20 min., 4°C). The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was washed 3 times with ice cold acetone, with centrifugation (as above) after each wash. Any remaining solvent was removed in an unheated speed vacuum.  Chemical:   A hot phenol extraction method described previously (Howe et al.,1972, Hurkman and Tanaka, 1986) was modified and utilized to extract total proteins from 500 million intact oocysts. A hot phenol extraction was employed to ensure that the heat would kill any remaining viable oocysts. The oocysts were pelleted by centrifugation as described above, and the supernatant discarded. A sandbath was used to heat a sealed conical vial containing 1-mL of phenol to 68°C, once temperature was achieved, the pelleted oocysts were added as a slurry in 500uL of distilled water. The vial was sealed and the contents mixed by inversion every 2 minutes. After 20 minutes, the vial was removed and placed onto ice. The vial was gently centrifuged to facilitate good phase separation. The aqueous layer was removed and discarded. The interphase and phenol layers were carefully separated and saved. The proteins were subsequently precipitated from the phenol and interphase layers by the addition of 8 volumes of -20°C MeOH containing 0.1M ammonium acetate, and allowed to sit undisturbed for at least 18 hours at -20°C. The precipitated proteins were concentrated as described above, with the exception that the pellets were washed 3X with -20 °C MeOH/0.1M NH4OAc prior to final lyophilization.  Protease Digestion: Two groups of samples, and three total categories of samples were prepared for proteomics experiments. One category, refered to as "CHAPS", in the "Mechanical" group, and two categories within the "Chemical" group, "Phenol" and "Interphase". All sampleswere digested in a similar manner as by an in solution digests. The precipitated proteins were dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, reduced with 50mM DTT for 20 minutes at 60°C, cooled, then alkylated with iodoacetamide protected from the light, 20 minutes at room temperature, excess IAA was quenched with DTT. Proteomics grade trypsin added in a 1:20weight:weight ratio, and incubated overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were dried byspeed vacuum and desalted with C18 ZipTip® concentrators.

### Data Protocol
Database Search: LC MS/MS proteomics database search and analysis: Raw data, *.RAW format, from a LTQ-Orbitrap or QE+ mass spectrometer was imported, and searches using the PEAKS software suite version 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON,  Canada). searches performed as follows: the data refinement step corrected for the precursor m/z, for the PEAKSdenovo search stages, trypsin was specified as the enzyme, a 8.0ppm parent  mass error tolerance, 0.05Da fragment mass error tolerance, with carbamidomethyl cysteine set as a fixed modification, with methionine oxidation, HexNAc serine/threonine,  HexNAc2Hex6;HexNAc2Hex5 on asparagine all as possible dynamic modifications. A maximum of 5 dynamic modifications was specified. The PEAKSDB search stage was identical to the PEAKSdenovo  stage, with the exception that up to three missed trypsin cleavages with the possibility of one non-specific cleavage occurring. Searches were performed against the Cryptosporidium parvum  Iowa-II predicted proteome release-5.0 obtained from the Cryptosporidium Genome Resource (cryptodb.org). False discovery rate (FDR) estimation was enabled. For the final PEAKSPTM stage, the  de novo score average local confidence (ALC%) threshold was 15 and the peptide hit threshold (-10logP) was set to 30. Alll possible Unimod modifications were considered for this stage. The  PEAKSPTM report was exported as a mzidentML with a FDR set to 5%, ALC 50% for de novo only , and proteins with a score of (-10logP) ≥ 20 containing unique peptides ≥ 2. Each data file was  analyzed separately for all samples and replicates.    Scaffold Analysis: The data from the PEAKSPTM search results were exported as mzidentML files, and imported into Scaffold version 4.6 for further analysis (Proteome Software, Inc.,Portland, Oregon). Three  “Biosamples” and two “categories” were specified for the samples. The two categories corresponded to the method of protein extraction, either “mechanical” or “chemical”. The sample names  correspond to the sub-sample classification, the “CHAPS” was the mechanically broken 2% CHAPS extraction buffer soluble portion, and the “phenol” and “interphase” samples correspond to the  phenol and interphase layers from the chemical extraction procedure. Each sample was analyzed independently, with experiment wide grouping and protein clustering. The probability model  utilized was peptide prophet with delta mass correction. All possible N-glycosylated spectra that were assigned by the software were manually reviewed for quality and proper assignment. A  final list of glyopeptides and proteins was tabulated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cryptosporidiosis, Cryptosporidium parvum, Lc-ms/ms, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Boston University
Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

### Submitter
John Haserick

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine E. Costello
Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA


