### Accession
PXD025080

### Title
Proteome of the coral symbiont Breviolum minutum under elevated temperature stress

### Description
Cultures of three Symbiodiniaceae genera (Breviolum minutum, Durusdinium trenchii, Cladocopium sp.) were exposed to temperatures increasing from 26C to 32C over three days, followed by one week at 32C. Samples for proteome analysis were taken from controls (26C), at the end of the temperature ramp, and after one week at 32C. The three species have been submitted to PRIDE individually. Manuscript in preparation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted, digested and purified using a modified filter-aided sample preparation protocol (Wisniewski et al. 2009). Algal cells were pelleted by centrifugation, the medium discarded, and the pellet stored at −80 °C. Salt was removed by centrifugation and resuspension of the cells in liquid chromatography-grade water twice, followed by transfer to low protein binding tubes and freezing at −80 °C until further processing. The algal pellet was then resuspended in 500 μL 5% w/v sodium deoxycholate and the cells lysed by 20 × 2 s pulses with an ultrasonicator probe. Proteins were reduced with 1% final concentration β-mercaptoethanol and denatured by incubation at 85 °C for 30 min. Photosynthetic pigments were partially removed by the twice adding two volumes of ethyl acetate, vortexing for 1 min, and centrifugation at 10,000 g × 1 min, discarding the upper organic fraction each time. Residual ethyl acetate was removed by centrifugation under vacuum for 15 min. The supernatant was then transferred to a centrifugation filter (Amicon Ultra 30kDa 0.5 mL, Merck Millepore) and concentrated by centrifugation (14,000 g × 20 min). Proteins were then resuspended and washed twice by the addition of 380 μL 50mM Tris buffer, pH 8.1, followed by centrifugation (14,000 g × 15 min). After a third and final addition of 380 μL 50mM Tris buffer, a 10 μL subsample was transferred to a new tube, diluted with 90 μL water, acidified with 1 μL 100% formic acid to precipitate deoxycholate, centrifuged (16,000 g × 5 min) and the protein quantified by protein-binding dye fluorescence (Qubit 2.0, ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). 100 μg total protein was reduced by incubation with 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol at 37 °C for 10 min, alkylated by incubation for 20 min at room temperature with 20 mM acrylamide, the alkylation quenched by a second equal addition of β-mercaptoethanol, and digested with 2 μg trypsin for 18 h in the filter unit. Digested peptides were collected by centrifugation (14,000 g × 20 min) through the filter and any remaining deoxycholate removed by the addition of formic acid to 1% final concentration, followed by centrifugation (16,000 g × 1 min). The supernatant, containing digested peptides, was transferred to a new tube, concentrated by vacuum centrifugation to approximately 200 μL and desalted using C18-packed pipette tips (Omix Bond Elut, Agilent Technologies). Peptides were dried by centrifugation under vacuum and stored at 4 °C until analysis, upon which they were dissolved in 70 μL 0.1% formic acid and the peptide content quantified by fluorescence as before. Unless otherwise noted all reagents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich New Zealand, and all samples were handled in low protein binding tubes (Eppendorf).   Peptide samples were separated by a 75 min linear gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at 300 nL min−1 on an Acclaim PepMap C18, 3 μm, 100 Å column (Thermo Scientific, Auckland, New Zealand) and Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatograph system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were ionised by electrospray at 1.8 kV and analysed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Precursor mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000, rejecting singly-charged ions, with quadrupole isolation enabled and an automatic gain target of 7.0e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The 20 most intense precursor spectra were fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation and analysed in the ion trap with an automatic gain target of 5.0e3 and a maximum injection time of 300 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration of 60 s. Samples were each analysed 1-3 times as technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified from raw spectrum files using the Andromeda search algorithm in MaxQuant (1.6.10.43, Cox and Mann 2008, Cox et al 2014). Protein search databases were generated for each Symbiodiniaceae species from transcripts obtained from samples from the same experiment. Trypsin was the selected digest enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein n-terminus were considered as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine considered as a fixed modification. The first search and main search peptide tolerances were 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da for the ion trap MS2 search. Label-free quantification was enabled with a minimum of two unique plus razor peptides for quantification and match between runs enabled. Peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rates were both set to 1%, with a minimum of two peptides required for identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thermal stress, Coral bleaching, Dinoflagellate, Symbiodiniaceae, Photosynthesis

### Affiliations
Victoria University of Wellington

### Submitter
Clinton Oakley

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Davy
Victoria University of Wellington


