### Accession
PXD025547

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Urinary Extracellular Vesicles Reveals a Role for the Complement System in Medullary Sponge Kidney Disease

### Description
Medullary sponge kidney (MSK) disease is a rare and neglected kidney condition often associated with nephrocalcinosis/nephrolithiasis and cystic anomalies in the precalyceal ducts. Little is known about the pathogenesis of this disease, so we addressed the knowledge gap using a proteomics approach. The protein content of microvesicles/ exosomes isolated from urine of 15 MSK and 15 idiopathic calcium nephrolithiasis (ICN) patients was investigated by mass spectrometry, followed by weighted gene coexpression network analysis, support vector machine (SVM) learning, and partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) to select the most discriminative proteins. Proteomic data were verified by ELISA. We identified 2998 proteins in total, 1764 (58.9%) of which were present in both vesicle types in both diseases. Among the MSK samples, only 65 (2.2%) and 137 (4.6%) proteins were exclusively found in the microvesicles and exosomes, respectively. Similarly, among the ICN samples, only 75 (2.5%) and 94 (3.1%) proteins were exclusively found in the microvesicles and exosomes, respectively. SVM learning and PLS- DA revealed a core panel of 20 proteins that distinguished extracellular vesicles representing each clinical condition with an accuracy of 100%. Among them, three exosome proteins involved in the lectin complement pathway maximized the discrimination between MSK and ICN: Ficolin 1, Mannan-binding lectin serine protease 2 and Complement component 4-binding protein β. ELISA confirmed proteomic results. Our data show that the complement pathway is involved in MSK, revealing a new range of potential therapeutic targets and early diagnostic biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed with in-StageTip (iST) method with two poly (styrene divinylbenzene) reversed-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) disks. The microvesicle- and exosome-containing pellets were solubilized with a solution containing 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM chloro-acetamide, 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5), and 2% sodium deoxycholate. Lysis, reduction, and alkylation of the samples were performed in a single step and then loaded into the StageTip. The samples were then diluted with a buffer containing 25 mM Tris (pH 8.5) and 1 μg of trypsin. After the acidification step with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), the samples were washed with 0.2% TFA three times. The proteins were eluted in 60 μl 5% v/v ammonium hydroxide containing 80% v/v acetonitrile. The desalted peptides were dried in a speed vacuum and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid (FA). They were then separated on a 50-cm reversed-phase Easy Spray column (75-μm internal diameter × 50 cm; 2 μm/100 Å C18) on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano device (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with a binary buffer system comprising buffer A (0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 5% dimethylsulfoxide, 0.1% FA). The program consisted of a 70-min gradient (2–45% buffer B) at a flow rate of 250 μl/min, with the column temperature maintained at 60 ◦C. The chromatography system was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), acquiring data in Charge Ordered Parallel Ion aNalysis (CHOPIN) mode. The precursors were ionized using an EASY-spray source held at +2.2 kV and the iICNet capillary temperature was held at 300 ◦C. Single MS survey scans were performed over the mass window 375–1500 m/z withan AGC target of 250,000, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled for peptide isotopic distributions, precursors of z = 2–5 were selected for 2 s of cycle time, and dynamic exclusion was set to 25 s with a ± 10 ppm window set around the precursor. The following CHOPIN conditions were applied: a) if the precursor charge state is 2, then follow with collision-induced dissociation (CID) and scan in the ion trap with an isolation window of 1.8, CID energy of 35%, and a rapid ion trap scan rate; b) if the precursor charge state is 3–5 and precursor intensity >500,000, then follow with higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) and scan in the Orbitrap with an isolation window of 1.8, HCD energy of 28%, and a resolution of 15,000; c) if the precursor charge state is 3–5 and precursor intensity < 500,000, then follow with CID as described for option (a). For all MS2  events, the following options were set: “Injection Ions for All Available Parallelizable Time” with an AGC target value of 4000 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms for CID, or an AGC target value of 10,000 and a maximum injection time of 40 ms for HCD.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed in the MaxQuant v1.6.0.16 environment using the MaxLFQ algorithm for label-free quantification and Andromeda search engine. Peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDRs) were both set at < 0.01. The search contained variable modifications for the oxidation of methionine (M), N-terminal protein acetylation (protein N-terminus), and fixed carbamidomethyl modifications (C). For protease digestion, up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptides of length greater than six amino acids have been considered for the identification. The “match between runs” algorithm with a setting of 1 min time window was used for the quantification of MS missed data in each individual measurement. UniProt FASTA Homo sapiens database (access August 2017) was used for the identification of peptides and proteins.After normalization, unsupervised hierarchical clustering and multidimensional scaling (MDS) with Spearman’s rank correlation and k-means were used to recognize outliers and sample dissimilarity. Weighted-gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) package in R was used for building the co-expression network with the normalized expression profiles of the identified proteins.A non-parametric Mann–Whitney U-test, machine learning methods, such as non-linear support vector machine (SVM) learning, and partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) were used to identify the hub proteins of modules that maximize the discrimination between the selected clinical traits.

### Publication Abstract
Medullary sponge kidney (MSK) disease is a rare and neglected kidney condition often associated with nephrocalcinosis/nephrolithiasis and cystic anomalies in the precalyceal ducts. Little is known about the pathogenesis of this disease, so we addressed the knowledge gap using a proteomics approach. The protein content of microvesicles/exosomes isolated from urine of 15 MSK and 15 idiopathic calcium nephrolithiasis (ICN) patients was investigated by mass spectrometry, followed by weighted gene coexpression network analysis, support vector machine (SVM) learning, and partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) to select the most discriminative proteins. Proteomic data were verified by ELISA. We identified 2998 proteins in total, 1764 (58.9%) of which were present in both vesicle types in both diseases. Among the MSK samples, only 65 (2.2%) and 137 (4.6%) proteins were exclusively found in the microvesicles and exosomes, respectively. Similarly, among the ICN samples, only 75 (2.5%) and 94 (3.1%) proteins were exclusively found in the microvesicles and exosomes, respectively. SVM learning and PLS-DA revealed a core panel of 20 proteins that distinguished extracellular vesicles representing each clinical condition with an accuracy of 100%. Among them, three exosome proteins involved in the lectin complement pathway maximized the discrimination between MSK and ICN: Ficolin 1, Mannan-binding lectin serine protease 2, and Complement component 4-binding protein &#x3b2;. ELISA confirmed the proteomic results. Our data show that the complement pathway is involved in the MSK, revealing a new range of potential therapeutic targets and early diagnostic biomarkers.

### Keywords
Medullary sponge kidney; idiopathic calcium nephrolithiasis; complement system; proteomics

### Affiliations
IRCCS Ist G. Gaslini
IRCCS Gaslini

### Submitter
Martina Bartolucci

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
IRCCS Ist G. Gaslini


