### Accession
PXD015242

### Title
Identification of proteins  interacted with  EphA2 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells by LC-MS / MS

### Description
To search proteins that interact with EphA2, EphA2 interactors were coimmunoprecipitated with anti-EphA2 antibody from 5-8F NPC cell extracts, separated on SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue , and non-immune IgG antibody instead of anti-EphA2 antibody served as control. All bands were excised, and subjected to in gel trypsin digestion and liquid chromatography and high-throughput mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.As a result, a total of1352 proteins including ANXA1 and Cbl were identified .

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates were extracted from nasopharyngeal carcinoma 5-8F cells using NP-40 lysis buffer with sonication. About 1.2 mg of total proteins were incubated with 30μl Protein G-Sepharose™ 4B (Thermo Fischer Scientific) for 4hr at 4°C followed by centrifugation for 5 min at 4 °C. The clarified supernatants were immunoprecipated with 2μg anti-EphA2 antibody (sc-398832, Santa Cruz) and 30μl Protein G-Sepharose™ 4B overnight at 4 °C, and centrifuged for 5 min 4 °C. The beads were washed 3 times with PBS at 4 °C, and were boiled in 2×SDS-PAGE loading buffer for 5min to elute protein complexes. The elutants were separated on SDS-PAGE gel followed by coomassie brilliant blue G250 staining, and then all protein bands were excised from the gels, in-gel trypsin digested, and subjected to NanoLC-MS/MS analysis with the Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) to get MS/MS spectra. Data of MS/MS were searched against Swiss-Prot database (Homo Sapiens). Individual ions scores >35, and unique peptide≥1 indicate identity or extensive homology (P < 0.05), and were considered significant. All proteins deemed to be high confidence interactors of EphA2 were identified by at least two times of three replicates.

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS Proteomic analysis. Before analysis on the Q Exactive (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA), peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. Prior to injection, Peptides were re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid andcentrifuge for 60 minat 13,000 rpm.For each injection, Samples were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap®100 (75 μm x 2 cm, nanoViper,C18,3 μm, 100 A), and separated on an Acclaim PepMap® RSLC(75 μmx15 cm , nanoViper,C18, 2 μm, 100A,), (Thermo Scientific). The analytical separation was performed over a 50 mingradient (flow rate of 0.3 μl/min) of 5 to 30% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) ,30% to 40% in 5 min and climbingto 90% in 1 min then holding at 90% for 8 min , at last, holding at 5% for 10 min. The Q Exactive was operated in a data dependent manner, selecting top 20 precursors for fragmentation by HCD. For MS scans, the survey scan range was 300 m/z–1800 m/z.MS1wasperformed at 70,000 resolution, with an AGC target of 3e6 ions and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. MS2 spectrawere performed at 17,500 resolution, Peptides were selected for MS/MS using 27% NCE .A data-dependent acquisition (DDA) procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was appliedfor the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1e6. Precursors were fixed first mass of 100.0 m/z and isolated with a width of 2.0 m/z ,and put on the Dynamic exclusion list for 60.0 s. 1,8,>8 and unassigned charge states were excluded from precursor selection.The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the orbtrap and 1e3 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. Database search Proteome discoverer 1.4(PD1.4, ThermoFisher Scientific) with Masccot was used for protein identification.Data were searched against Swissprot homo sapiens(human)database concatenated with reverse decoy database.The maximum missed cleavages sites was set to a default value of 2 and enzyme specificity was trypsin(full).Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragments mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Dynamic modification set as Oxidized methionine, and static modification set as carbamidomethylation. The false discovery rate (FDR)was adjusted to < =1% at protein, peptide and PSMlevels.Individual ions scores >35,unique peptide>=1indicate identity or extensive homology (P < 0.05), and were considered significant. Proteins were considered identified if they had quantifiable protein area in 2 or more of the 3 biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
EphA2 is an important oncogenic protein and emerging drug target, but the oncogenic role and mechanism of ligand-independent phosphorylation of EphA2 at tyrosine 772 (pY772-EphA2) is unclear. In this study, we established nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cell lines with stable expression of exogenous EphA2 and EphA2-Y772A (phosphorylation inactivation) using endogenous EphA2-knockdown cells, and observed that pY772A EphA2 was responsible for EphA2-promoting NPC cell proliferation and anchorage-independent and in vivo growth in mice. Mechanistically, EphA2-Y772A mediated EphA2-activating Shp2/Erk-1/2 signaling pathway in the NPC cells, and Gab1 (Grb2-associated binder 1) and Grb2 (growth factor receptor-bound protein 2) were involved in pY772-EphA2 activating this signaling pathway. Our results further showed that Shp2/Erk-1/2 signaling mediated pY772-EphA2-promoting NPC cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth. Moreover, we observed that EphA2 tyrosine kinase inhibitor ALW-II-41-27 inhibited pY772-EphA2 and EphA2-Y772A decreased the inhibitory effect of ALW-II-41-27 on NPC cell proliferation. Collectively, our results demonstrate that pY772-EphA2 is responsible for EphA2-dependent NPC cell growth in vitro and in vivo by activating Shp2/Erk-1/2 signaling pathway, and is a pharmacologic target of ALW-II-41-27, suggesting that pY772-EphA2 can serve as a therapeutic target in NPC and perhaps in other cancers.

### Keywords
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, Lc-ms / ms, Epha2

### Affiliations
Research Center of Carcinogenesis and Targeted Therapy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, China
Research Center of Carcinogenesis and Targeted Therapy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University

### Submitter
Shanshan LU

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi-Qiang Xiao
Research Center of Carcinogenesis and Targeted Therapy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, China


