### Accession
PXD017140

### Title
Yeast glutamine tRNA synthetase doxycycline shut-off

### Description
During protein synthesis, charged tRNAs deliver amino acids to translating ribosomes, and are then re-charged by tRNA synthetases (aaRS). In humans, mutant aaRS cause a diversity of neurological disorders, but their molecular aetiologies are incompletely characterised. To understand system responses to aaRS depletion, the yeast glutamine aaRS gene (GLN4) was transcriptionally regulated using doxycycline by tet-off control. Depletion of Gln4p inhibited growth, and induced a transcriptional GCN4 amino acid starvation response, indicative of uncharged tRNA accumulation and Gcn2 kinase activation. The GCN4 response was confirmed using SILAC proteomics, using heavy isotope labelling to identify changes in protein expression during glutamine tRNA synthetase depletion.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotopic labelling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) was carried out. Triplicate yeast cultures were grown in ‘light’ (Gln4 tRNA synthetase shut-off strain with 1 micro g /ml doxycycline(containing 20 mg/l 12C arginine and lysine) or ‘heavy’ (Gln4 tRNA synthetase shut-off strain without doxycycline) (containing 20 mg/l L-arginine-13C-HCl (CLM-2265-H, Cambridge Isotope Labs) and 20 mg/l L-lysine-13C-HCl [CLM-2247-H, Cambridge Isotope Labs]) synthetic defined yeast growth media supplemented where required with doxycycline to deplete the Gln4 tRNA synthetase. Cultures were grown for at least 8 doublings to ensure steady-state 13C labelling of proteins, and harvested at approximately OD600 0.5-0.6. Equal numbers of cells from heavy and light cultures were mixed, harvested and resuspended in lysis buffer [25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.2), 50 mM KCl, 5 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 1 x cOmplete mini protease inhibitor (Roche)]. Yeast were glass bead-lysed and the lysate clarified using low speed centrifugation (10 min at 12,000 x rcf). For SILAC mass spectrometry, 25 µg total protein was separated on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel, and 12 gel slices of equal size subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS performed using a Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the mass spectra was carried out using MaxQuant software. Only protein groups with two or more unique peptides recorded were analysed.

### Publication Abstract
During protein synthesis, charged tRNAs deliver amino acids to translating ribosomes, and are then re-charged by tRNA synthetases (aaRS). In humans, mutant aaRS cause a diversity of neurological disorders, but their molecular aetiologies are incompletely characterised. To understand system responses to aaRS depletion, the yeast glutamine aaRS gene (GLN4) was transcriptionally regulated using doxycycline by tet-off control. Depletion of Gln4p inhibited growth, and induced a GCN4 amino acid starvation response, indicative of uncharged tRNA accumulation and Gcn2 kinase activation. Using a global model of translation that included aaRS recharging, Gln4p depletion was simulated, confirming slowed translation. Modelling also revealed that Gln4p depletion causes negative feedback that matches translational demand for Gln-tRNAGln to aaRS recharging capacity. This maintains normal charged tRNAGln levels despite Gln4p depletion, confirmed experimentally using tRNA Northern blotting. Model analysis resolves the paradox that Gln4p depletion triggers a GCN4 response, despite maintenance of tRNAGln charging levels, revealing that normally, the aaRS population can sequester free, uncharged tRNAs during aminoacylation. Gln4p depletion reduces this sequestration capacity, allowing uncharged tRNAGln to interact with Gcn2 kinase. The study sheds new light on mutant aaRS disease aetiologies, and explains how aaRS sequestration of uncharged tRNAs can prevent GCN4 activation under non-starvation conditions.

### Keywords
Trna synthetase depletion, Translation, Silac, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Aberdeen
Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, UK

### Submitter
Ian Stansfield

### Lab Head
Dr Ian Stansfield
Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, UK


