### Accession
PXD013122

### Title
Tyrosine-protein phophatase non-receptor type 2 (PTPN2) deficiency increases short-lived effector T-cell survival and augments autonomous proliferation of T-cells

### Description
Whole proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of T-cells isolated from PTPN2 wild-type and knock-out micestrongly linked amplified T cell numbers to increased proliferation mediated by transcriptional activation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) protein family. Subsequent analysis confirmed improved proliferation and survival but not an increase in initial engraftment to be the cause of higher T cell numbers upon adoptive transfer.

### Sample Protocol
CD8 T cells of 3 mice each of PTPN2 KO and WT were isolated and activated for 30 h with Dynabeads™ Mouse T-Activator CD3/CD28 beads (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s instructions and using 50 U/ml of recombinant IL-2 in RPMI media supplemented with 10 % heat inactivated FCS. Cellular proteins were extracted using 8 M urea lysis buffer. After reduction and alkylation, 165 ug protein per sample were digested overnight at 37 °C using trypsin. Acidified digests were desalted, vacuum dried and then labeled using 100 ug TMTsixplex™ reagents (Thermos Fisher) per sample. After desalting, peptides were loaded onto a ProPac IMAC-10 column (4 × 50 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) charged with FeCl3. The flow through (non-phosphopeptides) was collected, and bound phosphopeptides were subsequently eluted and collected applying a 6.5 min gradient from 0 % to 26 % of 0.315 % NH4OH. The phosphopeptide fraction was desalted and separated into a total of 6 fractions via high pH reversed phase tip fractionation. Non-phosphopeptides were separated into 32 fractions on an Acclaim Trinity P1 column (2.1 × 150 mm, 3 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific)using increasing concentrations of ACN in 10 mM ammonium acetate. All fractions were measured on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) employing an MS3 measurement mode.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.0.16). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the mouse reference database (UP000000589, downloaded on 03.08.2018) supplemented with common contaminants. High pH RP and Trinity P1 fractions were separated into two groups, and ‘6plex TMT’ was specified as label within a reporter ion MS3 experiment type. Phosphopeptide samples were defined as ‘PTM’. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. For phosphopeptide fractions, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine was allowed as additional variable modification. Precursor tolerance was set to ±5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to ±20 ppm. ‘Label minimum ratio count’ was set to 1. All other parameters were left as default. Results were adjusted to 1 % peptide spectrum match and 1 % protein false discovery rate employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Manipulating molecules that impact T&#xa0;cell receptor (TCR) or cytokine signaling, such as the protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 2 (PTPN2), has significant potential for advancing T&#xa0;cell-based immunotherapies. Nonetheless, it remains unclear how PTPN2 impacts the activation, survival, and memory formation of T&#xa0;cells. We find that PTPN2 deficiency renders cells in&#xa0;vivo and in&#xa0;vitro less dependent on survival-promoting cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-2 and IL-15. Remarkably, briefly ex&#xa0;vivo-activated PTPN2-deficient T&#xa0;cells accumulate in 3- to 11-fold higher numbers following transfer into unmanipulated, antigen-free mice. Moreover, the absence of PTPN2 augments the survival of short-lived effector T&#xa0;cells and allows them to robustly re-expand upon secondary challenge. Importantly, we find no evidence for impaired effector function or memory formation. Mechanistically, PTPN2 deficiency causes broad changes in the expression and phosphorylation of T&#xa0;cell expansion and survival-associated proteins. Altogether, our data underline the therapeutic potential of targeting PTPN2 in T&#xa0;cell-based therapies to augment the number and survival capacity of antigen-specific T&#xa0;cells.

### Keywords
T-cells, Phosphoproteomics, Tmt, Ms3, Ptpn2

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany
Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany

### Submitter
Jana Zecha

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich (TUM), Freising, Germany


