### Accession
PXD006698

### Title
Tyrosine phosphatase interaction network

### Description
Protein tyrosine phosphatases are crucial for various biological processes including cell metabolism, gene transcription, translation, cell-cycle regulation, protein stability, signal transduction, and apoptosis. To understand the functional network of each protein phosphatase in the cell, we performed a systematic proteomic analysis of 81 human protein phosphatases using tandem affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry (TAP-MS).

### Sample Protocol
Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces and subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure and dried(1).  On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip .  After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column.    A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.  Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosine phosphatases play a critical role in many cellular processes and pathogenesis, yet comprehensive analysis of their functional interacting proteins in the cell is limited. By utilizing a proteomic approach, here we present an interaction network of 81 human tyrosine phosphatases built on 1884 high-confidence interactions of which 85% are unreported. Our analysis has linked several phosphatases with new cellular processes and unveiled protein interactions genetically linked to various human diseases including cancer. We validated the functional importance of an identified interaction network by characterizing a distinct novel interaction between PTPN5 and Mob1a. PTPN5 dephosphorylates Mob1a at Y26 residue. Further, we identify that PTPN5 is required for proper midbody abscission during cytokinesis through regulation of Mob1a dephosphorylation. In conclusion, our study provides a valuable resource of tyrosine phosphatase interactions, which can be further utilized to dissect novel cellular functions of these enzymes.

### Keywords
Human, Tap, Hek293t, Lc-msms, Ptp

### Affiliations
Group Head
Head Laboratory of Cell Death & Cell Survival (LCDCS) Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD) Laboratory Block : Tuljaguda Complex, (Opp. M.J. Market)  Nampally, Hyderabad, India

### Submitter
Subbareddy Maddika

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Maddika Subba Reddy
Head Laboratory of Cell Death & Cell Survival (LCDCS) Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD) Laboratory Block : Tuljaguda Complex, (Opp. M.J. Market)  Nampally, Hyderabad, India


