### Accession
PXD018418

### Title
Essential functions of glycans in human epithelia dissected by a CRISPR/Cas9-engineered human  organotypic skin model

### Description
The glycome undergoes characteristic changes during histogenesis and organogenesis, but our understanding of the importance of select glycan structures for tissue formation and homeostasis is incomplete. Here, we present a human organotypic platform that allows genetic dissection of cellular glycosylation capacities and systematic interrogation of the roles of distinct glycan types in tissue formation. We used CRISPR-Cas9 gene targeting to generate a library of 3D organotypic skin tissues that selectively differ in their capacity to produce glycan structures on the main types of Nand O-linked glycoproteins and glycolipids. This tissue library revealed distinct changes in skin formation associated with a loss of features for all tested glycoconjugates. The organotypic skin model provides phenotypic cues for the distinct functions of glycoconjugates, and serves as a unique resource for further genetic dissection and identification of the specific structural features involved. The strategy is also applicable to other organotypic tissue models.

### Sample Protocol
N/TERT-1 cells were maintained in Keratinocyte Serum-free Media with 0.2 ng/ml EGF, 0.3 mM CaCl2, and 25 µg/ml Bovine Pituitary Extract. Packed cell pellets were lysed in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.2% RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters Corp.), and the lysate was homogenized by sonication. Cleared lysates were diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to bring the final concentration of RapiGest below 0.2% before being subjected to reduction with DTT, alkylation with iodoacetamide, and digestion with either trypsin, chymotrypsin, or Glu-C (Roche Applied Science). Each of the three digests were purified using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters Corp.), and peptide concentration was measured on a NanoDrop. In this study, we employed LWAC enrichment of O-GalNAc glycopeptides using Jacalin lectin which is known to recognize T (Galβ1-3GalNAcα-O-R) antigen. Given that a majority of O-glycan structures may be further modified by NeuAc capping which could interfere with LWAC enrichment and hamper glycopeptide identification, neuraminidase treatment was utilized prior to LWAC to remove NeuAc. Finally, samples we fractionated using High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation as described by the manufacturer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex™ Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Nano-LC was operated in a single analytical column setup using PicoFrit Emitters (New Objectives, 75-µm inner diameter) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pure-AQ C18 phase (Dr. Maisch, 1.9-µm particle size, 16-cm column length), with a flow rate of 200 nl / min. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire full scan MS spectra (350-1700 m/z) for a maximum injection time of 50 ms at a mass resolution of 120,000 and an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 4.0e5. Fragmentation and acquisition strategy was a decision tree based parallel HCD-ETciD fragmentation with 25% supplemental activation energies. MS data processing for all raw files was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Raw files were searched with Sequest HT search engine against a concatenated human-specific database. Enzyme restriction was set to trypsin/chymotrypsin/GluC digestion with full specificity a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and HexNAc, Hex(1)HexNAc(1) attachment to serine, threonine, and tyrosine were used as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The glycome undergoes characteristic changes during histogenesis and organogenesis, but our understanding of the importance of select glycan structures for tissue formation and homeostasis is incomplete. Here, we present a human organotypic platform that allows genetic dissection of cellular glycosylation capacities and systematic interrogation of the roles of distinct glycan types in tissue formation. We used CRISPR-Cas9 gene targeting to generate a library of 3D organotypic skin tissues that selectively differ in their capacity to produce glycan structures on the main types of N- and O-linked glycoproteins and glycolipids. This tissue library revealed distinct changes in skin formation associated with a loss of features for all tested glycoconjugates. The organotypic skin model provides phenotypic cues for the distinct functions of glycoconjugates and serves as a unique resource for further genetic dissection and identification of the specific structural features involved. The strategy is also applicable to other organotypic tissue models.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Skin, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, University of Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, University of Copenhagen, Denmark


