### Accession
PXD032318

### Title
Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus induces specialised ribosomes to efficiently translate viral lytic mRNAs

### Description
Historically, ribosomes have been viewed as unchanged homogeneous macromolecular machines with no intrinsic regulatory capacity for mRNA translation. However, an emerging concept is that heterogeneity of ribosomal composition exists, which can exert a regulatory function or specificity in translational control. This is supported by recent discoveries identifying compositionally distinct ‘specialised ribosomes’ that actively regulate mRNA translation. Viruses lack their own translational machinery and impose a high translational demand on the host cell during replication. Here we explore the possibility that Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) can manipulate host ribosome biogenesis during infection to produce specialised ribosomes which preferentially translate viral transcripts. Quantitative proteomic analysis has identified changes in the stoichiometry and composition of precursor ribosomal complexes during the switch from latent to lytic KSHV replication. Intriguingly, we demonstrate the enhanced association of ribosomal biogenesis factors BUD23 and NOC4L, and a previously uncharacterised KSHV lytic protein, ORF11, with small ribosomal subunit precursor complexes during lytic KSHV infection. Notably, BUD23 depletion resulted in significantly reduced viral gene expression and progression through the lytic cascade, culminating in a dramatic reduction of infectious virion production. Importantly, ribosome profiling demonstrated that BUD23 is essential for the reduced association of ribosomes with KSHV uORFs in late lytic genes, required for the efficient translation of the main open reading frame. Together our results provide new mechanistic insights into KSHV-mediated manipulation of cellular ribosome composition inducing a population of specialised ribosomes to facilitate efficient translation of viral mRNAs.

### Sample Protocol
TREx BCBL1-Rta cell lines expressing FLAG-2xStrep tagged ribosome biogenesis bait proteins and a control TREx BCBL1-Rta cell line were seeded at 0.75 x 106 cells/ml in 20 ml of RPMI selection or growth media. This was done in duplicate and in half the flasks KSHV lytic replication was induced. After 24 hours incubation the cells were harvested and cell pellets were lysed [10 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.6), 100 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.5% (v/v) NP-40, 1 mM DTT, 1% (v/v) Phosphatase inhibitor (v/v), and 1 × Roche protease inhibitor cocktail] for 20 minutes on ice.  Magnetic Strep-Tactin®XT coated beads (IBA Lifesciences GmbH) were equilibrated by washing 40 μl of bead slurry three times in lyses buffer not containing phosphatase or protease inhibitor. The cell lysates were then clarified by centrifugation (12,000 × g, 10 mins, 4°C) and incubated with the equilibrated beads for 1 hour on a rotator disk at 4°C. The supernatant was then removed, and the beads washed four times in wash buffer I [10 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.6), 100 mM KCl and 2 mM MgCl2] with short a pulse vortex in between. The beads were then finally washed in wash buffer II [10 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.6) and 2 mM MgCl2] with a pules vortex. Precipitaded complexes were set on beads in wash buffer II o the University of Bristol Proteomics facility for TMT coupled to LC-MS/MS. Briefly, Samples were proteolytically digested and labelled with amine-specific isobaric tags yielding differentially labelled peptides of the same mass. Labelled samples were then pooled and fractionated using Strong Anion eXchange chromatography before analysis by synchronous precursor selection MS3 on a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
For each sample the background abundance values for each protein from the control TREx BCBL1-Rta cell lysate pulldown were taken away from the abundance value of each protein identified in the FLAG-2xStrep tagged ribosome biogenesis bait protein sample. A cutoff abundance value of 150 was selected and all proteins with a lower value were discarded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microbiology/virology/herpes virus/human/specalised ribosome/ribosome biogenesis

### Affiliations
University of Leeds
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom

### Submitter
James Murphy

### Lab Head
Dr Adrian Whitehouse
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom


