### Accession
PXD014397

### Title
Melanoma spliced and linear HLA-I peptides

### Description
In this project we have identifed and linear and spliced HLA-I bound peptides to LM-MEl-44, 53 and 33 cell lines in two different condition, treated and not treated with interferone gamma.

### Sample Protocol
We have usd immunopercipitation to capture HLA-I peptide complex. Then we fractanatioed peptides by RP-HPLC and run them on MS on DDA mode.

### Data Protocol
We have used PEAKS X for data analysis. We have used hybrid finder to generate a list of spliced peptides candidates and did a second search by a meged database for validating spliced peptides sqeunces.

### Publication Abstract
Antigen recognition by CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells is governed by the pool of peptide antigens presented on the cell surface in the context of HLA class I complexes. Studies have shown not only a high degree of plasticity in the immunopeptidome, but also that a considerable fraction of all presented peptides is generated through proteasome-mediated splicing of noncontiguous regions of proteins to form novel peptide antigens. Here, we used high-resolution mass spectrometry combined with new bioinformatic approaches to characterize the immunopeptidome of melanoma cells in the presence or absence of IFN&#x3b3;. In total, we identified more than 60,000 peptides from a single patient-derived cell line (LM-MEL-44) and demonstrated that IFN&#x3b3; induced changes in the peptidome, with an overlap of only approximately 50% between basal and treated cells. Around 6% to 8% of the peptides were identified as <i>cis</i>-spliced peptides, and 2,213 peptides (1,827 linear and 386 <i>cis</i>-spliced peptides) were derived from known melanoma-associated antigens. These peptide antigens were equally distributed between the constitutive- and IFN&#x3b3;-induced peptidome. We next examined additional HLA-matched patient-derived cell lines to investigate how frequently these peptides were identified and found that a high proportion of both linear and spliced peptides was conserved between individual patient tumors, drawing on data amassing to more than 100,000 peptide sequences. Several of these peptides showed <i>in vitro</i> immunogenicity across multiple patients with melanoma. These observations highlight the breadth and complexity of the repertoire of immunogenic peptides that can be exploited therapeutically and suggest that spliced peptides are a major class of tumor antigens.

### Keywords
Spliced peptides, Melanoma, Hla peptides

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia
Monash University

### Submitter
Pouya Faridi

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


