### Accession
PXD027799

### Title
Reversible Click Chemistry Tag for Universal Proteome Sample Preparation

### Description
Here, we introduce a reversible protein tag, ProMTag, that enables whole proteome capture, cleanup, and release of intact proteins for top-down analysis. Alternatively, the addition of a novel Trypsin derivative to the workflow generates peptides for bottom-up analysis. We show that the ProMTag workflow yields >90% for intact proteins and >85% for proteome digests. For top-down analysis, ProMTag cleanup improves resolution on 2D gels; for bottom-up exploration, this methodology produced reproducible mass spectrometry results, demonstrating that the ProMTag method is a truly universal approach that produces high quality proteome samples compatible with multiple downstream analytical techniques.

### Sample Protocol
In a typical MS experiment, peptides were reconstituted in 2% aqueous acetonitrile prior to analysis. MS experiments were performed using liquid chromatography (LC) using either an Acquity M-Class UPLC (Waters) followed by MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS (Thermo Scientific) or a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) connected to an Orbtrap Q Exactive HF-X MS (Thermo Scientific). A flow rate of 300 nL/min was used, where mobile phase A was 0.2% (v/v) formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.2% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. Analytical columns were either prepared in-house, with an internal diameter of 100 microns packed with NanoLCMS solutions 1.9 um C18 stationary phase to a length of approximately 20 cm, or 50 cm uPAC columns (Pharmafluidics), for the Fusion and HF-X, respectively. Peptides were directly injected into the analytical column using a gradient (2% to 45% B, followed by a high-B wash) of 90 min. MS was operated in a data-dependent fashion using Collision-Induced Dissociation (CID) fragmentation for MS/MS spectra generation collected in the ion trap on the Fusion or Higher Energy Collison Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation on the HF-X.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis, the .RAW data files were checked using Preview (Protein Metrics) to verify calibration and quality prior to further analysis. Data were then processed using Byonic v3.7.13 (Protein Metrics) to identify peptides and infer proteins using the s. cerevisiae database from Uniprot, including isoforms and concatenated with common contaminant proteins. Proteolysis with Trypsin was assumed to be semi-specific with up to two missed cleavage sites, and allowing for common modifications. Precursor mass accuracies were held within 12 ppm with fragment ions held within 0.4 Da (for CID) and 12 ppm (for HCD). Proteins were held to a false discovery rate of 1%, using standard approaches described previously.

### Publication Abstract
Successful proteome analysis requires reliable sample preparation beginning with protein solubilization and ending with a sample free of contaminants, ready for downstream analysis. Most proteome sample preparation technologies utilize precipitation or filter-based separation, both of which have significant disadvantages. None of the current technologies are able to prepare both intact proteins or digested peptides. Here, we introduce a reversible protein tag, ProMTag, that enables whole proteome capture, cleanup, and release of intact proteins for top-down analysis. Alternatively, the addition of a novel Trypsin derivative to the workflow generates peptides for bottom-up analysis. We show that the ProMTag workflow yields &gt;90% for intact proteins and &gt;85% for proteome digests. For top-down analysis, ProMTag cleanup improves resolution on 2D gels; for bottom-up exploration, this methodology produced reproducible mass spectrometry results, demonstrating that the ProMTag method is a truly universal approach that produces high-quality proteome samples compatible with multiple downstream analytical techniques. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD027799.

### Keywords
Sample preparation, Proteomics, Click chemistry

### Affiliations
Carnegie Mellon University
Impact Proteomics LLC, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 15206

### Submitter
Jonathan Minden

### Lab Head
Dr Amber Lucas
Impact Proteomics LLC, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 15206


