### Accession
PXD029625

### Title
DIA proteomics of OGG1 inhibition in murine model of fibrosis

### Description
Interstitial lung diseases such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) are caused by persistent micro-injuries to alveolar epithelial tissues accompanied by aberrant repair processes. Despite substantial advancement in our understanding of IPF progression, numerous questions remain concerning disease pathology. IPF is currently treated with pirfenidone and nintedanib, compounds which slow the rate of disease progression but fail to target underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. The DNA repair enzyme 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase-1 (OGG1) is upregulated following TGF-β1 exposure in several fibrosis-associated cell types. Currently, no pharmaceutical solutions targeting OGG1 have been utilized in the treatment of IPF. In this study, administration of Ogg1-targetting siRNA, mitigated bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in mice, thereby highlighting OGG1 as a tractable target in lung fibrosis. The novel small molecule OGG1 inhibitor, TH5487, decreased myofibroblast transition and associated pro-fibrotic markers in fibroblast cells. In addition, TH5487 decreased pro-inflammatory cytokine production, inflammatory cell infiltration, and lung remodeling in a murine model of bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis. OGG1 and SMAD7 interact to induce fibroblast proliferation and differentiation, with both increased in fibrotic murine and IPF patient lung tissue. Taken together, these data strongly suggest that TH5487 is a potent, specific, and clinically-relevant treatment for IPF. This DIA-MS dataset entails the raw data and peptide-centric DIA-NN search results of both, lung tissue and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of n=5 mice profiled across the treatment groups bleomycin combined with TH (BTH), dexamethasone (DEX), TH alone (TH) and vehicle control (V) relative to bleomycin alone (B) as control. Different animals within protein groups were considered biological replicates of the respective treatment condition.

### Sample Protocol
Collection of lung tissue  Right lungs were collected in Eppendorf tubes on dry ice and stored at -80 °C. The snap-frozen lungs were thawed and homogenized in tissue protein extraction reagent (T-PER) solution (ThermoFisher) containing protease inhibitor (Pefabloc SC; Sigma-Aldrich) at a final concentration of 1 mM. Lung homogenates were centrifuged at 9,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatants were collected for multiplex analysis. Left lungs were collected in Histofix (Histolab, Göteborg, Sweden) and submerged in 4 % buffered paraformaldehyde solution.  Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) collection BAL was performed with a total volume of 1 ml PBS containing 100 μM EDTA. BALF was collected in Eppendorf tubes on ice, with aliquots made for flow cytometry, cytospin differential counts, and an aliquot transferred to -80°C for multiplex cytokine analysis. Cytospin preparations of cells were stained with modified Wright-Giemsa stain (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Tissue homogenization Freshly harvested lungs in PBS were homogenised in MagNA Lyser (Roche) with silica beads (VWR) using 2 x 2minute cycles. Protein estimation in the homogenates was performed using BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 50 micrograms of protein from organs and 1 microliter of plasma were taken for digestion. Protein denaturation, tryptic digest & peptide solid-phase-extraction Proteins were resuspended in 8M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 5mM TCEP, pH 7.0 for 45 min at 37 °C, and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, USA) for 30 min followed by dilution with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final urea concentration below 1.5 M. Proteins were digested by incubation with trypsin (1/100, w/w, Promega) for at least 9h at 37 °C. Digestion was stopped using 5% trifluoracetic acid (Sigma) to pH 2-3. The peptides were cleaned up by C18 reversed-phase spin columns as per the manufacturer’s instructions (Harvard Apparatus, USA). Samples were resuspended in 30 µl HPLC-water (Fisher Chemical) with 2% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid (Sigma). Samples were spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys AG, Switzerland). LC- Data-independent acqusition MS analysis All peptide analyses were performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on pre-column (PepMap100 C18 3 µm; 75µm x 2cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an EASY-Spray C-18 reversed phase column with integrated ESI emitter (250 mm, ES902, column temperature 45 °C, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equilibrations of columns and sample loading were performed per manufacturer’s guidelines. Solvent A was used as stationary phase (0.1 % formic acid), and solvent B (mobile phase; 0.1 % formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) was used to run a linear gradient from 5 % to 38 % over 120 or min at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The 44 variable windows data-independent acquisition (DIA) acquisition method is derived from Bruderer et al (Bruderer et al., 2017). The mass range for MS1 was 350-1,650 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 and a resolution of 30,000 for MS2 with a stepped normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25.5, 27 and 30.

### Data Protocol
Protein sequences employed for proteomics data interpretation were downloaded from the UniProt database (1 sequence per gene, 17.09.2020). Peptide-centric analysis of DIA data was carried out using an in silico predicted spectral library using the DIANN Toolset (v1.7.12) and a two-pass analysis procedure. In the first pass, an empirically corrected, in silico predicted spectral library was created from the sample set of interest by querying the full proteome predicted library (with parameters Trypsin/P, up to 1 missed cleavage, excision of N-terminal M and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues enabled as variable modification). The predicted library and initial search space thereby spanned 22,159 proteins, 33,323 protein groups and 4,141,742 precursors of 1,357,505 peptide species in distinct elution groups. DIANN was instructed to optimize mass accuracy and RT extraction windows separately for each MS run to maximize identification sensitivity and to then write out a new, constrained and empirically corrected spectral library (First-pass FDR was set to 1 %. Protein inference was disabled to maintain protein grouping information and the option to reduce RAM usage was enabled). The produced libraries for lung/BALF datasets contained 10.121/5,017 protein groups, 97,775/33,857 precursors and 78,267/28,672 peptides, respectively. In the second pass of the analysis, the libraries were then applied to the datasets of the respective tissue type to derive quantitative information (FDR set to 1 % and with high accuracy quantification strategy selected).

### Publication Abstract
Circulating metabolite levels may reflect the state of the human organism in health and disease, however, the genetic architecture of metabolites is not fully understood. We have performed a whole-genome sequencing association analysis of both common and rare variants in up to 11,840 multi-ethnic participants from five studies with up to 1666 circulating metabolites. We have discovered 1985 novel variant-metabolite associations, and validated 761 locus-metabolite associations reported previously. Seventy-nine novel variant-metabolite associations have been replicated, including three genetic loci located on the X chromosome that have demonstrated its involvement in metabolic regulation. Gene-based analysis have provided further support for seven metabolite-replicated loci pairs and their biologically plausible genes. Among those novel replicated variant-metabolite pairs, follow-up analyses have revealed that 26 metabolites have colocalized with 21 tissues, seven metabolite-disease outcome associations have been putatively causal, and 7 metabolites might be regulated by plasma protein levels. Our results have depicted the genetic contribution to circulating metabolite levels, providing additional insights into understanding human disease.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, Dia-ms, Orbitrap, Mass spectrometry, Lung tissue

### Affiliations
Division of Infection Medicine, BMC Faculty of Medicine Lund University Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Moritz Heusel

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malmström
Division of Infection Medicine, BMC Faculty of Medicine Lund University Lund, Sweden


