### Accession
PXD010076

### Title
Nannochloropsis data LC-MS/MS for CA mutant and WT

### Description
Analysis of the CO2 pathway under high carbon supply in Nannochloropsis oceanica Imet1 which compares the WT with a generated carboanhydrase 2 knockdown mutant

### Sample Protocol
For the sample processing the wildtype and a generated carboanhydrase knockdown mutant were cultivated under high carbon conditions (5% CO2 supply  (50000 PPM CO2)) . Cell samples were taken after 0, 3, 6, 12, 2and 24 hours. The cell pellets were freeze dried in liquid nitrogen for storage at -80 degrees. The samples were grinded under liquid nitrogen and extracted with extraction buffer. The protein was loaded onto a SDS-LAEMMLI-Gel, after the run the protein gel lanes were cut into 4 fractions per timepoint. these replicates were measured in an UPLC-MS/MS mass spectrometer (Velos Elite, Thermo) with a 90 minutes gradient via CID fragmentation. The data was organized as followed: For each cultivation method (50000 ppm CO2 (heavy)) three biological replicates per time point were measured. They were labeled as follows: strain_time_ replicate number-fraction number (example M3h_1-2 which means mutant 3 hours, replicate 1, fraction of gel lane 2 always at 50000 ppm CO2 supply).

### Data Protocol
The data were searched with MAXQUANT version 1553 and statistical test were performed in Perseus Version 1553 the data was filtered by at least 2 unique peptides and a FDR of 0.05.  Protein Database:  0823_IMET1_protein_annotation+keratin.fasta Enzyme Name:  Trypsin (Full) Modifications: Max. Equal Modifications Per Peptide:  3, Max. Dynamic Modifications Per Peptide:  4. Dynamic Modification:  Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M) Static Modification:  Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C).   MAXQUANT Version 1551 settings: First search peptide tolerance 20 ppm Main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm Isotope match tolerance 2 ppm Centroid match tolerance 8 ppm Centroid half width 35 ppm Time valley factor 1.4 ppm Isotope valley factor 1.2 ppm Isotope time correlation 0.6 ppm Min. peak length 2 Max. charge 7 Min score for recalibration 70 Cut peaks: yes Gap scans 1 Intensity determination: Value at maximum Identification settings: PSM FDR 0.01 Protein FDR 0.01 Site decoy fraction 0.01 Min. peptides 1 Min. razor = unique peptides 1 Min. unique peptides 0 Min score for unmodified peptides 0 Min score for modified peptides 40 Min delta score for unmodified peptides 0 Min score for modified peptides 6 Main search max. combinations 200 Base FDR calculations on delta score: no Razor protein FDR: yes The data was then exported into excel. The excel sheet was imported to PERSEUS Version 1553 and the PSM values were used for label free quantification of the proteome.

### Publication Abstract
Improving acid tolerance is pivotal to the development of microalgal feedstock for converting flue gas to biomass or oils. In the industrial oleaginous microalga Nannochloropsis oceanica, transcript knockdown of a cytosolic carbonic anhydrase (CA2), which is a key Carbon Concentrating Mechanism (CCM) component induced under 100&#x202f;ppm CO<sub>2</sub> (very low carbon, or VLC), results in &#x223c;45%, &#x223c;30% and &#x223c;40% elevation of photosynthetic oxygen evolution rate, growth rate and biomass accumulation rate respectively under 5% CO<sub>2</sub> (high carbon, or HC), as compared to the wild type. Such high-CO<sub>2</sub>-level activated biomass over-production is reproducible across photobioreactor types and cultivation scales. Transcriptomic, proteomic and physiological changes of the mutant under high CO<sub>2</sub> (HC; 5% CO<sub>2</sub>) suggest a mechanism where the higher pH tolerance is coupled to reduced biophysical CCM, sustained pH hemostasis, stimulated energy intake and enhanced photosynthesis. Thus "inactivation of CCM" can generate hyper-CO<sub>2</sub>-assimilating and autonomously containable industrial microalgae for flue gas-based oil production.

### Keywords
Nannochloropsis, Carbon concentrating metabolism, Mutant, Carbon metabolism, Carboanhydrase

### Affiliations
Ruhr-University Bochum
1) Department of Plant Biochemistry, Ruhr University  Bochum, Bochum, Germany 2) School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences Plymouth University Drake Circus, Plymouth Devon PL4 8AA United Kingdom

### Submitter
Mohamed El Hajjami

### Lab Head
Dr Ansgar Poetsch
1) Department of Plant Biochemistry, Ruhr University  Bochum, Bochum, Germany 2) School of Biomedical and Healthcare Sciences Plymouth University Drake Circus, Plymouth Devon PL4 8AA United Kingdom


