### Accession
PXD018020

### Title
Light spectra affect in vitro shoot development of Cedrela fissilis Vell. (Meliaceae) by changing the differential accumulation of proteins and polyamine contents

### Description
Light spectrum quality is an important signal for plant growth and development. We aimed to analyze the effects of different light spectra on in vitro shoot development and proteomic and polyamine (PA) profiles in shoots of Cedrela fissilis. Cotyledonary and apical nodal segments were grown under different light emitting diode (LED) lamps and a fluorescent lamp. Shoots from cotyledonary nodal segments cultured with 6-benzyladenine (BA) grown under WmBdR LED increased their length, fresh and dry matter compared to shoots grown under fluorescent light. A non-redundant protein databank generated by transcriptome sequencing and de novo assembly of C. fissilis improved, and almost doubled, protein identification compared to a Citrus sinensis databank. Using the C. fissilis protein databank, a total of 616 proteins were identified, with 23 up- and 103 downaccumulated in shoots under WmBdR LED compared to fluorescent lamp. Differential accumulation of argininosuccinate synthase protein was associated with an increase in free-Put contents and, consequently, with higher shoot elongation under WmBdR LED. Furthermore, the proteins S-adenosylmethionine synthase, which is related to PA and ethylene biosynthesis, and 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase, related to ethylene biosynthesis, were unique in shoots grown under fluorescent lamp, showing lower elongation of shoots, possibly due to ethylene production. The downaccumulation of calreticulin, heat shock proteins, plastid-lipid-associated protein, ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes, and ultraviolet-B receptor UVR8 isoform X1 could be related to better shoot length under LED. This work provides important data related to the effects of light spectrum quality on in vitro morphogenesis via modulation of specific proteins and free-Put biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
Biological material  For regenerate a non-redundant protein database of Cedrela fissilis by high-throughput RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data, three subsamples were used: a) pooled subsample of geminating seeds with 5 days of imbibition in water and geminating seeds with 5 days of imbibition in 4 mM FeSO₄ solution; b) pooled subsamples of root tissue from 28-day-old seedlings that were grown in the following conditions: (i) normally at 25 ºC under water irrigation, exposed to 35 ºC for 4 h before collection, (ii) wilted seedlings kept for 4 h in Petri dishes before collection, and (iii) iron irrigated for 5 days with 4 mM FeSO₄ solution before collection; c) pooled subsamples of the aerial parts of 28-day-old seedlings that were grown in the following conditions: (i) normally at 25 ºC under water irrigation, (ii) exposed to 35 ºC for 4 h before collection, (iii) wilted seedlings kept for 4 h in Petri dishes before collection, and (iv) iron-irrigated seedlings for 5 days with 4 mM FeSO₄ solution before collection. For comparative proteomic analysis, three biological samples (each sample composed of 500 mg FM) from shoots obtained from cotyledonary nodal segments grown in MS culture medium with 2.5 μM BA under WmBdR LED and fluorescent (control) lamps were used.  Sample processing for RNA-seq to generate a non-redundant protein database of Cedrela fissilis Pooled subsample (200 mg FM) from each of biological materials stored at -80C was used for total RNA extraction using a TRIzol protocol based on the ‘single step’ method (Chomczynski and Sacchi 1987). Subsample aliquots were used to create a mixed sample with equal concentrations of extracted RNA. The sequencing library was prepared following the manufacturer’s protocol with reagents supplied in Illumina’s TruSeq mRNA Stranded Library Preparation Kit (Illumina) and sequenced using Illumina NextSeq 500 (Illumina) technology generating 75 base pair (bp)-long, paired-end reads. A total of 460,850,546 raw RNA-seq reads were pre-processed to trim adapter sequences using CutAdapt, version 1.16 (Martin 2011). Reads with average Phred quality ≥30 were used for de novo transcriptome assembly with Trinity suite (v. 2.8.4) (Grabherr et al. 2011) with parameters required for second strand-specific paired-end reads. TransDecoder (v. 5.4.0) was used to predict the longest open reading frames (ORF) of the assembled transcripts. ORFs encoding peptides longer than 100 amino acids were searched for similar proteins in the SwissProt database using BLASTp (v. 2.8.1+) (Altschul et al. 1997; Camacho et al. 2009). Conserved domains were analyzed using hmmer (3.1b2, hmmer.org) searches against the PFAM-A (v. 32.0) database. CD-HIT-EST (v. 4.6, default settings) was used to reduce the redundancy of the assembled transcriptome. Predicted protein sequences were used in downstream proteomic analyses.  Proteomic procedures Sample processing Total protein extraction was performed according to Damerval et al. (1986) with modifications. Samples were first macerated to a fine powder with liquid nitrogen, resuspended in 1 mL of protein extraction buffer containing 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid in acetone and 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), vortexed for 5 min at 4 °C and kept at − 20 °C for 1 h before centrifuging at 16,000x g for 20 min at 4 ºC. The resulting pellets were washed three times with cold acetone containing 20 mM DTT and centrifuged for 5 min each wash. The pellets were air-dried, resuspended in buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% Triton X-100, 1% DTT, and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride. For trypsin digestion, 100 µg of protein from each biological replicate were desalted using Amicon Ultra-0.5 3 kDa centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore). Then, these samples were submitted to trypsin digestion essentially as previously described (Calderan-Rodrigues et al. 2014).  Mass spectrometry  A Nano-LC-electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) coupled to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters). After sample normalization, the peptide mixtures were separated by liquid chromatography by loading 1 μg of digested protein samples onto a nanoAcquity UPLC 5 µm C18 trap column (180 µm × 20 mm; Waters) at 5 µL min−1 for 3 min and then onto a nanoAcquity HSS T3 1.8 µm analytical reverse-phase column (75 µm × 150 mm; Waters) at 400 nL min−1, with a column temperature of 45 °C. A binary gradient was used for peptide elution: mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Mass spectrometry was performed in positive and resolution mode (V mode), 35,000 full width at half maximum, with ion mobility separation (IMS) and in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode (HDMSE). Human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich) at 100 fmol µL−1 was used as an external standard, and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Spectral processing and database searching were performed using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS; version 3.0.2; Waters). Apex3D parameters were set to a low-energy threshold of 150 counts, an elevated-energy threshold of 50 counts, and an intensity threshold of 750 counts. In addition, the analysis used one missed cleavage, minimum fragment ions per peptide equal to 3, minimum fragment ions per protein equal to 7, minimum peptides per protein equal to 2, automatic peptide and fragment tolerance, and fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl and variable modifications of oxidation and phosphoryl. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to a maximum of 1%. For protein identification, two distinct databases were used: a) the non-redundant C. fissilis database generated from RNA-seq data; b) the Citrus sinensis protein sequence database from UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org), the largest databank with proximity based on the PhyloT phylogenetic tree generator (Letunic and Bork 2016). Comparative label-free quantification analysis ware performed using ISOQuant software v.1.7 (Distler et al. 2014), using the parameters: FDR 1% for peptide and protein identification, sequence length of at least six amino acid residues, and minimum peptide score equal to 6. The analysis included retention time alignment, exact mass retention time, ion-mobility spectrometry clustering, data normalization and protein homology filtering. Samples were normalized by a multidimensional normalization process, which corrects peak intensities based on intensity and retention time domains. The software performed relative protein quantification according to the TOP3 method. Based on the relative abundances of uniquely assigned peptides, the abundances of shared peptides were redistributed to the respective source proteins, followed by TOP3-based quantification (Distler et al. 2014). To ensure the quality of the results after data processing, only the proteins present or absent (for unique proteins) in all three runs of the biological replicates were considered for differential accumulation analysis using Student’s t-test (two-tailed; P < 0.05). Differentially abundant proteins were considered upaccumulated if the log2 value of their fold change (FC) was greater than 0.6 and downaccumulated if the log2 value of their FC was lower than -0.6 by Student’s t-test. Finally, proteins were used in BLASTp searches against the Non-redundant (nr) Green Plants/Viridiplantae Protein Sequences database using OmicsBox software (https://www.biobam.com/omicsbox) for the description of high-throughput functional annotation (Gotz et al. 2008)

### Publication Abstract
The light spectrum quality is an important signal for plant growth and development. We evaluated the effects of different light spectra on the in vitro shoot development of Cedrela fissilis and its proteomic and polyamine (PA) profiles. Cotyledonary and apical nodal segments were grown under different light emitting diodes (LED) and fluorescent lamps. Shoots from cotyledonary nodal segments cultured with 6-benzyladenine (BA) that were grown under W<sub>m</sub>B<sub>d</sub>R LED showed increased length and higher fresh and dry matter compared to shoots grown under fluorescent lamps. A nonredundant protein databank generated by transcriptome sequencing and the de novo assembly of C. fissilis improved, and almost doubled, the protein identification compared to a Citrus sinensis databank. A total of 616 proteins were identified, with 23 up- and 103 down-accumulated in the shoots under W<sub>m</sub>B<sub>d</sub>R LEDs compared to fluorescent lamps. Most differentially accumulated proteins in shoots grown under the WmBdR LED lamp treatment compared to the fluorescent lamp treatment are involved in responding to metabolic processes, stress, biosynthetic and cellular protein modifications, and light stimulus processes. Among the proteins, the up-accumulation of argininosuccinate synthase was associated with an increase in the free putrescine content and, consequently, with higher shoot elongation under W<sub>m</sub>B<sub>d</sub>R LED. The down-accumulation of calreticulin, heat shock proteins, plastid-lipid-associated protein, ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes, and ultraviolet-B receptor UVR8 isoform X1 could be related to the longer shoot length noted under LED treatment. This study provides important data related to the effects of the light spectrum quality on in vitro morphogenesis through the modulation of specific proteins and free putrescine biosynthesis in C. fissilis, an endangered wood species from the Brazilian Atlantic Forest of economic and ecological relevance. The nonredundant protein databank of C. fissilis is available via ProteomeXchange under identifier PXD018020.

### Keywords
In vitro morphogenesis, Fasta databank generation, Rna-seq, Light-emitting diode lamp, Proteomics, Nodal segments, Polyamines

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biologia Celular e Tecidual, CBB Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense
Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro

### Submitter
Claudete Santa-Catarina

### Lab Head
Dr Claudete Santa-Catarina
Laboratório de Biologia Celular e Tecidual, CBB Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense


