### Accession
PXD030669

### Title
Proteomic analyses of excess starch and early senescent leaf mutant lses1 in rice

### Description
The current study established the high correlation between the changes in physiological characteristics and mRNA and protein expression profiles in lses1 leaves, and emphasized the positive effect of excessive starch on accelerating premature leaf senescence. The expression patterns of genes/proteins related to starch biosynthesis and ABA signaling were analyzed via transcriptomes and proteomes, which provided a novel direction and research basis for the subsequent exploration of the regulation mechanism of temporary starch and apoptosis via LSES1/OsCKI1 in rice.

### Sample Protocol
The leaf samples used for iTRAQ analysis were the same as those used for RNA-seq analysis. Protein extraction and digestion of each sample for proteomic analysis were performed according to Han et al  with minor modifications. iTRAQ labelling of peptides was performed using an iTRAQ 4-plex kit (Applied Biosystems, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions, dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed on a nanoElute (plug-in V1.1.0.27; Bruker, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a CaptiveSpray source. All raw files were analysed by Peaks Studio X software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). Data were searched against the rice UniProt Reference Proteome with isoforms (downloaded December 2019). De novo sequencing of peptides, database searching and characterization of specific PTMs were performed to analyse the raw data; the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤1%, and [-10*log(p)] was calculated accordingly, where p is the probability that an observed match is a random event.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome, Leaf senescence, Rice

### Affiliations
Xiamen University
Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Genetic Improvement and Comprehensive Utilization of Crops, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Crop Breeding by Design, College of Agriculture, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University

### Submitter
Zhang Zesen

### Lab Head
Dr Fangyu Chen
Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Genetic Improvement and Comprehensive Utilization of Crops, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Crop Breeding by Design, College of Agriculture, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University


