### Accession
PXD001786

### Title
Proteomics of Alzheimer's Disease mouse models - control dataset

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease displaying plaques formed by the neurotoxic amyloid β-peptide (Aβ), and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles consisting of protein tau. However, how these pathologies relates to the massive neuronal death that occurs in AD brains remain elusive. Neprilysin is the major A degrading enzyme and a lack thereof increases A levels in the brain twofold. To identify altered protein expression levels induced by increased Aβ levels, we performed a proteomic analysis of the brain of the AD mouse model APPsw and compared it to that of APPsw mice lacking neprilysin. To this end we established an LC-MS/MS method to analyze brain homogenate, using an 18O-labeled internal standard to accurately quantify the protein levels. To distinguish between alterations in protein levels directly caused by increased A levels and those induced by neprilysin deficiency independently of A, the brain proteome of neprilysin deficient APPsw mice was compared to that of neprilysin deficient mice. By this approach we identified approximately 600 proteins and could quantify the levels of 300 of these. Pathway analysis showed that many of the proteins with altered expression were involved in neurological disorders, and that tau, presenilin and APP were key regulators in the identified networks. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with identifier PXD000968. Interestingly, the levels of several proteins, including some not previously reported to be associated with AD, were associated with increased A levels.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and 18O-labelling. Cortex from 3 months old male APPsw, Nep KO and  APPsw x Nep KO mice were dissected from PBS perfused brains and directly frozen in liquid nitrogen. The samples were homogenized in 8 M Urea and 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate using Multi-Beads Shocker (Yasui Kikai) at 2500 rpm for 20 seconds and directly frozen in liquid nitrogen. The protein concentrations of the homogenates were determined by BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific #23227). 50 μg protein was incubated with 1 μg trypsin in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.2% RapiGest SF (Waters Corporation, WI, USA), and 2 mM CaCl2 for 12 hours. The reaction was acidified by adding 1.5 μl 37% HCl to hydrolyze RapiGest, followed by 10 min centrifugation at 15 000 rpm for ten min at 4 °C.  The 18O- labeled internal standard was made by pooling 100 μg of brain homogenate from each individual followed by removal of water by a spin-vacuum system (Savant SPD1010, ThermoScientific). The conditions for the tryptic digest were as described above with the exception that all solutions included in the reaction were made in H218O (97%, Sigma), and the protein:trypsin ratio was 1:15 to increase incorporation of two 18O residues into the peptide C-terminal. The incubation time was 48 h followed by acidification and RapiGest removal as described above. Before quantitative MS-analysis, the 18O-labeling was verified by MS/MS. Unlabeled and 18O-labeled peptides were stored at -80 °C until further use. Peptide purification. 2.5 μg of tryptic peptides from each individual was mixed with 2.5 μg 18O-labeled internal standard and purified by ZipTipC18 (Millipore, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The sample was dried and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and injected into Paradigm MS2 HPLC system (Michrom BioResources) coupled to an LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a L-Trap C18 trap column (0.3 x 5 mm, CERI) and an InertSustain C18 analytical column of dimensions 0.1 x 150 mm (GL Science). The mobile phase A consisted of 2% acetonitrile/0.1% Formic acid and the mobile phase B of 98% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. After sample injection, the trap column was washed with 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and the peptides eluted with a 120 min gradient (0 to 35 % mobile phase B in 90 min, 35% to 65% mobile phase B from 90 to 120 min) at 0.5 ul/min. The settings for peptide identification were: peptide MS/MS isolation width; 10 Da and MS range; 350-1500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Identification of the peptides was performed with Mascot software using SwissProt database (Mus musculus). Quantification was performed at the MS/MS level using the 18O multiplex tool in Mascot (ver 2.4.0).

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease displaying extracellular plaques formed by the neurotoxic amyloid &#x3b2;-peptide (A&#x3b2;), and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles consisting of protein tau. However, how these pathologies relate to the massive neuronal death that occurs in AD brains remain elusive. Neprilysin is the major A&#x3b2;-degrading enzyme and a lack thereof increases A&#x3b2; levels in the brain twofold. To identify altered protein expression levels induced by increased A&#x3b2; levels, we performed a proteomic analysis of the brain of the AD mouse model APPsw and compared it to that of APPsw mice lacking neprilysin. To this end we established an LC-MS/MS method to analyze brain homogenate, using an (18) O-labeled internal standard to accurately quantify the protein levels. To distinguish between alterations in protein levels caused by increased A&#x3b2; levels and those induced by neprilysin deficiency independently of A&#x3b2;, the brain proteome of neprilysin deficient APPsw mice was also compared to that of neprilysin deficient mice. By this approach we identified approximately 600 proteins and the levels of 300 of these were quantified. Pathway analysis showed that many of the proteins with altered expression were involved in neurological disorders, and that tau, presenilin and APP were key regulators in the identified networks. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with identifiers PXD000968 and PXD001786 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000968 and (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001786). Interestingly, the levels of several proteins, including some not previously reported to be linked to AD, were associated with increased A&#x3b2; levels.

### Keywords
Mouse brain

### Affiliations
Lab for Proteolytic Neuroscience, RIKEN Brain Science Institute
RIKEN Brain Science Institute

### Submitter
Per Nilsson

### Lab Head
Dr Per Nilsson
Lab for Proteolytic Neuroscience, RIKEN Brain Science Institute


