### Accession
PXD032926

### Title
Species identification of early colonial bone artefacts excavated from Pyrmont, Australia, by mass spectrometric identification of collagen peptides

### Description
Zooarchaeology by Mass Spectrometry (ZooMS) is a rapidly developing and increasingly utilised peptide mass fingerprinting (PMF) technique that analyses Collagen 1A1 and 1A2 marker peptides for the genus- or species-level identification of fragmentary bones in the archaeological record. Traditionally, this analysis is performed using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-ToF-MS) to identify characteristic m/z values of known marker peptides.  Here we present data on the application of a modified ZooMS approach, using nanoflow liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry proteomics, to the analysis of a collection of six early colonial Australian (early to mid-19th Century CE) bone artefacts excavated from a site in Pyrmont, Sydney, Australia in 2017. We were successfully able to identify characteristic marker peptides for bovine COL1A1 and COL1A2 in all six artefacts.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling of bone powder Approximately 15mg of bone powder was collected from each artefact using a Dremel sanding tool into a fresh weigh boat. The Dremel sanding tool and laboratory space were thoroughly cleaned with 80% EtOH (v/v) after each sample to minimise potential cross-contamination. Bone powder was washed twice briefly in 100µL of 50mM NH4HCO3 to remove soluble surface contaminants.   Collagen Extraction To maximise the amount of potential marker peptide identifications, three different collagen extraction protocols which have been previously reported in the literature (Wang, et al., 2021) were applied to the collected bone powder. Briefly, these are the Acid Soluble (AC), Acid Insoluble (AI), and the non-destructive AmBiC (AM) protocols. Sampling was performed twice for each bone artefact to collect enough bone powder to perform each of the protocols.   Acid Soluble Protocol The portions of bone powder designated for the acid-based protocols were demineralised at 4ºC in 500µL of 600mM HCl until there were no visible signs of reaction. Samples were centrifuged briefly at 14500rpm for one minute, then the acid supernatant was transferred to a 30kDa centrifuge spin filter prior to further centrifugation at 3700rpm for approximately 30 minutes until liquid had passed through the filter membrane. Flow-through was discarded, and 500µL of 50mM NH4HCO3 was added to the spin filter unit. Centrifugation was repeated at 3700rpm until the liquid had passed through, and flow-through was similarly discarded. An aliquot of 100µL of 50mM NH4HCO3 was added to the filter unit and extracts were resuspended via pipetting before transferring to fresh 1.5mL centrifuge tube for trypsin digestion.   Acid Insoluble Protocol HCl-treated bone powder was re-equilibrated via washing with 100µl of 50mM NH4HCO3 briefly. Bone powder was centrifuged briefly at 14500rpm and NH4HCO3 was removed, then replaced with a fresh 100µL aliquot of 50mM NH4HCO3. These samples were then gelatinised at 65ºC for 1 hour. After gelatinisation, samples were spun briefly at 14,500 rpm and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh 1.5mL centrifuge tube for trypsin digestion.  AmBiC Protocol The remaining untreated bone powder sample was washed briefly with 100µL 50mM NH4HCO3, then gelatinised in a fresh aliquot of 100µL 50mM NH4HCO3 at 65ºC for 1 hour as previously described in the AI protocol. Samples were then spun briefly at 14500rpm and supernatant was transferred to a fresh 1.5mL centrifuge tube for trypsin digestion.   Trypsin in-solution digestion and C18 Zip-tip purification of resultant peptides Collagen extracts from each sample preparation method were digested in solution with 0.4µg/µL trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Porcine Trypsin, Promega) in 100mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37ºC. Peptide clean-up was performed using OMIX C18 100µL tips. C18 tips were equilibrated by washing twice with 50µL Conditioning Solution (80% Acetonitrile (ACN)/ 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)), then twice with 50µL Washing Solution (2% ACN/ 0.1% TFA). Peptides were loaded onto the C18 resin via pipetting back and forth at least 10 times, washed twice with Washing Solution, and eluted with 50µL Elution Solution (60% ACN/ 0.1% TFA) 10 times to ensure thorough elution into a fresh 1.5mL centrifuge tube. This was repeated for each sample using fresh Zip-tips and reagents. Purified samples were vacuum centrifuged to dryness and reconstituted in 10 µL 1% Formic Acid (FA) for LC-MS/MS analysis.   NanoLC-MS/MS of peptides NanoLC-MS/MS was performed on a Thermo Q-Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to a Thermo Easy-nLC1000 liquid chromatography system. Briefly, collagen peptide digests were loaded onto a 75µm ID x 100mm length column packed with C18 HALO resin (2.7µm bead size, 160Å pore size) for reversed-phase chromatographic separation. A linear gradient of 1-50% solvent A (0.1% FA) to solvent B (99.9% ACN/ 0.1% FA) was developed over 60 minutes. Data-dependent acquisition was configured to automatically switch from Orbitrap MS to MS/MS mode, and spectra were acquired from a m/z range of 350-1600amu with a resolution of 35000 and an isolation window of 3.0m/z. The top ten most abundant ions were subsequently selected for HCD fragmentation at 30% normalised HCD collision energy, with a dynamic exclusion of target ions set for 20sec. Fragmentation ions were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500. Analytical blanks of 70% MeOH (v/v) were run between samples.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification using X! Tandem Raw mass spectral files were converted to mzXML format using MSConvertGUI (Kessner, et al., 2008, Chambers, et al., 2012), and peptide-to-spectrum matching was performed using the X! Tandem algorithm under the Global Proteome Machine (GPM) user interface software (version 3.0, https://www.thegpm.org/) (Craig and Beavis, 2004, Craig, et al., 2004). Converted mzXML files were searched against the curated SwissProt protein database (downloaded April 2020, 562,895 proteins) supplemented with additional COL1A1 and COL1A2 sequences for species of interest including all available mammalian COL1A1 and COL1A2 sequences from the NCBI protein database, previously reported experimentally-determined marsupial peptide markers (Buckley, et al., 2017, Peters, et al., 2021), and the Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database (Shin, et al., 2019). Searching was performed with the following specified parameters: Orbitrap instrument method (±20 ppm parent ion mass tolerance), fragment ion mass tolerance ±0.1 Da, trypsin digestion with allowance for two missed cleavages, minimum and maximum peptide sequence lengths of 6 and 50 amino acids, respectively, and up to 4+ charge states allowed. No fixed modifications were specified, however variable modifications were as follows: oxidation of methionine and tryptophan, hydroxylation of proline, and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine. Spectra were searched against a decoy reversed sequence database for assessment of false discovery rates (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Collagen

### Affiliations
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Dylan Multari

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Andrew Haynes
Macquarie University


