### Accession
PXD011386

### Title
Quantifying changes in the bacterial thiol redox proteome during host-pathogen interaction

### Description
In this study, we used a quantitative redox proteomic method (OxICAT) to assess the in vivo thiol oxidation status of phagocytized E. coli. The majority (65.5%) of identified proteins harbored thiols that were significantly oxidized (>30%) upon phagocytosis. A substantial number of these proteins are from major metabolic pathways or are involved in cell detoxification and stress response, suggesting a systemic breakdown of the bacterial cysteine proteome in phagocytized bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
2.4 Fractionation of phagocytized and non-phagocytized bacteria Differentiated PLB-985 cells were co-cultivated with bacteria as described above for 2 h. Afterwards, the PLB cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS in order to remove extracellular bacteria (500 g, 5 min, 4°C), the resulting supernatant containing non-phagocytized bacteria was used as the control sample for subsequent OxICAT-analysis. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 0.1% Triton (v/v) and passed five times through a 26-G needle in order to lyse the PLB-cells. Cell nuclei and large debris were removed by low-speed centrifugation (500 g, 5 min, 4°C). The bacteria in the supernatant were recovered by following mid-speed centrifugation (3000 g, 10 min, 4°C). The bacteria containing pellet was rinsed once with 0.1% SDS (w/v) and pelleted (16.000 g, 5 min, 4 °C). This bacterial fraction was then immediately used for further analysis. The extracellular control obtained from the supernatant of the initial centrifugation (see above) was passed through a 26-G needle and treated with 0.1 % Triton and SDS as well. This whole enrichment procedure was carried out in less than 45 min. Protein concentrations were determined using the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, USA) and the relative bacterial protein content was monitored with Western Blot analysis using an antibody against GFP (1:4000, rabbit, Sigma-Aldrich (USA)), which was reactive to roGFP2-Orp1 expressed by E. coli. The OxICAT analysis was done according to the protocol of Lindemann and Leichert (Leichert et al., 2008; Lindemann and Leichert, 2012). Briefly, protein labeling was done using reagents provided by the Cleavable ICAT Method Development kit and Bulk kit (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA). 100 µg of proteins were dissolved with one vial of the light-labeled ICAT predissolved in a mixture consisting of 80 µl DAB-buffer (6 M Urea, 200 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5 % SDS, 10 mM EDTA, pH 8,5) and 20 µl acetonitrile (ACN), incubated for 2 h at 37 °C in the dark. Proteins from this solution were precipitated overnight at -20 °C with 80 % acetone, rinsed twice with 1 ml of 80 % acetone each and collected as pellet (4 °C, 16.000 g. 30 min). The pellet was dried at 37 °C for 5 min, dissolved in 80 µl DAB buffer containing 1 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and incubated for 10 min at 37 °C. This solution was mixed with one vial of the heavy-labeled ICAT resuspended in 20 µl ACN. This protein solution was incubated for 2 h at 37 °C in low light conditions. Proteins were precipitated using acetone and rinsed as described. The resulting pellet was dissolved in 80 µl of Denaturing Buffer (50 mM Tris, 0.1% SDS) from the ICAT kits as mentioned above and mixed with 20 µl ACN and 100 µl of 0.125 µg/µl trypsin solution and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Subsequent peptide purification by cation exchange, avidin affinity chromatography and cleavage of the biotin-tag were performed according to the manufacturer´s instructions with the modification that the Affinity Buffer-Elute (30 % ACN, 0.1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid)) was freshly prepared at the day of experiment. Purified peptides were concentrated to dryness and dissolved in 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis. ICAT-labeled peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase nano-LC and detected by MS/MS in an LTQ Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) as described(Lindemann et al., 2013). In short, samples were loaded onto a C18 precolumn (300-µm x 5-mm Acclaim PepMap100, 3 µM, Dionex) with 0.1 % TFA with 2.5 % ACN (v/v) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min for 10 min The peptides were then loaded onto the main column (75-µm x 25-cm Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 100-Å, Dionex) with 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid (v/v)) and 5 % solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 84% ACN) at a flow rate of 0.4 µl/min Subsequent elution was performed with a linear gradient of 5%-40% B (120 min, 0.4 µl/min). The 6-20 most intense peaks were selected for MS/MS fragmentation (charge range +2 to +4, exclusion list size: 500, exclusion duration: 35 s, collision energy: 35 V).

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.0, DE) was used to quantify the ICAT-labeled peptide thiols. For the search engine Andromeda, the E. coli K12 proteome database (taxonomy ID 83333) obtained from UniProt (4323 proteins, released, September 2017) was used. For the Andromeda search, two miscleavages were allowed, Oxidation (M) was chosen as variable modification. The parent ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, the fragment ion mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da. The oxidation of each identified peptide thiol and the relative oxidation change as compared to control samples were calculated from three biological replicates using the MaxQuant analysis. Identified peptides and their respective ICAT-quantification were assessed using the “peptides.txt” MaxQuant output file. In short, “peptides.txt” was imported into Microsoft Excel 2016 (Microsoft, USA). Then, values of each identified peptide from the the column “Intensity H” was divided by the respective value from the column “Intensity” and multiplied by 100. This value equals the percentage of reversibly oxidized cysteine of the identified peptide and was used to determine cysteine oxidation in all samples. For further analysis, column bar diagram, volcano plot and heat map were generated using GraphPad Prism (version 5.00, USA) and Microsoft Excel 2016 (Microsoft, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Phagocyte-derived production of a complex mixture of different oxidants is a major mechanism of the host defense against microbial intruders. On the protein level, a major target of these oxidants is the thiol group of the amino acid cysteine in proteins. Oxidation of thiol groups is a widespread regulatory post-translational protein modification. It is used by bacteria to respond to and to overcome oxidative stress. Numerous redox proteomic studies have shown that protein thiols in bacteria, such as Escherichia coli react towards a number of oxidants in specific ways. However, our knowledge about protein thiols in bacteria exposed to the complex mixture of oxidants encountered in the phagolysosome is still limited. In this study, we used a quantitative redox proteomic method (OxICAT) to assess the in vivo thiol oxidation status of phagocytized E. coli. The majority (65.5%) of identified proteins harbored thiols that were significantly oxidized (&gt;&#x202f;30%) upon phagocytosis. A substantial number of these proteins are from major metabolic pathways or are involved in cell detoxification and stress response, suggesting a systemic breakdown of the bacterial cysteine proteome in phagocytized bacteria. 16 of the oxidized proteins provide E. coli with a significant growth advantage in the presence of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, when compared to deletion mutants lacking these proteins, and 11 were shown to be essential under these conditions.

### Keywords
Redox proteomics, Escherichia coli, Plb-985, Neutrophils

### Affiliations
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Institute for Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry Microbial Biochemistry Universitätsstrasse 150 44780 Bochum Germany
Ruhr-Universität Bochum

### Submitter
Lars Leichert

### Lab Head
Dr Lars I. Leichert
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Institute for Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry Microbial Biochemistry Universitätsstrasse 150 44780 Bochum Germany


