### Accession
PXD000719

### Title
Rat Brain LC-MS/MS -  Quantitative Proteomics Reveals Protein-Protein Interactions with Fibroblast Growth Factor12 as a Component of the Nav1

### Description
Voltage-gated sodium channels are responsible for the initiation and propagation of action potentials in excitable cells. While the channel is functional on its own, it is the transient and stable protein-protein interactions that modulate functional outcomes. AP-MS has been successfully applied to a number of ion channels. However to the best of our knowledge, no AP-MS study has been carried out on any member of the voltage-gated sodium channel family.

### Sample Protocol
Crude membrane extract from whole rat brain was solubilized and used for affinity purification (AP) with Nav1.2 antibody and mouse IgG (Control) crosslinked to Protein A/B beads. Samples were eluted with 0.2 M glycine, titrated to neutral pH, reduced, alkylated, and digested with Lys-C and Trypsin. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite with separations performed by an online Easy-LC-1000 nanoflow HPLC with a C18 trap column and analytical column.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were imported into Progenesis LC-MS (v4.1; Nonlinear Dynamics) for alignment. The top 5 spectra for each feature were exported as a combined .mgf file and searched with MASCOT (v2.1.6), X!Tandem, and PEAKS (v6, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) against a merged UniprotKB/Swissprot RatMouse-cRap database of canonical sequences (July 2013). Precursor ion mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.8 Da and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. All search results were combined with a 1% FDR and protein identifications were annotated at > 95% probability. All peptides containing modifications other than oxidation of methionine or carbamidomethylation of cysteine were removed. Second, all proteins not identified by at least 2 unique peptides were removed. A table of peptide intensities were imported to SAS for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Voltage-gated sodium channels (Nav1.1-Nav1.9) are responsible for the initiation and propagation of action potentials in neurons, controlling firing patterns, synaptic transmission and plasticity of the brain circuit. Yet, it is the protein-protein interactions of the macromolecular complex that exert diverse modulatory actions on the channel, dictating its ultimate functional outcome. Despite the fundamental role of Nav channels in the brain, information on its proteome is still lacking. Here we used affinity purification from crude membrane extracts of whole brain followed by quantitative high-resolution mass spectrometry to resolve the identity of Nav1.2 protein interactors. Of the identified putative protein interactors, fibroblast growth factor 12 (FGF12), a member of the nonsecreted intracellular FGF family, exhibited 30-fold enrichment in Nav1.2 purifications compared with other identified proteins. Using confocal microscopy, we visualized native FGF12 in the brain tissue and confirmed that FGF12 forms a complex with Nav1.2 channels at the axonal initial segment, the subcellular specialized domain of neurons required for action potential initiation. Co-immunoprecipitation studies in a heterologous expression system validate Nav1.2 and FGF12 as interactors, whereas patch-clamp electrophysiology reveals that FGF12 acts synergistically with CaMKII, a known kinase regulator of Nav channels, to modulate Nav1.2-encoded currents. In the presence of CaMKII inhibitors we found that FGF12 produces a bidirectional shift in the voltage-dependence of activation (more depolarized) and the steady-state inactivation (more hyperpolarized) of Nav1.2, increasing the channel availability. Although providing the first characterization of the Nav1.2 CNS proteome, we identify FGF12 as a new functionally relevant interactor. Our studies will provide invaluable information to parse out the molecular determinant underlying neuronal excitability and plasticity, and extending the relevance of iFGFs signaling in the normal and diseased brain.

### Keywords
Mammalian brain, Ap-ms, Interactome

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology
Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology

### Submitter
Norelle Wildburger

### Lab Head
Dr Carol Lynn Nilsson
Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology


