### Accession
PXD001792

### Title
High-throughput phosphoproteomics reveals in vivo insulin signaling dynamics

### Description
In this project we report 133 biologically distinct mouse liver cell (Hepa 1-6 and FL83B) and mouse tissue (brain, kidney, and liver) phosphoproteomes prepared using a newly developed scalable, single-run phosphoproteomics platform, using titanium dioxide (TiO2) based phosphopeptide enrichment and performed in 96-well format. We combine this technology with in situ hepatic stimulation, to generate time-resolved maps of insulin signaling in the mouse liver.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed according to the protocol described in detail in the Supplementary Methods provided with the associated manuscript. Briefly, protein was digested in a TFE-based buffer directly compatible with downstream phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptides were enriched in a single-step, 96-well plate format, followed by single-run LC-MS/MS analysis as described in the manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.1.6, with FDR < 0.01 at the level of proteins, peptides and modification sites. Proteins and peptides (minimum six amino acids) were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database, using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. Searches were performed against the Mouse UniProt FASTA database (September 2014) containing 51,573 entries. Quantification of peptides and proteins was performed by MaxQuant, match between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 1 min.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry has enabled the study of cellular signaling on a systems-wide scale, through the quantification of post-translational modifications, such as protein phosphorylation. Here we describe EasyPhos, a scalable phosphoproteomics platform that now allows rapid quantification of hundreds of phosphoproteomes in diverse cells and tissues at a depth of &gt;10,000 sites. We apply this technology to generate time-resolved maps of insulin signaling in the mouse liver. Our results reveal that insulin affects ~10% of the liver phosphoproteome and that many known functional phosphorylation sites, and an even larger number of unknown sites, are modified at very early time points (&lt;15 s after insulin delivery). Our kinetic data suggest that the flow of signaling information from the cell surface to the nucleus can occur on very rapid timescales of less than 1 min in vivo. EasyPhos facilitates high-throughput phosphoproteomics studies, which should improve our understanding of dynamic cell signaling networks and how they are regulated and dysregulated in disease.

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Q exactive, Liver, Phosphoproteome, Kidney

### Affiliations
Dept. Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Dept. Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry


