### Accession
PXD003908

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of MAPK signaling

### Description
Using label-free mass spectrometry, we measured phosphorylation changes in response to inhibition of MAPK.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was performed by Cell Signaling Technology (PTMscan method). For each condition (HCT116  cells treated with DMSO, MEK inhibitor, or ERK inhibitor), proteins were extracted and digested with trypsin. Using four phosphomotif antibodies phosphopeptides were enriched and subject to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed with SEQUEST 3G and SORCERER 2.

### Publication Abstract
The RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK (MAPK) pathway is prevalently perturbed in cancer. Recent large-scale sequencing initiatives profiled thousands of tumors providing insight into alterations at the DNA and RNA levels. These efforts confirmed that key nodes of the MAPK pathway, in particular KRAS and BRAF, are among the most frequently altered proteins in cancer. The establishment of targeted therapies, however, has proven difficult. To decipher the underlying challenges, it is essential to decrypt the phosphorylation network spanned by the MAPK core axis. Using mass spectrometry we identified 2241 phosphorylation sites on 1020 proteins, and measured their responses to inhibition of MEK or ERK. Multiple phosphorylation patterns revealed previously undetected feedback, as upstream signaling nodes, including receptor kinases, showed changes at the phosphorylation level. We provide a dataset rich in potential therapeutic targets downstream of the MAPK cascade. By integrating TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) data, we highlight some downstream phosphoproteins that are frequently altered in cancer. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003908 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD003908).

### Keywords
Mapk

### Affiliations
Genentech; Bioinformatics Department
Genentech

### Submitter
Florian Gnad

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Gnad
Genentech; Bioinformatics Department


