### Accession
PXD017222

### Title
mTPP of temperature sensitive proteasome mutants

### Description
Temperature sensitive (TS) missense mutants have been foundational in the characterization essential gene function. However, an unbiased approach for the analysis of the biochemical and biophysical changes in TS missense mutants within the context of their functional proteomes is lacking. We applied mass spectrometry (MS) based thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to investigate the proteome-wide effects of missense mutations in a specific application that we refer to as mutant Thermal Proteome Profiling (mTPP). This study characterized the global changes in mRNA abundance, protein abundance, and protein thermal stability as a result of missense mutants within two subunits of the yeast ubiquitin-proteasome system. Global protein abundance measurements and RNA sequencing data resulted in a large number of possible candidates that could be causing the phenotypic changes observed in the mutant strains. The additional information gained from mTPP along with complementary proteomic and transcriptomic experiments allows for multiomic intersection analysis that may reveal interesting regulatory categories to pursue in follow-up mechanistic experiments.

### Sample Protocol
All lysates were then diluted to a protein concentration of 5 μg/μl for subsequent heat treatment. Six-50 μl aliquots for each genotype and replicate were then distributed across six PCR tubes, and equilibrated at six temperature points—35.0; 45.3; 50.1; 55.2; 60.7; and 74.9 oC for 3 minutes in a thermocycler (Mastercycler Pro, Eppendorf, Hamberg, Germany) system as described elsewhere (Jafari et al., 2014). Following heat treatment, lysates were centrifuged for twenty minutes at 4 oC to pellet out insoluble protein and then to decant the soluble fraction. A 20 μL aliquot from each heat-treated sample was subject to TCA (Trichloroacetic acid) based protein precipitation overnight. Following centrifugation and acetone-based wash steps, resulting protein pellets were reconstituted in 30 μL of 8M urea in Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Samples were subjected to reduction of Cys-Cys bonds with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), and alkylation with 10 mM chloroacetaminde (CAM) to protect the reduced Cys residues. Samples were diluted to 2M urea and were digested in-solution overnight using Trypsin (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI) as previously described to derive peptides (Mosley et al., 2009; Mosley et al., 2011; Smith-Kinnaman et al., 2014). Samples were de-salted using a Sep-Pak® Vac 1cc C18 Cartridge (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) according to the vendor provided vacuum manifold protocol that involves: 1) priming the column 2) loading the peptides on to column 3) washing the column to remove any buffers from the immobilized peptides 4) elution of immobilized peptides. This was performed to remove buffer additives and excess reagents as many lysis buffers are known to interfere with the TMT labeling reaction. Resulting peptide elutions were dried using a speed vacuum and subjected to TMT labelling using vendor provided protocols. A sixplex kit (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA) was employed for the purpose and, more specifically, channels— TMT126; TMT127; TMT128; TMT129; TMT130 and TMT131 were respectively used to label peptide solutions derived from the 35.0; 45.3; 50.1; 55.2; 60.7; and 74.9 oC temperature treatments. Labeling reactions were quenched and the six labeled samples were mixed and were dried using a speed vacuum system. Dried samples were fractionated using reversed phase fractionation columns (8 fractions) employing vendor provided protocols (Pierce Biotechnology, Waltham, MA). The resulting 8 fractions were dried using a speed vacuum system and resuspended in .1% formic acid (30 μL) Ten μL equivalent volume of the resuspended fractions from above were loaded using 300 bar as applied maximum pressure onto an in-house prepared reversed phase column. Each reversed phase column was prepared by pulling a 100 μm fused-silica column to carry ca. 5 μm tip for the nanospray using a P-2000 laser puller, and then packing the capillary with C18 reverse phase resin (particle size: 3 μm diameter; Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). The peptides were eluted using a varying mobile phase (MP) gradient from 95% phase A (FA/H2O 0.1/99.9, v/v) to 24% phase B (FA/ACN 0.4/99.6, v/v) for 150 mins, from 24% phase B to 35% phase B for 25 mins and then keeping the same MP-composition for 5 more minutes at 400 nL/min to ensure elution of all peptides. Nano-LC mobile phase was introduced into the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex Source (Proxeon Biosystems A/S, Denmark). The heated capillary temperature was kept at 275 oC and ion spray voltage was kept at 2.5 kV. During peptide elution, the mass spectrometer method was operated in positive ion mode for 180 minutes, programmed to select the most intense ions from the full MS scan using a top 20 method. Additional parameters: Microscans 1; Resolution 70k; AGC target 3E6; Maximum IT 50 ms; Number of scan ranges 1; Scan range 400 to 1600 m/z; and Spectrum data type “profile”, and then to perform data dependent MS/MS scans with parameters: Microscans 1; Resolution 35k; AGC target 1E5; Maximum IT 64 ms; Loop count 20; MSX count 1; Isolation window 0.7 m/z; Fixed first mass 100 m/z; NCE 38.0; and Spectrum data type “Centroid”. The respective data dependent settings were set with parameters: Minimum AGC target of 1.00e3; Intensity threshold of 1.6e4; Apex trigger as “-”; Charge exclusion as “1,7,8, >8“; Multiple Charge States as “all”; Peptide match as “preferred”; Exclude isotopes as “on”; Dynamic exclusion of 30.0 s; If idle “pick others”. The data were recorded using Thermo Xcalibur (4.1.31.9) software (Copyright 2017, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA). The SEQUEST HT search engine was used to search against a yeast protein database from the UniProt sequence database (December 2015). Specific search parameters used were: trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme, peptides with a max of 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Static modifications used for the search were, 1) carbamidomethylation on cysteine(C) residues; 2) TMTsixplex label on lysine (K) residues and the N-termini of peptides. Dynamic modifications used for the search were oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-termini. Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05. Values from both unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. For the TeMPP experiments, no normalization setting was used for protein quantification; for the global protein abundance measurements peptides were normalized by “total peptide amount”.

### Publication Abstract
Temperature-sensitive (TS) missense mutants have been foundational for characterization of essential gene function. However, an unbiased approach for analysis of biochemical and biophysical changes in TS missense mutants within the context of their functional proteomes is lacking. We applied MS-based thermal proteome profiling (TPP) to investigate the proteome-wide effects of missense mutations in an application that we refer to as <u>m</u>utant <u>t</u>hermal <u>p</u>roteome <u>p</u>rofiling (mTPP). This study characterized global impacts of temperature sensitivity-inducing missense mutations in two different subunits of the 26S proteasome. The majority of alterations identified by RNA-Seq and global proteomics were similar between the mutants, which could suggest that a similar functional disruption is occurring in both missense variants. Results from mTPP, however, provide unique insights into the mechanisms that contribute to the TS phenotype in each mutant, revealing distinct changes that were not obtained using only steady-state transcriptome and proteome analyses. Computationally, multisite &#x3bb;-dynamics simulations add clear support for mTPP experimental findings. This work shows that mTPP is a precise approach to measure changes in missense mutant-containing proteomes without the requirement for large amounts of starting material, specific antibodies against proteins of interest, and/or genetic manipulation of the biological system. Although experiments were performed under permissive conditions, mTPP provided insights into the underlying protein stability changes that cause dramatic cellular phenotypes observed at nonpermissive temperatures. Overall, mTPP provides unique mechanistic insights into missense mutation dysfunction and connection of genotype to phenotype in a rapid, nonbiased fashion.

### Keywords
Yeast, Tpp, Lc-ms/ms, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Indiana University School of Medicine Indianapolis, IN

### Submitter
Sarah Peck Justice 

### Lab Head
Dr Amber L. Mosley
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Indiana University School of Medicine Indianapolis, IN


