### Accession
PXD016300

### Title
Proteomic investigation on Anopheles gambiae in Burkina Faso related to insecticide pressures from different climatic regions

### Description
In Sub-Saharan Africa, Anopheles gambiae Giles (Diptera: Culicidae) largely contributes to malaria transmission, in direct relation to environmental conditions influencing the vector ecology. Therefore, our study aimed to compare the proteomes of An. gambiae according to varying insecticide pressures associated to cotton crops also integrating different population origins from two climatic regions of Burkina Faso.

### Sample Protocol
All mosquito samples (pool of 15 individuals per locality) were grinded under liquid nitrogen and the proteins were extracted with AllPrep DNA/RNA/Protein Mini kit (Qiagen). Proteins were recovered in 100µL UT buffer. Protein concentration of each sample was assessed by RC-DC Protein Assay kit (Biorad). Samples were diluted in NH4HCO3 100mM to get a final protein concentration of 20µg/µL. Reduction of disulfide bridges was performed by treating samples with DTT followed by alylation with IAA. Proteins were precipitated using the 2D-Clean up kit (GE Healthcare).  Pellets were re-solubilized in NH4HCO3 100mM and digested in solution using trypsin. After stopping  of digestion by adding TFA 0.5%, the samples were dried under vacuum using SpeedVac. The protein digests were then resuspended in water acidified with 0.1% TFA and 1µg of peptides were injected onto the LC system. LS-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Acquity M-Class UPLC (Waters) hyphenated to a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific), in nanoelectrospray positive ion mode. The trap column is a Symmetry C18 5µm (180µm x 20mm) and analytical column is a HSS T3 C18 1.8 µm (75µm x 250mm) (Waters). The samples were loaded at 20µL/min on the trap column in 100% solvent A (water 0.1% formic acid) during 3min and subsequently separated on the analytical column; flow rate 600 nL/min, solvent A and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), linear gradient 0min, 98% A; 5min, 93%A; 135min, 70%A; 150min, 60%A. The toal run time was 180min. Mass spectrometer method is a TopN-MSMS method where N was set to 12. The parameters for MS spectrum acquisition are: Mass range from 400 to 1750m/z, Resolution of 70000, AGC target of 1e6 and Maximum injection time of 50ms. The parameters for MS2 spectrum acquisition are: Isolation Window of 2.0m/z, Collision energy of 25, Resolution of 17500, AGC target of 1e5 and Maximum injection time of 50ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed on NCBI database restricted to Anopheles gender, using MaxQuant vs 1.5.2.8, which allows normalization of data and label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins. Carbamidomethyl of cysteines and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications, with an MS/MS-FTMS tolerance of 10ppm. Significant identification was obtained when at least 2 peptides were identified per protein hit. Protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
In Sub-Saharan Africa, An. gambiae sensu lato (s.l.) Giles 190, largely contributes to malaria transmission. Therefore, the authors carry out a proteomic analysis to compare its metabolic state, depending on different pesticide pressures by selecting areas with/without cotton crops. The proteomes data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD016300. From a total of 1.182 identified proteins, 648 are retained for further statistical analysis and are attributed to biological functions, the most important of which being energy metabolism (120 proteins) followed by translation-biogenesis (74), cytoskeleton (71), stress response (62), biosynthetic process (60), signalling (44), cellular respiration (38), cell redox homeostasis (25), DNA processing (17), pheromone binding (10), protein folding (9), RNA processing (9), other proteins (26) and unknown functions (83). In the Sudano-Sahelian region, 421 (91.3%) proteins are found in samples from areas both with and without cotton crops. By contrast, in the Sahelian region, only 271 (55.0%) are common to both crop areas, and 233 proteins are up-regulated from the cotton area. The focus is placed on proteins with putative roles in insecticide resistance, according to literature. This study provides the first whole-body proteomic characterisation of An. gambiae s.l. in Burkina Faso, as a framework to strengthen vector control strategies.

### Keywords
Anopheles gambiae, Burkina faso, Proteomic, Insecticide pressures

### Affiliations
Functional and Evolutionary Entomology, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, University of Liège, Passage des Déportés 2, 5030 Gembloux
Université de Liège, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech

### Submitter
Laurent Serteyn

### Lab Head
Dr Frédéric Francis
Functional and Evolutionary Entomology, Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, University of Liège, Passage des Déportés 2, 5030 Gembloux


