### Accession
PXD039789

### Title
Restoring Tumor Immunogenicity with Dendritic Cell Reprogramming

### Description
Immune evasion is an important hallmark of cancer ensured by diverse strategies, including immunosuppression and downregulation of antigen presentation. Here, to restore immunogenicity of cancer cells, we employed the minimal gene regulatory network of highly immunogenic type 1 conventional dendritic cells (cDC1) to reprogram cancer cells into professional antigen presenting cells (APCs). We showed that enforced expression of PU.1, IRF8 and BATF3 (PIB) was sufficient to induce cDC1 phenotype in 33 cell lines derived from human and mouse hematological and solid tumors. PIB gradually modified the cancer cell transcriptional and epigenetic program imposing global antigen presentation and cDC1 gene signatures within 9 days. cDC1 reprogramming restored the expression of antigen presentation complexes as well as co-stimulatory molecules at the cell surface, leading to the presentation of endogenous antigens on MHC-I, and to CD8+ T cell mediated killing. Functionally, tumor- APCs acquired the ability to uptake and process exogenous proteins and dead cells, secreted inflammatory cytokines and cross-presented antigens to naïve CD8+ T cells. Importantly, tumor-APCs were efficiently generated at the single cell level from primary cancer cells of 7 solid tumors that presented antigens to memory and naïve T-cells, as well as to activated patient-specific intra-tumoral lymphocytes. Alongside antigen presentation, tumor-APCs harboring TP53, KRAS and PTEN mutations showed impaired tumorigenicity in vitro and in vivo. Finally, using in vivo mouse models of melanoma, we showed that intra-tumoral injection of tumor-APCs promoted lymphoid infiltration, delayed tumor growth and increased survival. The anti-tumor immunity elicited by tumor-APCs was synergistic with immune checkpoint inhibitors enabling tumor eradication. Our approach combines cDC1’s antigen processing and presenting abilities with endogenous generation of tumor antigens and serves as a platform for the development of novel immunotherapies based on endowed antigen presentation in cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Purification MHC-I-eluted peptides Anti–MHC-I monoclonal antibody (28-8-6S) was purified from the supernatant of HB-51 hybridoma cells (ATCC) using Protein A–Sepharose 4B beads (Invitrogen). Antibodies were cross-linked to Protein A–Sepharose 4B beads at a concentration of 5 mg of antibodies per 1 mL volume of beads.  To improve sensitivity, two groups of samples were processed: 3 biological replicated of 6*108 B16-F10 cells intended for data dependent acquisition (DDA) measurement to generate a spectral library generation, and 3 biological replicates of samples of 106 B16-F10 cells either sorted GFP transduced, reprogramed, or IFNg treated, and control cells, for data independent acquisition (DIA) measurement. B16-F10 cell were lysed in phosphate buffered saline containing 0.50% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (Roche), and 1% octyl-β-D glucopyranoside (Sigma-Alrich) at 4°C for 1 hour. Samples of 2*108 cells were lysed in 4 mL, samples of 106 cells in 1 mL lysis buffer. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation with a table-top centrifuge (Eppendorf Centrifuge) at 4°C at 20,000 g for 50 minutes. MHC-I molecules were purified by incubating the cleared lysates with HIB antibodies cross-linked to Protein A–Sepharose 4B beads in affinity columns for 3 hours at 4°C. 300uL of beads were used for samples of 2*108 and 200uL for samples of 106 cells. The affinity columns were then washed as follows: 2 column volumes of 150 mM sodium chloride (NaCl) in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 2 column volumes of 400 mM NaCl in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, and again 2 column volumes of 150 mM sodium chloride in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. Finally, the beads were washed in 1 column volume of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. MHC complexes and the bound peptides were eluted at room temperature by adding twice 500uL of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Sep-Pak tC18 96-well plates (Waters), preconditioned with 1 mL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% TFA and then with 2 mL of 0.1% TFA, were used for the purification and concentration of MHC-I peptides. Elutions containing MHC-I molecules and peptides were loaded in the Sep-Pak tC18 96-well plates and the C18 wells were then washed with 2 mL of 0.1% TFA. The MHC-I peptides were eluted twice with 250uL of 28% ACN in 0.1% TFA. MHC-I peptides containing elutions were transferred into Eppendorf tubes. Recovered peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at −20°C. MS acquisition Prior to MS analysis, MHC-I peptide samples were resuspended in 8μL of 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA). Then, to technical replicates of 3 μL per biological samples were loaded on the column for each measurement by LC-MS/MS. The LC-MS system consists of an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line to Q Exactive HF and or HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 450-mm homemade column of 75-μm inner diameter packed with ReproSil Pur C18–AQ 1.9-μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). For DDA the analytical separation was performed for a period of 130 minutes using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 80%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run in sequential, linear steps: 0 to 110 min (2%-25% B), 110 to 114 min (25%-35% B), 114 to 115 min (35%-100% B), and 115 to 130 min (constant at 100% B) at a flow rate of 250 nL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated as follows: full-scan MS spectra were acquired from m/z = 300–1,650 at a resolution of 60,000 (m/z = 200) with a maximum injection time of 80 ms. The auto gain control (AGC) target value was set to 3 × 106 ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30’000 (m/z = 200) using a top 20 method with an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, and a collision energy of 27 (HCD). For all MS/MS scans ions were accumulated to an AGC target value of 2*105 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. Precursors with a charge of 4 or more were excluded from fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s. For DIA the analytical separation was performed for a period of 65 minutes using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 80%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run in sequential, linear steps: 0 to 52 min (2%-25% B), 52 to 54 min (25%-35% B), 54 to 55 min (35%-100% B), and 55 to 65 min (constant at 100% B) at a flow rate of 250 nL/minute. The DIA method consisted of one full-scan MS spectra, acquired from m/z = 300–1,650 (Resolution = 60’000, ion accumulation time = 60 ms), and 22 MS/MS scans (suppl. table). For each MS/MS scan the automatic gain control (AGC) target value was set to 3 × 106 ion, resolution was set at 30’000 and a stepped normalized collision energy (25.5, 27, 30) approached was used. Maximum ion accumulation was set to auto, fixed first mass to 200 m/z. The overlap between consecutive MS/MS scans was 1 m/z.

### Data Protocol
All DDA files were used to generate a library with a database search using fragpipe v17.1, including MSFragger v3.5. The FASTA file contained all reviewed mouse uniprot entries (May 2022), as well as the manually added uniprot sequences P11269, P03386, Q3UFS3, and Q2TA50. The search space comprised unspecifically digested peptides with a length of 8 to 14 amino acids. Variable modifications included methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation and no fixed modifications were applied. Maximal precursor and fragment ion deviation was set to 20 ppm. Peptide, ion, and peptide spectrum match FDRs were set to 0.01, no protein FDR was applied. DIA files were searched with the library described above using SpectroNaut 16 with a precursor q-value cut-off of 0.01. Data analysis Technical replicates were averaged for each biological replicate. MHC-I peptide predicted as binders were ranked by intensity (highest intensity = rank 1). The ranks were then normalized by dividing each rank by the total amount of binders per sample and subsequently transformed (f(x) = x - 1), yielding the Intensity score that ranges from 0 to 1 where 0 indicates the lowest intensity in a sample and 1 indicates the highest intensity in a sample. Peptide binding affinities were predicted with NetMHCpan [1] and MixMHC [2]. Peptides were considered as binders when they received a rank percentage of 2% or less by either of the two tools for at least one allele. Data analyses were done with Julia and R, visualizations with R only.

### Publication Abstract
Decreased antigen presentation contributes to the ability of cancer cells to evade the immune system. We used the minimal gene regulatory network of type 1 conventional dendritic cells (cDC1) to reprogram cancer cells into professional antigen-presenting cells (tumor-APCs). Enforced expression of the transcription factors PU.1, IRF8, and BATF3 (PIB) was sufficient to induce the cDC1 phenotype in 36 cell lines derived from human and mouse hematological and solid tumors. Within 9 days of reprogramming, tumor-APCs acquired transcriptional and epigenetic programs associated with cDC1 cells. Reprogramming restored the expression of antigen presentation complexes and costimulatory molecules on the surfaces of tumor cells, allowing the presentation of endogenous tumor antigens on MHC-I and facilitating targeted killing by CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. Functionally, tumor-APCs engulfed and processed proteins and dead cells, secreted inflammatory cytokines, and cross-presented antigens to na&#xef;ve CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. Human primary tumor cells could also be reprogrammed to increase their capability to present antigen and to activate patient-specific tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. In addition to acquiring improved antigen presentation, tumor-APCs had impaired tumorigenicity in vitro and in vivo. Injection of in vitro generated melanoma-derived tumor-APCs into subcutaneous melanoma tumors delayed tumor growth and increased survival in mice. Antitumor immunity elicited by tumor-APCs was synergistic with immune checkpoint inhibitors. Our approach serves as a platform for the development of immunotherapies that endow cancer cells with the capability to process and present endogenous tumor antigens.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Antigen presentation, Cell reprogramming, Cancer antigens

### Affiliations
UNIL/CHUV
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Department of Oncology, University hospital of Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Department of Oncology, University hospital of Lausanne, Switzerland


