### Accession
PXD019952

### Title
Unravelling metabolic cross-feeding in a yeast-bacteria community using 13C proteomics

### Description
Cross-feeding is fundamental to the diversity and function of microbial communities. However, identification of cross-fed metabolites is often challenging due to the universality of metabolic and biosynthetic intermediates. Here, we use 13C isotope tracing in peptides to elucidate cross-fed metabolites in cocultures of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Lactococcus lactis. The community was grown on lactose as the main carbon source with either glucose or galactose fraction of the molecule labelled with 13C. Data analysis allowing for the possible mass-shifts yielded hundreds of peptides for which we could assign both species identity and labelling degree. The labelling pattern showed that the yeast utilized galactose and, to a lesser extent, lactic acid shared by L. lactis as carbon sources. While the yeast provided essential amino acids to the bacterium as expected, the data also uncovered a complex pattern of amino acid exchange. The identity of the cross-fed metabolites was further supported by metabolite labelling in the co-culture supernatant, and by diminished fitness of a galactose-negative yeast mutant in the community. Together, our results demonstrate the utility of 13C-based proteomics for uncovering microbial interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were washed first with water and then with ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM. Pellets were resuspended in RapiGest SF (Waters, 186001860) lysis buffer composed of 1mg RapiGest ST 0.1%, 4M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3, 5 mM DTT and protease inhibitor cocktail. Cells were lysed by 3 rounds of bead beating (45 s beating, 1 min rest at 4.5 m/s and 4°C) with zirconia/silica beads. Cell lysates were centrifuged for 1 min at 800 rpm and 4°C, supernatants were recovered and sonicated for 90 s at 4°C (30 s, 3 times at 80 % amplitude in 0.5 s on-off cycles with 1 min cooling intervals on ice). Lysate protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay. Protein samples were processed in-solution and all reagents were prepared in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5). Cysteines were reduced using dithiothreitol (56°C, 30 minutes, 10 mM). The sample was then cooled to 24 °C and alkylated with iodoacetamide (room temperature, in the dark, 30 minutes, 10 mM). A novel protocol using paramagnetic beads, termed Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) (Hughes, Foehr et al. 2014) was used to prepare the samples for LC-MS/MS. The proteins were digested at 37°C overnight using trypsin (Promega) with an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. Peptides were cleaned up using OASIS HLB µElution Plate (Waters). 

Peptides were separated using an ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (nanoAcquity, Waters) fitted with a trapping column (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 200 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water with 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μL/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 μL/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3% to 7% in 10 min, then increased to 25% in 100 min and finally to 40% in a further 10 min. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Velos, Thermo) via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 μm OD x 20 μm ID; 10 μm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300°C. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 300-1700 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the FT (Fourier transform) with resolution of 30000. The filling time was set at a maximum of 500 ms with a limitation of 1.0 x 106 ions. The most intense ions (up to 15) from the full scan MS were selected for sequencing in the LTQ. A normalized collision energy of 40% was used and the fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 3.0 x104 ions or after a filling time of 100 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data was acquired in centroid mode. Only multiply charged (2+, 3+, 4+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 30 s and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. Lock mass correction using the ion 445.12003 m/z was applied.


### Data Protocol
For protein-SIP analyses, the automated and freely available bioinformatics solution for protein-SIP-based metaproteomic experiments, MetaProSIP (Sachsenberg, Herbst et al. 2015) was used, as well as the workflow engine Konstanz Information Miner (KNIME, v3.6.2) for the analysis of large datasets and production of high-quality visualizations (Berthold, Cebron et al. 2009) and the OpenMS framework (Rost, Sachsenberg et al. 2016). A total of 9 LC-MS/MS raw files were analyzed, corresponding to three different labelling conditions: lactose non-labelled, lactose-[13C-galactose] and lactose–[13C-glucose], in triplicates.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-feeding is fundamental to the diversity and function of microbial communities. However, identification of cross-fed metabolites is often challenging due to the universality of metabolic and biosynthetic intermediates. Here, we use <sup>13</sup> C isotope tracing in peptides to elucidate cross-fed metabolites in co-cultures of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Lactococcus lactis. The community was grown on lactose as the main carbon source with either glucose or galactose fraction of the molecule labelled with <sup>13</sup> C. Data analysis allowing for the possible mass-shifts yielded hundreds of peptides for which we could assign both species identity and labelling degree. The labelling pattern showed that the yeast utilized galactose and, to a lesser extent, lactic acid shared by L. lactis as carbon sources. While the yeast provided essential amino acids to the bacterium as expected, the data also uncovered a complex pattern of amino acid exchange. The identity of the cross-fed metabolites was further supported by metabolite labelling in the co-culture supernatant, and by diminished fitness of a galactose-negative yeast mutant in the community. Together, our results demonstrate the utility of <sup>13</sup> C-based proteomics for uncovering microbial interactions.

### Keywords
Cross-feeding, Synthetic community, : microbial interaction, Protein stable-isotope labeling (protein-sip)

### Affiliations
EMBL
Group Leader, Structural and Computational Biology Unit,  European Molecular Biology Laboratory Director of Research, MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Christoniki Maga-Nteve

### Lab Head
Dr Kiran Raosaheb Patil
Group Leader, Structural and Computational Biology Unit,  European Molecular Biology Laboratory Director of Research, MRC Toxicology Unit, University of Cambridge


