### Accession
PXD015465

### Title
Multiplexed quantitative proteomics of  extracellular vesicles released by endMSCs (EV-endMSCs)

### Description
The extracellular vesicles released by endMSCs (EV-endMSCs)were characterized by multiplexedquantitative proteomics approach. We hypothesized that inflammatory priming of adult stem cells may contribute to increase their therapeutic effectiveness, thus, extracellular vesicles derived from IFN-γ-primed endMSCs (IFNγ/EV-endMSCs) were compared to control counterparts (n=3 patients).

### Sample Protocol
endMSCs were obtained from menstrual blood collected by four healthy pre-menopausal women (30-34 years of age), on days 2 to 3 of the menstrual cycle, with the use of a menstrual cup for several hours. Cells were isolated, according to previously described protocols (Álvarez et al., 2018; Marinaro et al., 2019). EndMSCs characterization was carried out by flow cytometry and differentiation assay, as previously mentioned (Álvarez et al., 2018; Marinaro et al., 2019). Expanded endMSCs at passages 5-6 were treated with 3 ng/ml human IFN gamma Recombinant Protein (IFNγ, catalog number RIFNG100, Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) everyday, for 6 days. For EV-endMSCs isolation, the standard culture medium (for control endMSCs), or the culture medium containing IFNγ (for IFNγ-treated endMSCs) were removed, and replaced by DMEM containing 1% insulin–transferrin–selenium (product code: 41400045, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), after rinsing with PBS. After 4 further days, the EV-endMSCs were isolated by collecting the supernatants resulting from cell culture, according to a previously optimized protocol (Álvarez et al., 2018; Marinaro et al., 2019). The characterization of EV-endMSCs from three different donors was performed by high-throughput proteomic analysis according to previously described protocols (Bonzon-Kulichenko et al., 2011; García-Marqués et al., 2016; Jorge et al., 2009; Navarro et al., 2014; Navarro and Vázquez, 2009). protein extracts were incubated with trypsin using the Filter Aides Sample Preparation (FASP) digestion kit (Expedeon), as previously described (Wiśniewski et al., 2011). The resulting peptides were labelled using 8plex-iTRAQ reagents (Sciex) according to manufacturer´s instructions and desalted on OASIS HLB extraction cartridges (Waters Corp.). High-resolution LC-MS analysis of iTRAQ-labelled peptides was carried out on an Easy nLC 1000 nano-HPLC apparatus (Thermo Scientific) coupled to QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
. A total of 14 MS data sets, eight from unfractionated material and six from the corresponding fractions, were registered with 42 h total acquisition time. For peptide identification the MS/MS spectra were searched with the SEQUEST HT algorithm implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). The results were analyzed using the probability ratio method (Martínez-Bartolomé et al., 2008) and the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identification was calculated based on the search results against a decoy database using the refined method (Navarro and Vázquez, 2009). Peptide and scan counting was performed assuming as positive events those with a FDR equal or lower than 1%. Quantitation data were extracted from MSMS spectra and analyzed using the statistical model WSSP (Navarro et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Endometrial-derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells (endMSCs) are involved in the regeneration and remodeling of human endometrium, being considered one of the most promising candidates for stem cell-based therapies. Their therapeutic effects have been found to be mediated by extracellular vesicles (EV-endMSCs) with pro-angiogenic, anti-apoptotic, and immunomodulatory effects. Based on that, the main goal of this study was to characterize the proteome and microRNAome of these EV-endMSCs by proteomics and transcriptomics approaches. Additionally, we hypothesized that inflammatory priming of endMSCs may contribute to modify the therapeutic potential of these vesicles. High-throughput proteomics revealed that 617 proteins were functionally annotated as <i>Extracellular exosome</i> (GO:0070062), corresponding to the 70% of the EV-endMSC proteome. Bioinformatics analyses allowed us to identify that these proteins were involved in adaptive/innate immune response, complement activation, antigen processing/presentation, negative regulation of apoptosis, and different signaling pathways, among others. Of note, multiplexed quantitative proteomics and Systems Biology analyses showed that IFN&#x3b3; priming significantly modulated the protein profile of these vesicles. As expected, proteins involved in antigen processing and presentation were significantly increased. Interestingly, immunomodulatory proteins, such as CSF1, ERAP1, or PYCARD were modified. Regarding miRNAs expression profile in EV-endMSCs, Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) showed that the preferred site of microRNAome targeting was the nucleus (<i>n</i> = 371 microTargets), significantly affecting <i>signal transduction</i> (GO:0007165), <i>cell proliferation</i> (GO:0008283), and <i>apoptotic processes</i> (GO:0006915), among others. Interestingly, NGS analyses highlighted that several miRNAs, such as hsa-miR-150-5p or hsa-miR-196b-5p, were differentially expressed in IFN&#x3b3;-primed EV-endMSCs. These miRNAs have a functional involvement in glucocorticoid receptor signaling, IL-6/8/12 signaling, and in the role of macrophages. In summary, these results allowed us to understand the complexity of the molecular networks in EV-endMSCs and their potential effects on target cells. To our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive study based on proteomic and genomic approaches to unravel the therapeutic potential of these extracellular vesicles, that may be used as immunomodulatory effectors in the treatment of inflammatory conditions.

### Keywords
Endometrial, Human  mesenchymal stem cells, Proteomic, Extracellular vesicles, Ifnγ-primed

### Affiliations
Vascular Biology and Inflammation
Stem Cell Therapy Unit, Jesus Uson Minimally Invasive Surgery Centre, Cáceres, Spain

### Submitter
Inmaculada Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr Javier G Casado
Stem Cell Therapy Unit, Jesus Uson Minimally Invasive Surgery Centre, Cáceres, Spain


