### Accession
PXD046333

### Title
Remodeling of the gastric environment in Helicobacter pylori-induced atrophic gastritis

### Description
Helicobacter pylori colonization of the human stomach is a strong risk factor for gastric cancer. To investigate H. pylori-induced gastric molecular alterations, we used a Mongolian gerbil model of gastric carcinogenesis. Histologic evaluation revealed varying levels of atrophic gastritis (a premalignant condition characterized by parietal and chief cell loss) in H. pylori-infected animals, and transcriptional profiling revealed a loss of markers for these cell types. We then assessed the spatial distribution and relative abundance of proteins in the gastric tissues using imaging mass spectrometry and liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We detected striking differences in protein content of corpus and antrum tissues. 492 proteins were preferentially localized to the corpus in uninfected animals. The abundance of 91 of these proteins was reduced in H. pylori-infected corpus tissues exhibiting atrophic gastritis compared to infected corpus tissues with non-atrophic gastritis or uninfected corpus tissues; these included numerous proteins with metabolic functions. Fifty proteins localized to the corpus in uninfected animals were diffusely delocalized throughout the stomach in infected tissues with atrophic gastritis; these included numerous proteins with roles in protein processing. Corresponding alterations were not detected in animals infected with a H. pylori ∆cagT mutant (lacking Cag type IV secretion system activity). These results indicate that H. pylori can cause loss of proteins normally localized to the gastric corpus as well as diffuse delocalization of corpus-specific proteins, resulting in marked changes in the normal gastric molecular partitioning into distinct corpus and antrum regions.

### Sample Protocol
Antrum and corpus regions of the stomach were delineated by histologic analysis and analyzed separately by LC-MS/MS. Following trypsin digestion of specific regions of the tissue sections overnight, peptides were microextracted and dried. Samples were analyzed via reversed phase column coupled to a nano-electrospray source with an Exploris 480 (Thermo-Fisher) mass spectrometer. Peptides were resolved using an RSLC-nano (Thermo-Fisher).

### Data Protocol
). LC-MS/MS data were analyzed and identified using FragPipe (software can be found at nesvilab.org) and IonQuant94. Results were searched against a Mongolian gerbil protein database appended to an H. pylori protein database, with default parameters for LFQ-MBR searches performed using MSFragger 95. Search results filtered to a 1% false discovery rate using Percolator 96 were loaded into Scaffold (Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR) for visualization. Pairwise comparisons between groups and gastric regions were performed using MSStats

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Helicobacter pylori, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Premalignant, Inflammation, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Professor of Medicine Professor of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Hayes McDonald

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy Cover
Professor of Medicine Professor of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology Vanderbilt University School of Medicine


