### Accession
PXD023683

### Title
First evidence for an isoprene reductase in Acetobacterium wieringae

### Description
Isoprene-metabolizing bacteria represent a global regulator for atmospheric isoprene concentrations. Under anoxic conditions, isoprene can be used as an electron acceptor reducing it to methylbutene. This study describes the proteogenomic profiling of an isoprene reducing enrichment culture to identify organisms and genes responsible for the isoprene hydrogenation reaction. A metagenome assembled genome (MAG) of the most abundant (88 % rel. abundance) lineage in the enrichment, Acetobacterium wieringae, was obtained. Comparative proteogenomics and RT-PCR identified a five-gene operon from the A. wieringae MAG upregulated during isoprene reduction. The operon encodes a putative oxidoreductase, three pleiotropic nickel chaperones (HypA, HypA, HypB) and one 4Fe-4S ferredoxin. The oxidoreductase is proposed as the putative isoprene reductase with a binding site for NADH, FAD as well as two pairs of [4Fe-4S]-clusters. Other Acetobacterium strains (A. woodii DSM 1030, A. wieringae DSM 1911, A. malicum DSM 4132 and A. dehalogenans DSM 11527) do not encode the isoprene reduction operon and could not reduce isoprene. Uncharacterized homologs of the putative isoprene reductase are observed across the Firmicutes, Spirochaetes, Tenericutes, Actinobacteria, Chloroflexi, Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria, suggesting the ability of biohydrogenation of non-functionalized conjugated doubled bonds in other unsaturated hydrocarbons.

### Sample Protocol
Isoprene reducing biomass was grown on H2/HCO3-/(±isoprene). After or 10 days of incubation at 30 ˚C cells were harvested.Cell aggregates of 2 samples were pooled in a 2 ml reaction tube, centrifuged at 10 000 × g for 10 min and then stored at -20℃ until use. Harvested cells suspended in 100 μl of lysis buffer were mechanically disrupted in FastPrep Lysis Matrix A tubes (MP Biomedicals) at 30 Hz for 10 min. Crude extracts were passed through a 30 kDa Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL Centrifugal Filters and washed 6 times with 200 μl of 50 mM NH₄HCO₃ buffer (pH 6.9). Sample protein concentrations were determined with the Quick Start Bradford Protein Assay following manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Australia), and adjusted to 2 µg µl-1 and 10 µl (20 µg) were used for Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP). Samples were treated with 5 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 30 min. Protein lysates were then transferred to new 30 kDa Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL Centrifugal Filters and treated following FASP method which involved an alkylation step (100 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide). Trypsin solution (1 μl of a 200 ng µl-1) was added for digestions at 37°C overnight. Peptides were eluted in 2 × 20 μl 50 mM NH₄HCO₃ buffer and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  Samples analysis was performed at the Bioanalytical Mass Spectroscopy Facility (BMSF) at the UNSW. Digest peptides were separated by nanoLC using an Ultimate nanoRSLC UPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands). Samples (2.5 µl) were concentrated and desalted onto a micro C18 precolumn (300 µm x 5 mm, Dionex) with H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % TFA) at 15 µl/min. After a 4 min wash the pre-column was switched (Valco 10 port UPLC valve, Valco, Houston, TX) into line with a fritless nano column (75µ x ~15cm) containing C18AQ media (1.9µ, 120 Å Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen Germany). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % formic acid) to H2O:CH3CN (64:36, 0.1 % formic acid) at 200 nl/min over 30 min. High voltage 2000 V was applied to low volume Titanium union (Valco) and the tip positioned ~ 0.5 cm from the heated capillary (T=275°C) of a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer. Positive ions were generated by electrospray and the Fusion Lumos operated in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA).  A survey scan m/z 350-1750 was acquired in the orbitrap (resolution = 120,000 at m/z 200, with an accumulation target value of 400,000 ions) and lockmass enabled (m/z 445.12003). Data-dependent tandem MS analysis was performed using a top-speed approach (cycle time of 2s). MS2 spectra were fragmented by HCD (NCE=30) activation mode and the ion-trap was selected as the mass analyser. The intensity threshold for fragmentation was set to 25,000. A dynamic exclusion of 20 s was applied with a mass tolerance of 10ppm.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data was processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.1) and searched against a custom data-base of all predicted proteins in the metagenome of the isoprene reducing culture (6517 sequences, ENA bioproject PRJEB30289). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, cleaving C terminal to lysine and arginine and a maximum number of two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, acetylation of protein N termini were set as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum peptide mass was 4600 Da. The minimal score for modified peptides was 40 and the minimal delta score for modified peptides was 6. Peptide intensities were normalised using MaxLFQ. Downstream analysis was performed in R v3.5.1 with the package DEP v1.4.0. First, MaxQuant output data was filtered, retaining only proteins detected by at least two unique peptides, and detected in all replicates of the treatments. LFQ intensities were normalised with vsn [56] and missing values imputed by left-censored imputation (MinProb function). Differential expression analysis was conducted with limma. Proteins were considered differentially expressed if they had an adjusted (FDR) p-value ≤ 0.05, and a log2 fold change (LFC) ≥ 2 or ≤ -2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Isoprene reduction, Metaproteome

### Affiliations
1UNSW Water Research Centre, School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
The University of New South Wales

### Submitter
Xabier Vázquez-Campos

### Lab Head
Dr Michael J. Manefield
1UNSW Water Research Centre, School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia


