### Accession
PXD012814

### Title
Quantitative analysis of the succinylome in the thyroid tissue of high fat diet induced hypothyroxinemia in rats

### Description
Background Hypothyroidism is a common disease, and its molecular mechanism still needs further investigation. Succinylation, as a newly identified protein posttranslational modification, is found to be involved in various metabolisms and cellular processes. In the present study, we performed quantitative analysis of the lysine succinylome in the thyroid of rats with hypothyroxinemia. Methods Hypothyroxinemia was induced in rats through the administration of a high-fat diet and then the thyroid tissues were taken out for further analysis. Affinity enrichment and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry techniques were applied for the quantitative proteome and succinylome analyses, respectively. Bioinformatic analyses were performed to decipher the differentially expressed proteins and succinylated sites, including the gene ontology (GO) annotation-based classification, Wolfpsort-based subcellular localization prediction, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)-based functional pathway enrichment, and conserved domains of protein and succinylation sites prediction. Finally, the mitochondrial oxygen consumption rates of human normal thyroid epithelial cells were measured to further verify the role of lysine succinylation in vitro. Results Overall, 3869 proteins were identified, among which 129 differentially expressed proteins were quantified. Downregulated expressed proteins were enriched in the thyroid hormone synthesis and thyroid hormone signaling pathways and were mainly localized to the mitochondria and ATPase complex. In addition, 685 lysine succinylation sites on 250 proteins were identified, of which 172 lysine succinylation sites on 104 proteins were obvious changed (7 upregulated on 5 proteins and 165 downregulated on 99 proteins). Decreased succinylated proteins were involved in diverse metabolic pathways and biological processes, including the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle), cellular respiration, energy derivation by oxidation of organic compounds and aerobic respiration. Moreover, these decreased succinylated proteins were primarily localized to the mitochondria. Finally, OCRs related to basal respiration, ATP production and maximal respiration were markedly blunted in the normal thyroid epithelial cells treated with palmitic acid (all p < 0.05),  and the changes were reversed when the cells were treated with palmitic acid and desuccinylase inhibitor together (all p < 0.05).  Conclusions The thyroid differentially expressed proteins and changed succinylation levels played a potential role in the mitochondria-mediated energy metabolism in the HFD-induced hypothyroxinemia rat model.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Each thyroid tissue sample was ground into powder using liquid nitrogen and then transferred to a centrifuge tube (5 ml). Following the addition of four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA) into the centrifuge tube, sonication on ice was performed three times using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). After centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, the remaining debris was removed and the supernatant was collected. Finally, a BCA kit (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, Shanghai, China) was utilized to determine the protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In preparation for digestion, the protein solution was reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol, 30 min, 56 °C) and alkylated (11 mM iodoacetamide, 15 min, room temperature in darkness). The urea concentration was then diluted to less than 2M by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3. Finally, trypsin (Promega Corporation, Fitchburg, Wisconsin, United States) was added at 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate mass ratio and incubated overnight for the first digestion, followed by the addition of trypsin at 1:100 enzyme-to-substrate mass ratio for an additional 4 h digestion.  HPLC Fractionation for proteome The tryptic peptides were then fractionated into several fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 columns (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly speaking, peptides were first separated into 60 fractions with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (ACN, pH 9.0) for over 60 min. Afterwards, the peptide fractions were combined into four fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Antibody-based affinity enrichment Enrichment was implemented by immunoprecipitation in accordance with previous studies (29;30). Briefly, to enrich lysine-succinylation modified peptides, tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and then incubated overnight with prewashed anti-succinyl lysine antibody agarose beads (Catlog no. PTM402; PTM Bio, Hangzhou, China) at 4 °C with gentle shaking. After incubation, the beads were carefully washed at least four times with NTEN buffer and twice with ddH2O to remove unbound peptides. Finally, the bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), combined and vacuum-dried. Before LC-MS/MS analysis, the obtained peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The acquired MS/MS data were processed and analyzed with the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt Rat database (29,795 sequences) concatenated with protein sequences of common contaminants (such as hemoglobin, keratin, and lactoglobulin) and a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages as well as five modifications per peptide. The mass error was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, whereas acetylation on the protein N-terminal and oxidation on methionine were specified as variable modifications. For the succinylome analysis, succinylation on lysine was  also set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for the identification of PTM levels, peptides and proteins were adjusted to 0.01. The minimum length of peptide was set as 7 amino acid residues.  Bioinformatics Analysis Gene ontology (GO) analyses were derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) and GO annotation (http://geneontology.org/) to classify all identified proteins into three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. A cutoff of absolute fold change ≥ 1.5 was employed to identify the differentially expressed proteins. InterProScan, based on the InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/), was used to predict the conserved domains of each identified protein or succinylated protein. Wolfpsort (http://wolfpsort.seq.cbrc.jp/), a subcellular localization prediction software, was utilized to predict the subcellular localization of each identified protein or succinylated protein. The functional pathways of all quantified proteins or succinylated proteins were annotated by performing the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). The functional enrichment analyses were carried out to reveal the differentially expressed proteins enriched in all identified proteins and succinylated proteins. When performing the bioinformatics analysis, a two-tailed Fisher's exact test was performed and a corrected p value < 0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Hypothyroidism is a common disease, and its molecular mechanism still needs further investigation. Lysine succinylation is found to be involved in various metabolic processes associated with hypothyroidism. We performed quantitative analysis on lysine succinylome in thyroids of rats with hypothyroxinemia, which was induced through the administration of a high-fat diet. Overall, 129 differentially expressed proteins were quantified. Downregulated proteins were enriched in the thyroid hormone synthesis and thyroid hormone signaling pathways and were mainly localized in the mitochondria. In addition, 172 lysine succinylation sites on 104 proteins were obviously changed. Decreased succinylated proteins were involved in diverse metabolic pathways and were primarily localized in mitochondria. Finally, the mitochondrial oxygen consumption rates of human normal thyroid epithelial cells were measured to further verify the role of lysine succinylation. The mitochondrial oxygen consumption rates were markedly blunted in the cells treated with palmitic acid (all <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05), and the changes were reversed when the cells were treated with palmitic acid and desuccinylase inhibitor together (all <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Thus, we theorize that the thyroid differentially expressed proteins and changed succinylation levels played potential roles in the mitochondria-mediated energy metabolism in the high-fat diet-induced hypothyroxinemia rat model.

### Keywords
Rat, Hypothyroxinemia, Succinylome

### Affiliations
Scientific Center, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, Shandong, P.R. China
PTM Biolabs Inc.

### Submitter
lihuan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Ling Gao
Scientific Center, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, Shandong, P.R. China


