### Accession
PXD033901

### Title
Optogenetic rejuvenation of mitochondrial membrane potential extends C. elegans lifespan

### Description
Despite longstanding scientific interest in the centrality of mitochondria to biological aging, directly controlling mitochondrial function to test causality has eluded researchers. We show that specifically boosting mitochondrial membrane potential through a light-activated proton pump reversed age-associated phenotypes and extended C. elegans lifespan. We show that harnessing the energy of light to experimentally increase mitochondrial membrane potential during adulthood alone is sufficient to slow the rate of aging.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation: 100 µg protein in 50µl Lyse was recommended as starting material for the sample preparation with the Preomics iST Sample Preparation Kit. In the case the protein concentration was higher than 2µg/µl, the sample was diluted with Lyse. The preparation was performed according to the supplier guidelines. (Kit: iST Sample Preparation Kit, Preomics, Order nr. P.O.00001). LC-MS/MS data acquisition: LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). After 10 minutes of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 450 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 110 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 msec. Up to 18 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation in case of the full proteome analyses. Only precursors with charge state 2 to 6 were selected and dynamic exclusion of 30 sec was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26%. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 Resolution was 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 msec.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis: Peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4). MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot C. elegans proteome database (UP000001940, 26672 protein entries, downloaded 21.12.2020) supplemented with the GFP-tagged proton pump protein plus common contaminants. Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was disabled. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.The label free quantification (LFQ) [cite: PMID: 24942700] from MaxQuant was used to represent the relative abundance of proteins across samples. The ATP synthase, HSP6, HSP 60, TOM70, VDAC, mitochondrial complex proteins were manually selected. The different expression of these protein between the ATR positive and negative samples were performed using student t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. elegans, Aging

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University Munich (TUM), Freising, 85353, Germany
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS), Technical University Munich (TUM), Freising, 85353, Germany


