### Accession
PXD002124

### Title
Zebrafish Deyolking Survey -  A Survey of the Impact of Deyolking on Biological Processes Covered by Shotgun Proteomic Analyses of Zebrafish Embryos

### Description
Deyolking, the removal of the most abundant protein from the zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryo, is a common technique for in-depth exploration of proteome-level changes in vivo due to various environmental stressors or pharmacological impacts during embryonic stage of development. However, the effect of this procedure on the remaining proteome has not been fully studied. Here, we report a label-free shotgun proteomics survey on proteome coverage and biological processes that are enriched and depleted as a result of deyolking.

### Sample Protocol
Zebrafish embryos were split in two groups where one group had yolk proteins removed by deyolking and the other group was not deyolked. After proteins were extracted, they were processed for shotgun analysis by reduction, alkylation and digestion with trypsin. Samples were desalted and analyzed in triplicate on a hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-AQCUITY UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS were searched against a composite UniProt zebrafish protein sequence database using the Mascot and SEQUEST search algorithms within Proteome Discoverer. Scaffold was used to validate tandem MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was utilized to derive annotations along with potential protein-protein interaction networks.

### Publication Abstract
Deyolking, the removal of the most abundant protein from the zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryo, is a common technique for in-depth exploration of proteome-level changes in vivo due to various environmental stressors or pharmacological impacts during embryonic stage of development. However, the effect of this procedure on the remaining proteome has not been fully studied. Here, we report a label-free shotgun proteomics survey on proteome coverage and biological processes that are enriched and depleted as a result of deyolking. Enriched proteins are involved in cellular energetics and development pathways, specifically implicating enrichment related to mitochondrial function. Although few proteins were removed completely by deyolking, depleted molecular pathways were associated with calcium signaling and signaling events implicating immune system response.

### Keywords
Deyolking, Zebrafish, Bioinformatics, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology & Neuroscience UNT Health Science Center Fort Worth, TX, USA
Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience

### Submitter
Laszlo Prokai

### Lab Head
Dr Laszlo Prokai
Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience


