### Accession
PXD035709

### Title
Spike S1 domain interactome in non-pulmonary systems: a role beyond the receptor recognition

### Description
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), which, since 2019 in China, has rapidly become a worldwide pandemic. The aggressiveness and global spread were enhanced by the many SARS-CoV-2 variants that have been isolated up to now. These mutations affect mostly the viral glycoprotein Spike (S), the capsid protein mainly involved in the early stages of viral entry processes, through the recognition of specific receptors on the host cell surface.  In particular, the subunit S1 of the Spike glycoprotein contains the Receptor Binding Domain (RBD) and it is responsible for the interaction with the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Although ACE2 is the primary Spike host receptor currently studied, it has been demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 is also able to infect cells expressing low levels of ACE2, indicating that the virus may have alternative receptors on the host cells. The identification of the alternative receptors can better elucidate the pathogenicity and the tropism of SARS-CoV-2.  Therefore, we investigated the Spike S1 interactomes, starting from host membrane proteins of non-pulmonary cell lines, such as human kidney (HK-2), normal colon (NCM460D), and colorectal adenocarcinoma (Caco-2). We employed an affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) to pull down, from the membrane protein extracts of all cell lines, the protein partners of the recombinant form of the Spike S1 domain. The purified interactors were identified by a shotgun proteomics approach. The lists of S1 potential interacting proteins were then clusterized according to cellular localization, biological processes, and pathways, highlighting new possible S1 intracellular functions, crucial not only for the entrance mechanisms but also for viral replication and propagation processes.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain the membrane protein extracts, the cell lines were treated with Mem-PER™ Plus Membrane Protein Extraction kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, US), according to the manufacturer protocol. The Spike S1 recombinant protein was purchased by Abcam (Cambridge, UK) as a chimera protein fused with a sheep Fc. 2.5µg of Spike S1 was immobilized on 40µl of slurry Dynabeads protein G (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, US), and incubated for 2h at 4°C.  For the pre-clearing step, 1 mg of each membrane extract was previously incubated with naked Dynabeads Protein G (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, US) for 2h at 4°C to adsorb non-specific proteins. The supernatants were incubated with the resin derivatized with the S1 protein overnight at 4°C. The supernatants were removed, and the resin was washed with membrane extraction buffer provided by the Mem-PER™ kit. The proteins retained in the S1 pulldown and onto the pre-clearing resin were eluted with buffer containing 5% SDS. The pre-clearing eluates were used as a control. S1 pulled-down and control eluates from the three cell lines were digested with the S-Trap cartridges (Protifi, New York, US) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS, using the Proxeon nanoEasy II chromatographic system coupled with an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. Peptide mixture fractionations were performed onto a C18 capillary reverse-phase column (200 mm, 75 µm, 5 µm) working at a 250 nl/min flow rate, using a non-linear 5% to 50% gradient of eluent B (0.2% formic acid, 95% acetonitrile LC-MS Grade) over 260 min. Mass analyses were performed in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode by fragmenting the 10 most intense ions in the collision-induced dissociation (CID) modality.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out by MaxQuant software (v.1.5.2.8), using the UniProt Homo Sapiens database as previously described. The FDR cutoff for each peptide and protein identification was set up to 0.01. The fixed modification was the carbamidomethyl (Cys), while the variable modifications were Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Gln) and Oxidation (Met). Only proteins identified with at least 4 peptides were considered acceptable. To define the non-specific contaminants identified in the pulldown experiment, we queried the Contaminant Repository for Affinity Purification (CRAPome) 2.0 web tool (https://reprint-apms.org), searching for the human experiment collection. The UniProt codes were inserted in the database interrogating the “Workflow1” and “H. sapiens – All” parameters. Contaminants defined as proteins reported in at least 50% of the experiments were discarded from the initial lists.

### Publication Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), which, since 2019 in China, has rapidly become a worldwide pandemic. The aggressiveness and global spread were enhanced by the many SARS-CoV-2 variants that have been isolated up to now. These mutations affect mostly the viral glycoprotein Spike (S), the capsid protein mainly involved in the early stages of viral entry processes, through the recognition of specific receptors on the host cell surface. In particular, the subunit S1 of the Spike glycoprotein contains the Receptor Binding Domain (RBD) and it is responsible for the interaction with the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Although ACE2 is the primary Spike host receptor currently studied, it has been demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 is also able to infect cells expressing low levels of ACE2, indicating that the virus may have alternative receptors on the host cells. The identification of the alternative receptors can better elucidate the pathogenicity and the tropism of SARS-CoV-2. Therefore, we investigated the Spike S1 interactomes, starting from host membrane proteins of non-pulmonary cell lines, such as human kidney (HK-2), normal colon (NCM460D), and colorectal adenocarcinoma (Caco-2). We employed an affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS) to pull down, from the membrane protein extracts of all cell lines, the protein partners of the recombinant form of the Spike S1 domain. The purified interactors were identified by a shotgun proteomics approach. The lists of S1 potential interacting proteins were then clusterized according to cellular localization, biological processes, and pathways, highlighting new possible S1 intracellular functions, crucial not only for the entrance mechanisms but also for viral replication and propagation processes.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, S1 domain, Ap-ms, Host-virus interaction, Covid-19, Spike protein, Proteomics, Interactomics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, Naples 80126, Italy 
CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, University of Naples Federico II, Naples 80145, Italy
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples “Federico II”, Naples, Italy CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, Naples, Italy

### Submitter
ilaria iacobucci

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Monti
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Naples “Federico II”, Naples, Italy CEINGE Advanced Biotechnologies, Naples, Italy


