### Accession
PXD022111

### Title
The AMBRA1 E3 ligase adaptor regulates Cyclin D protein stability

### Description
Ubiquitylation proteomics experiment for HEK293T cells treated with either non-targeting shRNA, or shRNA knockdown of AMBRA1 by two independent shRNA's (shAMBRA1-TRC20, and shAMBRA1-TRC36).

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed by probe sonication in three pulses of 20% amplitude for 15 s in a lysis buffer consisting of:  8 M urea, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8; added per 10 ml of buffer: 1 tablet of Roche mini-complete protease inhibitor EDTA free and 1 tablet of Roche PhosSTOP. In order to remove insoluble precipitate, lysates were centrifuged at 16,100 g at 4˚C for 30 min. A Bradford Assay (Thermo) was performed to measure protein concentration in cell lysate supernatants. The clarified lysate was reduced with 4 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 30 min at room temperature and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Remaining alkylated agent was quenched with 10 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted with three starting volumes of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, to reduce the urea concentration to 2 M. Samples were incubated with 50 μg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) and incubated at room temperature with rotation for 18 hr. The sample pH was reduced to approximately 2.0 by the addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min. Peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters). The columns were activated with 1 ml of 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA, and equilibrated 3 times with 1 ml of 0.1% TFA. Peptide samples were applied to the columns, and the columns were washed 3 times with 1 ml of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 1.2 ml of 50% ACN, 0.25% formic acid.  Peptide samples were subjected to ubiquitin remnant immunoaffinity. 10 uL of PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Antibody Bead Conjugate purification (Cell Signaling) slurry was used per 1 mg peptide sample. Ubiquitin remnant beads were washed twice with IAP buffer, then split into individual 1.7 mL low bind tubes (Eppendorf) for binding with peptides. Peptides were dried with a centrifugal evaporator for 12 hours to remove TFA in the elution. The lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 1 ml of IAP buffer (50 mM 4- morpholinepropnesulfonic acid, 10 mM disodium hydrogen phosphate, 50 mM sodium chloride, pH 7.5). Peptides were sonicated and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 16,100g. The soluble peptide supernatant was incubated with the beads at 4˚C for 90 minutes with rotation. Unbound peptides were separated from the beads after centrifugation at 700g for 60 seconds. Beads containing peptides with di-glycine remnants were washed twice with 500 µL of IAP buffer, then washed twice with 500 µL of water, with a 700g 60s centrifugation to allow the collection of each wash step. Peptides were eluted twice with 60 µL of 0.15% TFA. Di-glycine remnant peptides were desalted with UltraMicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group). Desalted peptides were dried with a centrifugal adaptor and stored at -20˚C until analysis by liquid chromatograph and mass spectrometry. Samples were resuspended in 4% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile solution, separated by a reversed-phase gradient over a nanoflow column (360 µm O.D. x 75 µm I.D.) packed with 25 cm of 1.8 µm Reprosil C18 particles with (Dr. Maisch), and directly injected into an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo). Total acquisition was 120 min.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were searched with MaxQuant against both the human proteome (Uniprot canonical protein sequences downloaded 2/28/2020).  Peptides, proteins, and PTMs were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant.  Statistical analysis was performed using the artMS package (https://github.com/biodavidjm/artMS), and MSstats.

### Publication Abstract
The initiation of cell division integrates a large number of intra- and extracellular inputs. D-type cyclins (hereafter, cyclin&#xa0;D) couple these inputs to the initiation of DNA replication<sup>1</sup>. Increased levels of cyclin&#xa0;D promote cell division by activating cyclin-dependent kinases&#xa0;4 and 6 (hereafter, CDK4/6), which in turn phosphorylate and inactivate the retinoblastoma tumour suppressor. Accordingly, increased levels and activity of cyclin&#xa0;D-CDK4/6 complexes are strongly linked to unchecked cell proliferation and cancer<sup>2,3</sup>. However, the mechanisms that regulate levels of cyclin&#xa0;D are incompletely understood<sup>4,5</sup>. Here we show that autophagy and beclin&#xa0;1 regulator&#xa0;1 (AMBRA1) is the main regulator of the degradation of cyclin&#xa0;D. We identified AMBRA1 in a genome-wide screen to investigate the genetic basis of &#xa0;the response to CDK4/6 inhibition. Loss of AMBRA1 results in high levels of cyclin&#xa0;D in cells and in mice, which promotes proliferation and decreases sensitivity to CDK4/6 inhibition. Mechanistically, AMBRA1 mediates ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation of cyclin&#xa0;D as a substrate receptor for the cullin&#xa0;4 E3 ligase complex. Loss of AMBRA1 enhances the growth of lung adenocarcinoma in a mouse model, and low levels of AMBRA1 correlate with worse survival in patients with lung adenocarcinoma. Thus, AMBRA1 regulates cellular levels of cyclin&#xa0;D, and contributes to cancer development and the response of cancer cells to CDK4/6 inhibitors.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Human, Orbitrap elite

### Affiliations
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
UCSF


