### Accession
PXD030368

### Title
Protein profile in a panel of HEK293A cell lines with genetic deletion

### Description
MS Analysis of genetic KO in a panel of HEK293A cell lines with genetic deletion

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in 150 mm tissue culture plates at 80% confluent, after harvesting the cell pellet was snap frozen, lysed in 8 M urea and subjected to harsh sonication (3 times 1 minute, 80% amplitude and 80% cycle time, Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology), Benzonase (Sigma) activity (50U/ml) and centrifugation (14,000 × g for 15 minutes). The protein amount of the cleared supernatant was measured by the Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce) and 50 µg protein were subsequently reduced (5 mM TCEP in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min). The protein sample was diluted to 1.5 M urea and proteolyzed with 0.5 μg of LysC (Wako) and 2 μg Trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) for 16 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was quenched by 0.1% TFA and peptides were purified with a C18 column (Sep-Pak 1cc, Waters), dried using a speed vacuum before being resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked to each sample (1:50) before LC-MS/MS analysis for quality control. MS ANALYSIS Assay library generation: LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (25 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter) with a 120 min gradient from 3% to 35% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition (DDA) mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan (350-2000 m/z) at 120,000 resolution, 50 ms injection time and 4e5 AGC target, followed by twelve FTMS/MS scans at 30,000 resolution, 54 ms injection time and 5e4 AGC target for a cycle time of 3 seconds. Charge states lower than two and higher than seven were rejected. Selected ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter of 1.4 m/z isolation window and fragmented (HCD, Normalized Collision Energy 35%). Selected ions were dynamical excluded for 30 s. D.IA. measurements: samples were analyzed with the same set up used for assay library generation. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan (375-1250 m/z) at 120,000 resolution, 50ms injection time and 4e5 AGC target, followed by 40 variable windows from 375 to 1250 m/z with 1 m/z overlap at 30,000 resolution, 54ms injection time and 1e5 AGC target for a cycle time of 3 seconds. Precursor ions were fragmented with HCD, Normalized Collision Energy 35%.

### Data Protocol
Different protein expression of three independent biological replicates was measured by data independent acquisition (D.I.A.). For library generation a single cell lysate from HEK293A was proteolyzed. peptides were fractionated and analyzed in DDA mode. Spectral library was generated by Spectronaut 13 (version 13.2.190709)62 (Biognosys) using peptide identification results from Max Quant analysis. Acquired spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 embedded with the Andromeda search engine54 against human proteome reference dataset (http:/www.uniprot.org/, downloaded on 10.10.18) extended with reverse decoy sequences. The search parameters were set to include only full tryptic peptides, maximum one missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl as static peptide modification and oxidation (M) as variable modification and “match between runs” option. The MS and MS/MS mass tolerance were set, respectively, to 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da. False discovery rate of <1% was used at the protein level to infer the protein presence.. The generated library included entries for 120,844 peptide precursor and 8,408 protein groups. For the DIA. analysis, extraction of quantitative data was performed with Spectronaut 13 querying the library above-mentioned with the following settings: tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor and 25 ppm for fragment ions and a dynamic retention time extraction window with nonlinear iRT retention time calibration. Precursor and proteins were identified with Q value cut-off of 0.01 (5,947 protein groups). Data normalization by total ion current (TIC)) and filtering was performed with mapDIA63, where a standard deviation factor of 2 and a minimal correlation of 0.2 were used to filter robust fragment ions with minimum intensity threshold of 200. Filter strategy at protein level include minimum identification of two peptides per protein group in at least two over three biological replicates. Group comparison level between each of the 7 conditions against the wildtype HEK293A signal was performed within mapDIA. We identified 31,295 and 4,436 proteins with only 3% of missing values across the matrix. Missing values were imputed with the median value of biological replicates (only one missing value per condition) or using random sampling from a normal distribution generated 1% less intense values. Two sided t test and p values (Benjamini and Hochberg method correction) were computed to compare treated and control groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Gstaiger
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


