### Accession
PXD014458

### Title
Proteomic breast cancer data set for exploring somatic mutations

### Description
MCF7, SKBR3 (breast cancer) and MCF10 (non-tumorigenic) cell extracts were explored by LC-MS/MS for the identification of protein-level mutations.

### Sample Protocol
The cell lines were obtained from ATCC and were cultured at 37 °C (5 % CO2) in the manufacturer’s recommended medium (MCF7 in EMEM, insulin 10 ug/mL, FBS 10 %; SKBR3 in McCoy 5A, FBS 10 %; MCF10 in DEMEM/F12 1:1, horse serum 5-10 %, EGF 20 ng/mL, hydrocortisone 0.5 ug/mL, cholera toxin 0.1 ug/mL, insulin 10 ug/mL ). The cells were arrested in serum/growth factor-free culture medium for 48 h, released for 24 h in medium/FBS (10 %) and growth factors, harvested, lysed (Sigma Cell Lytic NuCLEAR extraction kit), denatured at 55-60 °C for 1 h in urea (8 M) and DTT (4.5 mM), diluted 10-fold with NH4HCO3 (50 mM), and digested with trypsin overnight (substrate:enzyme ratio 30-50:1). All samples were cleaned with C18/SCX cartridges (Agilent SPEC-PTC18/SCX), and prepared at a concentration of 2 ug/uL in a solution of H2O/CH3CN (98:2, v/v)/TFA (0.01 %) for LC-MS/MS analysis. The samples were analyzed by nano-LC (12 cm x 100 um i.d. column, Zorbax C18 packing/5 um), 200 min gradient (solvent A 5 % CH3CN, solvent B 80 % CH3CN, TFA 0.01 %, gradient from 10 % to 90 % B), using an LTQ Thermo mass spectrometer and DDA analysis (MS range 500-2000 m/z, normalized collision energy 30-35 %, activation Q 0.25, activation time 30 ms, isolation width 3 m/z, tandem MS performed on top 5 most intense ions, +/-5 m/z zoom scan width, +/-1.5 m/z exclusion mass width, exclusion duration 60 s).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4/Sequest HT by using a UniProt Homo sapiens database (reviewed, non-redundant, 20,198 entries, January 2015 download). MS database search parameters included: 500-5000 precursor mass range, min/max peptide length 6/144, S/N threshold 1.5, precursor ion tolerance 2 Da, fragment ion tolerance 1 Da, fully tryptic fragments, 2 missed cleavages allowed, b/y/a ions, no PTMs, and peptide stringent FDR 1 % and relaxed FDR 3 %. Peptide mutations were identified by searching the raw files (the tandem mass spectra that could not be matched to the canonical Homo sapiens database) against the XMAn-v1 database of mutated peptides (Yang. X; Lazar I.M., XMAn: A Homo sapiens mutated-peptide database for the MS analysis of cancerous cell states, J. Proteome Res. 2014, 13, 5486-5495).

### Publication Abstract
Cancer evolves as a result of an accumulation of mutations and chromosomal aberrations. Developments in sequencing technologies have enabled the discovery and cataloguing of millions of such mutations. The identification of protein-level alterations, typically by using reversed-phase protein arrays or mass spectrometry, has lagged, however, behind gene and transcript-level observations. In this study, we report the use of mass spectrometry for detecting the presence of mutations-missense, indels and frame shifts-in MCF7 and SKBR3 breast cancer, and non-tumorigenic MCF10A cells. The mutations were identified by expanding the database search process of raw mass spectrometry files by including an in-house built database of mutated peptides (XMAn-v1) that complemented a minimally redundant, canonical database of Homo sapiens proteins. The work resulted in the identification of nearly 300 mutated peptide sequences, of which ~50 were characterized by quality tandem mass spectra. We describe the criteria that were used to select the mutated peptide sequences, evaluate the parameters that characterized these peptides, and assess the artifacts that could have led to false peptide identifications. Further, we discuss the functional domains and biological processes that may be impacted by the observed peptide alterations, and how protein-level detection can support the efforts of identifying cancer driving mutations and genes. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014458.

### Keywords
Somatic mutations, Cell lines, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Virginia Tech

### Submitter
Iulia M. Lazar

### Lab Head
Dr Iulia M. Lazar
Virginia Tech


