### Accession
PXD033623

### Title
Protein turnover analysis in Salmonella Typhimurium during infection by dynamic SILAC, Topograph and quantitative proteomics

### Description
Protein turnover affects protein abundance and phenotypes. Comprehensive investigation of protein turnover dynamics has the potential to provide substantial information about gene expression. Here we report a large-scale protein turnover study in Salmonella Typhimurium during infection by quantitative proteomics. Murine macrophage-like RAW 264.7 cells were infected with SILAC labeled Salmonella. Bacterial cells were extracted after 0, 30, 60, 120 and 240 min. Mass spectrometry analyses yielded information about Salmonella protein turnover dynamics and a software program named Topograph was used for the calculation of protein half lives. The half lives of 311 proteins from intracellular Salmonella were obtained. For bacteria cultured in control medium (DMEM), the half lives for 870 proteins were obtained. The calculated median of protein half lives was 69.13 min and 99.30 min for the infection group and the DMEM group respectively, indicating an elevated protein turnover at the initial stage of infection. Gene ontology analyses revealed that a number of protein functional groups were significantly regulated by infection, including proteins involved in ribosome, periplasmic space, cellular amino acid metabolic process, ion binding and catalytic activity. The half lives of proteins involving in purine metabolism pathway were found to be significantly shortened during infection.

### Sample Protocol
Host cell culture, infection and isolation of Salmonella Murine macrophage-like RAW 264.7 cells were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS at 37 °C in 5% CO2. For infection, labeled Salmonella cells were resuspended in 1 mL DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. Bacterial cells were added to each dish with a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 100. Uptake of S. Typhimurium was allowed for 30 min at 37 °C in 5% CO2. For samples at 30 min time points, RAW 264.7 cells were washed 5 times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to remove any extracellular S. Typhimurium and lysed in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) buffer containing 150 mM NaCl and 0.1% Triton X-100. For samples at 60 min, 120 min and 240 min time points, cells were washed with PBS twice. DMEM supplemented with FBS and 12.5 μL/mL gentamicin were added to each dish for the remainder of time. For the control group, the same amount of labeled bacteria was added into each dish containing only the culturing medium. The bacteria were cultured at 37 °C in 5% CO2 in static before the harvest at the same indicated time points. For the infection group, the isolation of Salmonella cells was carried out as previously described [49]. Briefly, host cells were washed 5 times with PBS and lysed in 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) buffer containing 150 mM NaCl and 0.1% Triton X-100. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 600 g for 5 min to remove cell debris, and the supernatant containing bacterial cells was centrifuged at 4,000 g for 20 min. The pellets were immediately washed with radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.6], 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) to remove any host proteins. Samples from DMEM control group were centrifuged at 4,000 g for 5 min, washed three times with PBS and stored at -40 °C. Two biological replicates were carried out for both groups. Short-run gel electrophoresis and in-gel digestion Collected S. Typhimurium cells were resuspended in SDS-PAGE loading buffer containing 60 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 1.7% (wt/vol) SDS, 6% (vol/vol) glycerol, 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 0.002% (wt/vol) bromophenol blue and heated at 95 °C for 10 min. 20 μg proteins per sample were loaded to the gel and the SDS-PAGE was maintained at 150 V for about 10 min until bromophenol blue had reached 1.5 cm below the stacking gel. The gel was then stained, sliced and in-gel digested by trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) as described [50]. Peptides were concentrated under vacuum by SpeedVac prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis and database searching All LC−MS/MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). The desalted peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile/98% H2O, loaded onto a C18 trap column (5 µm, 100 µm × 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 2 μL/min, and subsequently eluted from the trap column over the self-packed C18 analytic column (100 μm × 150 mm, 3 μm particle size, 120 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min in a 120 min gradient. The mobile phase consisted of two components: component A was 2% acetonitrile/98% H2O with 0.1% formic acid, and component B was 98% acetonitrile/2% H2O with 0.1% formic acid. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent mode with a full scan followed by MS/MS for the top 20 precursors in each cycle. Maximum injection time for MS was set to 20 ms with a resolution of 120,000 across m/z 400-1800. For MS/MS, maximum injection time was set to 105 ms with resolution of 60,000. All raw files (.raw) were submitted to Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) to perform protein identification and quantitation utilizing its integrated SEQUEST HT search engine and Percolator algorithm. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 20 mmu for MS/MS. N-terminal protein acetylation, Oxidation of methionine and deamidation of N, Q were set as dynamic modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification. A high confidence dataset with less than 1% FDR were used for peptide filtering. Files from samples cultured in control DMEM group were searched against the S. Typhimurium strain LT2 proteome. In order to generate an appropriate database for the infection group we manually concatenated the S. Typhimurium strain LT2 proteome UNIPROT fasta file with that of Mus musculus’. Quantification was performed using the workflow node Precursor Ions Quantifier in Proteome Discoverer.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of protein turnover using Topogragh The calculation of protein turnover rates and half lives was achieved using Topogragh as previously described [45-47]. The Topograph software (https://skyline.gs.washington.edu/labkey/project/home/software/Topograph/begin.view) was developed by MacCoss laboratory for the measurement of peptide isotopologue abundances from LC-MS chromatograms, and for the calculation of protein turnover rates [45]. Briefly, peptide search results (.xml files) and peak lists (.raw files) from both groups were added to the Topograph workspace. Tracer mass difference was set at 8.01418. Minimum deconvolution score for peptides to be used in average precursor pool calculation was set at 0.98. Half lives were calculated according to first order kinetics: t1/2 = ln2/ slope. Topograph also performs chromatogram alignment by LOESS regression which recognizes unidentified peptides by peak comparison between samples [45,46] (Fig. S1). A deconvolution score was calculated for each scan by Topogragh and peptides with a deconvolution score of less than 0.98 were excluded from the turnover analysis [46]. Gene ontology (GO) analysis Gene ontology analyses were done using PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships) Classification System [51,52] (http://pantherdb.org/, version 10.0). Salmonella Typhimurium was selected as organism. PANTHER overrepresentation tests were performed using default settings. Bonferroni correction was utilized. Protein half lives from selected entries of biological process, cellular component and molecular function that were overrepresented (P < 0.05) were compared between groups. Nonparametric Mann-Whitney U tests were applied to evaluate the significance of difference between the two experimental groups. Network and pathway analysis Proteins were submitted to STRING 10 (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins, http://string-db.org/) for known and predicted protein-protein interaction network analysis [53]. Parameters were set at default using medium confidence (0.400). The file containing information of proteins and interactions was downloaded and visualized by Cytoscape (Version 3.2.1, http://www.cytoscape.org/) [54]. Cytoscape plugin CytoKegg (http://apps.cytoscape.org/apps/cytokegg) was used to identify KEGG pathways associated to the protein profile.

### Publication Abstract
Protein turnover affects protein abundance and phenotypes. Comprehensive investigation of protein turnover dynamics has the potential to provide substantial information about gene expression. Here we report a large-scale protein turnover study in Salmonella Typhimurium during infection by quantitative proteomics. Murine macrophage-like RAW 264.7 cells were infected with SILAC labeled Salmonella. Bacterial cells were extracted after 0, 30, 60, 120, and 240&#x2009;min. Mass spectrometry analyses yielded information about Salmonella protein turnover dynamics and a software program named Topograph was used for the calculation of protein half lives. The half lives of 311 proteins from intracellular Salmonella were obtained. For bacteria cultured in control medium (DMEM), the half lives for 870 proteins were obtained. The calculated median of protein half lives was 69.13 and 99.30&#x2009;min for the infection group and the DMEM group, respectively, indicating an elevated protein turnover at the initial stage of infection. Gene ontology analyses revealed that a number of protein functional groups were significantly regulated by infection, including proteins involved in ribosome, periplasmic space, cellular amino acid metabolic process, ion binding, and catalytic activity. The half lives of proteins involved in purine metabolism pathway were found to be significantly shortened during infection.

### Keywords
Dynamic silac, Proteomics, Salmonella typhimurium, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University
Wuhan University

### Submitter
Zhe Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Lin Guo
State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University


