### Accession
PXD032231

### Title
Identification of Bod1L interactors in HeLa cells

### Description
To gain further insights into the role of BOD1L in maintaining genome stability, we performed exploratory mass spectrometry to identify interacting partners of BOD1L-GFP.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa-C-Flap-BOD1L and HeLa-C-Flap cells were collected and lysed in benzonase lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5, 75 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 1% CHAPS, 30 U ml−1 benzonase, protease inhibitors). NaCl concentration was adjusted to 150 mM, EDTA to 3 mM and lysates were cleared by centrifugation. Supernatants were pre-cleared with Protein G agarose beads for 30 min at 4 deg. Pre-cleared lysates were incubated with anti-Flag affinity agarose resin (Sigma) for 4 h at 4 deg. Beads were washed five times with wash buffer (20 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 3 mM EDTA, 1% CHAPS) and once with PBS. Bound proteins were eluted by boiling in SDS–PAGE sample buffer and eluates were resolved on NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen) and stained with Coomassie Blue (Abcam).

### Data Protocol
Gel slices were excised and processed for mass spectrometry. Proteins were digested with trypsin and peptides sequentially extracted according to the protocols established by the Crick proteomics lab. Peptide mixtures were resuspended in 10 ul of 0.1% TFA to retain hydrophilic peptides on the trapping column, separated on a 50 cm, 75um I.D. Pepmap column over a 30-minute gradient and then eluted directly onto an Orbitrap instrument. X-calibur software was used to control the data acquisition. All data analysis was performed using the MaxQuant bioinformatics suite. The “light” version of intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was used for label free protein quantification and data was exported to Perseus software for viewing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hela, Bod1l-gfp

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Valerie Borel

### Lab Head
Dr Simon J. Boulton
The Francis Crick Institute


