### Accession
PXD011471

### Title
Single amino acid variant

### Description
We performed deep proteomic profiling down to as few as 9 Panc-1 cells using sample fractionation, TMT multiplexing and carrier/reference strategy. Off line fractionation of the TMT-labeled sample pooled with TMT-labeled carrier Panc-1 whole cell proteome was achieved using alkaline reversed phase spin columns. The fractionation in conjunction with carrier/reference proteome allowed us to detect 47,414 unique peptides derived from 6261 proteins which provided a sufficient coverage to search for single amino acid variants (SAAVs)related to cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Panc-1 cells that were archived in PCR tube was suspended in TEAB for reduction and alkylation with TCEP and IAA. Lysis was accomplished by sonication and trypsin for digestion. TMT-11 plex labeled samples and C/R proteome. The samples were quenced by hydroxylamine and pool all samples. The pool was fractionated using the Pierce high pH reserved-phase peptide fractionation kit. The sample was analyzed with Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer coupled with the Easy 1000 nano UHPLC system.

### Data Protocol
Databas searching was conducted using Mascot algorithm (V2.5.1 Matrix Science Inc.)The searching parameters were set as Oxidation at Met. Carbamidomethylation at Cysteine and TMT tags labeling at N-termini and Lysine. The tolerance of precursor ions and fragment ions was set as 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. The maximum missed trypsin cleavage site allowed to 2. Charge status was set as +2, +3,+4. CarProVar (V2.0) was applied for the database searching.

### Publication Abstract
We have performed deep proteomic profiling down to as few as 9 Panc-1 cells using sample fractionation, TMT multiplexing, and a carrier/reference strategy. Off line fractionation of the TMT-labeled sample pooled with TMT-labeled carrier Panc-1 whole cell proteome was achieved using alkaline reversed phase spin columns. The fractionation in conjunction with the carrier/reference (C/R) proteome allowed us to detect 47&#x202f;414 unique peptides derived from 6261 proteins, which provided a sufficient coverage to search for single amino acid variants (SAAVs) related to cancer. This high sample coverage is essential in order to detect a significant number of SAAVs. In order to verify genuine SAAVs versus false SAAVs, we used the SAVControl pipeline and found a total of 79 SAAVs from the 9-cell Panc-1 sample and 174 SAAVs from the 5000-cell Panc-1 C/R proteome. The SAAVs as sorted into high confidence and low confidence SAAVs were checked manually. All the high confidence SAAVs were found to be genuine SAAVs, while half of the low confidence SAAVs were found to be false SAAVs mainly related to PTMs. We identified several cancer-related SAAVs including KRAS, which is an important oncoprotein in pancreatic cancer. In addition, we were able to detect sites involved in loss or gain of glycosylation due to the enhanced coverage available in these experiments where we can detect both sites of loss and gain of glycosylation.

### Keywords
Human, Panc-1, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, USA.

### Submitter
Zhijing Tan

### Lab Head
Dr David M. Lubman
Department of Surgery, University of Michigan, USA.


