### Accession
PXD004157

### Title
Blanc Du Bios Proteome -  Proteome Profile of American Hybrid Grape cv

### Description
Blanc Du bois grapes are gaining popularity in the South eastern US due to its distinctive flavor and disease tolerance characteristics. Berry composition at harvest is a major contributing factor of wine quality. Blanc Du bois grapes are harvested from EL-38 and EL-39 stages depending on the style of wine desired or harvested early to avoid rain nearing harvest. In the current study, gel-free proteome analysis was applied to investigate changes in enzymes, primary and secondary metabolism proteins during ripening and late ripe stage. Grape berries from EL-33, EL-34, EL-36, EL-38  and EL-39 were collected based on brix, acidity and density. Protein extracts from different berry stages were resolved by electrophoresis. Proteins were extracted from the gel as a single band, detained and subjected to proteolysis with sequencing grade trypsin. Trypsin digested peptides from different berry protein extracts were separated on a nano LC and the eluent was sprayed onto to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. The raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer with Sequest and Mascot search nodes using Vitis species FASTA database (70,263 entries) and the data were further validated by Scaffold software.   A total of 1091, 1131, 1078, 1042 and 1066 proteins were detected in EL-33, EL-34, EL-36, EL-38 and EL-39 of berries respectively. Statistical ANOVA analysis revealed 927 proteins present across the stages that are involved in various biochemical and metabolic pathways.  Seventeen proteins including dihydroflavonol reductase, sucrose phosphate synthase, PR proteins increased more than three-fold between ripe and late ripe berry stages. Other proteins that increased during ripe and late ripe stage berries were alcohol dehydrogenase 1, anthocyanidin reductase, phospho-2-dehydro-3-deoxyheptonate aldolase, fatty acid hydroperoxide lyase,  cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase, -isopiperitenol (-)-carveol and SAM-methyltransferases.

### Sample Protocol
Developing grape berries were sampled from Florida Hybrid grape berry cv. Blanc Du Bois,  from the vineyard at the FAMU Center for Viticulture and Small fruit Research, Tallahassee, Florida during the 2013 season. Berries were collected from EL-33, EL-34, EL-36, EL-38 and EL-39 maturity categories. The berry tissue were frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.  At all stages, samples of whole fresh berries obtained as described above, were used immediately to measure their total soluble solids, pH and titratable acidity. The berries were cut open, seeds removed and the seed-free tissue (pericarp) was used for protein extraction. Each replicates was subjected to independent protein extraction from frozen, finely ground berry samples using a phenol based extraction protocol (Vincent et al, 2006, Kambiranda et al 2014) from GH stage and skin and pulp separately for GS, PS and ripe stages. The final protein pellets was resolubilized in 1.5 mL of rehydration buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 10 mM DTT). Protein was quantified using Bradford method. Aliquot of the protein extracts in rehydration buffer was acetone precipitated and the recovered pellets re-suspended in 0.5 M Bicine buffer, pH 8.5 containing 0.1 % (w/v) SDS and placed on a thermomixer (Eppendorf) over night at 4oC as per Marsh et al., (2010) to facilitate re-suspension of protein pellet. The re-suspended protein was quantified again using BCA reagent (BioRad). Each samples and replicates, 50µg protein was run on a 10% SDS polyacrylamide gel until the protein band entered the resolving gel. Protein bands were excised from the gel and trypsin digested. Trypsin digested peptides from individual stages and replications were subjected to nLC-MS/MS. An externally calibrated Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos nLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap (high-resolution electrospray tandem mass spectrometer) was used with the following parameters:  A 2 cm, 100 ?m i.d. (internal diameter) trap column (SC001 Easy Column from Thermo-scientific) was followed by a 10 cm analytical column of 75 ?m i.d. (SC200 Easy Column from Thermo-scientific). Both trap column and analytical column had C18-AQ packaging. Separation was carried out using  Easy nanoLC II  (Thermo-Scientific) with a continuous, vented column configuration. A 5 µL (~500 ng) sample was aspirated into a 20 µL sample loop and loaded onto the trap. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min for separation on the analytical column. Mobile phase A was composed of 99.9 H2O (EMD Omni Solvent), and 0.1% formic acid  and mobile phase B was composed of 99.9% ACN, and 0.1% formic acid. A 1 h linear gradient from 0% to 45% B was performed. The LC eluent was directly nano-sprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). During the chromatographic separation, the LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in a data-dependent mode and under direct control of the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). The MS data were acquired using the following parameters: 10 data-dependent collisional-induced-dissociation (CID) MS/MS scans per full scan. All measurements were performed at room temperature and three technical replicates for each of the three replicates per sample were run to allow for statistical comparisons between samples, which are necessary for label-free  quantification

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 1.4.0.288) and Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.4.0.288). Mascot and Sequest were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethyl of cysteine and carboxymethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot and Sequest as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.Proteins were annotated with GO terms from gene_association.goa_uniprot (downloaded Jan 7, 2014). (Ashburner, M et al Nat. Genet. 2000;25(1):25-9).

### Publication Abstract
The study of key control points in ripening is essential to improve grape wine quality. Molecular basis of ripening is still far from being understood from the Pierce's disease (PD)-tolerant grapes predominantly grown in the southeastern United States. To identify proteins expressed during Blanc du Bois grape berry green and ripening stages, proteome analysis from five different stages revealed 1091, 1131, 1078, 1042, and 1066 proteins. Differential expression analysis revealed 551 common proteins across different stages of maturity that are involved in various biochemical and metabolic pathways. The proteins identified were associated with phenylpropanoids, isoquinoline alkaloids, fatty acids, unsaturated fatty acids, and furanones. Our data provide the first step to understand the complex biochemical changes during ripening of PD-tolerant American hybrid grapes that are popular for their aroma and flavor profile in the southeastern United States. Proteomics data are deposited to the ProteomeXchange PXD004157.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Ripening, Grape

### Affiliations
Center for viticulture and Small fruit research
Center For Viticultutre and Small Fruits Florida A&M University Tallahassee, FL 32317

### Submitter
Devaiah Kambiranda

### Lab Head
Dr Mehboob Sheikh
Center For Viticultutre and Small Fruits Florida A&M University Tallahassee, FL 32317


