### Accession
PXD044802

### Title
Engineered skin microbiome-assisted delivery to the pilosebaceous unit

### Description
Microbes are fascinating molecular machines which can be equipped with synthetic genetic programs that allow them to produce therapeutic molecules targeted on demand upon disease sensing. Cutibacterium acnes engraftment capacity and its living habitat close to important pharmacological targets makes it an attractive chassis to create skin-delivered therapeutics. Here, we report the engineering of this bacterium, the most abundant commensal of the human skin, to produce and secrete the therapeutic molecule neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin in vivo, known to modulate cutaneous sebum production.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were treated with 0.5% peptone/PBS (control), wild type C. acnes KPA171202 (WT) or NGAL producing C. acnes KPA171202 (KI) for 3 consecutive days. Bacteria was applied on the skin of shaved mice. 48 h after the last application, mice were swabbed with a pre-moistened cotton swab and dissolved in 8 M urea solution. The proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin (1:10, 37 ºC o/n). Digested peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (nanoLC EASY, Orbitrap Eclipse) using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) to target the Ngal peptides (resolution 120.000, unscheduled). A purified recombinant Ngal protein was run in parallel both in targeted (PRM) and discovery mode.

### Data Protocol
A database search was performed with the Mascot search engine for the Ngal sample acquired in discovery mode. The obtained results were used to build a reference spectral library and extract reference retention times. Acquired targeted raw data for the skin swabs and the Ngal recombinant protein were analyzed with Skyline, and extracted ion chromatograms were obtained for all the targeted peptides and compared to the reference signals.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Engineering, Cutibacterium acnes, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Centre de Regulació Genòmica
Centre for Genomic Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra

### Submitter
Eduard Sabidó

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
Centre for Genomic Regulation, Universitat Pompeu Fabra


