### Accession
PXD016863

### Title
Encystation deep proteome of Giardia duodenalis

### Description
Background: Cyst formation in parasitic protist Giardia duodenalis is critical to its transmission. Proteomic data is essential for the system-level understanding of the molecular mechanisms managing stage transition from a flagellated, binucleate trophozoite to a tetra-nucleate cyst. The current encystation proteome quantifies 16% of predicted protein coding genes and lacks complete coverage of the developmental transition. Given recent gains in mass spectrometry instrumentation, we have generated significantly improved proteomes for Giardia across encystation, providing framework for transcriptome-proteome correlation drawing insights into molecular networks modulating encystation in Giardia.  Results: We have reproducibly identified 3,796 (64.6% of Giardia proteins) and quantified 3,402 proteins (56.12 % of Giardia proteins), tripling the currently published encystation proteome coverage. This includes timepoints from standard trophozoite growth (TY), during low-bile encystation priming (LB), mid-encystation (EC), and enriched, mature cysts (C), making this the first proteome study across the entire encystation process. This is also the first proteome analysis of trophozoites during low bile priming prior to in vitro induction of encystation, and analysis of mature cyst proteomes. Almost 28% (1,102 proteins) of the proteome is differentially changed during encystation including within proteasomal machinery, metabolic pathways and lipid metabolism, indicating a multimodal regulation in encystation. To further understand novel observations in lipid metabolism, we used hidden markov model (HMM) based domain prediction strategies and i-Tasser based structural modelling to provide evidence for the presence of three families of lipid transporters (LTP’s) StARkin (steroidogenic acute regulatory protein–related lipid transfer), ORP/Osh (Oxysterol Binding protein related protein), GLTP (Glycosphingolipid transfer protein) in Giardia. Finally, we performed functional interaction studies using in silico docking of newly identified LTP’s with corresponding lipid ligands to validate their interaction. This identified a shift in lipid species dependency in Giardia as the parasite progress towards cyst formation.

### Sample Protocol
Lysis and protein extraction were performed using 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.8) (Sigma Aldrich). Reduction was performed at 37oC with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 hour, followed by alkylation with 15mM iodacetamide (IAM) for 45 min in the dark at room temperature, and quenched with 5 mM DTT. Proteins were precipitated via methanol/chloroform approach and solubilised to 8 M Urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.8) and protein concentration quantitated by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce). Protein digestion was performed first with Lys-C (Wako) overnight at 30◦C, followed with Trypsin (Promega) digestion at 37◦C for 6 hours at ratios of 1 μg enzyme: 100 μg protein. Samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to 1% concentration acid and then desalted using solid phase extraction (SPE) with in-house tips packed with styrene divinyl benzene (3M Empore)[82]. Peptide extracts were dried by SpeedVac centrifuge, resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and 0.5% acetic acid for MS.   The peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000) coupled with an LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific, USA) in conjuction with a nanoESI source. The peptides were loaded in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) into an LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm × 50 cm). Elution of the peptides were performed with a non-linear 125-min gradient of 3%-80% solvent B (100% v/v CH3CN in 0.l% v/v formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.3uL/ min. All mass spectra LTQ Orbitrap Elite were acquired in positive mode in a data dependent manner with full MS scan from m/z 300-1650 in the Fourier transform mode. Lock mass of 401.922718 was used. Fragmentation of top 20 most intense peptides were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID) with normalised collision energy of 30, activation q of 0.25 and  fragmented ions were dynamically excluded for 10 s . Xcalibur software was used to acquire the data[83].

### Data Protocol
Raw files from MS were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3) and the database search was performed using Giardia intestinalis ATCC 50803 annotated proteome file (Release February 2018) obtained from Uniprot FASTA database. Including isoforms with strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while N-acetylation of proteins N-termini and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. During the MaxQuant main search, precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ions were allowed a mass deviation of 20 ppm. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Further analysis was performed using a custom pipeline developed in R, which utilizes the LFQ intensity and iBAQ values in the MaxQuant output file proteinGroups.txt. Proteins not found in at least 50% of the replicates in one group were removed. Missing values were imputed using a random normal distribution of values with the mean set at mean of the real distribution of values minus 1.8 s.d., and a s.d. of 0.3 times the s.d. of the distribution of the measured intensities. The probability of differential protein expression between groups was calculated using the Limma R package or by ANOVA using base R. Probability values were corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini–Hochberg method. Analysis of the data as well as visualization was performed using the Perseus software package(Version), RStudio(Version) and TIBCO spotfire version(Version).

### Publication Abstract
Cyst formation in the parasitic protist Giardia duodenalis is critical to its transmission. Existing proteomic data quantifies only 17% of coding genes transcribed during encystation and does not cover the complete process from trophozoite to mature cyst. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we have quantified proteomic changes across encystation and compared this with published transcriptomic data. We reproducibly identified 3863 (64.5% of Giardia proteins) and quantified 3382 proteins (56.5% of Giardia proteins) over standard trophozoite growth (TY), during low-bile encystation priming (LB), 16&#xa0;h into encystation (EC), and at cyst maturation (C). This work provides the first known expanded observation of encystation at the proteomic level and triples the coverage of previous encystation proteomes. One-third (1169 proteins) of the quantified proteome is differentially expressed in the mature cyst relative to the trophozoite, including proteasomal machinery, metabolic pathways, and secretory proteins. Changes in lipid metabolism indicated a shift in lipid species dependency during encystation. Consistent with this, we identified the first, putative lipid transporters in this species, representing the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein-related lipid transfer (StARkin), oxysterol binding protein related protein (ORP/Osh) and glycosphingolipid transfer protein (GLTP) families, and follow their differential expression over cyst formation. Lastly, we undertook correlation analyses of the transcriptome and proteome of trophozoites and cysts, and found evidence of post-transcriptional regulation of key protein classes (RNA binding proteins) and stage-specific genes (encystation markers) implicating translation-repression in encystation. We provide the most extensive proteomic analysis of encystation in Giardia to date and the first known exploration across its complete duration. This work identifies encystation as highly coordinated, involving major changes in proteostasis, metabolism and membrane dynamics, and indicates a potential role for post-transcriptional regulation, mediated through RNA-binding proteins. Together our work provides a valuable resource for Giardia research and the development of transmission-blocking anti-giardials.

### Keywords
Encystation, Proteomics, Deep proteome, Giardia

### Affiliations
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Science, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Population Health and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research

### Submitter
Samantha Emery

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron Jex
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Science, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia


