### Accession
PXD011806

### Title
Dpf2 interactome in mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
Dpf2 is a subunit of the BAF/pBAF chromatin remodelling complex. We have used cross-linking affinity purification-mass spectrometry to explore Dpf2 protein interactions in mouse embryonic stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing tagged Dpf2 were cross-linked with formaldehyde. Whole cell extracts were prepared using a high salt lysis buffer (450 mM NaCl, 0.2% Nonidet P-40) and Dpf2 was purified via FLAG affinity purification. Proteins were then eluted in elution buffer containing 200 ug/ml of 3xFLAG peptide,reduced with 5 mM TCEP (Sigma), and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). Samples were fractionated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and whole lanes were sliced in 7-24 bands, gel pieces were de-stained completely and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Roche). Peptides were extracted using 0.5% formic acid-50% acetonitrile and dried in a Speed Vac. Peptides were re-dissolved in 0.5% formic acid and analysed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) coupled to an LTQ FT Ultra (Thermo Fisher) hybrid or Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source.

### Data Protocol
he raw files were processed with Proteome Discover 1.4 (Thermo). Database searches were performed with Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) against the mouse SwissProt database (v. January 2015). The search parameters were: trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), N-acetylation (protein N-term), deamidation (NQ), formyl (N-term), oxidation (M), and Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q). Database search results were refined through processing with Mascot Percolator (Brosch & Choudhary, 2009). Protein identification required at least one high-confidence peptide (FDR < 1%).

### Publication Abstract
BAF complexes are composed of different subunits with varying functional and developmental roles, although many subunits have not been examined in&#xa0;depth. Here we show that the Baf45 subunit Dpf2 maintains pluripotency and ESC differentiation potential.&#xa0;Dpf2 co-occupies enhancers with Oct4, Sox2, p300, and the BAF subunit Brg1, and deleting Dpf2 perturbs ESC self-renewal, induces repression of Tbx3, and impairs mesendodermal differentiation without dramatically altering Brg1 localization. Mesendodermal differentiation can be rescued by restoring Tbx3 expression, whose distal enhancer is positively regulated by Dpf2-dependent H3K27ac maintenance and recruitment of pluripotency TFs and Brg1. In contrast, the PRC2 subunit Eed binds an intragenic Tbx3 enhancer to oppose Dpf2-dependent Tbx3 expression and mesendodermal differentiation. The PRC2 subunit Ezh2 likewise opposes Dpf2-dependent&#xa0;differentiation through a distinct mechanism involving Nanog repression. Together, these findings delineate distinct mechanistic roles for specific BAF and PRC2 subunits during ESC differentiation.

### Keywords
Cross-linking, Interactome, Dpf2, Affinity purification, Mouse embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute / The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute / The Institute of Cancer Research


