### Accession
PXD014829

### Title
Selective autophagy maintains centrosome integrity and accurate mitosis by turnover of centriolar satellites

### Description
The centrosome is the master orchestrator of mitotic spindle formation and chromosome segregation in animal cells. Centrosome abnormalities are frequently observed in cancer, but little is known of their origin and about pathways affecting centrosome homeostasis. Here we show that autophagy preserves centrosome organization and stability through selective turnover of centriolar satellite components, a process we termed doryphagy. Autophagy targets the satellite organizer PCM1 by interacting with GABARAPs via a C-terminal LIR motif. Accordingly, autophagy deficiency results in accumulation of large abnormal centriolar satellites and a resultant dysregulation of centrosome composition. These alterations have critical impact on centrosome stability and lead to mitotic centrosome fragmentation and unbalanced chromosome segregation. Our findings identify doryphagy as an important centrosome-regulating pathway and bring mechanistic insights to the link between autophagy dysfunction and chromosomal instability. In addition, we highlight the vital role of centriolar satellites in maintaining centrosome integrity.

### Sample Protocol
MCF-7 cells stably expressing GFP-tagged GABARAP, GABARAPL2, LC3B or a control construct (GFP-3xFLAG) were grown in full medium, and 24h prior to collection, protein expression was induced with doxycycline. Cells were collected and pelleted in ice cold PBS. Cell pellets were lysed in standard IP lysis buffer, sonicated using Branson tip sonicator (settings: 2 x 15 sec, amplitude 10 %) and clarified by centrifugation (16000 x g, 10 min at 4C). Co-IPs were performed in biological quadruplicates using one 15 cm plate per experiment. Clarified lysates were incubated for 90 min with GFP-trap MA beads (Chromotek) and the beads were subjected to 3 washes in standard IP lysis buffer and followed by two washes with lysis buffer w/o detergent. Proteins were eluted with trypsin in 50 mM TAEB buffer. Reduced and alkylated peptides were immobilized and purified on C18 stage-tips (Pierce) and subjected to LC-MS analysis. Tryptic peptides were identified by LC-MS using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed column of ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3µm resin (Dr Maisch, GmbH) using a 60-minute gradient of solvent A (0.5 % acetic acid) and solvent B (80 % acetonitrile in 0.5 % acetic acid) and a flow of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a top 12 data-dependent acquisition, a resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z), a scan range of 300 – 1700 m/z and an AGC target of 3e6 for the MS survey. MS/MS was performed at a scan range of 200-2000 m/z using a resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z), an AGC target of 1e5, an intensity threshold of 4.5e4 and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. Further parameters included an exclusion time of 45 sec. and a maximum injection time for survey and MS/MS of 15 ms and 110 ms respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was conducted by processing raw files obtained from LC-MS analysis using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 at default settings. Peak lists were searched against the human UniProt database with internal MaxQuant engine (Andromeda). Variable modifications included methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and the box “Re-quantify” was checked. In global parameters carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, minimum peptide length was set to 7 and the box match between runs was checked with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. For protein and peptide identification, the FDR was set to 1% based on the target-decoy approach and protein quantifications were based on a minimum ratio count of 2 using both unmodified and proteins modified with the variable modifications mentioned above for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The centrosome is the master orchestrator of mitotic spindle formation and chromosome segregation in animal cells. Centrosome abnormalities are frequently observed in cancer, but little is known of their origin and about pathways affecting centrosome homeostasis. Here we show that autophagy preserves centrosome organization and stability through selective turnover of centriolar satellite components, a process we termed doryphagy. Autophagy targets the satellite organizer PCM1 by interacting with GABARAPs via a C-terminal LIR motif. Accordingly, autophagy deficiency results in accumulation of large abnormal centriolar satellites and a resultant dysregulation of centrosome composition. These alterations have critical impact on centrosome stability and lead to mitotic centrosome fragmentation and unbalanced chromosome segregation. Our findings identify doryphagy as an important centrosome-regulating pathway and bring mechanistic insights to the link between autophagy dysfunction and chromosomal instability. In addition, we highlight the vital role of centriolar satellites in maintaining centrosome integrity.

### Keywords
Pcm1, Centriolar satellites, Mitosis, Cep131, Selective autophagy, Gabarap, Autophagy, Centrosome, Centrosome fragmentation

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Anders H. Lund Professor, PhD  Biotech Research and Innovation Centre University of Copenhagen Ole Maaloes Vej 5 DK-2200 N Copenhagen Denmark

### Submitter
Michal Lubas

### Lab Head
Dr Anders Lund
Anders H. Lund Professor, PhD  Biotech Research and Innovation Centre University of Copenhagen Ole Maaloes Vej 5 DK-2200 N Copenhagen Denmark


