### Accession
PXD031583

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Balneola and Vibrio isolates

### Description
Proteome profile of Balneola and Vibrio isolates established by next-generation proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and captured on SP3 beads, digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed, spectral counts and NSAF were extracted and compared.

### Publication Abstract
The vast majority of marine microorganisms and their functions are yet to be explored. The considerable diversity they encompass is an endless source of knowledge and wealth that can be valued on an industrial scale, emphasizing the need to develop rapid and efficient identification and characterization techniques. In this study, we identified 26 microbial isolates from coastal water of the NW Mediterranean Sea, using phylopeptidomics, a cutting-edge tandem mass spectrometry proteotyping technique. Taxonomical identification at the species level was successfully conducted for all isolates. The presence of strains belonging to the newly described Balneolaeota phylum, yet uncharacterized at the proteomics scale, was noted. The very first proteomics-based investigation of a representative of the Balneolaeota phylum, <i>Balneola vulgaris,</i> is proposed, demonstrating the use of our proteotyping workflow for the rapid identification and in-depth molecular characterization, in a single MS/MS analytical run. Tandem mass spectrometry proteotyping is a valuable asset for culturomic programs as the methodology is able to quickly classify the most atypical isolates.

### Keywords
Bacterium, Balneola, Proteomics, Proteotyping, Phylopeptidomics, Marine bacteria, Vibrio

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


