### Accession
PXD008904

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of susceptible and resistance maize lines to southern corn rust

### Description
Southern corn rust (SCR) is one of destructive diseases in maize caused by Puccinia polysora Undrew. (P. polysara), widely occurring in warm-temperate and tropical regions globally. To identify candidate SCR resistance-related proteins and understand the molecular mechanism underlaying the maize and P. polysara interaction, comparative proteomic analysis of susceptible and resistance maize lines was performed. A total of 6,612 proteins were successfully identified using an iTRAQ-based proteomic approach. Fold changes and statistical analysis demonstrated that 687 proteins increased and 802 proteins decreased in the resistant line, while 571 increased and 464 decreased in the susceptible line. One remorin protein, namely ZmREM1.3 (B4G1B0), was significantly induced by SCR in the resistant genotype, while decreased in susceptible genotype after P. polysara infection. Plant-specific remorin proteins have been shown to play important roles during microbial infection and plant signaling processes. Transgenic analysis showed that overexpression of ZmREM1.3 in maize confers enhanced resistance to the biotrophic fungal pathogen SCR. Upon pathogen challenge, the ZmREM1.3-overexpressing plants accumulated higher levels of defense hormones, SA and JA. Moreover, stronger induction of defense gene expression was also observed in ZmREM1.3-overexpressing maize plants in response to SCR infection. Taken together, our results support that ZmREM1.3 plays a positive role in regulating the maize defense against SCR likely through SA/JA-mediated defense signaling pathways. This is the first attempt for large scale analysis of the molecular mechanisms underlaying the maize and P. polysara interaction at the proteomic level, and the first evidence for remorin protein family in resistant to fungal disease.

### Sample Protocol
To investigate the impact of P. polysora infection on maize. Two maize inbred line P178 (resistance line) and Lx9801 (susceptible line) was used for phenotype examination and iTRAQ analysis. The plants were grown in greenhouse under diurnal conditions with 15 h light at 28℃ and 9 h dark at 25℃. About 4 weeks after planting, at 4-5 leaf stage, were inoculated with a uniform solution of approximately 105-106 spores ml-1, 0.02% of Tween-20 (v/v). Spores were collected from artificial glasshouse infection on susceptible Lx9801 adult plants displaying typical SCR symptoms. Inoculations were performed by using an air-assisted sprayer, 5 ml of spores solution for per plant. After inoculation, infected plants were incubated in the dark under high humidity (~95%) at 25℃for 24 h. Then, plants were shifted to diurnal conditions (15 h light at 28 ℃, 9 h dark at 25 ℃, 80% humidity). In parallel, the experimental controls were mock-inoculated using inoculation buffer, three replicates of plant leaf tissue were harvested at 14 days after inoculations. Each sample consisted of 10 leaves derived from five fresh plants, three biological replicates were performed. Quickly frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 ℃ freezer before analysis. Approximately 3 g stored frozen leaves were ground into a powder in liquid nitrogen, and the powders were precipitated in a 10% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid/acetone solution containing 65 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at −20°C for 1 h. After extraction, the solution was centrifuged at 10,000g for 45 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate was vacuum-dried and solubilized in 1/10 volumes of SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, and 150 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0). After 3 min incubation in boiling water, the suspensions were ultrasonicated (80 w, 10 s ultrasonic at a time, every 15 s, and 10times) then incubated at 100°C for 3 min. The crude extract was clarified by centrifugation at 13,000g at 25°C for 10 min. The sample protein content was determined using the BCA Protein Assay Reagent (Promega, USA). The supernatants were stored at -80C until use. For labeling, each iTRAQ reagent was dissolved in 70 μl of ethanol and added to the respective peptide mixture. The samples were labeled as (9801SCR)-114, (9801Mock)-115, (P178SCR)-116, and (P178Mock)-117, and were multiplexed and vacuum dried. he iTRAQ-labeled peptides were subjected to strong cation exchange chromatography using the AKTA Purifier 100 system (GE Healthcare). The dried peptide mixture was loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL column (4.6 × 100 mm; 5 µm; 200 Å) (PolyLCInc, MD, USA). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Buffer A consisted of 10 mM KH2PO4 and 25% acetonitrile, pH 3.0, while buffer B consisted of 500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4, and 25% acetonitrile, pH 3.0. The following gradient was used to elute the peptides: 100% buffer A for 22 min, 8–52% buffer B for 5 min, 52–100% buffer B for 3 min, and 100% buffer B for 8 min. Buffer B was then reset to 0% for 15 min. The elution was monitored by absorbance (214 nm), and fractions were collected every 1 min. The fractions were desalted on C18 cartridges and then concentrated by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry analysis Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry analysis was completed in 120 min using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to the EASY nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode. Mass spectrometry data were acquired using a data-dependent top-10 method, in which the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1,800 m/z) were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The automatic gain control target was set to 3e6, while the maximum injection time was 10 ms and the dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (m/z 200), and the resolution for the HCD spectra was set to 17,500 (m/z 200). Additionally, the isolation window was 2 m/z, and ions were fragmented by HCD, with normalized collision energies of 30 eV. The underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%. Protein identification and quantification Raw data files were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 program (Thermo Scientific). The fragmentation spectra were analyzed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.2; Matrix Science, London, UK). Searches involved the decoy database and UniProt Plant database (http://www.uniprot.org) containing 132,441 sequences.The search parameters were as follows: peptide mass tolerance: ±20 ppm; MS/MS tolerance: ±0.1 Da; two missed cleavages allowed; and enzyme: trypsin. Protein identifications and quantifications were supported by at least two unique peptides. The results were filtered based on a maximum false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Southern corn rust (SCR), which is a destructive disease caused by Puccinia polysora Underw. (P.&#xa0;polysora), commonly occurs in warm-temperate and tropical regions. To identify candidate proteins related to SCR resistance and characterize the molecular mechanisms underlying the maize-P.&#xa0;polysora interaction, a comparative proteomic analysis of susceptible and resistant maize lines was performed. Statistical analyses revealed 1489 differentially abundant proteins in the resistant line, as well as 1035 differentially abundant proteins in the susceptible line. After the P.&#xa0;polysora infection, the abundance of one remorin protein (ZmREM1.3) increased in the resistant genotype, but decreased in the susceptible genotype. Plant-specific remorins are important for responses to microbial infections as well as plant signalling processes. In this study, transgenic maize plants overexpressing ZmREM1.3 exhibited enhanced resistance to the biotrophic P.&#xa0;polysora. In contrast, homozygous ZmREM1.3 UniformMu mutant plants were significantly more susceptible to P.&#xa0;polysora than wild-type plants. Additionally, the ZmREM1.3-overexpressing plants accumulated more salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA). Moreover, the expression levels of defence-related genes were higher in ZmREM1.3-overexpressing maize plants than in non-transgenic control plants in response to the P.&#xa0;polysora infection. Overall, our results provide evidence that ZmREM1.3 positively regulates maize defences against P.&#xa0;polysora likely via SA/JA-mediated defence signalling pathways. This study represents the first large-scale proteomic analysis of the molecular mechanisms underlying the maize-P.&#xa0;polysora interaction. This is also the first report confirming the remorin protein family affects plant resistance to SCR.

### Keywords
Southern corn rust, Proteomic, Maize

### Affiliations
Henan agricultural university
Henan agricultural university, China

### Submitter
Shunxi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Liuji Wu
Henan agricultural university, China


