### Accession
PXD016515

### Title
Mouse Brain LC-MSMS. To identify the heterogeneity of aBLA and pBLA.

### Description
To identify the heterogeneity of aBLA and pBLA at protein level, TMT labeled-Quantitative Proteomics strategy was applied.

### Sample Protocol
The aBLA and pBLA were excised and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. After tissue lysis, aBLA and pBLA were digested (200 μg for each sample). Peptides were labelled with TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each aliquot (100 μg of peptide equivalent) was reacted with one tube of TMT reagent. After the sample was dissolved in 100 μL of 0.05 M TEAB solution, pH 8.5, the TMT reagent was dissolved in 41 μL of anhydrous acetonitrile. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Then, 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine was added to the sample and incubated for 15 min to quench the reaction. The multiplex-labelled samples were pooled together and lyophilized. The TMT-labelled peptide mixture was fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 column (C18, 3.5 μm, 2.1 × 150 mm) on an Agilent 1290 HPLC operating at 0.3 mL/min. The fractions were collected for each peptide mixture and then concatenated (pooling equal interval RPLC fractions). The fractions were dried for nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting LC-MS/MS raw files were imported into MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16) for data interpretation and protein identification against the database UniProt_Mouse (downloaded on 28/01/2019, including 86520 protein sequences), which is sourced from the protein database at https://www.uniprot.org. To reduce false positive identification results, a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% were required for all reported PSM, peptide and proteins. Finally, analyses of bioinformatics data were carried out with Perseus software, Microsoft Excel and R statistical computing software. Differentially significant expressed proteins were screened with the cut-off of a ratio fold-change of >1.20 or <0.83 and P-values < 0.05. GO enrichment analyses were carried out with Fisher’s exact test, and FDR correction for multiple testing was also performed.

### Publication Abstract
The basolateral amygdala (BLA) and ventral hippocampal CA1 (vCA1) are cellularly and functionally diverse along their anterior-posterior and superficial-deep axes. Here, we find that anterior BLA (aBLA) and posterior BLA (pBLA) innervate deep-layer calbindin1-negative (Calb1-) and superficial-layer calbindin1-positive neurons (Calb1+) in vCA1, respectively. Photostimulation of pBLA-vCA1 inputs has an anxiolytic effect in mice, promoting approach behaviours during conflict exploratory tasks. By contrast, stimulating aBLA-vCA1 inputs induces anxiety-like behaviour resulting in fewer approaches. During conflict stages of the elevated plus maze task vCA1<sup>Calb1+</sup> neurons are preferentially activated at the open-to-closed arm transition, and photostimulation of vCA1<sup>Calb1+</sup> neurons at decision-making zones promotes approach with fewer retreats. In the APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease, which shows anxiety-like behaviour, photostimulating the&#xa0;pBLA-vCA1<sup>Calb1+</sup> circuit ameliorates the anxiety in a&#xa0;Calb1-dependent manner. These findings suggest the&#xa0;pBLA-vCA1<sup>Calb1+</sup> circuit from heterogeneous BLA-vCA1 connections drives approach behaviour to reduce anxiety-like behaviour.

### Keywords
Brain, Tissue, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
HUST

### Submitter
Ying Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Yang
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China


