### Accession
PXD030550

### Title
Glycoproteoforms of Integrins α2 and β1 in Megakaryocytes in the Occurrence of Primary Myelofibrosis

### Description
Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is a myeloproliferative neoplasm prone to leukemic transformation, for which limited treatment is available. Amongst individuals diagnosed with PMF, the most prevalent mutation is the JAK2V617F somatic point mutation that activates the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) enzyme. Our earlier reports on hyperactivity of β1 integrin and enhanced adhesion activity of the α2β1 complex in JAK2V617F megakaryocytes (MKs) led us to examine the new hypothesis that this mutation leads to post-translational modification via changes in glycosylation. Samples were derived from immunoprecipitation of MKs obtained from Vav1-hJAK2V617F and wild type mice. Immunoprecipitated fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed using LC-MS/MS techniques in a bottom-up glycoproteomics workflow. In the immunoprecipitate, glycopeptiforms corresponding to 11 out of the 12 potential N-glycosylation sites of integrin β1, and to all nine potential glycosylation sites of integrin α2, were observed. Glycopeptiforms were compared across WT and JAK2V617F phenotypes for both integrins. The overall trend observed is that JAK2V617F mutation in PMF MKs leads to changes in β1 glycosylation; in most cases, it results in an increase in the integrated area of glycopeptiforms. We also observed that, in mutated MKs, changes in integrin α2 glycosylation were more substantial than those observed for integrin β1 glycosylation, a finding that suggests that altered integrin α2 glycosylation may also affect activation. Additionally, the identification of proteins associated to the cytoskeleton that were co-immunoprecipitated with integrins α2 and β1 demonstrated the potential of the methodology employed in this study to provide some insight, at the peptide level, into the consequences of integrin activation in MKs. The extensive and detailed glycosylation patterns we uncovered provide a basis for future functional studies of each site in control cells as compared to JAK2V617F mutated cells.

### Sample Protocol
All samples analyzed were derived from a Vav1-hJAK2V617F mouse colony and age-, sex, genotype-matching controls (wild type mice). Three biological replicates, in each case 3.08 x 105 – 1.80 x 106 megakaryocytes obtained after culture of cells from the bone marrow obtained from the hind limbs of 3-5 mice, age 12-16 weeks, were performed at approximately four-month intervals; no technical replicate was acquired for the mass spectrometric data due to the limited amount of these samples and the resulting very small pools of integrins isolated from the mouse megakaryocytes. For each phenotype, the sample was separated into three aliquots based on migration along an SDS-PAGE gel and each of the bands was subjected to in-gel proteolytic digestion (reported as upper and lower 100-150 kDa, 150-250 kDa in Supplemental Tables 1 and 2) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, thus any given sample was characterized by three raw data files.

### Data Protocol
The protein content of unbound fractions from the ZIC-HILIC enrichment for glycopeptides and lysate fractions for both MK and PLT samples was evaluated using Peaks Studio X+ software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). Data were searched against the UniProt protein database for Mus musculus (54,424 validated proteins, May 2019). Data were searched with 10-ppm error tolerance for precursor ions and 0.02-Da mass error tolerance for fragment ions. The protease was specified as Trypsin/Lys-C, allowing a maximum of three missed cleavages in the semi-specific digestion mode. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was chosen as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, pyroglutamic acid from amino-terminal glutamine and deamidation of asparagine were set as variable modifications, with a maximum of three variable modifications per peptide. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using the decoy fusion method. Protein search results were filtered with a -10 logP minimum score of 20 and two unique peptides; peptide search results were filtered at 0.1% false discovery rate (FDR). Data obtained from glycopeptide-enriched samples (from the co-IP fractions) were analyzed using Byonic version 3.8-11 software (Protein Metrics, Cupertino, CA). For each LC-MS/MS run, data were searched against the UniProt protein database for Mus musculus (54,424 validated proteins, May 2019) and sequences for mouse integrins α2 and β1 in three separate searches. (Once the presence of a glycoprotein is established, searching against a focused database greatly decreases the search space, and this maximizes the number of possible glycoproteoforms retrieved). Digestion and instrument search parameters used for Byonic searches were identical to the ones used in Peaks Studio X+ software. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as the rare 1 modification and deamidation of asparagine as the rare 2 modification, with a maximum of two total rare modifications. The Byonic glycan database of 309 N-glycans was used as common glycan modification; no sodium adduction was considered. The protein search results were filtered to 1% FDR. Glycopeptides identified by Byonic were examined manually, and the only matches accepted as valid were those for which both oxonium ions and at least two full-length peptide ions with one N-acetyl hexosamine or multiple saccharide units attached were present in the spectrum. Integrated areas, obtained from extracted ion chromatograms corresponding to the glycopeptiforms of interest were reported manually. In order to compare glycopeptiforms in myelofibrotic mice to WT, the total signal corresponding to the sum of all glycopeptiforms that span each N-linked site was normalized to the total ion current for each of the biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is a neoplasm prone to leukemic transformation, for which limited treatment is available. Among individuals diagnosed with PMF, the most prevalent mutation is the JAK2V617F somatic point mutation that activates the Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) enzyme. Our earlier reports on hyperactivity of &#x3b2;1 integrin and enhanced adhesion activity of the &#x3b1;2&#x3b2;1 complex in JAK2V617F megakaryocytes (MKs) led us to examine the new hypothesis that this mutation leads to posttranslational modification via changes in glycosylation. Samples were derived from immunoprecipitation of MKs obtained from Vav1-hJAK2<sup>V617F</sup> and WT mice. Immunoprecipitated fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed using LC-MS/MS techniques in a bottom-up glycoproteomics workflow. In the immunoprecipitate, glycopeptiforms corresponding to 11 out of the 12 potential N-glycosylation sites of integrin &#x3b2;1 and to all nine potential glycosylation sites of integrin &#x3b1;2 were observed. Glycopeptiforms were compared across WT and JAK2V617F phenotypes for both integrins. The overall trend observed is that JAK2V617F mutation in PMF MKs leads to changes in &#x3b2;1 glycosylation; in most cases, it results in an increase in the integrated area of glycopeptiforms. We also observed that in mutated MKs, changes in integrin &#x3b1;2 glycosylation were more substantial than those observed for integrin &#x3b2;1 glycosylation, a finding that suggests that altered integrin &#x3b1;2 glycosylation may also affect activation. Additionally, the identification of proteins associated to the cytoskeleton that were co-immunoprecipitated with integrins &#x3b1;2 and &#x3b2;1 demonstrated the potential of the methodology employed in this study to provide some insight, at the peptide level, into the consequences of integrin activation in MKs. The extensive and detailed glycosylation patterns we uncovered provide a basis for future functional studies of each site in control cells as compared to JAK2V617F-mutated cells. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD030550.

### Keywords
Integrins; megakaryocytes; primary myelofibrosis; lc-ms/ms; glycopeptiforms

### Affiliations
Boston University, School of Medicine
Boston University School of Medicine

### Submitter
MAISSA GAYE

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine E. Costello
Boston University, School of Medicine


