### Accession
PXD007113

### Title
A novel mobile genomic island: introducing ‘cephalosporinase morons’  in Enterobacteriaceae

### Description
The exchange of mobile genomic islands (MGIs) between microorganisms is often mediated by phages. As a consequence, not only phage genes are transferred, but also genes that have no particular function in the phage's lysogenic cycle. If they provide benefits to the phage's host, such genes are referred to as ‘morons’. The present study was aimed at characterizing a set of Enterobacter cloacae, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli isolates with exceptional antibiotic resistance phenotypes from patients in a neonatal ward. Unexpectedly, these analyses unveiled the existence of a novel family of closely related MGIs in Enterobacteriaceae. The respective MGI from E. cloacae was named MIR17-GI. Importantly, our observations show that MIR17-GI-like MGIs harbor genes associated with high-level resistance to cephalosporins. Further, we show that MIR17-GI-like islands are associated with integrated P4-like prophages. This implicates phages in the spread of cephalosporin resistance amongst Enterobacteriaceae. The discovery of a novel family of MGIs spreading ‘cephalosporinase morons’ is of high clinical relevance, because high-level cephalosporin resistance has serious implications for the treatment of patients with Enterobacteriaceal infections.

### Sample Protocol
E. cloacae isolates 1 and 2 were cultured in triplicate in brain heart infusion broth (BHI; Oxoid, Basingstoke, UK) at 37 oC with vigorous shaking at 250 rpm. For sample preparation, cells were collected in the mid-exponential and stationary growth phases by centrifugation and disrupted by bead-beating with glass beads (~0.1 mm diameter) in a Precellys 24 homogenisator (PeqLab). Glass beads and cell debris were removed by centrifugation (21,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C).

### Data Protocol
The cell extract protein fraction was prepared and analyzed by liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) as described previously (Bonn F, Pané-Farré J, Schlüter R, Schaffer M, Fuchs S, Bernhardt J, Riedel K, Otto A, Völker U, van Dijl JM, Hecker M, Mäder U, Becher D. Global analysis of the impact of linezolid onto virulence factor production in S. aureus USA300. Int J Med Microbiol. 2016 May;306(3):131-40.). Briefly, desalted peptides were loaded on an EASY-nLC™ II nano-flow LC system (ThermoFisher) with 10 µl buffer A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) and a constant flow rate of 0.5 µL/min. Afterwards, the peptides were separated by reversed phase chromatography with a 155 min non-linear gradient from 1 to 50 % buffer B (0.1 % (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a constant flow rate of 0.3 µl/min and injected online into the mass spectrometer. The 20 most abundant precursor ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation after a survey scan in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 and activated lockmass correction. MS/MS scans were recorded in the dual pressure linear ion trap after fragmentation was performed for 10 ms with a normalized collision energy of 35. Data analysis was performed according to Bonn et al. (F Bonn, J Bartel, K Büttner, M Hecker, A Otto, D Becher Analytical chemistry 86 (15), 7421-7427). In brief, database searching was done with Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, USA). After data extraction from raw files, the *.dta files were searched with Sequest against a target-decoy database with a set of common laboratory contaminants. A non-redundant database for peptide/protein searches was created from the genome sequences of isolate 1 (339389L) and isolate 2 (141024K), which was downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org) on 23rd of october 2015 (Supplementary FASTA file in originla publication). The used database includes protein sequences that differ in at least 1 amino acid, and it contains 30486 proteins in total. Database search was based on strict trypsin digestion, permitting two missed cleavages. Fixed modifications were not considered. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were considered as variable modifications. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm, and for fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Validation of the MS/MS-based peptide and protein identification was performed with Scaffold v.4.4.1.1 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA). Peptide identifications were only accepted if they exceeded the following specific database search engine thresholds: the SEQUEST identifications required at least deltaCn scores of > 0.1 and XCorr scores of > 2.2, 3.3 and 3.7 for doubly, triply and all higher charged peptides, respectively. Protein identifications were accepted if at least 2 identified peptides were detected with above mentioned filter criteria in 2 out of 3 biological replicates. This resulted in a false-positive identification rate (FPR) below 0.2% on protein level as was verified by a search against a concatenated target-pseudoreversed decoy database. The protein data as obtained with Scaffold were transferred to Microsoft Excel 2010 for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The exchange of mobile genomic islands (MGIs) between microorganisms is often mediated by phages, which may provide benefits to the phage's host. The present study started with the identification of Enterobacter cloacae, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli isolates with exceptional cephalosporin and carbapenem resistance phenotypes from patients in a neonatal ward. To identify possible molecular connections between these isolates and their &#x3b2;-lactam resistance phenotypes, the respective bacterial genome sequences were compared. This unveiled the existence of a family of ancient MGIs that were probably exchanged before the species E. cloacae, K. pneumoniae and E. coli emerged from their common ancestry. A representative MGI&#xa0;from E. cloacae was named MIR17-GI, because it harbors the novel &#x3b2;-lactamase gene variant bla<sub>MIR17</sub>. Importantly, our observations show that the MIR17-GI-like MGIs harbor genes associated with high-level resistance to cephalosporins. Among them, MIR17-GI stands out because MIR17 also displays carbapenemase activity. As shown by mass spectrometry, the MIR17 carbapenemase is among the most abundantly expressed proteins of the respective E. cloacae isolate. Further, we show that MIR17-GI-like islands are associated with integrated P4-like prophages. This implicates phages in the spread of cephalosporin and carbapenem resistance amongst Enterobacteriaceae. The discovery of an ancient family of MGIs, mediating the spread of cephalosporinase and carbapenemase genes, is of high clinical relevance, because high-level cephalosporin and carbapenem resistance have serious implications for the treatment of patients with enterobacteriaceal infections.

### Keywords
"mobile genomic islands ", "cephalosporin resistance ", Enterobacteriaceae

### Affiliations
Dr. Andreas Otto Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald  phone: +49 3834 4205920 fax:        +49 3834 4205902
Institute for Microbiology

### Submitter
Andreas Otto

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Otto
Dr. Andreas Otto Institute for Microbiology Department of Microbial Proteomics Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald F.-L.-Jahn-Str. 15 17489 Greifswald  phone: +49 3834 4205920 fax:        +49 3834 4205902


