### Accession
PXD025484

### Title
Peripheral blood proteomic signature of newly diagnosed prostate cancer

### Description
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common malignant tumour, with high incidence rates and heterogeneity in men around the world. It is becoming an increasing burden on the health care system due to lack of tests for precise detection of disease, risk assessment and response to treatments. We used SWATH-MS as a discovery proteomics tool to identify markers in the serum of newly diagnosed PCa patients and healthy controls to facilitate the improved diagnosis. Furthermore, identification and expression of proteins was also determined in patients undergone radiotherapy  and prostatectomy  for monitoring of the clinical response to respective treatment options. Thus, this study provides the basis for a proteomic signature to improve diagnostics of patients with localised prostate cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Serum samples were prepared according to the Stoller Biomarker Discovery Centre standard serum proteomic methodology (McGurk et al., 2020). 10µL of serum sample was used to extract peptides for each MS run. Highly abundant serum proteins were depleted from each sample using a Pierce™ Top 12 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns following manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead).

### Data Protocol
Data independent acquisition (DIA)/SWATH-MS was performed using 100 variable precursor windows optimised for analysis of digested peptides from human serum samples. An ultra-high–performance liquid chromatography system (Eksigent ekspert nanoLC 400 autosampler and an Eksigent ekspert nanoLC 425 pump, AB SCIEX Ltd, UK) coupled to a SCIEX Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer with a DuoSpray Ion Source (AB SCIEX Ltd, UK) was employed. Complete description of the data acquisition method is available in (McGurk et al., 2020). Raw data files (wiff) were searched against a purpose-built PCa serum library (acquired through Data-dependent acquisition MS) using openSWATH (version 2.0.0) (Navarro et al., 2016). SWATH2Stats package (Bioconductor packages release 3.11) (Blattmann et al., 2016) was used to annotate the feature alignment file. The resultant data was imported to MSstats (MSstats. release 3.11), to convert into relative protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer is the most common malignant tumour in men. Improved testing for diagnosis, risk prediction, and response to treatment would improve care. Here, we identified a proteomic signature of prostate cancer in peripheral blood using data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry combined with machine learning. A highly predictive signature was derived, which was associated with relevant pathways, including the coagulation, complement, and clotting cascades, as well as plasma lipoprotein particle remodeling. We further validated the identified biomarkers against a second cohort, identifying a panel of five key markers (GP5, SERPINA5, ECM1, IGHG1, and THBS1) which retained most of the diagnostic power of the overall dataset, achieving an AUC of 0.91. Taken together, this study provides a proteomic signature complementary to PSA for the diagnosis of patients with localised prostate cancer, with the further potential for assessing risk of future development of prostate cancer. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025484.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Biomarkers, Swath-ms, Prostate cancer, Clinical onset

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Stoller Biomarker Discovery Center, University of Manchester, Manchester, England

### Submitter
AMMARA MUAZZAM

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Whetton
Stoller Biomarker Discovery Center, University of Manchester, Manchester, England


