### Accession
PXD043478

### Title
Ctenophore organic matter degradation experiment

### Description
Microcosm experiment on degradation of organic matter from M. Leidyi by marine bacteria

### Sample Protocol
For analyses of endo-metaproteomes, biomass was collected onto 0.22 µm polycarbonate filters. Protein extraction from collected cells was performed as follows: filters were ground into small pieces with a sterile metal spatula after submerging the tubes with the filters into liquid nitrogen. Filter pieces were resuspended in lysis buffer (100mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1% SDS, 150mM NaCl, 1mM DTT, 10mM EDTA) and cells were lysed with five freeze-and-thaw cycles. After centrifugation (20,000 g at 4°C for 25 min) the supernatant was transferred into a tube and proteins were co-precipitated with 0.015% deoxycholate and 7% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) on ice for 1h and washed twice with ice-cold acetone. Dried protein pellets were resuspended with 50 mM TEAB buffer (Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA, USA) and quantified using Pierce 660nm Protein Assay Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Next, cysteines were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), respectively. For analyses of exo-metaproteomes, the filtrate (< 0.22 µm) of each sample was concentrated using a VivaFlow 200 (Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) with 30 KDa and 5 KDa Molecular Weight Cut-Off (MWCO) to collect the high molecular weight (30 KDa - 0.22 μm) and the low molecular weight (5 KDa - 30 KDa) fraction, respectively. The high and low molecular-weight fractions were further concentrated to 250 μL using an Amicon (Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA, USA) Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter 30 KDa MWCO and 3 KDa MWCO Unit.  All samples (endo- and exo-metaproteomes) were re-precipitated using 9 times the sample volume of 96% EtOH at -20°C overnight. Pellets were resuspended in 50 mM TEAB, followed by overnight in-solution trypsin (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) digestion (1:100, w/w) at 37°C. TFA was added to the samples at 1% final concentration to terminate trypsin digestion. Samples were desalted using Pierce C18 Tips (ThermoFisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Prior the LC MS/MS analyses, digested peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile and transferred into micro-inserts sealed with aluminum caps.

### Data Protocol
The resulting peptides were sequenced on a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) at the Vienna Research Platform for Metabolomics & Proteomics and analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer v2.2.0.388 (ThermoFisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) at the Life Science Computer Cluster (LiSC) of the University of Vienna. The tandem mass spectrometry spectra of proteins extracted from the Cteno-OM powder were searched using MASCOT v2.6.1 (Perkins et al., 1999) against the M. leidyi transcriptome shotgun assembly project (NCBI TSA accession number GFAT01000000). The tandem mass spectrometry spectra of proteins extracted from the microcosms and the seawater inoculum were searched using SEQUEST-HT against the bacterial protein coding genes of the co-assembled metagenome. Search parameters were as follows: enzyme - trypsin, fragment mass tolerance - 0.8 Da, max. missed cleavages - 2, fixed modifications - carbamidomethyl (Cys), optional modifications - oxidation (Met). Percolator parameters were as follows: max. delta Cn: 0.6, max. rank: 0, validation based on q-value, false discovery rate (calculated by automatic decoy searches) 0.05. Protein quantification was conducted using the chromatographic peak area-based label-free quantitative method.

### Publication Abstract
Blooms of gelatinous zooplankton, an important source of protein-rich biomass in coastal waters, often collapse rapidly, releasing large amounts of labile detrital organic matter (OM) into the surrounding water. Although these blooms have the potential to cause major perturbations in the marine ecosystem, their effects on the microbial community and hence on the biogeochemical cycles have yet to be elucidated. We conducted microcosm experiments simulating the scenario experienced by coastal bacterial communities after the decay of a ctenophore (<i>Mnemiopsis leidyi</i>) bloom in the northern Adriatic Sea. Within 24 h, a rapid response of bacterial communities to the <i>M. leidyi</i> OM was observed, characterized by elevated bacterial biomass production and respiration rates. However, compared to our previous microcosm study of jellyfish (<i>Aurelia aurita s.l</i>.), <i>M. leidyi</i> OM degradation was characterized by significantly lower bacterial growth efficiency, meaning that the carbon stored in the OM was mostly respired. Combined metagenomic and metaproteomic analysis indicated that the degradation activity was mainly performed by <i>Pseudoalteromonas</i>, producing a large amount of proteolytic extracellular enzymes and exhibiting high metabolic activity. Interestingly, the reconstructed metagenome-assembled genome (MAG) of <i>Pseudoalteromonas phenolica</i> was almost identical (average nucleotide identity &gt;99%) to the MAG previously reconstructed in our <i>A. aurita</i> microcosm study, despite the fundamental genetic and biochemical differences of the two gelatinous zooplankton species. Taken together, our data suggest that blooms of different gelatinous zooplankton are likely triggering a consistent response from natural bacterial communities, with specific bacterial lineages driving the remineralization of the gelatinous OM.IMPORTANCEJellyfish blooms are increasingly becoming a recurring seasonal event in marine ecosystems, characterized by a rapid build-up of gelatinous biomass that collapses rapidly. Although these blooms have the potential to cause major perturbations, their impact on marine microbial communities is largely unknown. We conducted an incubation experiment simulating a bloom of the ctenophore <i>Mnemiopsis leidyi</i> in the Northern Adriatic, where we investigated the bacterial response to the gelatinous biomass. We found that the bacterial communities actively degraded the gelatinous organic matter, and overall showed a striking similarity to the dynamics previously observed after a simulated bloom of the jellyfish <i>Aurelia aurita s.l</i>. In both cases, we found that a single bacterial species, <i>Pseudoalteromonas phenolica</i>, was responsible for most of the degradation activity. This suggests that blooms of different jellyfish are likely to trigger a consistent response from natural bacterial communities, with specific bacterial species driving the remineralization of gelatinous biomass.

### Keywords
Ctenophore, Lc-msms, Bacteria

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Dept. of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology, University of Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Edaurd  Fadeev

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard J
Dept. of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology, University of Vienna, Austria


