### Accession
PXD000973

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of calcium signaling

### Description
Calcium signaling plays a pivotal role in t cell activation through activation of kinases and phosphatases, but comprehensive analysis to overview calcium-induced phosphorylation has never been performed. To investigate Ca2+-mediated phosphorylation globally, we next undertook a phosphoproteomic analysis of calcium signaling, especially focused on the Ca2+-dependent phosphatase, calcineurin. Normal mouse thymocytes were stimulated in 4 different conditions; 1). DMSO, 2). CsA, 3). IOM, or 4). CsA and IOM, and compared their phosphorylation status.

### Sample Protocol
Thymocytes were lysed with TRIzol reagent according to manufacturer's instruction. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay and adjust to 3 mg/ml. After addition of 30 g of bovine casein (Sigma) as an internal control, samples were sequentially digested with Lys-C for 3 h and trypsin for 16 h at 37C. To block of cystein/cystine residue, the digested peptides were treated with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min at 37C, followed by alkylation with 12.5 mM iodoacetoamide for 30 min at room temperature. Resulting whole cell digests (WCD) were loaded onto C18 SepPAK (500 mg) and washed with 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile, eluted with 0.1 % TFA, 60% acetonitrile. Probond resin was used for IMAC media. To strip Ni3+ from Probond, resin was washed with 10 volumes of 50 mM EDTA, pH8.0, water, and 0.1% acetic acid. These resins were re-charged with 100 mM FeCl3 in 0.1% acetic acid and extensively washed with 0.1% acetic acid and finally with 0.1% TFA, 60% acetonitrile. Whole cell digest obtained as above, were mixed with Fe-Probond resin and rotated for 60 min at room temperature. Suspensions were transferred into disposable column and quickly centrifuged for 1 min at 800 g. Column was washed with three volumes of 0.1% TFA, 60% acetonitrile two times, with equal volumes of 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile. Phosphopeptides were eluted with three volumes of 1% phosphate, followed by desalting with SepPAK C18 (100 mg). Resulting peptides were dried and dissolved in iTRAQ labeling buffer. Each one vial of iTRAQ reagents were used to label single sample. Labeling was succeed for 2 h at room temperature, and terminated by addition of three volumes of water following incubation for 1 h at room temperature.  Labeled peptides were mixed and fractionated on a strong cation exchange chromatography column (MiniS and SMART system) using a linear salt gradient 0-10% B for 15 min, 10-40% B for 9 min, 40-100% B for 5 min (A: 5 mM potassium phosphate buffer salt, 25% ACN at pH3.3, B: 5 mM potassium phosphate buffer salt, 25% ACN, 5M potassium chloride at pH3.3) at a flow rate of 50 l/min.

### Data Protocol
Peak list was obtained by the script in Analyst QS 2.0. MASCOT search was performed against IPI mouse version 3.44 (IPI, European Bioinformatics Institute) with following parameter settings: Trypsin was selected as enzyme used, allowed number of missed cleavages was set 2 and iTRAQ-label on N-terminus and Lys, carbamidomethylation on Cys were selected as fixed modification. Oxidized methionine, iTRAQ-label on Tyr, Pyroglutamination of amino-terminus glutamine and glutamate, and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
A key issue in the study of signal transduction is how multiple signaling pathways are systematically integrated into the cell. We have now performed multiple phosphoproteomics analyses focused on the dynamics of the T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling network and its subsystem mediated by the Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling pathway. Integration of these phosphoproteomics data sets and extraction of components of the TCR signaling network dependent on Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling showed unexpected phosphorylation kinetics for candidate substrates of the Ca<sup>2+</sup> -dependent phosphatase calcineurin (CN) during TCR stimulation. Detailed characterization of the TCR-induced phosphorylation of a novel CN substrate, Itpkb, showed that phosphorylation of this protein is regulated by both CN and the mitogen-activated protein kinase Erk in a competitive manner. Phosphorylation of additional CN substrates was also found to be regulated by Erk and CN in a similar manner. The combination of multiple phosphoproteomics approaches thus showed two major subsystems mediated by Erk and CN in the TCR signaling network, with these subsystems regulating the phosphorylation of a group of proteins in a competitive manner.

### Keywords
Calcium signaling, Calcineurin, Mouse thymocytes, Itraq

### Affiliations
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University 
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University

### Submitter
Atsushi Hatano

### Lab Head
Dr Keiichi I. Nakayama
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University


