### Accession
PXD008090

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of Barley Spent Grains

### Description
Proteomic profiling was performed on barley spent grain. Spent grain from malted barley and from raw barley supplemented with exogenous enzymes were profiled.

### Sample Protocol
Spent grain samples from processes using malted barley (SGA) and non-malted barley supplemented with exogenous enzymes (SGB) were milled in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized. Proteins in the spent grain were processed in the filter-assisted sample preparation(FASP) method as described by Wisniewski et al. (2009) Nat Methods 6(5):359-62 doi:10.1038/nmeth.132. In brief, the sample was extracted using SDS extraction buffer, reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin on 30kDa cut-off regenerated cellulose membrane.  LC-MSMS was performed on nanoAcquity HPLC (Waters, SG) coupled to LTQ orbitrap Elite MS (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC BEH130 C 18 column(1.7 µm, 75 µm × 200 mm)operating at 35°C using mobile phases A: 0.1% formic acid and B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile on a gradient of 5-40% B in 105 min and 40-90% B in 5 min at a flow rate of 0.3 µl/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap Elite was set to obtain the top 15 peaks in a data dependent scan at 120,000 resolution from 250 to 1800m/z. CID MS/MS was obtained with normalized collision energy of 35.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files was searched against barley (Hordeum vulgare L) database extracted from NCBI (38557 relevant entries, downloaded on 6 Feb 2017) using sequestHT in Proteome Discoverer. Trypsin with up to 2 mis-cleavages was specified. Peptides were filtered to range from 6 to 150 amino acids. Peptide and fragment ion mass tolerances were set at ± 10 ppm and ± 0.6 Da respectively.  Dynamic modifications of oxidation on methionine and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, and static modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteine were defined in the search parameters. A maximum of 3 modifications per peptide was also defined. Percolator node was performed after the search.  Maxquant (version 1.5.2.8) was used for label free quantification. Fixed modification of carbamidomethylation to cysteine residues and variable modifications of oxidation (to methionine residues) and acetylation (to the protein N-terminal) were specified and search against the same barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) database and a common contaminants database supplied by Maxquant. Search Tolerances were specificed as FTMS at 10ppm and ITMS at 0.5Da. Minimum ratio count was set to 1 and ‘matching between runs’ was enabled. FDR of 1% was used to filtered protein identifications and quantification was based on razor and unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Within the brewing industry, malted barley is being increasingly replaced by raw barley supplemented with exogenous enzymes to lessen reliance on the time-consuming, high water and energy cost of malting. Regardless of the initial grain of choice, malted or raw, the resultant bulk spent grains are rich in proteins (up to 25% dry weight). Efficient enzymatic solubilization of these proteins requires knowledge of the protein composition within the spent grains. Therefore, a comprehensive proteomic profiling was performed on spent grains derived from (i) malted barley (spent grain A, SGA) and (ii) enzymatically treated raw barley (spent grain B, SGB); data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008090. Results from complementary shotgun proteomics and 2D gel electrophoresis showed that the most abundant proteins in both spent grains were storage proteins (hordeins and embryo globulins); these were present at an average of two fold higher in spent grain B. Quantities of other major proteins were generally consistent in both spent grains A and B. Subsequent in silico protein sequence analysis of the predominant proteins facilitated knowledge-based protease selection to enhance spent grain solubilization. Among tested proteases, Alcalase 2.4&#xa0;L digestion resulted in the highest remaining protein solubilization with 9.2 and 11.7% net dry weight loss in SGA and SGB respectively within 2&#xa0;h. Thus, Alcalase alone can significantly reduce spent grain side stream, which makes it a possible solution to increase the value of this low-value side stream from the brewing and malt extract beverage manufacturing industry.

### Keywords
Barley, Spent grain

### Affiliations
Proteomics at Bioprocessing Technology Institute in Singapore
Bioprocessing Technology Institute

### Submitter
Daniel Ng

### Lab Head
Dr Xuezhi Bi
Proteomics at Bioprocessing Technology Institute in Singapore


