### Accession
PXD017219

### Title
Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase SHP2 Controls Interleukin-8 Expression in Breast Cancer Cells

### Description
Our work highlights a new role of SHP2 in regulating breast cancer progression by enhancing the production and secretion of the pro-metastatic cytokine IL-8. We also provide mechanistic insights into the effects of SHP2 inhibition and its downstream repercussions. Overall, this work enforces the rational for targeting SHP2 in breast cancer in order to reduce local invasion and block the metastatic potential of neoplastic cells.

### Sample Protocol
SUM159 cells were cultured in 500cm² Square TC-treated Culture Dish (Corning) until reaching 65% confluence. Three plates have been treated with 10 µM of SHP099 at the indicated time points. After rinsing plates with ice-cold PBS twice, we collected cells with 2% sodium deoxycholate in 50mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.5) using a cell scraper. The cell lysate was sonicated using a Branson digital tip sonicator for 1min at 70% amplitude on ice followed by 5min incubation at 95°C. Proteins were reduced and alkylated for 30min in a dark using 5mM TCEP and 5mM chloroacetamide, respectively. The samples were four fold diluted using 50mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.5) and digested overnight with LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 1:100 ratio. In the next morning, samples were supplemented with Trypsin (ThermoFisher) at 1:100 ratio and incubated for 24h at 37 °C. The digestion was quenched by adding 10% TFA to a final concentration of 1% TFA. The peptides were cleared by centrifugation for 5 min at 7000 g and purified using a SEP-PAK (Waters) and eluted in 50 % acetonitrile in water.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher) as described in the manufactures instruction. Briefly, Sequest search engine was used to search the MS2 spectra against the Homo sapiens UniProt database (downloaded on 04/04/2017) supplemented with common contaminating proteins. For total proteome analysis cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT tags on lysine and peptide N-termini were set as static modifications, whereas oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. For phosphorylated peptides enriched samples analysis serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation were set as variable modifications while other modifications were set the same as for the proteome analysis. The assignments of the MS2 scans were filtered to allow 1% FDR. For reporter quantification the S/N values were corrected for isotopic impurities of the TMT reagent using the values provided by the manufacturer. The sums across all TMT reporter channels were normalized assuming equal total protein content in each sample for proteome analysis, whereas for phosphorylated peptide analysis normalization was based on total amount of phosphorylated peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shp2, Cytokines, Breast cancer, Mapk, Phosphatase, Il-8, Ets1

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedicine (DBM), University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Vytautas Iesmantavicius

### Lab Head
Dr Mohamed Bentires-Alj
Department of Biomedicine (DBM), University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland


