### Accession
PXD007130

### Title
Microenvironment remodeling during human iPSC-derived NSC 3D differentiation

### Description
Brain microenvironment plays an important role in neurodevelopment and function, where extracellular matrix (ECM) components and soluble factors modulate cellular features, as migration, proliferation survival and neuronal function. Disruption of microenvironment’s homeostasis is often related to pathological conditions. Here, we addressed the microenvironment remodeling occurring during in vitro differentiation of human neural stem cells (NSC) in a three-dimensional (3D) culture system. Proteome and transcriptome dynamics revealed significant changes namely at cell membrane and ECM composition during 3D differentiation, diverging significantly from the profile of monolayer cultures (2D). Structural proteoglycans typically found in brain ECM were enriched during 3D differentiation, while 2D cultures presented increased levels of basement membrane constituents (e.g., laminins, collagens and fibrillins). Moreover, higher expression levels of synaptic machinery and ion transport machinery constituents observed for 3D cultures, both at mRNA and protein levels, suggested a higher degree of neuronal maturation and organization relative to 2D differentiation. This work demonstrated that neural cellular and extracellular features can be recapitulated in the presented 3D neural cell model, highlighting its value to address molecular defects in cell-ECM interactions associated with neurological disorders. 
<html>
<head>
Associated GEO dataset is available at
</head>
<body>
<a href="https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi">GSE102139</a>
</body>
</html> 

### Sample Protocol
Samples from 3D cultures were directly harvested from the bioreactor. 2D differentiated cells were harvested by gentle mechanical dislodgment using a cell scrapper. Cells were then sedimented by centrifugation at 300 xg, 5 min. Supernatant was discarded and resulting cell pellet was washed with PBS, followed by centrifugation at 300 xg, 5 min. Cells were lysed in Triton X-100 lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 (all from Sigma-Aldrich) and 1x complete protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche)), for 45 minutes at 4ºC. Protein quantification was performed using Micro BCA™ Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins were precipitated using methanol, as previously described (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). Briefly, proteins were precipitated in four-fold excess of methanol, centrifuged at 9 000 xg for 10 seconds and followed by the addition of 2 parts of chloroform with subsequent centrifugation. For phase separation, 3 parts of deionized water were added to the samples, homogenized by vigorous vortex and centrifuged at 9 000 xg for 1 min. The upper phase was discarded and 3 parts of methanol were added. Samples were mixed, and centrifuged at 9 000 xg for 2 min to pellet precipitated protein. Supernatant was removed and precipitates were dried by heating at 60 °C with lids slightly ajar. For surfactant assisted in-solution protein digestion, precipitated proteins were solubilized in 0.1% of RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters). Prior to digestion, samples were reduced with 5 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 mins at 60 °C, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in dark and boiled at 100 °C for 5 mins. After cooling to room temperature, protein digestion was performed by overnight incubation with trypsin (Promega; 1.2 μg per 100 μg protein) at 37 °C. Trypsin inactivation was achieved by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) at 0.5 % and incubation at 37 °C for 45 min. Samples were centrifuged at 16 000 xg for 10 min, supernatants were collected into new tubes and dried using a Savant™ Universal SpeedVac™ concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Seven samples from different experimental group were used for information-dependent acquisition (IDA) analysis by NanoLC-MS using TripleTOF 6600 (ABSciex, Framingham, MA, USA). A reversed phase nanoLC with a trap and elution configuration, using a Nano cHiPLC Trap column (200 μm × 0.5 mm ChromXP C18-CL 3 μm 120 Å) and nano column (75 μm × 15 cm ChromXP C18-CL 3 μm 120 Å) was performed. Water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent B) were used. Sample was loaded in the trap column at a flow rate of 2 μL.min-1 for 10 min using 100% (v/v) solvent A. Peptide separation was performed in the nano column at a flow rate of 300 μL.min-1 applying a 90 min linear gradient of 5% to 30% (v/v) of solvent B. Each sample was subjected to two IDA runs. The mass spectrometer was set for IDA scanning full spectra (400–2000 m/z) for 250 ms. The top 50 ions were selected for subsequent MS/MS scans (150–1800 m/z for 40 ms each) using a total cycle time of 2.3 s. The selection criteria for parent ions included a charge state between +2 and +5, and counts above a minimum threshold of 125 counts per second. Ions were excluded from further MS/MS analysis for 12 s. Fragmentation was performed using rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread of 5. The spectral library was created by combining all IDA raw files using ProteinPilot™ software (v5.0 ABSciex) with the Paragon algorithm and with the following search parameters: search against Homo sapiens from Uniprot/SwissProt database (release 2015_05); trypsin digestion; iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation; through identification efforts. After a false discovery rate (FDR) analysis, only FDR<1% were considered (3272 proteins). The output of these searches, in the form of a group file, was used as the reference spectral library. An extended spectral library was built by merging the spectral library containing the IDA runs with an in-house spectral library of human samples, using SwathXtend R package (Wu and Pascovici, 2015). This spectral ion library contains 5458 proteins.  For quantitative analysis, 2.5 μg of each sample were subjected to three SWATH runs (Sequential Windowed data independent Acquisitions of the Total High-resolution Mass Spectra). Similar chromatographic conditions to the previously described IDA runs were used. The mass spectrometer was operated in a cyclic product ion data independent acquisition (DIA). A variable windows calculator and SWATH acquisition method editor (AB SCIEX) were used to setup the SWATH acquisition. A set of 32 overlapping windows (containing 1 m/z for the window overlap) was constructed, covering the precursor mass range of 400 – 1200 m/z. A 50 ms survey scan was acquired at the beginning of each cycle, and SWATH MS/MS spectra were collected for 96 ms resulting in a cycle time of 3.172 s. Rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread of 15 was used. The spectral alignment and targeted data extraction of DIA samples were performed using PeakView v.2.1 (AB SCIEX; Framingham, US) with the reference spectral library. For data extraction the following parameters were used: six peptides/protein, six transitions/peptide, peptide confidence level of >99%, FDR threshold of 1%, excluded shared peptides, and extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) window of 10 min and width set at 20 ppm. A total of 3728 proteins were quantified under these conditions. One sample that did not meet quality standards was removed from further analysis (day 0 from donor B).

### Publication Abstract
Brain microenvironment plays an important role in neurodevelopment and pathology, where the extracellular matrix (ECM) and soluble factors modulate multiple cellular processes. Neural cell culture typically relies on heterologous matrices poorly resembling brain ECM. Here, we employed neurospheroids to address microenvironment remodeling during neural differentiation of human stem cells, without the confounding effects of exogenous matrices. Proteome and transcriptome dynamics revealed significant changes at cell membrane and ECM during 3D differentiation, diverging significantly from the 2D differentiation. Structural proteoglycans typical of brain ECM were enriched during 3D differentiation, in contrast to basement membrane constituents in 2D. Moreover, higher expression of synaptic and ion transport machinery was observed in 3D cultures, suggesting higher neuronal maturation in neurospheroids. This work demonstrates that 3D neural differentiation as neurospheroids promotes the expression of cellular and extracellular features&#xa0;found in neural tissue, highlighting its value to address molecular defects in cell-ECM interactions associated with neurological disorders.

### Keywords
3d cultures; neual differentiation; hipsc-derived nsc; ecm; microenvironment; swath

### Affiliations
iBET, Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Biológica, Oeiras, Portugal; Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Oeiras, Portugal
iBET, Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Biológica, Oeiras, Portugal Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Oeiras, Portugal

### Submitter
Daniel Simão

### Lab Head
Dr Catarina Brito
iBET, Instituto de Biologia Experimental e Biológica, Oeiras, Portugal Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Oeiras, Portugal


