### Accession
PXD026994

### Title
In-depth proteome analysis of brain tissue from Ewsr1 gene knock-out mice

### Description
Ewing’s Sacroma (EWS) is a carcinogenic bone tumor which is predominantly occurred in young adults. EWS RNA binding protein 1 (Ewsr1) protein is well-known as a multifunctional protein and its epigenetic signatures contribute to the pathogenesis of various human disease such as neurodegenerative disorders, skin development, or tumorigenic process. However, the specific cellular function and physiological characteristics of Ewsr1 are still ambiguous. In this study, therefore, we applied TMT-labeled quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to investigate the global proteome changes of brain tissue between Ewsr1 knock-out (KO) and wild type (WT) mice (n=3, each).

### Sample Protocol
The extracted brain tissues of Ewsr1 KO and WT mice were transferred to about 5X volume of lysate buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 2 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, and HPLC water). The dissolved brain tissues were immediately homogenized with probe sonication. After homogenization, all of samples were heated under heat block at 95°C for 1 hour. To remove contaminants or effect of sodium dodecyl sulfate, we proceeded acetone precipitation of 200 ug of proteins. We added about five times the sample volume of -20°C cooled acetone with slight tapping and stored those within LoBind tubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at -20°C for overnight. After that, the samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 15,000 rpm at 4°C. The supernatant was properly disposed and repeat the above steps. Air dry 15-30 minutes to completely evaporate remaining acetone and store those at -80°C until digestion. The extracted protein from brain tissue were prepared with the FASP digestion.Each channels of 6-plex TMT kits (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was individually labeled for each sample (3 WT mice brain and 3 Ewsr1 KO mice brain).

### Data Protocol
All of 24 MS/MS data was processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.4 (Thermofisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) based on SEQUEST-HT search engine. The acquired data was compared and searched against UniProt mouse database. The search setting parameters were followed: full-trypsin as enzyme; precursor mass tolerance as 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance with 20 ppm; the false discovery rate (FDR) for all peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) under 1%, and performed with Percolator software package; fixed modifications, TMT tags (N-term and Lys, +229.163 Da), and carbamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021 Da) and variable modification as oxidation (Met, +15.995 Da) and deamidation (Asn and Gln, +0.984 Da). In addition, we refined the identified proteins which contains only PSMs that contained all intensity value from all of TMT channels to calculate quantification value. The common contaminants were filtered such as keratins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ewsr1, Tandem mass tag, Mice

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


