### Accession
PXD015652

### Title
Comparison of microglial proteomes of MACS and FACS-based purified CD11b+ microglia

### Description
Background  Proteomic characterization of microglia has been limited by low yield and contamination by non-microglial proteins by magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) enrichment strategies. To determine whether a fluorescent-activated cell sorting (FACS)-based strategy overcomes these limitations, we compared microglial proteomes of MACS and FACS-based purified CD11b+ microglia in order to identify core sets of microglial proteins in adult mouse brain tissue.  Results  Quantitative multiplex proteomics by tandem mass tag mass spectrometry (TMT-MS) of MACS-enriched (N = 5) and FACS-purified (N = 5) adult wild-type CD11b+ microglia identified 1,791 proteins, of which 953 were differentially expressed indicating significant differences between both approaches. While the FACS-purified microglia proteome was enriched with cytosolic, endoplasmic reticulum and ribosomal proteins involved in protein metabolism and immune system functions, the MACS-enriched microglia proteome was enriched with proteins related to mitochondrial function and synaptic transmission. As compared to MACS, the FACS microglial proteome showed strong enrichment for canonical microglial proteins while neuron, astrocyte, and oligodendrocyte proteins were decreased. Interestingly, we observed enrichment of endothelial specific proteins in the FACS microglia proteome. By comparing FACS-purified microglia proteomes with transcriptomes, we observed highly concordant as well as highly discordant proteins that were abundant at the protein level but low at the transcript level.  Conclusions  We demonstrate that TMT-MS proteomics of FACS-purified adult microglia is superior to column-based enrichment approaches, resulting in purer and highly-enriched microglial proteomes. We also define core sets of highly-abundant adult microglial proteins including Moesin (Msn) that can guide future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Acute isolation of CD11b-positive microglia  Male 4-month-old C57Bl/6J mice (N = 10) were anesthetized with isoflurane, followed by exsanguination and cardiac perfusion with 30mL of ice-cold 1× phosphate buffered saline (1×PBS). The brain was immediately dissected and mechanically homogenized over a 40µm cell strainer. Subsequently, the homogenate was centrifuged for 5min at 800×g at RT, supernatant was carefully decanted, and pellet was resuspended in 6mL per brain of 35% stock isotonic Percoll (SIP) solution diluted with 1×HBSS (SIP: 9:1 100% Percoll:10× HBSS). Cell suspension was transferred to a new 15mL conical and 3mL of 70% SIP was slowly underlaid. The established gradient was centrifuged for 25min at 800×g with no brake at 15°C. The top floating myelin layer was aspirated and 3mL from the 35-70% interphase, containing the mononuclear cells, was collected without disturbing the 70% layer. The mononuclear cells were washed with 6mL of 1×PBS, centrifuged for 5min at 800×g, and cell pellet was resuspended in 100µl of 1×PBS.  Isolated mononuclear cells from 5 brains were then further purified by CD11b positive selection using MACS columns (N = 5 mice, >90% enrichment of CD11b+ microglia) (Miltenyi Biotec, Cat #130–093-636) to selectively enrich microglia and brain mononuclear phagocytes. Isolated cells from the remaining 5 brains were labeled with APC-Cy7 rat anti-CD11b antibody (BD Pharmingen, Cat #557657) for 30min at RT and sorted using a BD FACSAria II cell sorter. In order to allow for a fair comparison between both approaches, we intentionally FACS-purified CD11b+ myeloid cells (predominantly microglia) rather than using a CD11b+CD45int selection strategy.  Cell homogenization and protein digestion  Isolated microglia were lysed in 200µL of lysis buffer (8M urea, 100mM NaHPO4, pH 8.5) with HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher, Cat. #78446) and each sample was sonicated for 3 cycles consisting of 5s of active sonication at 30% amplitude followed by 15s on ice. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce, Cat. #23225). 6µg of protein for each sample was reduced with 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 30 min and alkylated by 5mM IAA in the dark for 30 min. Samples were then diluted (8x) with 50mM TEAB, digested overnight with Lysyl endopeptidase (Wako, Cat. #127-06621) at 1:100 (w/w). The peptide solutions were acidified to a final concentration of 1% FA and 0.1% TFA, desalted with a C18 Sep-Pak column (Waters, Cat. #WAT054945) and dried down in a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac). One batch of 10-plex TMT kit (Thermo Fisher, Cat #90110) was used to label all 10 samples (Figure 1C). Channels were then combined and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.  High pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation  High pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation was used to perform desalting and fractionation (ThermoFisher, Cat. #84868). Dried sample containing 10 TMT channels was reconstituted with 300µL of 0.1% TFA and added to conditioned reversed-phase fractionation spin columns containing 20mg of resin in a 1:1 water/DMSO slurry. A sequential gradient of increasing ACN concentrations in a high-pH elution solution (0.1% TEA) was applied to the columns to elute bound peptides into 9 different fractions collected by centrifugation at 3000×g. Each fraction was dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at 4 degrees until mass spectrometry.  Mass spectrometry analysis and TMT data acquisition  Assuming equal distribution of peptide concentration across all 9 fractions, 10µL of loading buffer (0.1% TFA) was added to each fraction and 2µL was separated on a 25 cm long by 75 μm internal diameter fused silica column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed in-house with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin. The LC-MS/MS platform consisted of a Dionex RSLCnano UPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with a Flex nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher). Sample elution was performed over a 120 min gradient with a constant flow rate of 300nl/min. The gradient consisted multiple steps starting at 3% and going to 7% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) over 5 mins, from 7 to 30% B over 80 mins, from 30 to 60% over 5 mins, from 60 to 99 over 2 mins, constant at 99% for 8 mins and immediately back to 1% for 20 mins. The mass spectrometer was in positive ion mode and utilized the synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 method for reporter ion quantitation with a top speed cycle time of 3 seconds. The full scan range was 400–1500 m/z at a nominal resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and automatic gain control (AGC) set to 4 ×10^5. Tandem MS/MS Collision-induced dissociation (CID) spectra were collected in the ion trap with normalized collision energy set to 35%, max injection time set to 35 ms and AGC set to 1x10^4. HCD SPS-MS3 of the top 10 product ions at 65% normalized CE were collected in the orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000, a max injection time of 100 ms and an AGC setting of 5x10^4.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification  Raw files from Orbitrap Fusion were processed using Proteome Discover (version 2.1) and MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt Mouse proteome database (54,489 total sequences) as previously reported [22]. SEQUEST parameters were specified as: trypsin enzyme, two missed cleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of 6, TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da) as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da) as a variable modification, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Peptide spectral match (PSM) error rates were determined using the target-decoy strategy coupled to Percolator [24] modeling of true and false matches. Reporter ions were quantified from MS3 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was achieved by applying the target-decoy strategy. Following spectral assignment, peptides were assembled into proteins and were further filtered based on the combined probabilities of their constituent peptides to a final FDR of 1%. In cases of redundancy, shared peptides were assigned to the protein sequence with the most matching peptides, thus adhering to principles of parsimony. The search results and TMT quantification as well as raw LC-MS/MS files are included in the ProteomeXchange online  repository. We included proteins with TMT abundance values in at least 3 of the 5 replicates per group, as well as proteins present within all 5 replicates in one group and absent in the other group (present only in MACS: total n = 4), but also display a high protein FDR confidence (n = 2, Gpm6b & Sh3gl2). Additionally, even though TMT labeling limits missing values, normalized abundances of zero were imputed as the lowest TMT abundance value in the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Macs, Mouse acutely purified brain-associated microglia, Tmt, Facs

### Affiliations
Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology
Emory University

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried
Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology


