### Accession
PXD032830

### Title
Quantitative proteomic changes during anoxia and reoxygenation in anoxia-tolerant crucian carp

### Description
The freshwater fish crucian carp (Carassius carassius) can survive complete oxygen depletion (anoxia) for several months at low temperatures, achieved by a combination of reduced energy demand and increased glycolysis fueled by large hepatic glycogen stores. In crucian carp, the energy-requiring protein synthesis is controlled in a tissue-specific manner when oxygen levels decrease. During anoxia, translational rates are maintained at almost normoxic levels in brain, while heart and liver translation rates are strongly reduced. However, little is known about how the global proteome of these tissues are affected by oxygen variations. By applying mass spectrometry-based proteomics, 3304 proteins in brain, 3004 proteins in heart and 2516 proteins in liver were detected, of which 66 brain proteins, 243 cardiac proteins and 162 hepatic proteins were differentially expressed during the course of anoxia-reoxygenation compared to normoxic control. The brain proteome showed few differences in response to oxygen variations, indicating that anoxic survival is not regulated through protein expression in this tissue. Cardiac and hepatic adaptions to anoxia included enrichment of mitochondrial proteins involved in aerobic respiration and mitochondrial membrane integrity. We show that enzymes in the electron transport system (ETS) are regulated in a tissue-specific manner since no ETS components were regulated in brain, but were downregulated in heart and upregulated in liver during anoxia and reoxygenation. Furthermore, complement system activation was enriched in heart during anoxia. During reoxygenation, proteins involved in the cristae junction organization were regulated in the heart, possibly explaining how reactive oxygen species can be avoided when oxygen returns in this master of anoxic survival.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen crucian carp brain, heart and liver tissues from 6 fish per experimental group werelysed in ice-cold SILAC Phosphoprotein Lysis buffer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Brainand liver tissues were homogenized with a pestle, whereas heart tissue was lysed with a Tissuelyser II instrument (Qiagen,Hilden, Germany) operating at 15 strokes/s for 2 minutes twice with a tungsten carbide bead. After 5-10 minutes incubation on ice and then at -80 °C, the buffer volume was adjusted to 60 mg tissue/mL (for brain and liver) or 25 mg tissue/mL (for heart) lysis buffer and the lysate cleared by centrifugation (18 000g for 15 min). Total protein content was measured with a Detergent Compatible Bradford Assay Reagent(Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) at 595 nm or the BCA assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) at 570 nm, both with BSA as a standard. From each biological replicate, 60 μg protein was precipitated with five volumes icecold acetone at -20 °C overnight. Precipitated protein was pelleted by centrifugation (13 000 g for 15 minutes), the acetone was aspirated and the pellet let to air dry before resuspension in 6 M urea in100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Cystines present in the sample were reduced with 10 mM DTT at30 °C for 60 minutes and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide at 22 °C for 1 hour in the dark. The reaction was quenched with 30 mM DTT at 30 °C for 30 minutes and the sample diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate before digestion with 1 μg trypsin Mass Spec Grade (Promega, Madison, WI, USA)at 37 °C overnight. Finally, the digest was quenched with 1 % formic acid and the peptides cleaned by solid-phase extraction (SPE) using a Ziptip-C18 (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). LC-MS/MS analysis The peptide samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA,USA) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using Xcalibur v2.5.5 and raw files were processed. Database searches were performed against the Carassius auratus database (NCBI; all taxons; 96703 entries), with PEAKS X+ software version 10.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON, Canada). The following parameters were used: digestion enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavage, 1; fragment ion mass error tolerance, 0.1 Da; parent ion error tolerance, 10.0 ppm; and fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminus were specified as variable modifications and the maximum number of post-translational modifications (PTMs) was set to 2. Four (liver) or five (brain, heart) biological replicates were selected for label-free quantitation. The following filtration parameters were applied in PEAKS: peptide quality ≥ 2; average area ≥ 1E5; charge between 2 and 5; used peptides ≥ 1 and normalization by 10 internal standard proteins. The resulting protein lists were exported to the Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016) and filtered to keep only proteins detected in minimum three replicates in at least one experimental group. Missing values were replaced by the average area threshold (1E5) applied in PEAKS before log2 transformation. The overall similarity between the samples were evaluated by principal component analysis (PCA) using the web tool ClustVis (Metsalu & Vilo, 2015). Data were centered and scaled by unit variance scaling, and singular value decomposition (SVD) with imputation applied to calculate the principal components. Evaluation of differentially expressed proteins was performed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s HSD post hoc test at 5 % FDR in Perseus. Only significant proteins changing with a fold change > 2 were used for further analysis. Hiearchichal clustering was conducted with ClustVis on normalized and ln(x)transformed data (Metsalu & Vilo, 2015). Rows were centered and scaled by unit variance before clustering using correlation distance and average linkage.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anoxia, Crucian carp

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo

### Submitter
Bernd Thiede

### Lab Head
Dr Anette Johansen
Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo


