### Accession
PXD020296

### Title
Global quantitative analysis of the human brain proteome and phosphoproteome in Alzheimer’s diseaseGlobal quantitative analysis of the human brain proteome and phosphoproteome in Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is characterized by an early, asymptomatic phase (AsymAD) in which individuals exhibit amyloid-beta (Aβ) plaque accumulation in the absence of clinically detectable cognitive decline. Here we report an unbiased multiplex quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis using tandem mass tag (TMT) isobaric labeling of human post-mortem cortex (n=27) across pathology-free controls, AsymAD and symptomatic AD individuals. With off-line high-pH fractionation and liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer, we identified 11,378 protein groups across three TMT 11-plex batches. Immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) was used to enrich for phosphopeptides from the same TMT-labeled cases and 51,736 phosphopeptides were identified. Of these, 48,992 were quantified by TMT reporter ions representing 33,652 unique phosphosites. Two reference standards in each TMT 11-plex were included to assess intra- and inter-batch variance at the protein and peptide level. This comprehensive human brain proteome and phosphoproteome dataset will serve as a valuable resource for the identification of biochemical, cellular and signaling pathways altered during AD progression.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin Digestion followed by TMT Labeling and IMAC phosphopeptide enrichment.

### Data Protocol
The SEQUEST HT search engine was used and parameters were identical for both total and IMAC proteomes and specified as the following: fully-tryptic specificity; maximum of two missed cleavages; minimum peptide length of 6; fixed modifications for TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+ 229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+ 57.02146 Da); variable modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+ 15.99492 Da); deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+ 0.984 Da); phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (+ 79.9663 Da);  precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 daltons. Percolator was used to filter peptide spectral matches (PSM) and peptides to a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% using target-decoy strategy. The phosphosite localization site threshold was set to 0.75, ensuring <5% false-localization rate (FLR) of PTM assignments as described31. Following spectral assignment, peptides were assembled into proteins and were further filtered based on the combined probabilities of their constituent peptides to a final FDR of 1%. In cases of redundancy, shared peptides were assigned to the protein sequence in adherence with the principles of parsimony. Reporter ions were quantified from MS2 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Imac, Lc ms/ms, Tmt, Alzheimer's

### Affiliations
Emory Biochemistry and Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas Seyfried
Emory Biochemistry and Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases


