### Accession
PXD042599

### Title
Mechanisms of site-specific methylation by a highly conserved elongation factor 1A lysine methyltransferase

### Description
Translation elongation factor 1A (eEF1A) is an essential and highly conserved protein required for protein synthesis in eukaryotes. In both Saccharomyces cerevisiae and human, five different methyltransferase enzymes methylate specific residues on eEF1A, making eEF1A the eukaryotic protein targeted by the highest number of dedicated methyltransferases. eEF1A methyltransferases are highly selective enzymes, only targeting eEF1A and each targeting just one or two specific residues in eEF1A. However, the mechanism of this selectivity remains poorly understood. Here we have used AlphaFold modelling in combination with crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) and enzyme mutagenesis to reveal how S. cerevisiae elongation factor methyltransferase 4 (Efm4) specifically methylates eEF1A at K316. We find that a unique beta-hairpin motif, which extends out from the core methyltransferase fold, is important for methylation of eEF1A K316 in vitro. An alanine mutation of a single residue on this beta-hairpin, F212, significantly reduces Efm4 activity in vitro and in yeast cells. We show that the equivalent residue in human eEF1A-KMT2 (METTL10), F220, is also important for its activity towards eEF1A in vitro. Lastly, we find that phosphorylation of eEF1A at S314 negatively crosstalks with Efm4-mediated methylation of K316. Our findings demonstrate how protein methyltransferases can be being highly selective towards a single residue on a single protein.

### Sample Protocol
Purified Efm4 (16.4 μM, ~25 μg total) and eEF1A (from strain ΔEFM4 TEF1-His, 3.75 μM, ~11 μg total) were incubated in the presence of AdoMet (50 μM) and DSSO (1 mM) in in vitro methylation buffer (50 mM HEPES, 20 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.4) in a total volume of 60 μL at 30 °C for 1 hr. Crosslinking was terminated by the addition of Tris-Cl (pH 8.0) to 10 mM. The sample was then split in three and buffer-exchanged into either 50 mM NH4HCO3, for trypsin and GluC digests, or 100 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.0)/10 mM CaCl2, for the chymotrypsin digest. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 hr at 37 °C and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 hr at room temperature. Proteins were then digested with either 400 ng sequencing grade trypsin (Promega), 800 ng Sequencing Grade GluC (Promega), or 800 ng Chymotrypsin (Promega), at either 37 °C (trypsin and GluC) or 25 °C (chymotrypsin) for 18 h. Digested peptides were then desalted with 50 mg tC18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters) and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Crosslinked peptides were analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Purified yeast or human eEF1A were incubated with or without purified Efm4 or eEF1A-KMT2-207 in in vitro methylation buffer in the presence of 500 μM AdoMet at 30 °C (yeast) or 37 °C (human) for the indicated times. Reactions were terminated by the addition of 6 × SDS loading buffer (350 mM Tris–Cl, 30% (v/v) glycerol, 10% (w/v) SDS, 600 mM DTT, 0.012% (w/v) bromophenol blue) and boiling for 10 min. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE on NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gels with MES SDS running buffer, fixed with 25% isopropanol/10% acetic acid and stained with QC Colloidal Coomassie Stain (Bio-Rad). Gel bands corresponding to eEF1A were excised, digested with either 35-50 ng AspN or 50 ng trypsin and prepared for mass spectrometry. Samples were analysed on either an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) or an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). All clones of yeast strains EFM4-His, EFM4-F210A-His, EFM4-F212A-His were grown to mid-log (OD600 ~0.8) in YEPD, cells harvested and resuspended in HEPES lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, 2 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA, pH 7.5, 1 × cOmpleteTM EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). Cells were lysed by bead-beating and clarified as described above. Approximately 50 μg of protein from each lysate was then buffer-exchanged into 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 15 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature, before digestion with 1 μg of Sequencing Grade GluC (Promega) for 18 h at 37 °C. Digested peptides were then desalted with 50 mg tC18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters) and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Triplicate purifications of eEF1A from strain TEF1-His ΔTEF2 were carried out as described above. For each replicate, approximately 50 μg of purified eEF1A was buffer-exchanged into 50 mM NH4HCO3, reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 hr at 37 °C and alkylated with 15 mM IAA for 1 hr at room temperature. Samples were then digested with 100 ng of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) for 18 h at 37 °C, before desalting with tC18 Sep-Pak columns (50 mg, Waters). Five percent of each sample was retained, while the remaining 95% was subjected to phospho-peptide enrichment using Titansphere TiO2 beads (GL Sciences). Phosphopeptide-enriched samples were then analysed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer as detailed below.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to Mascot generic format (mgf) using RawConverter (v. 1.2.0.1). MS/MS spectra were then searched against the SwissProt database (SwissProt 2022_05 (568,744 sequences; 205,548,017 residues)) with a contaminants database included (contaminants 20090624 (262 sequences; 133,770 residues)), in Mascot (v2.8, Matrix Science), with the following settings: taxonomy: Saccharomyes cerevisiae (Baker’s yeast) or Homo sapiens (Human); Enzyme: trypsin or Asp-N_ambic; Missed cleavages: 3 (trypsin samples) or 5 (AspN samples); Peptide tolerance: 4 ppm; MS/MS tolerance: 20 ppm (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos) or 0.4 Da (LTQ Orbitrap Velos); Instrument: Default; Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (for samples subjected to reduction and alkylation); Variable modifications: Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M), Methyl (K), Dimethyl (K), Trimethyl (K), with Phospho (ST) included for S314 phosphorylation-related samples, and Ser->Ala (S) or Ser->Asp (S) included for S314 phospho-mutant samples. For analysis of purified, recombinant eEF1A-KMT2-207, data were further searched against the human expressed sequence tag database (Human_EST 135 (52,233,594 sequences; 8,864,668,104 residues)). eEF1A methylation was quantified by taking the area under the curve of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) of indicated peptide ions with a tolerance of ±10 ppm in Thermo XCalibur 2.2 SP1.48 Qual Browser. The percentage of each methylation state was determined by dividing its intensity by the sum total of intensities for all methylation state (including unmethylated). The methylation fraction percentage was calculated by summing the methylation state percentages, weighted according to the number of methyl groups (i.e. me0% × 0 + me1% × 1 + me2% × 2 + me3% × 3), and dividing by the theoretical max value for full di- or tri-methylation. To quantify eEF1A K316 methylation levels, a GluC peptide containing K316 (QGVPGDNVGFNVKNVSVKE, K316 unlined) was analysed by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by nanoLC and ionised by ESI. Then, PRM analysis consisted of a precursor scan acquired in the Orbitrap (350-1500 m/z, resolution = 60 000), followed by four MS/MS scans targeting the triply-charged GluC peptide in its un-, mono-, di- and tri-methylated state (m/z = 663.01, 667.68, 672.36 and 677.03) also acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution = 30 000, HCD NCE = 30, isolation width = 1.5 m/z). Data were analysed in Skyline v21.2.0.568 and eEF1A K316 methylation was quantified using the area under the curve of singly-charged fragment ions b7, b8, b9, b10, b11, b12, b13, b14, y6, y7, y8, y9, y10, y11, y12 and y13. XL-MS data were analysed with MaxLynx as implemented in MaxQuant (v. 2.2.0.0). Data were searched individually for each protease (trypsin, chymotrypsin or GluC) against custom sequence databases consisting of proteins identified in each sample. These were generated by searching data against the SwissProt database in a standard (not crosslinking) search using Mascot (as above). For MaxLynx analyses, “Cross linking type” was set as MS2-cleavable with DSSO selected as the crosslinker and with default settings. Trypsin, GluC and chymotrypsin digests were analysed separately with the following settings: Trypsin: Protease = Trypsin/P, Max missed cleavages = 3; GluC: Proteases = GluC and AspC, Max missed cleavages = 5; Chymotrypsin: Proteases = Trypsin/P and Chymotrypsin+, Max missed cleavages = 5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein methyltransferase, Protein methylation, Crosslinking mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of New South Wales
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Joshua Hamey

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Wilkins
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, NSW, Australia


