### Accession
PXD006426

### Title
Cowpox virus proteomics reveals massive ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of viral proteins but stable virus cores

### Description
The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is essential for replication of Orthopoxviruses (OPV) like vaccinia and cowpox virus (CPXV). Although several proteome studies identified ubiquitin as part of OPV particles, distinct modification sites are largely unknown. Moreover, the UPS plays a key role in poxvirus core uncoating but the underlying mechanisms are still elusive. In the presented study we show that impairment of CPXV replication by proteasome inhibition is caused by a lack of uncoating which can be observed by electron microscopy. These results suggest, that UPS-dependent degradation of viral core proteins is the mechanism underlying CPXV genome uncoating. To proof this hypothesis we analyzed the mature virion ubiquitinome of CPXV using mass spectrometry (MS). We elucidated 137 conserved ubiquitination sites in 54 viral proteins among five CPXV strains verifying ubiquitin is a major poxvirus modification. Structural core proteins were massively ubiquitinated and virions contained large amounts of K48-linked polyubiquitin supporting the hypothesis. Hence, we aimed to show the proteasome-dependent degradation of CPXV core proteins in infected HeLa cells. However, using MS-based quantitative analysis of ubiquitinated virus proteins early in infection we were not able to show the degradation of viral core proteins. Instead, our results revealed the proteasomal degradation of viral proteins associated with the formation of prereplication sites early in infection.

### Sample Protocol
The following virus strains were used: CPXV Brighton Red (BR), RatHei09 (RatHei), RatKre08 (RatKre), HumGri07 (HumGri) and HumBer07 (HumBer). All virus strains except BR were isolated in the German Consultant Laboratory for Poxviruses (Robert Koch-Institute, Berlin, Germany) from rat or human as indicated by the strain prefix. Viruses were propagated in HEp-2 cells (ATCC#CCL-23) and mature virus particles (IMVs) were purified by rate-zonal sucrose gradient centrifugation. Purified virus particles were lysed in 120 μL 4 % SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.6, 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40mM 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA) by heating for 5 min at 95 °C. The lysates were sonicated for 1 min, clarified 5 min at 16,000 × g, and prepared for mass spectrometric analysis using a modified FASP method. Briefly, 200 μg protein was filled up with 8 M Urea in 50 mM Tris, pH 8.5 (UA) to 230 µl and loaded onto a Microcon Centrifugal Filter Unit with 30 kDa MWCO (Merck). Removal of SDS was achieved by washing 3 x with 200 μL UA. Urea was replaced by washing 3 x with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and digestion was performed overnight with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega) at 37 °C in 40 µl ABC using a protein/enzyme ratio of 1:25. Tryptic peptides were recovered by centrifugation and washing twice with 40 μL ABC. Peptides were desalted with 3M Mili-SPE Extraction Disc Cartridges C18 SD (Sigma-Aldrich) and dried in a vacuum concentrator.  Enrichment of ubiquitinated peptides was perfomed with the PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, desalted tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 1.4 ml IAP buffer and incubated with washed motif antibody-bead slurry for 2 h at 4 °C. After 3 washes with IAP buffer and 3 washes with MS-grade water, diGly(K) peptides were eluted in 55 µl 0.15 % TFA followed by a second elution step with 50 µl 0.15 % TFA. DiGly(K) enriched peptides were desalted using 200 μL StageTips with two Empore™ SPE Disks C18 (3M Purification) and concentrated in a vacuum concentrator. To analyze the effect of proteasome inhibition on CPXV core protein degradation,  HeLa cells in T75 cm2 cell culture flasks were pretreated with or without 10 µM MG-132 for 1 h at 37 °C and infected with CPXV BR at an MOI of 50 in presence or absence of proteasome inhibitor (triplicates).  After 2 h p.i. cells were scraped into medium and washed twice with PBS. Cell pellets were lysed and digested with FASP prior to enrichment of diGly(K) peptides analogous to virions. Analysis of diGly(K) enriched peptides was performed with an Easy-nanoLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For single-run shotgun analysis, peptides were reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid (FA) and quantified by absorbance measurement at 280 nm using a Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Identical peptide amounts were loaded on a Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm, 300 mm x 75 μm fused silica capillary column (Dr. Maisch) and separated with a linear 90 min gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1 % FA and 3 % DMSO from 0 to 40 % at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The column heater temperature was set to 60 °C and a spray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied. For background ion reduction an ABIRD device was used. The transfer capillary was heated to 275 °C without applying sheath or auxiliary gas flow. The orbitrap mass analyzer operated at a resolution of 30,000 scanning a mass range of 300-1250 m/z. Data-dependent fragmentation of the 12 most intense ions with charge state ≥1+ was performed using CID fragmentation in the ion trap applying 35 % normalized collision energy. The threshold for MS² spectra selection was set to 500 counts with maximum allowed ion accumulation times of 500 ms for full scan and 150 ms for fragment spectra. Viral peptides were analyzed in technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
DiGly(K) peptides were identified with SEQUEST database search algorithm implemented in Proteome Discoverer computational proteomics platform (Version 2.1). MS2 spectra of both technical duplicates were searched against the human UniProt complete proteome set with isoforms, the protein sequences of the respective CPXV strain and a contaminant database (cRAP).  All CPXV databases were translated from the genome sequence (NCBI GenBank: BR #AF482758.2; Hei #KC813504.1; Kre #KC813505.1; Ber #KC813509.1; Gri #KC813511.1). CPXV proteins are named according to the GRI-90 strain (NCBI GenBank #X94355.2).The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (full) allowing for two missed cleavages. Mass tolerances were 10 ppm for parent ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. The maximum number of dynamic modifications per peptide was set to 4 including methionine oxidation, protein N-terminus acetylation and diGly modification of lysine residues. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification. Peptides were identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % estimated by Percolator algorithm and peptide areas were calculated using the Precursor Ions Area Detector node.  Identification and label-free quantification of ubiquitinated peptides in HeLa cells was performed using Andromeda and MaxLFQ algorithm, respectively, implemented in MaxQuant computational proteomics platform (Version 1.5.1.2).  MS2 spectra were searched against the human UniProt complete proteome set including isoforms, the CPXV BR database and a contaminant database applying specific trypsin/P digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable and fixed modifications were set analogous to those of the virion peptide identification. Mass tolerances were 4.5 ppm for parent ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. A strict peptide FDR of 1 % was applied while protein FDR was neglected. The match between runs option was used to transfer peptide identifications between samples within a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Further bioinformatic analysis of peptide identifications was done in Perseus (Version 1.5.0.31). Therefore, peptide raw intensities were filtered for reverse and contaminant peptide hits. Log2 transformed peptide intensities were normalized by median column subtraction and peptides with at least one diGly(K) modification were kept for further analysis. Categorically annotated control and inhibitor-treated replicates were filtered for at least three valid values in at least one group and normalized by median row subtraction. Missing values were imputed from normal distribution with default values mimicking low abundance measurements (width 0.3, down shift 1.8). Significant differences of ubiquitinated peptide quantities were analyzed using a two-sided t-test (S0=2) with 5 % permutation-based FDR and 250 randomizations.

### Publication Abstract
The emergence of Variola virus-like viruses by natural evolution of zoonotic Orthopoxviruses, like Cowpox virus (CPXV), is a global health threat. The proteasome is essential for poxvirus replication, making the viral components interacting with the ubiquitin-proteasome system attractive antiviral targets. We show that proteasome inhibition impairs CPXV replication by prevention of uncoating, suggesting that uncoating is mediated by proteasomal degradation of viral core proteins. Although Orthopoxvirus particles contain considerable amounts of ubiquitin, distinct modification sites are largely unknown. Therefore, for the first time, we analyzed globally ubiquitination sites in CPXV mature virion proteins using LC-MS/MS. Identification of 137 conserved sites in 54 viral proteins among five CPXV strains revealed extensive ubiquitination of structural core proteins. Moreover, since virions contained primarily K48-linked polyubiquitin, we hypothesized that core proteins are modified accordingly. However, quantitative analysis of ubiquitinated CPXV proteins early in infection showed no proteasomal degradation of core proteins. Instead, our data indicate that the recently suggested proteasomal regulation of the uncoating factor E5 is a prerequisite for uncoating. Expanding our understanding of poxvirus uncoating and elucidating a multitude of novel ubiquitination sites in poxvirus proteins, the present study verifies the major biological significance of ubiquitin in poxvirus infection.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Orthopoxvirus, Viral proteomics

### Affiliations
ZBS1, Highly Pathogenic Viruses, Robert Koch-Institute, Germany
Robert Koch Institute

### Submitter
Marica Grossegesse

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Nitsche
ZBS1, Highly Pathogenic Viruses, Robert Koch-Institute, Germany


