### Accession
PXD001180

### Title
Human brain phosphoproteome analyzed by refined phosphopeptide enrichment and high resolution LC-MS/MS

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia, characterized by progressive loss of cognitive function. One of the pathological hallmarks of AD is the formation of neurofibrillary tangles composed of abnormally hyperphosphorylated tau protein, but global deregulation of protein phosphorylation in AD is not well analyzed. Here we report a pilot investigation of AD phosphoproteome by titanium dioxide enrichment coupled with high resolution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). During the optimization of the enrichment method, we found that phosphate ion at a low concentration (e.g. 1 mM) worked efficiently as a non-phosphopeptide competitor to reduce background. The procedure was further tuned with respect to peptide-to-bead ratio, phosphopeptide recovery and purity. Using this refined method and 9 h LC-MS/MS, we analyzed phosphoproteome in one milligram of digested AD brain lysate, identifying 5,243 phosphopeptides containing 3,717 non-redundant phosphorylation sites on 1,455 proteins. This modified enrichment method is simple and highly efficient. The AD case study demonstrates its feasibility of dissecting phosphoproteome in a limited amount of postmortem human brain.

### Sample Protocol
Human frozen tissues from prefrontal cortical regions were provided by the Brain and Body Donation Program at Banner Sun Health Research Institute. The AD case was clinically and pathologically characterized in accordance with established criteria [26]. This study was approved by Banner Sun Health Research Institute. Adult Rat brain was purchased from Pel Freez Biologicals.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS raw files were converted into mzXML format and searched against Uniprot human database by Sequest algorithm (v28, revision 13). The target-decoy strategy was used to estimate false discovery rate (FDR). Spectra were matched with a mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for precursor ions and ±0.5 Da for product ions, partially tryptic restriction and 3 maximal miscleavages. Dynamic mass shift parameters included oxidized Met (+15.9949), phosphorylated Ser/Thr/Tyr (+79.9663), and 5 maximal modification sites. Only b and y ions were scored. Matched peptides were filtered by linear discriminant analysis to reduce peptide false discovery rate of <0.5%, based on numerous parameters including XCorr, ΔCn, precursor mass error, and charge state. The confidence of each phosphopeptide site assignment was determined by the Ascore program. The minimal Ascore for an unambiguous site was 13 (p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia, characterized by progressive loss of cognitive function. One of the pathological hallmarks of AD is the formation of neurofibrillary tangles composed of abnormally hyperphosphorylated tau protein, but global deregulation of protein phosphorylation in AD is not well analyzed. Here, we report a pilot investigation of AD phosphoproteome by titanium dioxide enrichment coupled with high resolution LC-MS/MS. During the optimization of the enrichment method, we found that phosphate ion at a low concentration (e.g. 1 mM) worked efficiently as a nonphosphopeptide competitor to reduce background. The procedure was further tuned with respect to peptide-to-bead ratio, phosphopeptide recovery, and purity. Using this refined method and 9 h LC-MS/MS, we analyzed phosphoproteome in one milligram of digested AD brain lysate, identifying 5243 phosphopeptides containing 3715 nonredundant phosphosites on 1455 proteins, including 31 phosphosites on the tau protein. This modified enrichment method is simple and highly efficient. The AD case study demonstrates its feasibility of dissecting phosphoproteome in a limited amount of postmortem human brain. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001180 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001180).

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Human brain, Lc-ms/ms, Alzheimer's disease, Phosphopeptide enrichment

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
St. Jude Children's research hospital

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


