### Accession
PXD021391

### Title
Identification of missing proteins in the proteome atlas of multiple healthy human tissues

### Description
We re-analyzed the deep proteome atlas of 29 paired healthy human from the published paper (Wang, Dongxue, et al. Molecular systems biology 15.2 (2019)) to identify missing proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh frozen human tissue samples were homogenized in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.6, 8 M urea, 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphin hydrochloride, 40 mM chloroacetamide, protease and phosphatase inhibitors) by bead milling (Precellys 24, Bertin Instruments, France; 5,500 rpm, 2 × 20 s, 10 s pause). Protein concentration was determined using the Bradford method (Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific) and 300 µg of the protein extract were used for in-solution digestion with trypsin. For this, the sample was diluted with 50 mM Tris/HCl to a final urea concentration of 1.6 M, and trypsin was added at a 50:1 (w/w) protein to protease ratio. After 4 hours of digestion at 37°C, another aliquot of trypsin was added to reach a final 25:1 (w/w) protein to protease ratio and the sample was incubated overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated on Sep-Pak C18 columns and fractionated into 36 fractions via hSAX off-line chromatography. The Stage-Tips desalted fractions were dried down by a vacuum centrifuge for further LC-MS/MS analysis. To validate the variant peptides and novel peptides, all the peptides from Mascot search passed filter criteria were synthesized at JPT Berlin using Fmoc-based solid-phase synthesis. The details of peptide synthesis, sample preparation and MS measurement were as described (Zolg et.al 2017).

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification and label free quantification, the Open-pFind suite of tools version 3.1.5 was used. The spectra were searched against the NextProt (20200117) with Open model. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with 2 maximum missed cleavages. The FDR was set to 1% at both PSM and protein level.  For the synthetic peptides, raw data were analyzed using Open-pFind suite of tools version 3.1.5 searching individual LC-MS runs against NextProt databases.

### Publication Abstract
The Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) was launched in 2012 to perfect the annotation of human protein existence by identifying stronger evidence of the expression of missing proteins (MPs) at the protein level. After an 8 year effort all over the world, the number of MPs in the neXtProt database significantly decreased from 5511 (2012-02-24) to 1899 (2020-01-17). It is now more difficult to provide confident evidence of the remaining MPs because of their specific characteristics, including low abundance, low molecular weight, unexpected modifications, transmembrane structure, tissue-expression specificity, and so on. A higher resolution mass spectrometry (MS) interpretation engine might provide an opportunity to identify these buried MPs in complex samples by the combination with multi-tissue large-scale proteomics. In this study, open-pFind was used to dig MPs from 20 pairs of healthy human tissues by Wang et al. ( <i>Mol. Syst. Biol.</i> 2019, 15 (2), e8503) combined with our large-scale testis data set digested by three enzymes (Glu-C, Lys-C, and trypsin) with specificity for different amino acid residues ( <i>J. Proteme Res.</i> 2019, 18 (12), 4189-4196). A total of 1&#x202f;535&#x202f;536 peptides with 17&#x202f;283&#x202f;477 peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were mapped to 14&#x202f;279 protein entries at a false discovery rate of &lt;1% at the PSM, peptide, and protein levels. A total of 103 MP candidates were identified, among which 86 candidates had more unique peptide numbers compared with our single testis tissue. After rigorous screening, manual checks, peptide synthesis, and matching with documented peptides from PeptideAtlas, we validated four MPs, P0C7T8 (duodenum and small intestine), Q8WWZ4 (stomach and rectum), Q8IV35 (fallopian tube), and O14921 (tonsil), at the protein level. All MS raw files have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021391.

### Keywords
Open-pfind, Chpp, Missing proteins, Mutiple tissues

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing), Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing 102206, China.
Student

### Submitter
Sun jinshuai

### Lab Head
Dr Shujia Wu
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing), Beijing Institute of Lifeomics, Beijing 102206, China.


