### Accession
PXD005491

### Title
Na2CO3-responsive proteins in chloroplasts from Puccinellia tenuiflora leaves

### Description
As the organelles in which photosynthesis occurs, chloroplasts are extremely susceptible to saline-alkali stress. Proteins from chloroplast were identified and quantified by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) strategy, and searched with both of Uniprot Liliposida database and NCBInr database. In each of the labeling experiments, approximately 700 proteins were identified, and 121 abundance changed proteins were identified in chloroplast under the condition of Na2CO3 treatment. While according to the subcellular localization prediction, 102 chloroplast localization abundance changed proteins were used for further analysis of the responsive mechanism of the chloroplast under the conditions of Na2CO3 treatment. The 102 proteins were classified into nine functional categories, including photosynthesis, energy metabolism, other metabolisms, stress and defense, membrane and transporting, signaling, chloroplast structure, gene expression, protein synthesis and folding, and miscellaneous. The abundance patterns of these proteins highlight the Na2CO3-responsive chloroplast structure modulation and a series of photosynthetic regulatory mechanisms, such as thermal dissipation, state transition, cyclic electron transport, photorespiration, repair of photodamaged PSII, alteration of PSI activity, and ROS homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of Puccinellia tenuiflora (Turcz.) scribn. et Merr. were sowed on vermiculite and grown in Hoagland solution in pots under fluorescent light (220 μmol m-2 s-1, 12 h : 12 h, light : dark) at 25 °C and 75% humidity for 50 d. Seedlings of 50-day old were treated with 0, 150, and 200 mM Na2CO3 (pH 11) for 12 and 24 h, respectively. After treatment, leaves were harvested, either used right away or immediately stored at -80 °C for experiments. Intact chloroplasts were isolated according to the modified methods as followed. Leaf tissue was homogenized on ice in MCBII buffer (containing 0.3M mannitol, 50mM HEPES, 2mM EDTA-Na2, 1mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.6% polyvinylpyrrolidone, 0.1% (W/V) BSA, pH8.0) and was filtered through eight layers of muslin. The suspension containing chloroplasts was centrifuged at 200g for 3min at 4°C, and the supernatant was centrifuged again at 3000g for 10min. The precipitation containing chloroplast was re-suspended with MCBII buffer (containing 0.3M mannitol, 50mM HEPES, 2mM EDTA-Na2, pH8.0) and loaded on top of a 40% Percoll solution (40% Percoll and 60% MCBII buffer). The density gradient centrifugation was performed at 3000g for 10min at 4°C, and the bottle green layer was collected. The re-suspension and density gradient centrifugation steps were repeated once. The intact chloroplasts were washed twice with MCBII buffer, and then directly applied to protein experiment and or stored at -80°C. Chloroplast protein was extracted for ITRAQ-based proteomic analysis, protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method with BSA as standard.  Three independent biological replicates and two technical replicates of samples (0mM, 150mM-12h, 200mM-12h, 150mM-24h and 200mM-24h) were prepared, and 75μg protein from each of the samples were reduced with 10mM DTT in UA solution (8M urea in 0.1M Tris-HCl, pH8.5) at 37 for 1h and alkylated with 55mM IAA in UA solution in darkness at room temperature for 30min. Then the solution was loaded into the filtration devices and processed by a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method using 10K Microcon filtration devices (Millipore). After centrifugation at 11500g for 15min, the concentrates were diluted in the devices with 75μL UA solution and centrifuged again. This step was repeated twice. Then, the concentrate was diluted with 0.5M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer and centrifuged again for three times. The resulting concentrate was diluted to 0.5M TEAB buffer with endoproteinase trypsin. After overnight incubation at 37°C, the peptides were collected by centrifugation of the filter units for 20min, and diluted with 0.5M TEAB once more. The digested peptides were subsequently labeled with the eight-channel iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s protocol. (Applied Biosystems) The samples 0mM, 150mM-12h, 200mM-12h, 150mM-24h and 200mM-24h were labeled for 2h with the five reagents 116, 117, 118, 119, and 121 at room temperature, and then pooled together. The mixture was then dried out using a Speedvac and submitted for HPLC and LC-MS/MS analysis. The iTRAQ labeled sample was dissolved in solution A (25% ACN in 10mM KH2PO4 (pH3.0)) and fractionated using a strong cation exchange chromatography on a PolySULFOETHYL ATM column (100 X 4.6mm, 5μm, 200Å) (PolyLC Inc, Maryland, USA) connected to an AKTA purifier 100 (GE health) HPLC system. The sample was injected and eluted at a flow rate of 1mL min-1 and monitored at 214nm as follows: 0%B (25% ACN in 10mM KH2PO4 and 500mM KCl (pH3.0)), 0-25min; 0-10%B, 25-32min; 10-20%, 32-42min; 20-45%, 42-47min; 45-100%B, 47-52min; 100%B, 52-60min; 100-0%B, 60-75min. The fractions were collected, combined to 11 fractions, lyophilize, and resuspended with 40μL of 0.1% FA, and 10μL of each fraction was loaded onto a C18 capillary trap cartridge (Eksigent NanoLC-Ultra® binary system) and then separated on a 15cm nanoflow C18 column (ChromXP C18-CL 200μm diameter, 3μm, 200 Å) (Eksigent NanoLC-Ultra® binary system) at a flow rate of 0.3nL min-1 by a linear gradient: 5-8% mobile phase B (98% ACN and 0.1% FA), 0-1min; 8-22% mobile phase B, 1-85min; 22-52% mobile phase B, 85-105min; 52-80% mobile phase B, 105-106min; 80% mobile phase B, 106-110min; 80-5% mobile phase B, 110-120min. For the LC-MS/MS system, mobile phase A contained 0.1% FA and 2% ACN in water. Then, eluted peptides were analyzed by Triple TOFTM 5600 LC-MS/MS (AB SCIEX), and the data were processed with Analyst® 1.5.1 (AB SCIEX), which was operated in a data-dependent analysis. The mass measurement accuracy for both the precursor and product ions was within 50mDa.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were submitted to database search considering biological modification and amino acid substitution against the Uniprot Liliposida database (320,685 entries, downloaded on 7 February 2012) and NCBI non-redundant database (NCBInr) by use of the Paragon algorithm of ProteinPilot v4.0 (AB SCIEX). Plant species, fixed modification of methylmethanethiosulfate labeled cysteine, fixed iTRAQ modification of free amine in the N-terminus and lysine, and variable iTRAQ modifications of tyrosine were considered. Parameters such as trypsin digestion, precursor mass accuracy and fragment ionmass accuracy are built-in settings of the software. The raw peptide identification results from the Paragon algorithm were further processed by the ProGroup algorithm. The software calculates a percentage confidence that reflects the probability that the hit is a false positive. In the iTRAQ experiments, at least one highly confident MS/MS spectrum is needed for identification. For proteins with one significant contributing peptide, the MS/MS spectrum of the peptide was manually inspected. The false discovery level was estimated by performing the search against a concatenated database containing both forward and reverse sequences. For relative protein quantification, only MS/MS spectra unique to a particular protein, signal-to-noise ratio > 9, and without any modification were used for quantification. (software default settings, AB SCIEX) The mean, standard deviation, and p-values to estimate statistical significance of the protein changes were calculated. An abundance changed protein needs to have at least three MS/MS spectra (allowing generation of a p-value) and a p-value < 0.05, and with more than a 1.5-fold change among any two treatments in at least two replicates

### Publication Abstract
Alkali-salinity exerts severe osmotic, ionic, and high-pH stresses to plants. To understand the alkali-salinity responsive mechanisms underlying photosynthetic modulation and reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis, physiological and diverse quantitative proteomics analyses of alkaligrass (Puccinellia tenuiflora) under Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> stress were conducted. In addition, Western blot, real-time PCR, and transgenic techniques were applied to validate the proteomic results and test the functions of the Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive proteins. A total of 104 and 102 Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive proteins were identified in leaves and chloroplasts, respectively. In addition, 84 Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive phosphoproteins were identified, including 56 new phosphorylation sites in 56 phosphoproteins from chloroplasts, which are crucial for the regulation of photosynthesis, ion transport, signal transduction, and energy homeostasis. A full-length PtFBA encoding an alkaligrass chloroplastic fructose-bisphosphate aldolase (FBA) was overexpressed in wild-type cells of cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. Strain PCC 6803, leading to enhanced Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> tolerance. All these results indicate that thermal dissipation, state transition, cyclic electron transport, photorespiration, repair of photosystem (PS) II, PSI activity, and ROS homeostasis were altered in response to Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub> stress, which help to improve our understanding of the Na<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>-responsive mechanisms in halophytes.

### Keywords
Na2co3, Chloroplasts, Proteomics, Puccinellia tenuiflora

### Affiliations
Alkali Soil Natural Environmental Science Center, Northeast Forestry University, Key Laboratory of Saline-alkali Vegetation Ecology Restoration in Oil Field, Ministry of Education, Harbin 150040, China
NEFU

### Submitter
Shaojun Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Shaojun Dai
Alkali Soil Natural Environmental Science Center, Northeast Forestry University, Key Laboratory of Saline-alkali Vegetation Ecology Restoration in Oil Field, Ministry of Education, Harbin 150040, China


