### Accession
PXD012624

### Title
Reconstitution of microtubule nucleation in vitro reveals novel roles for Mzt1

### Description
Protein-protein interaction within the MGM holocomplex has been investigated by chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry using EDC (1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide) cross-linker. Although this analysis was not exhaustive, we observed crosslinks between Alp4 and Alp6 along the length of these two proteins, consistent with their general parallel lateral alignment in current models for gamma-TuC organization. In addition, we observed specific cross-links from both Alp4 and Alp6 to the Mto1 [bonsai] CM1 domain and/or its immediate flanking regions. Interestingly, crosslinks from Alp4 and Alp6 N-terminal regions tended to be to the C-terminal portion of the CM1 domain, while crosslinks from Alp4 and Alp6 C-terminal regions tended to be to the N-terminal portion of the CM1 domain. This raises the possibility that the CM1 domain, which is adjacent to coiled-coil regions, may be oriented antiparallel to Alp4 and Alp6.

### Sample Protocol
For cross-linking mass spectrometry, MGM holocomplex and Alp6-MBP:Mzt1 complex were cross-linked (independently) with either EDC or sulfosuccinimidyl 4,4'-azipentanoate (Sulfo-SDA). The MGM complex was incubated with EDC and Sulfo-NHS at a 1:2:4.4 (w/w/w) ratio for 90 minutes at 18°C in 40 mM K-HEPES, 300mM NaCl, and 1 mM MgCl2 pH7.5. Alp6-MBP:Mzt1 complex was incubated with either EDC/Sulfo-NHS at a 1:6:13.2 (w/w/w) ratio for 90 minutes at 18°C, or with Sulfo-SDA at a 1:0.3 (w/w) ratio for 1 hour on ice with a further 30 minutes of UV irradiation. The mixtures were separated on a 4-12% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide precast gel, stained with Coomassie Blue and destained with 10% acetic acid overnight. On the following day, gels were washed twice in MilliQ water for 30 minutes each. The higher molecular-weight bands (>250 kDa; for both complexes) and Alp6-MBP bands (for experiments involving Alp6-MBP:Mzt1) were excised with a clean scalpel for further analysis. Proteins were then digested with trypsin, following previously established protocols. Peptides from the MGM holocomplex were fractionated after digestion using SCX-Stage- Tips. These peptide fractions were subsequently desalted using C18-StageTips for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides from the Alp6-MBP:Mzt1 complex were loaded onto StageTips for desalting and eluted in 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. For the MGM holocomplex, LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a “high/high” acquisition strategy. Peptide separation was carried out on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm × 75 μm i.d., PepMap C18, 2 μm particles, 100 A pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Peptides were loaded at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and eluted at 0.2 μL/min using a linear gradient from 2% mobile phase B to 40% mobile phase B over a period of 109 or 139 min, followed by a linear increase from 40% to 95% mobile phase B over a period of 11 min. The eluted peptides were directly introduced into the mass spectrometer.  MS data were acquired in the data-dependent mode with 3 s acquisition cycle. Precursor spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 8+ were isolated with a window size of 1.6 m/z and fragmented using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with collision energy 30. The fragmentation spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60 s exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant (version1.5.3.30), and cross-linked peptides were matched to spectra using Xi software (version 1.6.745)(https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/XiSearch). Search parameters were: MS accuracy, 3 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 10ppm; enzyme, trypsin; cross-linker, EDC; Max missed cleavages, 4; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine and phosphorylation on serine; fragments, b and y ions with loss of H2O, NH3 and CH3SOH. FDR was estimated using XiFDR on 5% residue level.

### Publication Abstract
Microtubule (MT) nucleation depends on the &#x3b3;-tubulin complex (&#x3b3;-TuC), in which multiple copies of the heterotetrameric &#x3b3;-tubulin small complex (&#x3b3;-TuSC) associate to form a ring-like structure (in metazoans, &#x3b3;-tubulin ring complex; &#x3b3;-TuRC) [1-7]. Additional conserved regulators of the &#x3b3;-TuC include the small protein Mzt1 (MOZART1 in human; GIP1/1B and GIP2/1A in plants) [8-13] and proteins containing a Centrosomin Motif 1 (CM1) domain [10, 14-19]. Many insights into &#x3b3;-TuC regulators have come from in&#xa0;vivo analysis in fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. The S.&#xa0;pombe CM1 protein Mto1 recruits the &#x3b3;-TuC to microtubule-organizing centers (MTOCs) [14, 20-22], and analysis of Mto1[bonsai], a truncated version of Mto1 that cannot localize to MTOCs, has shown that Mto1 also has a role in &#x3b3;-TuC activation [23]. S.&#xa0;pombe Mzt1 interacts with &#x3b3;-TuSC and is essential for &#x3b3;-TuC function and localization to MTOCs [11, 12]. However, the mechanisms by which Mzt1 functions remain unclear. Here we describe reconstitution of MT nucleation using purified recombinant Mto1[bonsai], the Mto1 partner protein Mto2, &#x3b3;-TuSC, and Mzt1. Multiple copies of the six proteins involved coassemble to form a 34-40S ring-like "MGM" holocomplex that is a potent MT nucleator in&#xa0;vitro. Using purified MGM and subcomplexes, we investigate the role of Mzt1 in MT nucleation. Our results suggest that Mzt1 is critical to stabilize Alp6, the S.&#xa0;pombe homolog of human &#x3b3;-TuSC protein GCP3, in an "interaction-competent" form within the &#x3b3;-TuSC. This is essential for MGM to become a functional nucleator.

### Keywords
“mgm” (mto/gamma/mozart) holocomplex, Cross-linking

### Affiliations
The University of Edinburgh
1Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh 2Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, 13355, Germany

### Submitter
Juan Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh 2Chair of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, 13355, Germany


