### Accession
PXD036981

### Title
The influence of symbiosis on the proteome of the symbiotic dinoflagellate Breviolum

### Description
The physiology and cellular mechanisms of the dinoflagellate symbionts of cnidarians, the Symbiodiniaceae, change as a response to symbiosis, nutrient availability, and their surrounding microhabitat, but the underlying processes are poorly understood. Here, we employed liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry-based proteomics to elucidate the changes associated with the symbiotic and nutritional states of Breviolum minutum, a native symbiont of the sea anemone Exaiptasia diaphana. Both symbiosis and nutritional state had significant impacts on the B. minutum proteome. B. minutum in hospite showed increased abundance of proteins that are involved in phosphoinositol manipulation (e.g., glycerophosphoinositol permease 1 and phosphatidylinositol phosphatase), potentially as a means of interpartner signalling to prevent host phagosomal maturation. Proteins involved in carbon concentration and fixation (e.g. carbonic anhydrase, V-type ATPase) and nitrogen assimilation (e.g. glutamine synthase) were upregulated in ex hospite B. minutum, possibly due to nitrogen limitation by host in hospite and a lack of host carbon concentration mechanisms when ex hospite, respectively. Photosystem proteins increased in abundance at high nutrient levels, as were proteins involved in antioxidant mechanisms (e.g. superoxide dismutase, glutathione s-transferase). Proteins involved in iron metabolism was also affected by nutrient state, indicating increased iron demand and uptake in low nutrient treatments. These results provide better insight on the cellular mechanisms of symbiosis and provides potential target pathways for investigating a functional cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis.

### Sample Protocol
Algal pellets were washed with 500 µl cold HPLC-grade water at 4 C to remove salts and resuspended in 500 μl 1% SDC in HPLC grade water to help remove host tissue from the agal cells. The resuspension was passed five times through a 23-gauge needle (0.337 mm inner diameter) to remove any remainingor protein of host origin. All samples were centrifuged again at 500 × g for 5 min at 4 C and the host-containing supernatant was discarded. For lysis, the pellet was resuspended in 500 µl of 5% sodium dodecyl sulphate in HPLC grade water. All cells were homogenized with an ultrasonic homogenizer (Vibra-Cell™ Ultrasonic VCX 500). Total protein extraction was conducted by incubating homogenized cell samples at 85 C for 20 min with 1% B-mercaptoethanol. Hydrophobic pigments were removed by ethyl acetate phase transfer. A filter-aided sample preparation method was used to concentrate and purify the protein fraction, followed by digestion overnight by trypsin. Digested peptides were separated using a 30 kDa molecular-weight cutoff filter and any remaining SDC precipitated by the addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. All the samples were then desalted as described in Oakley et al. (2016). Liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) was used for peptide analysis. 200 ng of peptides per sample were separated by liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) on a 150mm PepMap C18 column (#160321, Thermo Scientific) at 35 C with a non-linear gradient from 96% to 50% buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and a flow rate of 0.3 μl for 90 min. An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was used to analyse hyphenated peptides using Thermo Xcalibur (v4.3), which were ionized at 1.8 kV. Parent MS spectra were acquired using the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120 k and scan range of 375-1599 m/z. Sequencing was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation on the top 20 precursors, and the fragment ion spectra acquired in the linear ion trap with dynamic exclusion enabled for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Andromeda algorithm in MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 was used to search the tandem MS spectra against a custom protein database constructed from a B. minutum transcriptome, using standard genetic code for translation and a list of common contaminants. A maximum of two missed cleavages of trypsin digestion, a minimum of two matching peptides per protein, and a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids all with false discovery rate of 0.01 were required for peptide and protein validations. Variable modifications were set as N-terminus carbamylation and oxidation of methionine, and fixed modifications were specified as cysteine carbamidomethylation. The match between runs feature was enabled. All spectra from in hospite treatments were also searched against Aiptasia protein sequence databases to verify that few contaminating host proteins were present.

### Publication Abstract
The cellular mechanisms responsible for the regulation of nutrient exchange, immune response, and symbiont population growth in the cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis are poorly resolved. Here, we employed liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to elucidate proteomic changes associated with symbiosis in <i>Breviolum minutum</i>, a native symbiont of the sea anemone <i>Exaiptasia diaphana</i> ('Aiptasia'). We manipulated nutrients available to the algae in culture and to the holobiont <i>in hospite</i> (i.e., in symbiosis) and then monitored the impacts of our treatments on host-endosymbiont interactions. Both the symbiotic and nutritional states had significant impacts on the <i>B. minutum</i> proteome. <i>B. minutum in hospite</i> showed an increased abundance of proteins involved in phosphoinositol metabolism (e.g., glycerophosphoinositol permease 1 and phosphatidylinositol phosphatase) relative to the free-living alga, potentially reflecting inter-partner signalling that promotes the stability of the symbiosis. Proteins potentially involved in concentrating and fixing inorganic carbon (e.g., carbonic anhydrase, V-type ATPase) and in the assimilation of nitrogen (e.g., glutamine synthase) were more abundant in free-living <i>B. minutum</i> than <i>in hospite</i>, possibly due to host-facilitated access to inorganic carbon and nitrogen limitation by the host when <i>in hospite</i>. Photosystem proteins increased in abundance at high nutrient levels irrespective of the symbiotic state, as did proteins involved in antioxidant defences (e.g., superoxide dismutase, glutathione s-transferase). Proteins involved in iron metabolism were also affected by the nutritional state, with an increased iron demand and uptake under low nutrient treatments. These results detail the changes in symbiont physiology in response to the host microenvironment and nutrient availability and indicate potential symbiont-driven mechanisms that regulate the cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Coral, Dinoflagellate, Algae, Breviolum, Aiptasia

### Affiliations
Victoria University of Wellington
School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington

### Submitter
Clinton Oakley

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Davy
School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington


