### Accession
PXD009353

### Title
Data in support of Enhanced amyloid beta proteoform detection in an Alzheimer’s disease model by integrated matrix composition enhanced MALDI Imaging and laser capture microdissection

### Description
This study has investigated several parameters to obtain increased detection of the amyloid plaque intact protein profile, including a comparison of commonly used MALDI matrices, acid based reduction of signal suppression as well as the combination of strong acid based protein aggregate extraction from laser microdissection plaques to increase detection of proteoforms.  Female APPPS1-21 transgenic mice were analyzed by MALDI Imaging with different matrices on a Ultraflextreme MALDI TOF/TOF instrument followed by data analysis in SCiLS Lab software. A combination of formic acid treatment of laser capture microdissected plaques was further utilized to expand the analysis and validation of amyloid plaques.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for MALDI Imaging The glass slides containing the attached sections were dried at RT in a vacuum dessicator for 30 minutes. Next, they were rinsed in a series of solutions: 70% EtOH, 99.9% EtOH, Carnoy’s Fluid (EtOH, Chloroform, Acetic acid (60/30/10, v:v:v), 99.9% EtOH, ddH2O, 99.9% EtOH. The glass slides were left for 30 seconds in EtOH and ddH2O and two minutes in Carnoy’s Fluid [14]. They were subsequently left to dry for 45 minutes in a vacuum dessicator.  Matrix deposition Three matrices (CHCA, SA and S-DHB) were chosen for the comparison. The CHCA matrix (7 mg/ml) was dissolved in 50:50:0.2 (v:v:v) ACN:ddH2O:TFA. The S-DHB matrix (30 mg/ml) was dissolved in 50:50:0.2 (v:v:v) MeOH:ddH2O:TFA/PA. The SA matrix (10 mg/ml) was dissolved in 60:40:0.2 (v:v:v) ACN:ddH2O:TFA.  The matrices were deposited by using the ImagePrep robot (Bruker Daltonics) and company provided default deposition programs (DHB_nsh04 for S-DHB, HCCA_nsh04 for CHCA and SA_nsh04 for SA). Data logger software was used together with a coverslip (Bruker Daltonics) added on top of the glass slides to further validate and improve the deposition (Supplementary Figure 1). Average values acquired from the matrix deposition are listed in Table 1. Laser capture microdissection of plaque regions The PEN membrane glass slide containing one brain tissue section from each Tg APPPS1-21 mouse was dried at RT for 25 minutes, dip washed in ddH2O and stained in 1% Thioflavin-T solution for 10 minutes in darkness. The sections were washed in ddH2O for three minutes three times and dried at RT for 1 hour. The Veritas LCM instrument (Arcturus Bioscience) was utilized to microdissect plaques and adjacent control regions from each brain section. The microdissected material was collected in CapSureTM Macro LCM caps (Thermo Fisher). On average, 36 plaques corresponding to an area of 123.863 µm2 while 35 adjacent control regions corresponding to an area of 251.442 µm2 were extracted. The sample material was extracted from the caps by adding and resuspending 15 µl of 70% FA/ddH2O on the cap surface three times followed by incubation in the 70% FA solution O/N at 37°C. Next, the tubes where inserted into a SpeedVac (miVac, GeneVac) for 3 hours and stored at -80°C until further use. The dried material was reconstituted in 12 µl 20% ACN/ 0.1% FA solution. The samples were prepared on a MALDI target plate (Bruker Daltonics) with the dried droplet method by applying 1 µl of sample material and subsequently mixing with 1 µl of S-DHB/PA or S-DHB/TFA matrix solutions.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition MALDI Imaging data was acquired in linear positive mode optimized for imaging average masses in the m/z 1-20 kDa range (Bruker Daltonics, UltrafleXtreme MALDI TOF/TOF). The laser repetition rate was set to 1 kHz and 500 shots per spot. Furthermore, the laser diameter was set to medium and the raster step size to 300 µm in the matrix comparison experiment. A raster series of 50 µm, 100 µm and 300 µm were utilized to investigate the effect of matrix laser tolerability prior to the experiment.     MALDI-MS data was acquired in reflector positive mode optimized for the isotopic resolution in the m/z range 800-6000 Da. A total of 5000 shots per sample spot were used with a medium laser diameter and complete sample function. The laser repetition rate was set to 1 kHz.  A ClinProt Standard was used to generate calibration spectra for all conditions. This was composed of a mixture (1:1) of Protein Calibration Standard I and Peptide Calibration Standard II (Bruker Daltonics) and consisted of the following references: ACTH_clip (1-17) 2094.42700 Da; ACTH_clip (18-39) 2466.68100 Da; Somatostatin (28) 3149.57300 Da; Insulin 5734.51800 Da; Ubiquitin I 8565.76400 Da; Cytochrom C 12360.97400 Da; Myoglobin 16952.30600 Da. A synthetic Aβ1-42 peptide was further added adjacent to the calibration standard and used to verify the m/z value of Aβ1-42 in the tissue sections prior to the analysis.   Data processing of mass spectrometry spectra Matrix comparison The data files were imported into SCiLS Lab software vNN (Bruker Daltonics) where data for the statistical analysis was extracted. In brief, the .mis files obtained in FlexImaging were imported to SCiLS Lab software (Bruker Daltonics) and processed by TopHat baseline correction and TIC normalization.  Peaks at the theoretical m/z value of the Aβ1-42 peptide (Aβ1-42; [M+H]+Ave = 4515.1) were highlighted to visualize its spatial localization. The three highest intensity plaque associated spots where then selected and marked to create a combined mass spectrum (Referred to as Top-3 spot extraction method; Supplementary Figure 4). The intensity bar was adjusted in case of no clear visualization of the corresponding m/z value. Finally, the Find Peaks function was utilized to identify peaks within the newly created mass spectra and the report table was used to export the peak information (Add Mean Intensities; Maximum intensity in interval, Standard deviation at maximum, m/z at maximum and Area under curve).  T-test statistical analysis was performed in Prism 4 (GraphPad). No TopHat baseline correction was utilized in the comparison of the different rasters (50 µm, 150 µm and 300 µm), however, the data was TIC normalized in both cases.  LCM and LIFT analysis GPMAW software (v. 6.02; Lighthouse data) was used to compare the acquired mass spectra from the LIFT analysis to an in-silico fragment tandem MS of the Aβ1-42 peptide.  Data acquired from the LCM plaque extract analysis was imported to Flex Analysis and processed with Smooth function and baseline subtraction. The signal-to-noise (S/N) value of the peaks corresponding to the Aβ1-42 peptide (Aβ1-42; [M+H]+mono = 4512.2) were noted and adjacent peaks were matched to known Aβ peptide variants including possible modifications using the modification list at www.unimod.org.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Maldi, Biomarkers, Imaging ms, Alzheimers disease

### Affiliations
Aalborg University Laboratory for Medical Massspectrometry
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Aalborg University Laboratory for Medical Massspectrometry


