### Accession
PXD000694

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Giardia lamblia ESV and PV organelle enriched fractions

### Description
The protozoan Giardia lamblia is a unique biological model to investigate minimal cellular mechanisms because it is an early‐diverged eukaryote that has undergone reductive evolution and has minimized or lost organelles such as mitochondria, peroxisomes, the endo-lysosomal system and a Golgi apparatus. Giardia trophozoites reside in the host intestines where they largely depend on scavenging metabolites from the surrounding through endocytosis and/or pinocytosis. A canonical endo‐lysosomal system however is inexistent, but small peripheral vesicles (PVs) have been described which have partial endocytic characteristics but lack endocytic hallmarks: (i) unlike the dynamic multivesicular endo-lysosomal system in mammalian cells, PVs have a fixed location at the cell periphery and show no lateral cargo exchange; (ii) PVs lack maturation-specific markers. For transmission to a new host, motile trophozoites differentiate to cysts and thus secrete a protective cyst wall (CW). Giardia however has no Golgi or to organize regulated secretion of CW material. Instead, differentiating cells generate specialized organelles termed encystation‐specific vesicles (ESVs), being stage-regulated Golgi relic organelles dedicated to post‐translational maturation of the CW material. Basic sorting processes in maturing ESVs have been identified recently, but underlying mechanisms remain unknown.  To define the first proteome of ESVs and PVs, we used a new strategy combining flow cytometry-based organelle sorting with in silico filtration of mass spectrometry data.

### Sample Protocol
Organelle staining (PV organelles: endocytic uptake of a fluid phase marker, ESV organelles; GFP-fusion protein), cell disruption by mild sonication, organelle enrichment by flow cytometry, PRMM protein precipitation, 1D-SDS-PAGE, in-gel digestion with trypsin, sample analysis on a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer coupled to an Eksigent-Nano-HPLC system.

### Data Protocol
The raw-files from the mass spectrometer were converted into Mascot generic files (mgf) with Mascot Distiller software 2.4.2.0 (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK). The peak lists were searched using Mascot Server 2.3 against the G. lamblia database (http://tinyurl.com/37z5zqp) with a concatenated decoy database supplemented with contaminants, The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR9) protein database and the Swissprot database to increase the database’s size. The final database included 79141 entries. The identification results were loaded into Scaffold 3.0 (Proteome Software, Portland, US) and filtered for a minimal mascot score of 20 for peptide probability, a protein probability greater than 80%, and a minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Giardia lamblia is a flagellated protozoan enteroparasite transmitted as an environmentally resistant cyst. Trophozoites attach to the small intestine of vertebrate hosts and proliferate by binary fission. They access nutrients directly via uptake of bulk fluid phase material into specialized endocytic organelles termed peripheral vesicles (PVs), mainly on the exposed dorsal side. When trophozoites reach the G2/M restriction point in the cell cycle they can begin another round of cell division or encyst if they encounter specific environmental cues. They induce neogenesis of Golgi-like organelles, encystation-specific vesicles (ESVs), for regulated secretion of cyst wall material. PVs and ESVs are highly simplified and thus evolutionary diverged endocytic and exocytic organelle systems with key roles in proliferation and transmission to a new host, respectively. Both organelle systems physically and functionally intersect at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) which has catabolic as well as anabolic functions. However, the unusually high degree of sequence divergence in Giardia rapidly exhausts phylogenomic strategies to identify and characterize the molecular underpinnings of these streamlined organelles. To define the first proteome of ESVs and PVs we used a novel strategy combining flow cytometry-based organelle sorting with in silico filtration of mass spectrometry data. From the limited size datasets we retrieved many hypothetical but also known organelle-specific factors. In contrast to PVs, ESVs appear to maintain a strong physical and functional link to the ER including recruitment of ribosomes to organelle membranes. Overall the data provide further evidence for the formation of a cyst extracellular matrix with minimal complexity. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PXD000694.

### Keywords
Flow cytometry assisted organelle sorting, Endocytosis, Encystation, Organelle proteomics, Giardia

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich, Switzerland
Institute of Parasitology

### Submitter
Adrian Hehl

### Lab Head
Dr Adrian B. Hehl
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich, Switzerland


