### Accession
PXD033539

### Title
Proteome of arsenite in P. pseudoalcaligenes CECT 5344

### Description
Quantitative proteomic analysis of P. pseudoalcaligenes CECT 5344 in the presence of arsenite (As(III)) with ammonium and cyanide as nitrogen sources

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected at the same growth and consumption rates, then they were washed in phosphate buffer, sonicated and proteins were precipitated by using the 2D Clean-Up kit. Resuspended proteins in urea-based buffer were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in an Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were submitted to Andromeda search engine in the MaxQuant plantform. Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes CECT 5344 proteome from Uniprot (UP000032841) was used as database. Only those proteins identified from more than 1 peptide were considered for qualitative analysis. Only those proteins with a fold change higher than 2 and with a p value lower than 0.05 were considered as differential expressed. Samples 1-3 correspond to ammonium as nitrogen source, without arsenite; samples 4-6 correspond to samples with 2 mM ammonium and 0.25 mM arsenite; samples 7-9 were growth with 2 mM cyanide as nitrogen source, without arsenite; and samples 10-12 correspond to samples growth with cyanide and arsenite

### Publication Abstract
Wastewater from mining and other industries usually contains arsenic and cyanide, two highly toxic pollutants, thereby creating the need to develop bioremediation strategies. Here, molecular mechanisms triggered by the simultaneous presence of cyanide and arsenite were analyzed by quantitative proteomics, complemented with qRT-PCR analysis and determination of analytes in the cyanide-assimilating bacterium <i>Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes</i> CECT 5344. Several proteins encoded by two <i>ars</i> gene clusters and other Ars-related proteins were up-regulated by arsenite, even during cyanide assimilation. Although some proteins encoded by the <i>cio</i> gene cluster responsible for cyanide-insensitive respiration decreased in the presence of arsenite, the nitrilase NitC required for cyanide assimilation was unaffected, thus allowing bacterial growth with cyanide and arsenic. Two complementary As-resistance mechanisms were developed in this bacterium, the extrusion of As(III) and its extracellular sequestration in biofilm, whose synthesis increased in the presence of arsenite, and the formation of organoarsenicals such as arseno-phosphoglycerate and methyl-As. Tetrahydrofolate metabolism was also stimulated by arsenite. In addition, the ArsH2 protein increased in the presence of arsenite or cyanide, suggesting its role in the protection from oxidative stress caused by both toxics. These results could be useful for the development of bioremediation strategies for industrial wastes co-contaminated with cyanide and arsenic.

### Keywords
Biorremediation, Quantitative proteomics, Thf, Arsenite

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba
University of Cordoba

### Submitter
Alfonso Olaya Abril

### Lab Head
Dr Conrado Moreno Vivián
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba


