### Accession
PXD019817

### Title
Plasma proteome changes during the first week of human life in two independent cohorts

### Description
Introduction: Early life is characterized by heightened susceptibility to infections and is recognized as a major determinant of the immune system development and the overall health for the entire human lifespan. However, our knowledge of the development of the neonatal immune system is incomplete, limiting the development of novel preventative and therapeutic strategies, especially in newborns. To gain insight into the early immune system development and plasma proteome ontogeny, the Expanded Program on Immunization Consortium (EPIC) led by Professor Ofer Levy MD at Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School and Tobias R. Kollmann Telethon Kids Institute, Australia as part of the Human Immunological Project Consortium (HIPC), established two independent cohorts of plasma from healthy newborns born by vaginal delivery during the first week of life.  Methods: Blood samples were collected from 30 newborns in The Gambia (Medical Research Council Unit, The Gambia) at the day of birth (day of life, DOL 0) and at one of the follow-up visits on DOL1, DOL3, or DOL7. A similar validation cohort was collected in Papua New Guinea (PNG) (Institute for Medical Research, Papua New Guinea, Australasian) from 19 newborns. The plasma proteome was characterized by LC-MS on a Q Exactive using the proven and published plasma proteomics platform developed in the Steen Laboratory, led by Dr Hanno Steen, Director of Proteomics at Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, employing only microliter of plasma prepared in a 96-well plate format. The data was analyzed with MaxQuant.  Results: We characterized 385 blood-plasma proteins. Utilizing the paired study design, we identified consistent changes related to ontogeny and cellular growth pathways in the blood-plasma proteome.  Conclusion: This dataset allows for studying the early ontogeny of the plasma proteome, and in extension the early immune system development, in two independent healthy cohorts. Characterization of the plasma proteome may provide novel insight into new approaches to prevent, detect, and treat infectious diseases.  Acknowledgements: We would like to thank all the participating families and all past and current members of the EPIC-HIPC, and the Steen Laboratory, without whom this study would not be possible. A special recognition goes to the teams who established the unique cohorts in The Gambia, by Professor Beate Kampmann and Dr Olubukola T. Idoko at The Gambia at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, The Gambia, and in PNG, by Anita H.J. van der Biggelaar and William S. Pomat at Wesfarmers Centre of Vaccines and Infectious Diseases, Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Australia Perth, Australia.

### Sample Protocol
Study Cohort and ethics: Thirty healthy, term newborns were enrolled at the Medical Research Council (MRC) Unit The Gambia and 19 at the Institute for Medical Research (IMR) in Goroka, Papua New Guinea in accordance with a local Ethics Committee-approved protocol (MRC SCC 1436 and IMR IRB#1515 and MRAC #16.14). Following informed consent, mothers were screened for HIV-I and -II and Hepatitis B with positivity for either virus representing an exclusion criterion. Inclusion criteria were a healthy appearing infant as determined by physical examination, born by vaginal delivery at gestational age of >36 weeks, 5-min Apgar scores > 8, and a birth weight of >2.5 kg. Peripheral blood samples were obtained from all infants on the day of birth (DOL0) and then again either at DOL1, DOL3 or DOL7 (Figure 1) to reduce venipuncture to a maximum of twice in the first week of life. Peripheral venous blood was drawn from infants via sterile venipuncture directly into heparinized collection tubes (Becton Dickinson (BD) Biosciences; San Jose, CA, USA). Aliquots (200 μl) were immediately placed in RNA-later (Ambion ThermoFisher; Waltham, MA, USA) for RNAseq analysis with the remaining blood kept in the collection tubes at room temperature. Within 4 hrs, the whole blood was centrifuged on site at 500 × g for 10 min at room temp and the plasma was harvested and stored at −80°C. All samples were processed and subsequently shipped on dry ice, under temperature controlled and monitored conditions (World Courier; New Hyde Park, NY, USA).  Sample Preparation: Plasma samples from newborns were prepared for proteome analysis using the in-house developed plasma and serum proteomics workflow, based on the MStern blotting sample processing and trypsinization protocol (Bennike et al). To this end, 5 µL plasma was diluted in 100 µL sample buffer (8 M urea in TRIS-HCl, pH 8.5). Protein disulfide bonds were reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM final concentration) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (50 mM final concentration). Approximately 10 µg protein solution was transferred to a 96 well plate with a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane at the bottom. Protein digestion was performed with sequencing-grade modified Trypsin (V5111, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a nominal protease to protein ratio of 1:25 w/w. After incubation for two hrs at 37°C, the peptides were eluted and concentrated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. To monitor retention time stability and system performance, iRT peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) were spiked into all samples.  Mass Spectrometry Analysis: The samples were analyzed using a nanoLC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) equipped with a LCchip system (cHiPLC nanoflex, Eksigent, CA, USA) coupled online to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). From each sample, 0.2 µg peptide material was separated using a linear gradient from 93% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water), 7% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) which was increased to 32% solvent B over 60 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, selecting up to the 12 most intense precursors for fragmentation from each precursor scan.

### Data Protocol
We performed a label-free protein quantitation analysis in MaxQuant (v 1.6.2.5). Proteins were identified using the build-in Andromeda search engine and an updated reviewed UniProt Human Reference Proteome. Standard search settings were employed with matching between runs on and the following abundant modifications: max three tryptic missed cleavages, methionine oxidation as variable modification, and cysteine carboxymethylation as fixed modification. The revert decoy search strategy in MaxQuant was used to filter all reported proteins and peptides to < 1% false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
Systems biology can unravel complex biology but has not been extensively applied to human newborns, a group highly vulnerable to a wide range of diseases. We optimized methods to extract transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic, cytokine/chemokine, and single cell immune phenotyping data from &lt;1&#x2009;ml of blood, a volume readily obtained from newborns. Indexing to baseline and applying innovative integrative computational methods reveals dramatic changes along a remarkably stable developmental trajectory over the first week of life. This is most evident in changes of interferon and complement pathways, as well as neutrophil-associated signaling. Validated across two independent cohorts of newborns from West Africa and Australasia, a robust and common trajectory emerges, suggesting a purposeful rather than random developmental path. Systems biology and innovative data integration can provide fresh insights into the molecular ontogeny of the first week of life, a dynamic developmental phase that is key for health and disease.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Dda, Plasma, Newborn, Ontogeny, Healthy

### Affiliations
Aalborg University
Head of The Steen-Laboratory, Director of Proteomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Tue Bjerg Bennike

### Lab Head
Dr Hanno Steen
Head of The Steen-Laboratory, Director of Proteomics, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School


### SDRF

