### Accession
PXD024074

### Title
Co-dependent macrocyclic peptide interactions facilitate ipglycermide high affinity binding to phosphoglycerate mutases

### Description
The phylogenetic divergence between parasitic and mammalian phosphoglycerate mutases (PGMs) offers an opportunity for selective pharmacologic targeting of glycolysis in disease-causing organisms. With this aim we previously described ipglycermides, discovered by affinity selection from a vast nucleic acid-encoded cyclic peptide library, as the first potent and selective class of cofactor-independent PGM (iPGM) inhibitors. From C. elegans iPGM•ipglycermide co-crystal structures we now delineate the previously hypothesized metal ion binding geometries at the ipglycermide C-terminal cysteine. To develop a baseline structure-activity relationship complementing the structural details, the 14 amino acids of ipglycermide were individually substituted creating 280 DNA-encoded analogs.  Binding affinities to immobilized C. elegans iPGM, measured as fold-enrichment by deep sequencing, illuminated the significance of each amino acid sidechain to the pharmacophore and guided ipglycermides designed with improved orthologous iPGM affinity.  In consideration with binding kinetics, we describe how the high affinity of ipglycermide to a range of iPGM orthologs is achieved by a co-dependence on tunable metal ion coordination-associated off-rates and induced-concavity around the macrocyclic core at the phosphotransferase-phosphatase domain interface to freeze the structurally dynamic enzyme into an inactive, stable complex.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 25 µg of protein from each sample was used for in-solution digestion using RapidGest (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) to enhance enzymatic digestion of protein, followed by denature, reduction, alkylation and incubated with trypsin (1:50, trypsin/protein) at 37 0C for around 12 hours. Acidified tryptic peptides were desalted using an HPLC C18 column on an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA), lyophilized and then re-suspended in 3% ACN, 97.9% water and 0.1% formic acid (FA) buffer for LC-MS/MS analysis. Around 300 ng of the digested samples was loaded into Agilent LC-MS system comprised of a 1200 LC system coupled to a 6550 QTOF via an HPLC Chip Cube interface. Agilent Polaris-HR-Chip-3C18 chip (360 nL, 180 Å C18 trap with a 75 μm i.d., 150 mm length, 180 Å C18 analytical column) was used for the peptide capture and separation prior to MS analysis. Elution of peptides from the analytical column was performed using a gradient starting at 97% A (A: 99.9% water, 0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. The mobile phase was 3–10% B for 2 min, 10–35% B for 16 min, 35–99% for 1 min, and maintained at 99% B (B: 90% ACN, 9.9% water, 0.1% FA) for 4 min, followed by re-equilibration of column with 3% B for 6 min. Data dependent (autoMS2) MS acquisition was performed by an Agilent 6550 QTOF at 2 GHz. Precursor MS spectra were acquired from m/z 315 to 1700 and the top 6 peaks were selected for MS/MS analysis. Product scans were acquired from m/z 50 to 1700 at a scan rate of 3 spectra per second. A medium isolation width (∼4 amu) was used, and a collision energy of slope 3.6 V/100 Da with a 2.9 V offset was applied for fragmentation. A dynamic exclusion list was applied with precursors excluded for 0.50 min after two MS/MS spectrum was acquired.

### Data Protocol
All the LC-MS/MS raw data were converted to Mascot generic format (.mgf) by Agilent MassHunter Qualitative Analysis B.07.00. Mascot version 2.5 was used to search against either the Swiss-Prot database (2018.01) which consists of 556,568 entries or NCBI protein database (2018.02), which consists of 145,687,053 entries for peptide sequence assignments using the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 50 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.2 daltons. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints, and up to two internal cleavage sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. Fixed modifications consisted of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Variable modifications that were considered were oxidation of methionine residues.

### Publication Abstract
Catalysis of human phosphoglycerate mutase is dependent on a 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate cofactor (dPGM), whereas the nonhomologous isozyme in many parasitic species is cofactor independent (iPGM). This mechanistic and phylogenetic diversity offers an opportunity for selective pharmacologic targeting of glycolysis in disease-causing organisms. We previously discovered ipglycermide, a potent inhibitor of iPGM, from a large combinatorial cyclic peptide library. To fully delineate the ipglycermide pharmacophore, herein we construct a detailed structure-activity relationship using 280 substituted ipglycermide analogs. Binding affinities of these analogs to immobilized Caenorhabditis elegans iPGM, measured as fold enrichment relative to the index residue by deep sequencing of an mRNA display library, illuminated the significance of each amino acid to the pharmacophore. Using cocrystal structures and binding kinetics, we show that the high affinity of ipglycermide for iPGM orthologs, from Brugia malayi, Onchocerca volvulus, Dirofilaria immitis, and Escherichia coli, is achieved by a codependence between (1) the off-rate mediated by the macrocycle Cys14 thiolate coordination to an active-site Zn<sup>2+</sup> in the iPGM phosphatase domain and (2) shape complementarity surrounding the macrocyclic core at the phosphotransferase-phosphatase domain interface. Our results show that the high-affinity binding of ipglycermide to iPGMs freezes these structurally dynamic enzymes into an inactive, stable complex.

### Keywords
Cyclic peptide, Phosphoglycerate mutase, Interaction, Proteomics, Structure

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS)
NIH NCATS

### Submitter
Dingyin Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Dingyin Tao
NIH NCATS


