### Accession
PXD019565

### Title
Deposition for: Mild and Chemoselective, Light-Driven Post-translational Editing Allows Installation of Reactive Side-Chains into Proteins

### Description
MS/MS characterisation data of the publication: Mild anChemoselective, Light-Driven Post-Translational Editing Allows Installation of Reactive Side Chains into Proteins.

### Sample Protocol
All sample processing methods are described in the supplementary information of the publiation.

### Data Protocol
All sample processing methods are described in the supplementary information of the publiation.

### Publication Abstract
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) greatly expand the structures and functions of proteins in nature<sup>1,2</sup>. Although synthetic protein functionalization strategies allow mimicry of PTMs<sup>3,4</sup>, as well as formation of unnatural protein variants with diverse potential functions, including drug carrying<sup>5</sup>, tracking, imaging<sup>6</sup> and partner crosslinking<sup>7</sup>, the range of functional groups that can be introduced remains limited. Here we describe the visible-light-driven installation of side chains at dehydroalanine residues in proteins through the formation of carbon-centred radicals that allow C-C bond formation in water. Control of the reaction redox allows site-selective modification with good conversions and reduced protein damage. In situ generation of boronic acid catechol ester derivatives generates RH<sub>2</sub>C<sup>&#x2022;</sup> radicals that form the native (&#x3b2;-CH<sub>2</sub>-&#x3b3;-CH<sub>2</sub>) linkage of natural residues and PTMs, whereas in situ potentiation of pyridylsulfonyl derivatives by Fe(II) generates RF<sub>2</sub>C<sup>&#x2022;</sup> radicals that form equivalent &#x3b2;-CH<sub>2</sub>-&#x3b3;-CF<sub>2</sub> linkages bearing difluoromethylene labels. These reactions are chemically tolerant and incorporate a wide range of functionalities (more than 50 unique residues/side chains) into diverse protein scaffolds and sites. Initiation can be applied chemoselectively in the presence of sensitive groups in the radical precursors, enabling installation of previously incompatible side chains. The resulting protein function and reactivity are used to install radical precursors for homolytic on-protein radical generation; to study enzyme function with natural, unnatural and CF<sub>2</sub>-labelled post-translationally modified protein substrates via simultaneous sensing of both chemo- and stereoselectivity; and to create generalized 'alkylator proteins' with a spectrum of heterolytic covalent-bond-forming activity (that is, reacting diversely with small molecules at one extreme or selectively with protein targets through good mimicry at the other). Post-translational access to such reactions and chemical groups on proteins could be useful in both revealing and creating protein function.

### Keywords
Chemical biology, Synthetic protein modification, Photocatalysis

### Affiliations
CY Cergy Paris Université
University of Oxford Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry

### Submitter
Simon Nadal

### Lab Head
Dr Shabaz Mohammed
University of Oxford Departments of Chemistry and Biochemistry


