### Accession
PXD018889

### Title
Identification of SjEV proteins between male and female schistosomes

### Description
Identification of SjEV proteins between male and female schistosomes

### Sample Protocol
The purified EVs samples were dissolved in PBS. For reduction of proteins, dithothreitol (DTT) was then added to final concentration 10 mM followed by incubation at 37℃ for 1.5h. After that, iodoacetamine (IAA) was added to alkylate proteins to final concentration 50 mM followed by incubation at room temperature in dark for 40 min. Trypsin was then added with the ratio of trypsin to protein at 1:50 (w/w) for digestion at 37℃ for overnight after 4-fold dilution in 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer to achieve a final urea concentration below 2M. Trypsin digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges, concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Data interpretation and protein identification were performed with the MS/MS spectra data sets using the Mascot search algorithm (v 2.2, Matrix Science) against the UniProtKB Schistosoma japonicum database (download at January 22, 2020, with 29,784 entries). The search parameters were trypsin enzyme, two missed cleavages, fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl, variable modifications of oxidation, a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.10 Da, and peptide tolerance of 20 ppm. Only proteins with at least two peptide (filter by ion score ≥20 and false discovery rate <0.01) uniquely assigned to the respective sequence were considered identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteins, Schistosome; extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, CHINESE ACADEMY OF AGRICULTURAL SCIENCES

### Submitter
Guofeng Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Guofeng Cheng
Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, CHINESE ACADEMY OF AGRICULTURAL SCIENCES


