### Accession
PXD035110

### Title
Vap33 protein interactome - The Drosophila tumor suppressors Lgl and Vap33 activate the Hippo pathway by a dual mechanism involving RtGEF/Git/Arf79F and inhibition of the V-ATPase

### Description
To identify Vap33 binding proteins, we purified Vap33-containing protein complexes from Drosophila embryos, using the single-step GFP-trap bead purification from a fly line expressing YFP-tagged Vap33, followed by nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of the interactors. This study revealed the binding of Vap33 to RtGEF and Git, which we further connected to the regulation of Hippo signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Flies expressing endogenously YFP-tagged Vap33 (line #115288, Kyoto Stock Center) were grown in population cages, and overnight embryos were collected on apple juice/agar plates. Extraction and protein purification were carried out as described in Neumüller RA, et al. (2012) Genetics 190(3):931–940. Briefly, extracts were prepared using Default Lysis Buffer, spun down to clarify, incubated first with empty agarose beads, then with GFP-Trap beads, followed by washes and elution in SDS sample buffer. The eluates were loaded on SDS-polyacrylimide gel, and electrophoresed so that the dye front migrated ~1 cm in the separating gel. The gel was then stained with Coomassie blue, and the lane was cut into two 5 mm x 5 mm pieces and sent for mass spectrometry analysis (Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School). Samples were digested with trypsin in-gel and peptides were analyzed using Thermo Scientific Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometry analysis was conducted on three biological replicates for experimental samples (Vap33-YFP), and three biological replicates for controls (yw fly line).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Sequest and searches were run using a database of annotated Drosophila proteins. Mass tolerance = 2, mass units = amu, fragment ion tolerance = 1, ion series = nB;nY;b;y, Mods = 15.9949146221 M 14.0157 C, enzyme = trypsin. C = 57.0214 was used as a static mod (iodoacetamide). Even though the search used a large mass tolerance the data were filtered at the ppm level. Data were further analyzed using the SAINT algorithm, and the final SAINT output table will be provided in the publication.

### Publication Abstract
The tumour suppressor, Lethal (2) giant larvae [Lgl; also known as L(2)gl], is an evolutionarily conserved protein that was discovered in the vinegar fly Drosophila, where its depletion results in tissue overgrowth and loss of cell polarity. Lgl links cell polarity and tissue growth through regulation of the Notch and the Hippo signalling pathways. Lgl regulates the Notch pathway by inhibiting V-ATPase activity via Vap33. How Lgl regulates the Hippo pathway was unclear. In this current study, we show that V-ATPase activity inhibits the Hippo pathway, whereas Vap33 acts to activate Hippo signalling. Vap33 physically and genetically interacts with the actin cytoskeletal regulators RtGEF (Pix) and Git, which also bind to the Hippo protein (Hpo) and are involved in the activation of the Hippo pathway. Additionally, we show that the ADP ribosylation factor Arf79F (Arf1), which is a Hpo interactor, is involved in the inhibition of the Hippo pathway. Altogether, our data suggest that Lgl acts via Vap33 to activate the Hippo pathway by a dual mechanism: (1) through interaction with RtGEF, Git and Arf79F, and (2) through interaction and inhibition of the V-ATPase, thereby controlling epithelial tissue growth.

### Keywords
Embryo, Drosophila, Vap33

### Affiliations
University of Massachusetts Boston
Biology Department University of Massachusetts Boston Boston, USA

### Submitter
Alexey Veraksa

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey Veraksa
Biology Department University of Massachusetts Boston Boston, USA


