### Accession
PXD006631

### Title
Proteomic profiling of ethanol tolerance in yeast

### Description
For yeast cells, tolerance to high levels of ethanol is vital both in their natural environment and in industrially relevant conditions. We recently genotyped experimentally evolved yeast strains, tolerant to high levels of ethanol. In this study, we elucidate how the genotype and phenotype are related to each other on the molecular level through an integrated analysis of mutation data with protein abundance profiles from six evolved, ethanol-tolerant clones. We constructed a protein network of regulatory proteins, mutated and differentially regulated proteins. This resulted in the identification of a rewired regulatory network after adaptation to high levels of ethanol.

### Sample Protocol
Evolved yeast isolates (n=7) were previously described in Voordeckers et al. PloS Genetics 2015, and all originate from a diploid, prototrophic S288c strain. For all culturing steps, filter sterilized media was used. Three biological replicates of each strain were grown in YPD medium (4% glucose) to early exponential phase (OD600 nm ~0.4). Cultures were divided in two, spun down, washed once with YP and one pellet was re-suspended in YPD (4% glucose), while the other pellet was re-suspended in YPD (4% glucose) supplemented with 6% EtOH (v/v). Cells were grown for two generations before sampletaking for global proteome profiling. Pellets were washed twice with PBS to wash away any growth medium and subsequently frozen at -80°C until further processing. A total of 42 samples was prepared for LC-MS/MS analyses. Frozen cell pellets were dissolved in 2 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Hepes pH 8.0, 8 M urea) of which 500 µl was used to continue the protocol, yielding around 500 µg of protein material/sample. Lysis was performed using FastPrep (MP Biomedicals) with Lysing Matrix C beads. Samples were vortexed 7 times for 10 seconds using the FastPrep device at 4°C (one replicate sample was lost), followed by sonication with 5 pulses of 10 s at an amplitude of 20% using a 3 mm probe. After centrifugation for 15 minutes at 16,000 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components, proteins were reduced by addition of 5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated by addition of 100 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Samples were further diluted with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 2 µg LysC (Wako) (1/250, w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. Samples were again diluted to 2 M urea and digested with 5 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37˚C. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and after 15 minutes incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 1780 x g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. Next, peptides were purified on C18 spin columns (Harvard Apparatus). Columns were first washed with 500 µl of solvent B (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (40:60, v/v)) and pre-equilibrated with 1 ml of solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) before samples were loaded on the column. After peptide binding, the column was washed again with 1 ml of solvent A and peptides were eluted with 100 µl of solvent B. Purified peptides were dried, re-dissolved in solvent A and approximately 2 µg of each sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 140 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 15-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C in a column oven (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 22,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 32% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 45 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the yeast proteins in the Uniprot/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of January 2016 containing 6,721 yeast protein sequences, www.uniprot.org) supplemented with 53 mutated protein sequences from the yeast isolates. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained leading to the identification of 3312 proteins. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.2.6) after loading the proteingroups file from MaxQuant. Proteins only identified by site, reverse database hits and potential contaminants were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit leading to a list of 2,485 quantified proteins that was used for further data analysis. Briefly, since regulated proteins may not reflect the direct consequences of ethanol stress but rather a general profile of slow growth, among the proteins regulated by ethanol are a large number of proteins that are up- or downregulated in the slow growth profile. These proteins were filtered out as suggested previously, and proteins with fold change >+2 and <-2 were deleted from our proteomics profiles. In this way, we identified proteins in each isolate, which are differentially regulated (P < 0.01) in 6% ethanol versus the ancestral strains and we used these differentially regulated proteins for further downstream analyses (protein interactions, protein network constructions).

### Publication Abstract
For yeast cells, tolerance to high levels of ethanol is vital both in their natural environment and in industrially relevant conditions. We recently genotyped experimentally evolved yeast strains adapted to high levels of ethanol and identified mutations linked to ethanol tolerance. In this study, by integrating genomic sequencing data with quantitative proteomics profiles from six evolved strains (data set identifier PXD006631) and construction of protein interaction networks, we elucidate exactly how the genotype and phenotype are related at the molecular level. Our multi-omics approach points to the rewiring of numerous metabolic pathways affected by genomic and proteomic level changes, from energy-producing and lipid pathways to differential regulation of transposons and proteins involved in cell cycle progression. One of the key differences is found in the energy-producing metabolism, where the ancestral yeast strain responds to ethanol by switching to respiration and employing the mitochondrial electron transport chain. In contrast, the ethanol-adapted strains appear to have returned back to energy production mainly via glycolysis and ethanol fermentation, as supported by genomic and proteomic level changes. This work is relevant for synthetic biology where systems need to function under stressful conditions, as well as for industry and in cancer biology, where it is important to understand how the genotype relates to the phenotype.

### Keywords
Yeast, Experimental evolution, Ethanol stress

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University
Lab for Systems Biology, VIB Center for Microbiology KU Leuven Lab for Genetics and Genomics Leuven Institute for Beer Research - LIBR  University of Leuven Bio-Incubator Gaston Geenslaan 1 B-3001 Leuven, Belgium

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Verstrepen
Lab for Systems Biology, VIB Center for Microbiology KU Leuven Lab for Genetics and Genomics Leuven Institute for Beer Research - LIBR  University of Leuven Bio-Incubator Gaston Geenslaan 1 B-3001 Leuven, Belgium


