### Accession
PXD027904

### Title
Nicotinamide riboside supplementation confers modest effects on skeletal muscle metabolism without mitochondrial and acetyl-proteome remodelingNicotinamide riboside supplementation confers modest effects on skeletal muscle metabolism without mitochondrial and acetyl-proteome remodeling

### Description
Nicotinamide riboside supplements (NRS) have been touted as a nutraceutical that promotes cardiometabolic and musculoskeletal health by enhancing nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) biosynthesis, mitochondrial function and/or the activities of NAD-dependent sirtuin deacetylase enzymes. This investigation examined the impact of NRS on whole body energy homeostasis, skeletal muscle mitochondrial function, and corresponding shifts in the acetyl-lysine proteome, in the context of diet-induced obesity using C57BL/6NJ mice. The study also included a genetically-modified mouse model that imposes greater demand on sirtuin flux and associated NAD+ consumption, specifically within muscle tissues. In general, whole body glucose control was modestly improved by NRS when administered at the midpoint of a chronic high fat diet, but not when given as a preventative therapy upon initiation of the diet. Contrary to anticipated outcomes, the study produced little evidence that NRS increases tissue NAD+ levels, augments mitochondrial function and/or mitigates diet-induced hyperacetylation of the skeletal muscle proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Sample prep: See Williams et. al. for further details.  Briefly, approximately 15 mg of powdered quadriceps muscle were resuspended in ice-cold Urea Lysis Buffer and samples were disrupted with a TissueLyzer, subjected to three freeze-thaw cycles, and sonicated. Samples were centrifuged and protein determined via the BCA assay.  For each sample, 500 μg of protein (2.5 mg/mL) was reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide, digested with LysC (1:100 w:w,  4h at 32°C), diluted to 1.5 M urea, and digested with trypsin (50:1 w/w, overnight at 32°C). Samples were desalted by SPE and dried with a speed vac. All samples were suspended in 100 μL of 200 mM TEAB, mixed with a unique 10-plex TMT reagent (0.8 mg in 50 μL 100% acetonitrile), and vortexed for 4h at RT. Samples were quenched with 0.8 μL 50% hydroxylamine, vortexed for an additional 15 min at RT, combined, frozen, and dried overnight in a speed vac. Samples were desalted by SPE. The eluate was vortexed and ~5% was transferred to a separate tube for quantification of unmodified peptides (“input” material) and assessment of TMT labeling efficiency, and the larger portion (95%) was retained for acetylpeptide enrichment. Both portions were dried in a speed vac, and stored at -80°C. Acetylpeptide enrichment on the larger peptide aliquot (95%) was performed using the PTMScan Acetyl-lysine Motif Kit. Peptides were re-suspended in 1.4 mL IAP buffer, centrifuged, and incubated with PBS-washed antibody beads on a rotator overnight at 4°C. Samples were centrifuged and beads were washed with IAP buffer and water. The flow-through and wash fractions were saved for phosphopeptide analysis. After the last wash, bound peptides were eluted twice with 100 μL of 0.15% TFA. The eluate was desalted by SPE and dried in a speed vac, Acetylpeptide samples were re-suspended in 12 μL 0.1% formic acid, and stored at -80°C. The flow-through and wash fractions from the acetyl IP described above were combined, acidified, and desalted by SEP. The elutate was dried in a speed vac and subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment via IMAC using Ni-NTA Magnetic Agarose Beads. Briefly, the beads were washed with water, incubated in 40 mM EDTA, pH 8.0, washed with water again, incubated with 100 mM FeCl3, and washed with 80% acetonitrile/0.15% TFA. Samples were re-suspended in 1 mL 80% acetonitrile/0.15% TFA and incubated with the beads. Samples were subsequently washed with 80% acetonitrile/0.15% TFA and eluted for 1 minute by vortexing in 100 μL of 50% acetonitrile, 0.7% NH4OH. Eluted phosphopeptides were acidified immediately with 50 μL 4% formic acid, dried in a speed vac, re-suspended in 22.5 μL 0.1% FA and stored at -80°C. The input material was processed using the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. Dried input material was dissolved in 300 μL of 0.1% TFA. A 150 μL aliquot was removed, diluted 1:1 with 150 μL 0.1% TFA, and loaded onto a spin column while the remaining 150 μL was stored at -80°C. The eluate was collected for a total of eight fractions per TMT kit, based on the manufacturer’s instructions. All fractions were frozen and dried overnight in a speed vac. Dried samples were resuspended in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid and peptides were quantified using the Quantitative Colormetric Peptide Assay. Samples were suspended to a maximum final concentration of 0.2 μg/μL with 0.1% formic acid and stored at -80°C.  nLC-MS/MS: All samples were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using an EASY-nLC UHPLC system  system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray ionization source.  connected to an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trapping column (3 um particle size, 75 μm × 20 mm, Thermo) and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (2 um particle size, 75 μm × 500 mm column). Phosphopeptide samples were analyzed in triplicate injections of 6 μL, while acetylpeptide (6 μL) and input (8 μL, 1 ug maximum) fractions were each analyzed with  a singleinjection. After trapping on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trapping column (3 μm particle size, 75 μm × 20 mM, Thermo)  at a variable flow rate dictated by max pressure of 500 Bar, each sample underwent analytical separation on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (2 μm particle size, 75 μm × 500 mM column) over a 105 min gradient (flow rate of 300 nL/min) of 5 to 40% solvent B (90% ACN/0.1% FA), with a column temperature of 55ºC. MS1 was performed with default settings of 70,000 resolution, an AGC target of 3x106 ions, and a maximum IT of 60 ms. MS2 spectra were collected by DDA of the top 10 most abundant precursor ions with a charge greater than 1 per MS1 scan with dynamic exclusion enabled for a window of 30 sec. Precursor ions were filtered with a 0.7 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30. MS2 scans were performed at 35,000 resolution with an AGC target of 1x105 ions and a maximum IT of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis: Data were searched against the UniProt mouse complete proteome database of reviewed (Swiss-Prot) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) proteins, which consisted of 55,398 sequences on the date of download (4/27/2020). Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4, searching with both Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 with the following default parameters: oxidation (15.995 Da on M) as a variable modification and carbamidomethyl (57.021 Da on C) and TMT10plex (229.163 Da on peptide N-term and K) as fixed modifications, and 2 missed cleavages (full trypsin specificity). TMT labeling efficiency was assessed as a quality control measure by searching for N-terminal TMT as a variable modification—confirming labeling efficiency at ~93%. Phosphopeptide runs added phosphorylation (79.96633 Da on S,T, Y) as a variable modification.  Acetylpeptide runs included acetylation (42.011 Da on K) as a variable modification and changed TMT to a variable modification on K (remaining fixed on peptide N-term). Data were searched with a 10 ppm precursor mass and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. The maximum number of missed cleavages was set to a default value of 2 (but changed to 4 for acetyl runs) and enzyme specificity was trypsin (full). Considering each data type (acetyl, phospho, input) separately, peptide spectral matches (PSMs) from each search algorithm were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using Percolator {Kall, 2007 #7764} and PTM site localization probabilities were determined using ptmRS {Taus, 2011 #7765}. PSMs were grouped to unique peptides while maintaining a 1% FDR for peptides and a 90% localization threshold for PTMs. Peptides from phospho, acetyl, and input fractions were grouped to proteins using the rules of strict parsimony and proteins were filtered to 1% FDR using the Protein FDR Validator. Reporter ion intensities for all PSMs with co-isolation interference below 50% (percentage of the ion current in the isolation window) and an average S/N >5 for reporter ions were summed together at the peptide and protein level, but quantification for each data type (acetyl, input) were kept separate. Peptides shared between protein groups were excluded from protein quantitation calculations.  Proteomics statistical analysis: Protein and peptide isoforms tabs from the PDv2.4 results were exported as tab delimited .txt files and analyzed with an in-house Python module based on a workflow previously described previously (Cell Rep. 2019 Feb 5;26(6):1557-1572) with some modifications. Briefly, peptide group reporter intensities for each peptide group in the input material were summed together for each TMT channel, each channel’s sum was divided by the average of all channels’ sums, resulting in channel-specific loading control normalization factors to correct for any deviation from equal protein/peptide input into the ten-sample comparison. Reporter intensities for peptide isoforms from the phosphopeptide and acetylpeptide runs and proteins from the input fraction runs were divided by the loading control normalization factors for each TMT channel, respectively. All loading control-normalized quantifications were converted to log2 space. Protein-level quantification was performed exclusively on Master Proteins—the most statistically significant protein representing a group of parsimonious proteins containing common peptides identified at 1% FDR. Phosphopeptide and acetylpeptide measurements were calculated alone (abundance) and with normalization to any change in the corresponding Master Protein (relative occupancy), calculated by subtracting Log2 Master Protein values from PTM-containing peptide quantitation values on a sample-specific basis.

### Publication Abstract
Nicotinamide riboside supplements (NRS) have been touted as a nutraceutical that promotes cardiometabolic and musculoskeletal health by enhancing nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD<sup>+</sup>) biosynthesis, mitochondrial function, and/or the activities of NAD-dependent sirtuin deacetylase enzymes. This investigation examined the impact of NRS on whole body energy homeostasis, skeletal muscle mitochondrial function, and corresponding shifts in the acetyl-lysine proteome, in the context of diet-induced obesity using C57BL/6NJ mice. The study also included a genetically modified mouse model that imposes greater demand on sirtuin flux and associated NAD<sup>+</sup> consumption, specifically within muscle tissues. In general, whole body glucose control was marginally improved by NRS when administered at the midpoint of a chronic high-fat diet, but not when given as a preventative therapy upon initiation of the diet. Contrary to anticipated outcomes, the study produced little evidence that NRS increases tissue NAD<sup>+</sup> levels, augments mitochondrial function, and/or mitigates diet-induced hyperacetylation of the skeletal muscle proteome.

### Keywords
Nicotinamide riboside supplements, Mitochondria, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Professor, Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology andCancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center Director of Basic Research, Duke Molecular Physiology Institute and Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and Metabolism Center
Duke Molecular Physiology Institute

### Submitter
Paul Grimsrud

### Lab Head
Dr Deborah Muoio
Professor, Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology andCancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center Director of Basic Research, Duke Molecular Physiology Institute and Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and Metabolism Center


