### Accession
PXD037548

### Title
HAVOC: Small-scale histomic mapping of biodiversity across entire tumor specimens using deep neural networks

### Description
Intra-tumoral heterogeneity can wreak havoc on current precision medicine strategies due to challenges in sufficient sampling of geographically separated areas of biodiversity distributed across centimeter-scale tumor distances. In particular, modern tissue profiling approaches are still largely designed to only interrogate small tumor fragments; which may constitute a minute and non-representative fraction of the overall neoplasm. To address this gap, we developed a pipeline that leverages deep learning to define topographic histomorphologic fingerprints of tissue and create Histomic Atlases of Variation Of Cancers (HAVOC). Importantly, using a number of spatially-resolved readouts, including mass-spectrometry-based proteomics and immunohistochemisy, we demonstrate that these personalized atlases of histomic variation can define regional cancer boundaries with distinct biological programs. Using larger tumor specimens, we show that HAVOC can map spatial organization of cancer biodiversity spanning tissue coordinates separated by multiple centimeters. By applying this tool to guide profiling of 19 distinct geographic partitions from 6 high-grade gliomas, HAVOC revealed that distinct states of differentiation can often co-exist and be regionally distributed across individual tumors. Finally,to highlight generalizability, we further benchmark HAVOC on additional tumor types and experimental models of heterogeneity. Together, we establish HAVOC as a versatile and accessible tool to generate small-scale maps of tissue heterogeneity and guide regional deployment of molecular resources to relevant and biodiverse tumor niches.

### Sample Protocol
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue blocks were sectioned (at 10 um thickness) and mounted onto Leica PEN slides(Cat No. 11505189). Slides were subsequently deparaffinized using 100% xylene (2x), 100% ethanol,95% ethanol, 70% ethanol, and 50% ethanol (3 minutes each). These slides are then stained with hematoxylin (1 minute), rinsed in de-ionized water (1 minute), and stained in 1% eosin Y (Fisher scientific). Slides were then left to air dry for laser capture microdissection.  Regions of interest from these sections were micro-dissected using a Leica LMD 70000 (Leica Microsystems, Inc., Bannockburn, IL). HAVOC-generated color tiled maps were used as a reference to guide parameters for dissection. Samples were then collected in an Eppendorftube and stored at room temperature for further sample preparation.   For proteomic analysis, 50 uL of 1% Rapigest was added to each sample and stored overnight at a temperature of 4 degrees Celsius. 200 uL of a dithiothreitol, ammonium bicarbonate, and tris-HCl solution was subsequently added to each sample. Samples were then sonicated on high with 30 second intervals using a Bioruptor Plus for 1 hour. Solutions were then centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 minutes before supernatant was collected. Following collection, supernatant was heated to 95 degrees Celcius for 45 minutes, followed by 80 degrees Celsius for 90 minutes using a ThermoMixer. For alkylation, 20 uL of iodoacetamide was added to each solution in the absence of light. 1 ug of trypsin/Lys-C mix was then added to each sample and reacted overnight at 37 degrees Celsius. The solutions were subsequently acidified with trifuoroacetic acid at a final concentration of 1% ahead of stagetip cleanup.  In preparation for mass spectrometry analysis, samples were desalted with Omix C18 tips following manufacturer protocol. Peptides were eluted with 3 uL (0.1% formic acid, 65% acetonitrile)and diluted with 57 uL (0.1% formic acid in MS water). 18 uL of solution (2.5 ug of peptides)wasloaded from an autosampler, EASY-nLC1200 system running Buffer A (0.1% formic acid), while the analytical column consisted of EASY-Spray column ES803A heated to50 degrees Celsius. Peptides were eluted from the column at a rate of 300 nL/min with an increasing concentration of Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over a 60 minute gradient. The liquid chromatography setup was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X with a spray voltage of 2 kV with a 60 minute data-dependent acquisition method. The full MS1 scan was from 400 to 1500 m/z at a resolution of 70, 000 in profile mode with selection of top 28 ions for further fragmentation using HCD cell. Subsequent detection of fragmented ions occuring in the Orbitrap using centroid mode at a resolution of 17,500. MS parameters: MS1 Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target was set to 3 × 106 with maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms, MS2 AGC was set to 5 × 104 with maximum IT of 50 ms, isolation window was 1.6 Da, underfill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 2 × 104, normalized collision energy (NCE) was 27, charge exclusion was set to fragment only 2+, 3+ and 4+ charge state ions, peptide match set to preferred and dynamic exclusion set to 42 (for 90 min method).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant Andromeda (version 1.5.5.1) search engine was used to process mass spectrometry raw data files against the Human Swissprot protein database (July, 2019 version). Proteins were filtered to include only those appearing in at least 60% within a sample. Raw protein values were Log2 transformed, with non-valid values imputed (downshift=0.3, width=1.8). Analysis of proteomic data was performed using biostatistical platforms Perseus (www.coxdocs.org) and ssGSEA ((https://gsea- msigdb.github.io/ssGSEA-gpmodule/v10/index.html)with Bioconductor package GSVAv1.44.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deep learning, Computer vision, Tumor heterogeneity, Molecular profiling, Artificial intelligence

### Affiliations
Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology University of Toronto
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Sofia Melliou

### Lab Head
Dr Phedias Diamandis
Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology University of Toronto


