### Accession
PXD045029

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals activation of platelet- and fibrosis-related pathways in hearts of ApoE-/- mice exposed to diesel exhaust particles

### Description
Air pollution is an environmental risk factor linked to multiple human diseases including cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). While particulate matter (PM) emitted by diesel exhaust damages multiple organ systems, heart disease is one of the most severe pathologies affected by PM. However, the in vivo effects of diesel exhaust particles (DEP) on the heart and the molecular mechanisms of DEP-induced heart dysfunction have not been investigated. In the current study, we attempted to identify the proteomic signatures of heart fibrosis caused by diesel exhaust particles (DEP) in CVDs-prone apolipoprotein E knockout (ApoE-/-) mice model using tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic analysis. DEP exposure induced mild heart fibrosis in ApoE-/- mice compared with severe heart fibrosis in ApoE-/- mice that were treated with CVDs-inducing peptide, angiotensin II. TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis of heart tissues between PBS- and DEP-treated ApoE-/- mice revealed significant upregulation of proteins associated with platelet activation and TGFβ-dependent pathways. Our data suggest that DEP exposure could induce heart fibrosis, potentially via platelet-related pathways and TGFβ induction, causing cardiac fibrosis and dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion for proteomic analysis Heart tissues were first lysed in lysis buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany)) using a probe-type sonicator (Sonics & Materials, Newtown, CT, USA). Protein concentrations were determined using a Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc. Hercules, CA, USA). Prior to in-solution digestion, all samples were diluted using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) to equalize concentrations. Urea was added to samples to a final concentration of 8 M. Samples were then reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. After samples were treated with 25 mM ABC to decrease the urea concentration to <1 M, samples were digested with lysyl endopeptidaseR (Lys-C, Fujifilm Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, Osaka, Japan) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1 mAU Lys-C per 50 μg total protein at 30°C for 2 h [72]. Trypsin was then added to the samples (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a protease to substrate ratio of 1:50 (wt/wt) and incubated at 37°C overnight. Digested peptide samples were desalted using a Sep-Pak tC18 cartridge (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and subsequently dried in a miVAC vacuum concentrator (Genevac Ltd., Ipswich, UK). After samples were resuspended in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), peptide concentrations were determined using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA).   Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling and basic pH reversed‑phase liquid chromatography Each peptide sample was labeled with TMTpro 16plex label reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 h at room temperature, and the labeling reaction was stopped by addition of 5% hydroxylamine in 100 mM TEAB and incubation for 15 min. Equal amounts of TMT-labeled samples were then combined, desalted using a Sep-Pak tC18 cartridge, and dried in a miVAC vacuum concentrator. TMT-labeled peptide samples were resuspended in 10 mM ammonium formate (AF), and peptide concentrations were determined using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay kit. Then, 410 μg peptide sample was loaded onto an X-Bridge peptide BEH C18 column (4.6 mm i.d. × 250 mm length; pore size 130 Å; particle size 3.5 μm, Waters Corporation) and fractionated by basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography using an Agilent 1290 Infinity liquid chromatography (LC) system (Agilent Technology, Santa Clara, CA). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min with the following gradient conditions: 0 min 100% buffer A (10 mM AF, pH 10) and 0% buffer B (10 mM AF, pH 10 in 90% acetonitrile), 0-10 min 0-5% B, 10-48.5 min 5-40% B, 48.5-62.5 min 40-70% B, 62.5-72.5 min 70% B, 72.5-82.5 min 70-5% B, and 82.5-92.5 min 5% B. Fractionation was conducted by collecting 96 wells (1 well/0.8 min, Restek corporation, Bellefonte, PA, USA) during the chromatographic run (10¬–82.5 min). The resultant 96 fractions were pooled to 24 concatenated fractions, dried, and subsequently resuspended in 17.08 μL 0.4% acetic acid.  Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis Three µg fractionated peptide samples were injected into a trap column (2 cm x 75 µm i.d., 100 Å, 3 µm) and separated on a reversed-phase Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (50 cm × 75 µm i.d., 100 Å, 2 µm) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Column temperature was constantly set to 50℃ with a column heater The operating flow rate was 300 nL/min with the following gradient conditions: 0 min 95% buffer A (100% water with 0.1% formic acid) and 5% buffer B (100% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid), 0-4 min 5% B, 4-13min 5-10% B, 13-150 min 10-25% B, 150-155 min 25-28% B, 155-160 min 28-40% B, 160-165 min 40-80% B, 165-170 min 80%B, 170-170.1 min 80-5% B, and 170.1-180 min 5-0%B. The nano UHPLC system was coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS1 data were collected using an Orbitrap (120,000 resolution; scan range 350–2000 m/z; maximum injection time 50 ms; automatic gain control (AGC) 4 × 105). Determined charge states between 2 and 6 were required for sequencing, and a 30 s dynamic exclusion window was used. Data-dependent ‘top 20’ MS2 scans were performed in an 0.5 Da ion trap isolation window with collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation (NCE 35%; maximum injection time 35 ms; AGC 1 × 104). MS3 quantification scans were performed using the multinotch MS3-based TMT method [73] (ten synchronous precursor selection (SPS) ions; 50,000 resolution; NCE 55% for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD); maximum injection time of 130 ms; AGC 1.5 × 105).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were searched against the SwissProt mouse database (November 2020) with 17196 entries using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search criteria were set to a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for MS data and 0.6 Da for MS/MS data with fixed modifications for cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da), TMT on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.207 Da), and variable modification of methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for identification of peptides and proteins. All proteins were identified by one or more unique peptides. Reporter ion quantification was performed with a 20 ppm mass tolerance, and signal-to-noise ratio values of reporter ions were used for peptide quantification. Only spectra with an average reporter signal-to-noise ratio threshold ≥10 across 16 TMTpro 16-plex channels were considered for quantification. The signal-to-noise ratio values of each reporter ion channel were summed across all quantified proteins and normalized to make the summed signal-to-noise ratio values of each channel equal across all 16 channels. The normalized signal-to-noise ratio values were first log-transformed, and missing values were then replaced using values computed from the normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8. Proteins exhibiting statistical significances between two types of mouse groups (Student’s t test comparison of the log2 (normalized signal-to-noise ratio) values P < 0.05) were identified. Statistical significance was calculated using Perseus software (1.6.14.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart fibrosis, Platelet, Diesel exhaust particles, Tgfβ, Proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Korea Institue of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Ji Eun Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Ji Eun Lee
Korea Institue of Science and Technology


