### Accession
PXD031829

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based analysis of kindlin phosphorylation, ubiquitination and interactome

### Description
Kindlin is an essential activator of integrins and thus indispensable in cell to extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion. Kindlin abundance and functions are tightly regulated by multiple mechanisms including post-translational modifications (PTMs). Despite the critical roles of kindlin during embryonic development and pathogenesis, the knowledge of kindlin’s PTMs and interactome is far from complete. Here we analyze the phosphorylation, ubiquitination and interacting partners of kindlin in flat, firmly adherent interphase cells and round, weakly attached mitotic cells by immunoprecipitation-based mass spectrometry (IP-MS). The analysis generated potential phosphorylation and ubiquitination sites as well as interactors of kindlin and paved the way to investigate PTMs and binding partners of kindlin.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were incubated in 700 µL of lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 30 mM 2-Chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP; PierceTM, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1% Benzonase, 1 mM MgCl2 in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0) at 37°C for 10 min. The lysates were sonicated using a Bioruptor Plus sonication system (Diogenode) for 10 x 30 sec at high intensity and 10 x 30 sec pauses and incubated at 37°C for 10 min and sonicated once. The samples were diluted 1:4 with MS grade water (VWR) and digested for 2 hr at 37°C with 1 µg of LysC and overnight at 37°C with 3 µg Trypsin (Promega). The peptide solution was then acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (Merck) to a final concentration of 1%, followed by desalting via Sep-Pak C18 1cc vacuum cartridges (Waters). The cartridge was washed twice with 1 mL of Acetonitrile (ACN) and twice with 1 mL of 0.1 M Acetic acid prior to sample loading. The sample was eluted with 0.5 mL 80% (v/v) ACN and 0.1 M Acetic acid in Milli-Q H2O and vacuum dried. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched with Fe (III)-NTA cartridges (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, Ca) using the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies; Santa Clara, Ca) as previously described (Post et al, 2017, J Proteome R; Liaci et al, 2021, Mol Cell).

### Data Protocol
LC MS/MS data was acquired using a Thermo Easy-nLC (Thermo Fisher scientific) coupled to the Orbitrap mass spectrometer Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were seperated on a 30-cm column (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at 60°CAs gradient, the following steps were applied with increasing addition of buffer B (80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid): linear increase from 30% over 120 min followed a linear increase to 60% over 10 minutes then to 95% over the next 5 min and finally buffer B was maintained at 95% for another 5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with survey scans from 300 to 1750 m/z (resolution of 60,000 at m/z =200), and up to 15 of the top precursors were selected and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 28). The MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30,000 (at m/z = 200) for detection of phosphorylation and for total proteome measurements, the resolution was set to 15,000 (at m/z = 200). AGC target for MS and MS2 scans were set to 3 x E6 and 1 x E5, with a maximum injection time of 20 ms for MS1 and 50 ms for MS2 scans for the detection of phosphorylation and to 100 ms for MS1 and 25 ms for MS2 for total proteome measurements. Dynamic exclusion was set to 16 ms. Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.6.7.0) with standard settings. The peak list was searched against the human proteome data base (75069 entries) with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification, and oxidation (on methionine) and acetylation (N-terminal) and as variable modifications. Additonally, for the detection of phosphorylated and ubiquitinylated peptides, phosphorylation (on serine, threonine and tyrosine) and the GlyGly motif (on lysines) was set as a variable modification. Quantification of proteins across samples was achieved through the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kindlin, Ubiquitination, Phosphorylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry

### Submitter
Nanpeng Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Reinhard Fässler
Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry


