### Accession
PXD021249

### Title
Ablation of Btn1a1 leads to concurrent cell death and renewal in the mammary epithelium during lactation

### Description
Butyrophilin 1A1 (BTN1A1) was first identified as a major integral protein of both the apical surface of mammary epithelial cells during lactation and the surface membrane surrounding lipid droplets in milk. Current evidence supports a role for BTN1A1 in the secretion of milk lipids as a membrane receptor, which forms a secretion complex with the redox enzyme, xanthine oxidoreductase (XDH).  Capping of cytoplasmic lipid droplets with BTN1A1 and XDH serves to envelop the droplets with cellular membranes at the cell apex as an initial step in their subsequent release from the cell.  The first evidence that BTN1A1 functions in this process was the generation of Btn1a1-/- mice, in which lipid secretion was disrupted and large unstable droplets were released into alveolar spaces with fragmented surface membranes.  We have revisited this mutant mouse line using RNAseq and proteomic analysis to fully assess the consequences of ablating the Btn1a1 gene on the expression of other genes and proteins. Disruption of Btn1a1 expression led to a large build-up of Xdh (6-fold over wild-type levels) in the cytoplasm, induction of acute phase response genes and Lif-activation of STAT3 phosphorylation.  At peak lactation, approx. 10% of the cells were dying, as assessed by TUNEL-analysis of nuclear DNA.  Cell death appeared to proceed through expression of caspase 8 and activated caspase 3 and not via lysosomal lysis, which is the principal route for elimination of cells during mammary involution in wild-type mice.  Other potential death pathways include autophagy and Slc5a8-mediated inactivation of survivin (Birc5).   Milk secretion was prolonged by renewal of the secretory epithelium, as evidenced by the expression of cyclins, Fos/Jun and upregulation of Ki67 in approx. 10% of secretory cell nuclei.  Thus a 21-day lactation cycle can be maintained, despite significant cell death by compensatory cell division, provided a milking stimulus is maintained.  These data highlight the importance of BTN1A1 expression for the maintenance of terminally differentiated mammary epithelial cells and optimal milk production throughout lactation.  From a practical standpoint, the complimentary RNAseq and proteomics data should provide a useful reference database for gene and protein expression in C57/Bl6 mice at peak lactation.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were briefly treated with isoflurane 3.0-3.5 % followed by an intraperitoneal injection of a mixture of xylazine and ketamine (20 and 100 mg/kg body weight, respectively) to induce a deep plane of anesthesia throughout surgery.  All of the mammary glands were excised and weighed and tissue pieces suspended in three volumes of Tris-buffered saline (TBS; 10 mM Tris-HCl, 140 mM NaCl, pH 7.2) containing proteinase inhibitors [0.1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 0.1 mM N-p-tosyl-L-lysine chloromethyl ketone, 0.1 mM N-p-tosyl-L-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone, 1.0 ml/100 ml (8.2 IU/ml) aprotinin, and 1 mM -aminocaproic acid] per g of tissue. The tissue was minced finely and homogenized on ice using a Polytron homogenizer by giving five pulses of 10 s each at a speed setting of six.  Total homogenates (THs) were centrifuged at 500 gav for 5 min at 4 °C to obtain sediments and supernatants. Proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin overnight at 37 °C using S traps (ProtiFi), following the manufacturer’s protocol. The peptides were acidified and desalted on a C18 SepPak cartridge (Waters) and dried by vacuum concentration (Labconco). Dried peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed-phase spin columns (Thermo). The peptides from each fraction were lyophilized prior to mass spectrometry analysis. In order to avoid potential batch effects, Btn1a1+/+ and Btn1a1-/- samples were analyzed in random order.  Each fraction of each sample was separated on a 75 µm x 15 cm, 2 µm Acclaim PepMap reverse phase column (Thermo) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min followed by online analysis by tandem mass spectrometry using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.  Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer using a 120 minute gradient. Parent full-scan mass spectra were collected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer set to acquire data at 120,000 FWHM resolution; ions were then isolated in the quadrupole mass filter, fragmented within the HCD cell (HCD normalized energy 32%, stepped ± 3%), and the product ions analyzed in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo). Proteins were searched against murine proteins from the UniProt database using SequestHT. The search was limited to tryptic peptides, with maximally two missed cleavages allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation set as a variable modification. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da. The Percolator node was used to score and rank peptide matches using a 1% false discovery rate. The Minora and Precursor Ion Quantifier nodes in Proteome Discoverer were used for label-free detection. Normalization was done using total peptide amount and the peptide ratio was calculated using pairwise ratios, in which the peptide group ratios are calculated as the geometric median of all combinations of ratios from all the replicates and the protein ratio is subsequently calculated as the geometric median of the peptide group ratios.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Btn1a1, Milk-lipid secretion, Lactation, Butyrophilin 1a1

### Affiliations
National Cancer Institute, NIH Bethesda, MD 20892
National Cancer Institute, NIH

### Submitter
Lisa Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Lisa M. Jenkins
National Cancer Institute, NIH Bethesda, MD 20892


