### Accession
PXD005904

### Title
UBE2O remodels the proteome during terminal erythroid differentiation

### Description
Terminal differentiation is characterized by a respecification of the global protein complement, as epitomized by erythrocytes, whose cytosol is ~98% globin. Remodeling of the proteome involves programmed elimination of generic cellular constituents in parallel with synthesis of cell-type-specific proteins. The erythroid proteome undergoes a rapid transition at the reticulocyte stage; however, the mechanisms driving elimination of preexisting cytosolic proteins are unidentified. UBE2O is a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme expressed at elevated levels during late stage erythropoiesis. A Ube2o null mutation in mice results in anemia. Proteomic analysis of this mutant suggests that UBE2O is a broad-spectrum ubiquitinating enzyme that remodels the erythroid proteome. In particular, a hallmark of the reticulocyte to mature erythrocyte transition—ribosome elimination—is defective in Ube2o-/- mutants. UBE2O recognizes ribosomal proteins and other substrates directly, targeting them to proteasomes for degradation. Thus, in reticulocytes, and perhaps other highly differentiated cells, the induction of ubiquitinating factors may drive the transition from a complex to a simple proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Reticulocyte sample preparation for TMT quantification Reticulocytes from Ube2o+/+ and Ube2o-/- animals were washed 5x with ice-cold PBS. Then cells were processed for hemoglobin removal following the protocol provided with the Hemoglobind™ kit (BSG). Reticulocytes were lysed by vortexing for 5 minutes at room temperature with 10 bed vol of 0.02 M potassium phosphate pH 6.5. Extra 10 bed vol of Hemoglobind™ suspension was added to the samples and vortexed for another 10 min at room temperature followed by 4 min of centrifugation at 10,000 x g. The supernatants, which contain hemoglobin-depleted sample, were collected and protein concentration measured by BCA. 100 µg of protein were processed for TMT quantification.  Preparation of Flp-In T-REx 293 cells for tandem mass tags (TMT) analysis 293-E2O-WT and 293-E2O-CA cells were treated with 10 µg/mL doxycycline for 12, 24, 48, and 72 hours or without doxycycline. Cells were washed 2x with ice-cold PBS, and scraped into a 50-mL conical tubes with PBS. The cell pellet was lysed with an SDS lysis buffer (50 mM Na-HEPES [pH 7.5], 2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 1x EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche], 1x PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail [Roche]) at RT. The cell lysate was then passed 10x through a 25G needle, centrifuged at 13,200 rpm for 10 min at 4°C and protein concentration quantified by BCA. 150 µg of protein for each sample were processed for TMT analysis.  Tandem mass tag (TMT) analysis 150 µg of protein was reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min, then alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min, and finally quenched with 10 mM DTT for 15 min at room temperature. Proteins were then precipitated with methanol and chloroform. The pellet was resuspended in 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5) before overnight digestion at room temperature with LysC (1:100, LysC:protein). The day after, trypsin was added to the samples at 1:75 (trypsin:protein) ratio and incubated at 37°C for another 5 hours. After digestion, samples were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min to remove possible undigested protein aggregates from the samples. Peptides concentration were quantified using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Fisher). For peptide labeling, 25 µg of peptides per sample were prepared at 1 µg/µl concentration in 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5), ACN was added to a final concentration of 30% and then 50 µg of each TMT reagent, incubating for 1 hour at room temperature. Finally, the reactions were quenched with 0.3% hydroxylamine for 15 min at RT. For all TMT experiments, TMT10plex or TMT6plex kits (Thermo Fisher) were used. After labeling, same amount of peptides from each sample were mixed together, desalted using the tC18 SepPak solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters), and dried using the SpeedVac. Dried peptides were resuspended in 5% ACN, 10 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8 and fractionated in a basic pH reversed phase chromatography using a HPLC equipped with a 3.5µm Zorbax 300 Extended-C18 column (Agilent). All 96 fractions collected were combined in 24, being 12 of them desalted following the C18 Stop and Go Extraction Tip (STAGE-Tip) and dried down in the SpeedVac. Finally, peptides were resuspended in 3% FA, 3% ACN and then injected and separated in a C18 (Accucore 150 2.6 µm) reversed phase chromatography using a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 LC pump (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) as described previously (Paulo, O'Connell et al. 2015). To obtain the best quantitative values from the TMT, each analysis was performed using the multi-notch MS3 (SPS-MS3) method (McAlister, Nusinow et al. 2014, Paulo, O'Connell et al. 2016). Briefly, for every single MS1 spectrum detected in the Orbitrap (resolution of 120k; mass range 400−1400 m/z; automatic gain control (AGC) target 5 x 105, max injection time of 100 ms) the 20 most intense peaks were selected and fragmented by CID to generate the MS2 spectra (quadrupole ion-trap analysis; AGC 8 × 103; normalized collision energy (NCE) 35; maximum injection time 150 ms). Finally, to create the TMT report ions, the top 10 most intense ions from each MS2 spectrum were selected (synchronous-precursor-selection, SPS) and fragmented by HCD to generate the MS3 spectrum analyzed in the Orbitrap (NCE = 55%, AGC = 1 × 105, maximum injection time = 150 ms, and resolution = 60K).

### Data Protocol
All RAW files obtained from the mass spectrometer were transformed using in-house software (Huttlin, Jedrychowski et al. 2010) based on SEQUEST for the identification and relative quantification of the proteins presence in the samples. Shortly, mass spectra were searched against the mouse Uniprot database (July 2014) or human Uniprot database (February 2014), both with the most common contaminants, and a reverse decoy database. In all SEQUEST searches, precursor ion tolerance was set at 20 ppm and product ion tolerance at 0.9 Da, including methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) as variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da), and TMT tag (+229.1629 Da) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini as static modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% FDR (Elias and Gygi 2007, Elias and Gygi 2010). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (Huttlin, Jedrychowski et al. 2010).  Peptide intensities were quantified by extracting the signal-to-noise ratio and proteins were further collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1% (Paulo, O'Connell et al. 2016).

### Publication Abstract
During terminal differentiation, the global protein complement is remodeled, as epitomized by erythrocytes, whose cytosol is ~98% globin. The erythroid proteome undergoes a rapid transition at the reticulocyte stage; however, the mechanisms driving programmed elimination of preexisting cytosolic proteins are unclear. We found that a mutation in the murine <i>Ube2o</i> gene, which encodes a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme induced during erythropoiesis, results in anemia. Proteomic analysis suggested that UBE2O is a broad-spectrum ubiquitinating enzyme that remodels the erythroid proteome. In particular, ribosome elimination, a hallmark of reticulocyte differentiation, was defective in <i>Ube2o<sup>-/-</sup></i> mutants. UBE2O recognized ribosomal proteins and other substrates directly, targeting them to proteasomes for degradation. Thus, in reticulocytes, the induction of ubiquitinating factors may drive the transition from a complex to a simple proteome.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Proteomics, Red blood cell, Tmt, Ms3, Ube2o, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Finley and Gygi lab Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School US

### Submitter
Miguel Prado

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel J Finley
Finley and Gygi lab Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School US


