### Accession
PXD000573

### Title
2D-LC/MS/MS analysis of Escherichia coli during exposure to an abrupt temperature downshift

### Description
2D-LC/MS/MS analysis was used to examine time-dependent changes in proteome of E. coli O157:H7 strain Sakai upon an abrupt downshift in temperature (i.e., from 35°C to 14°C). Cell cultures were harvested at 30, 90, 160, and 330 min post-temperature downshift. It also should be noted that these time points were chosen with the aims to characterize the physiology of E. coli during dynamic changes in growth kinetics induced by an abrupt temperature downshift. Specifically, the samples taken at time 30 and 90 min were obtained during adaptation period, whereas the samples at time 160 and 330 min reflected the physiological state of E. coli during growth after the shift.  MS/MS data obtained from each protein sample were processed by the Computational Proteomics Analysis System (CPAS), a web-based system built on the LabKey Server (v9.1, released 02.04.2009). The experimental mass spectra produced were subjected to a semi-tryptic search against the combined databases of E. coli O157:H7 Sakai (5,318 entries in total) downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, downloaded 25.11.2008) using X!Tandem v2007.07.01. These databases included the E. coli O157:H7 Sakai database (5230 entries, NC_002695.fasta) and two E. coli O157:H7 Sakai plasmid databases, plasmid pO157 (85 entries, NC_002128.fasta) and plasmid pOSAK1 (three entries, NC_002127.fasta). The parameters for the database search were as follows: mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions: 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively; fixed modification: cysteine cabamidomethylation (+57 Da); and no variable modifications. The search results were then analyzed using the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms from the Trans Proteomic Pipeline v3.4.2. All peptide and protein identifications were accepted at PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet of ≥0.9, corresponding to a theoretical error rate of ≤2%.

### Sample Protocol
In separate cold shock experiments, cultures were subjected to a rapid temperature downshift from 35°C to 14°C as described above to prepare samples for cDNA microarray and 2D-LC/MS/MS analysis. An appropriate volume of each of the cell cultures was harvested before cold shock (i.e. the reference culture), and at 30, 90, 160, and 330 min post-temperature downshift. Independent samples were then subjected to extraction of RNA, and both soluble and membrane proteins, according to the methods of Kocharunchitt et al. [11]. The procedures used for microarray and 2D-LC/MS/MS analysis, were as previously described by Kocharunchitt et al. [11].

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra obtained from each protein sample of membrane and soluble fractions were managed by the Computational Proteomics Analysis System (CPAS), a web-based system built on the LabKey Server (v9.1, released 02.04.2009) [21]. The mass spectra produced were subjected to a semi-tryptic search against the combined databases of E. coli O157∶H7 Sakai (5,318 entries in total) downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, downloaded 25.11.2008) using X!Tandem v2007.07.01 [22]. These databases included the E. coli O157∶H7 Sakai database (5230 entries, NC_002695.fasta) and two E. coli O157∶H7 Sakai plasmid databases, plasmid pO157 (85 entries, NC_002128.fasta) and plasmid pOSAK1 (three entries, NC_002127.fasta). The search parameters used were as follows: mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions: 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively; fixed modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57 Da); and no variable modifications. The search results were then analyzed using the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms from the Trans Proteomic Pipeline v3.4.2 [23], [24]. All peptide and protein identifications were accepted at PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet of ≥0.9, corresponding to a theoretical error rate of ≤2% [23], [25]. In addition, the false-positive discovery rate for each dataset was further assessed by searching the MS/MS spectra against the target-reversed (decoy) database with the same search criteria as described above. The peptide false-positive discovery rate for each proteomic dataset was less than 5% for all MudPIT runs. All protein identifications that met the above criteria were further assessed based on the confidence level of protein identifications across biological replicates of each fraction of E. coli at each time point. The confidence level was based on the number of unique peptides identified from one sample and the number of replicates in which the protein was detected. Specifically, proteins identified by more than one unique peptide in at least one of the replicates were considered to have a ‘high’ confidence score. The ‘intermediate’ confidence level was assigned to proteins with a single peptide hit that was detected in more than one replicate. ‘Low-confidence’ proteins were considered to be those identified by a single unique peptide and found in only one replicate. Only protein identifications with a ‘high’ and ‘intermediate’ confidence level (referred to as having a ‘high confidence score’) were accepted for further analysis. Following data filtering, all protein identifications with ‘high’ confidence from membrane and soluble fractions of the same sample were combined to represent a ‘total’ fraction of the corresponding sample. This combined approach was employed on the basis that the observed R2 values, as determined by linear regression analysis, indicated a relatively stronger linear correlation between spectral counts (SpCs, the number of MS/MS spectra) for all possible pair-wise comparisons of replicates of pooled fractions (average R2 = 0.89±0.05) when compared to that of replicates of each fraction (average R2 = 0.64±0.19, and 0.85±0.05 for membrane and soluble fractions, respectively). Each of the total fractions across the biological replicates was then used to generate the final list of proteins for each time point of sampling.

### Publication Abstract
Escherichia coli O157&#x2236;H7 is a mesophilic food-borne pathogen. We investigated the growth kinetics of E. coli O157&#x2236;H7 Sakai during an abrupt temperature downshift from 35&#xb0;C to either 20&#xb0;C, 17&#xb0;C, 14&#xb0;C or 10&#xb0;C; as well as the molecular mechanisms enabling growth after cold stress upon an abrupt downshift from 35&#xb0;C to 14&#xb0;C in an integrated transcriptomic and proteomic analysis. All downshifts caused a lag period of growth before growth resumed at a rate typical of the post-shift temperature. Lag and generation time increased with the magnitude of the shift or with the final temperature, while relative lag time displayed little variation across the test range. Analysis of time-dependent molecular changes revealed, in keeping with a decreased growth rate at lower temperature, repression of genes and proteins involved in DNA replication, protein synthesis and carbohydrate catabolism. Consistent with cold-induced remodelling of the bacterial cell envelope, alterations occurred in the expression of genes and proteins involved in transport and binding. The RpoS regulon exhibited sustained induction confirming its importance in adaptation and growth at 14&#xb0;C. The RpoE regulon was transiently induced, indicating a potential role for this extracytoplasmic stress response system in the early phase of low temperature adaptation during lag phase. Interestingly, genes previously reported to be amongst the most highly up-regulated under oxidative stress were consistently down-regulated. This comprehensive analysis provides insight into the molecular mechanisms operating during adaptation of E. coli to growth at low temperature and is relevant to its physiological state during chilling in foods, such as carcasses.

### Keywords
2d-lc/ms/ms, Cold stress, Physiology, Stress response, E. coli

### Affiliations
Food Safety Centre, Tasmanian Institute of Agriculture, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia
Food Safety Centre

### Submitter
Chawalit Kocharunchitt

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Ross
Food Safety Centre, Tasmanian Institute of Agriculture, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia


