### Accession
PXD020644

### Title
A mass spectrometry-based targeted assay for detection of SARS-CoV-2 antigen from clinical specimens

### Description
The COVID-19 pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has overwhelmed health systems worldwide and highlighted limitations of diagnostic testing. Several types of diagnostic tests including RT-PCR-based assays and antigen detection by lateral flow assays, each with their own strengths and weaknesses, have been developed and deployed in a short time. Here, we describe an immunoaffinity purification approach followed a by high resolution mass spectrometry-based targeted qualitative assay capable of detecting SARS-CoV-2 viral antigen from nasopharyngeal swab samples. Based on our discovery experiments using purified virus, recombinant viral protein and nasopharyngeal swab samples from COVID-19 positive patients, nucleocapsid protein was selected as a target antigen. We then developed an automated antibody capture-based workflow coupled to targeted high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) - parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) assay on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. An ensemble machine learning-based model for determining COVID-19 positive samples was developed using fragment ion intensities from the PRM data. The optimized targeted assay, which was used to analyze 88 positive and 88 negative nasopharyngeal swab samples for validation, resulted in 98% (95% CI = 0.922-0.997) (86/88) sensitivity and 100% (95% CI = 0.958-1.000) (88/88) specificity using RT-PCR-based molecular testing as the reference method. Our results demonstrate that direct detection of infectious agents from clinical samples by tandem mass spectrometry-based assays have potential to be deployed as diagnostic assays in clinical laboratories, which has hitherto been limited to analysis of pure microbial culture

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis for untargeted discovery proteomics experiments was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) connected to an Orbitrap Eclipse  mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap C18 2 cm × 100 µm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 20 µl/min using 0.1% formic acid and separated on an analytical column (EasySpray 50 cm × 75 µm, C18 1.9 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient of 5 to 40% solvent B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) over a 40 min gradient. Both precursor and fragment ions were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Precursor ions were acquired in m/z range of 350–1700 with a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200). Precursor fragmentation was carried out using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) method using normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28. The fragment ions were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 (at m/z 200). The scans were arranged in top-speed method with 3 seconds cycle time between MS and MS/MS. Ion transfer capillary voltage was maintained at 2.5 kV. For internal mass calibration, lock mass option was enabled with polysiloxane ion (m/z, 445.120025) from ambient air.  In order to improve the sensitivity of the detection, we evaluated a number of antibodies. Briefly, antibody was biotinylated using biotinylation kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Biotinylated antibody (1 µg) was coated on streptavidin MSIA tips (Catalog#991STR11, ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) in 0.1% BSA containing 1X PBS on the Versette automated liquid handler (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Nasopharyngeal swab samples (750 µl) were mixed with zwitterion Z316 at final concentration of 0.002% in 96 well plate and were inactivated at 70°C for 30 minutes. Inactivated samples were subjected to enrichment using mass spectrometry immunoassay (MSIA)-based enrichment using biotinylated antibody, washed 3 times with 200 µl 1X PBS and eluted in 100 µl of 50% ACN/0.002% Z316 in 0.1% TFA. Sample eluent was mixed with 300 ul of rapid trypsin digestion buffer (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI) and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion (Gold Trypsin, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI) at 70°C for 1 hour on a shaker incubator. The digest was acidified using TFA to a final concentration of 1% TFA. The acidified digests were spiked-in with synthetic isotope labelled heavy peptides and the samples were loaded on EvoTips as per manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the C18 EvoTips were activated using 20 µl of 100% acetonitrile followed by equilibration with 20 µl of 0.1% formic acid in water. Activation and equilibration was carried out at 700 x g for 1 minute. The sample was loaded at 500 x g for 5 minute followed by washing using 0.1% formic acid once. At last the tips were loaded with 100 µl of 0.1% formic acid and processed for targeted analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data were searched using Andromeda in MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.7.0) against a combined protein database of SARS-CoV-2 proteins, SARS-CoV proteins, common coronaviruses (OC43, HKU1, NL63 and L229E) and UniProt human protein database, African green monkey (Chlorocebus aethiops) database (in case of irradiated virus MS data) including common MS contaminants. The search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at cysteine as a fixed modification for samples that were reduced and alkylated; N-terminal acetylation and oxidation at methionine as variable modifications. Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to ±0.02 Da. False discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), peptide and protein levels.   The PRM data were processed using the Skyline software package. PRM data were assessed for (i) peak symmetry and baseline; (ii) consistency of retention times and (iii) retention time consistency across transitions of the same analyte. In addition, peak integration of extracted ion chromatogram of all plausible fragments of light and heavy precursor was adjusted manually to avoid potential interferences. The fragment ion intensities were exported from skyline and (natural) log transformed. A supervised machine learning method was used to select the optimal fragments and determine their weights for maximizing the performance of the targeted mass spectrometry assay. All computations were performed in R (version 4.0.1). For this, we utilized an ensemble-based machine learning approach encoded in the Super Learner as described previously. This method was configured to use a generalized linear model via penalized maximum likelihood (glmNET), generalized linear model (glm) and random forest model; all configured to use binomial distribution. A 10-fold cross-validation with a goal to maximize the AUC was instituted during the learning process. An optimal weighted average of the different trained models was computed and considered as final model for an independent validation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Sars-cov-2, Swab, Ap-ms, Coronavirus, Lc-msms, Targeted proteomics, Covid19, Clinical diagnosis, Srm/prm, Viral antigen

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA


