### Accession
PXD039289

### Title
Conformational coupling of redox-driven Na+ translocation in Vibrio cholerae NADH:quinone oxidoreductase

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the architecture of the NQR complex in absence and presence of the inhibitor DQA (2-decyl-4-quinazolinylamine). The complex was cross-linked with the homobifunctional, noncleavable reagent, disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS).

### Sample Protocol
Chemical cross-linking using DSS was performed following previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014). Samples were digested using endoproteinase Lys-C followed by trypsin. Digests were fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography and SEC fractions were analyzed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos system. Additional experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.4, against the sequences of target proteins and identified contaminants. Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 / 0.3 Da for the different fragment ion types. The original scoring scheme of xQuest (Rinner et al., Nat. Methods, 2008) was used. The false discovery rate was estimated to be <5% at the non-redundant peptide-pair level. Cross-linking identifications are compiled in a spreadsheet in Microsoft Excel format; a separate spreadsheet connects the raw files and the individual cross-linking experiments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; structural proteomics; nqr complex

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


