### Accession
PXD008746

### Title
Xpo7 is a broad-spectrum exportin and a nuclear import receptor

### Description
Cargo molecules which exceed the passive diffusion limit of ~5nm require active translocation to cross the nuclear pore complex (NPC). Such a facilitated transport is achieved by specialized nuclear transport receptors (NTRs), which are classified according to their shuttling direction. Exportins bind their cargo in a RanGTP-dependent manner inside the nucleus and release it in the cytoplasm. Importins, on the other hand, bind their cargo without RanGTP and transfer it in the opposite direction. CRM1/Xpo1 is one of the best-characterized NTRs mostly due to the availability of specific inhibitors, like leptomycin B, which allowed cargo validation in vivo. Such inhibitors have not been characterized for other NTRs, thus analysis of those lagged behind. Here, we developed nanobodies to specifically target exportin 7/Xpo7 and block its transport pathway. Moreover, in-depth MS/MS analysis of Xpo7 under nuclear (+RanGTP) and cytoplasmic conditions (-RanGTP) revealed novel binders including ~200 potential export substrates, but also ~30 nuclear import cargoes. Enrichment factors of a putative cargo were calculated using the iBAQ strategy to quantify detectable proteins in the input as well as in the import or export mimicking material. Validation of selected cargo molecules was then accomplished by anti-Xpo7 nanobodies causing cargo mislocalization when transfected into cultured cells. Collectively, the data establish Xpo7 as a bidirectional NTR with a broad substrate specificity.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry:
Separation of proteins was done by SDS-PAGE (4-12% Bis/Tris gradient gel, NuPAGE, Novex) and visualized by colloidal Coomassie-staining. Proteins in excised gel pieces were digested as described before (Shevchenko et al, 2006) with minor modifications. Briefly, proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 55°C, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 20 min at 25°C in the dark, both in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer. Proteolysis was performed overnight at 37°C using trypsin (0.01μg/μl final conc., Serva) in 50 mM ABC buffer in presence of 5 mM CaCl2. Peptides were retrieved from the gel pieces by a series of extraction steps with 5% (v/v) formic acid, 50% acetonitrile, and undiluted acetonitrile. Peptide-containing, pooled fractions were concentrated by vacuum evaporation in a SpeedVac. Dried peptides were dissolved in 20 μl 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.05% (v/v) TFA, and 8 μl were analysed by LC-MS/MS.

LC-MS/MS Q-Exactive HF analysis:
In nano-liquid chromatography, two sequential columns have been utilized for desalting and chromatographic separation of extracted peptides. Both columns were packed in-house with spherical silica (ReproSil C18 AQ 120A, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with varying pore sizes of 5 μm in the pre-column (0.015 mm x 20 mm) and 3 μm in the tandem coupled analytical column (0.075 mm x 300 mm). Peptides were eluted using a 73 min linear gradient (5–44% acetonitrile in 0.05% TFA at a flow rate of 300 nl/min) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fischer, Dreieich) in-line coupled to a Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer, Dreieich). The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a survey scan range of 350-1600 m/z, a resolution of 60 000 at m/z 200 and an AGT target value of 1 x10^6. Up to 30 of the most intense precursor ions with charge states ranging from 2 to 5 were selected at an isolation width of 1.6 m/z for higher collision-induced dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 28%. MS/MS scans were detected in the orbitrap at a resolution of 15 000. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis:
MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.0.30) and measured spectra were searched against mouse UniProt FASTA sequence database (download date: November 2014) with in-built Andromeda search engine (Cox & Mann, 2008; Cox et al, 2011). For data annotation, peak lists from (Ruepp et al, 2010, mouse) and (Havugimana et al, 2012, human) together with the Uniprot database (UniProt Consortium, 2015) were used to create ‘Functional groups’. Further annotations were based on the UniProt database, where relevant data were fetched and condensed to ‘simplified localization’ (nucleus, cytoplasm or both) and ‘flags’ (transmembrane (TM), ER, mitochondrial and Nuclear pore complex (NPC) proteins). Common contaminants (e.g. keratins, serum albumin) were included into these databases and reversed sequences of all entries were used for false discovery rate (FDR) estimations. The FDR was set to 1% for proteins, modified and unmodified peptides. The Andromeda search engine parameters were: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed modification), oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation (variable modifications), tryptic specificity with proline restriction including peptides with up to two missed cleavages, the minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Mass accuracy was set to 6 ppm in the MS survey scan, and MS/MS mass tolerance to 20 ppm. Cargo identification and scoring of exportins and importins was based on normalized iBAQ intensities. For data processing, only Input (L1), and samples without Ran (L2) and with Ran (L3) were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Exportins bind cargo molecules in a RanGTP-dependent manner inside nuclei and transport them through nuclear pores to the cytoplasm. CRM1/Xpo1 is the best-characterized exportin because specific inhibitors such as leptomycin B allow straightforward cargo validations in vivo. The analysis of other exportins lagged far behind, foremost because no such inhibitors had been available for them. In this study, we explored the cargo spectrum of exportin 7/Xpo7 in depth and identified not only &#x223c;200 potential export cargoes but also, surprisingly, &#x223c;30 nuclear import substrates. Moreover, we developed anti-Xpo7 nanobodies that acutely block Xpo7 function when transfected into cultured cells. The inhibition is pathway specific, mislocalizes export cargoes of Xpo7 to the nucleus and import substrates to the cytoplasm, and allowed validation of numerous tested cargo candidates. This establishes Xpo7 as a broad-spectrum bidirectional transporter and paves the way for a much deeper analysis of exportin and importin function in the future.

### Keywords
Erythropoiesis, Lc-msms, Exportin, Mouse, Importin, Npcs, Rangtpase, Nanobodies

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Department of cellular Logistics

### Submitter
Christin Kappert

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dirk Görlich
Department of cellular Logistics


