### Accession
PXD027496

### Title
Global Lysine Acetylome Analysis of LPS-Stimulated HepG2 Cells Identifies Hyperacetylation of PKM2 as a Metabolic Reg-ulator in Sepsis

### Description
Sepsis-induced liver dysfunction is a frequent event and is strongly associated with mortality. Establishing a causative link between protein post-translational modification (PTM) and diseases is challenging. We studied the relationship among the lysine acetylation (Kac), the sirtuin (SIRTs), and their interactors carefully selected in sepsis-induced liver dysfunction (SILD), per-formed on LPS-stimulated HepG2 cells. Protein hyperacetylation was observed according to SIRTs reduction after LPS treatment for 24 h. We identified 1,449 Kac sites based on comparative acetylome analysis, and quantified 1,086 Kac sites on 410 proteins for acetylation. Interestingly, the up-regulated Kac proteins are enriched in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathways in the KEGG category. Among the proteins in the glycolysis pathway, hyperacetylation, a key regulator of lactate level in sepsis, was observed in three pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) sites. Hyperacetylation of PKM2 induced an increase in its activity, increasing the lactate concentration as a result. In conclusion, this study is the first to conduct global profiling of Kac, suggesting the Kac mecha-nism of PKM2 in glycolysis of sepsis. Moreover, it helps further understand the systematical in-formation of hyperacetylation during the sepsis process.

### Sample Protocol
For the LC-mass spectrometry (MS)/MS analysis, the HepG2 cells were cultured and labeled using SILAC media according to the following classes: “light,” “medium,” or “heavy.” The “light” cells had Lys and Arg labeling (K0R0), the “medium” cells had Lys4 (D4) and Arg6 (13C6) labeling (K4R6), and the “heavy” cells had Lys8 (13C6-15N2) and Arg10 (13C6-15N4) labeling (K8R10) isotope of lysine and arginine for at least four cell doublings to allow complete label incorporation. At 70% confluency, LPS was supplemented to culture, and 6 h later, the “medium” labeled cells were harvested. The “heavy” labeled cells were supplemented with LPS for 24 h, and the “light” labeled cells were cultured as control. The harvested cell pellet was collected and then lysed with RIPA buffer containing Halt protease inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) on ice. Reduction and alkylation were performed using 10 mM DTT (pH 8), incubated for 1 h at 37ºC. Then, iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 50 mM, and the resultant mixture was incubated for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. The mixture was incubated in trypsin (Promega sequencing grade, Madison, WI; 1:25 protease to protein ratio) at 37ºC overnight, at pH 7–8. The addition of 1% TFA stopped digestion, and the sample was then dried in a speed vacuum.

### Data Protocol
The DAVID software was utilized for the gene ontology (GO) annotation and the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathway (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). The GO enrichment analysis showed that six identified clusters were related to specific biological processes (BP), molecular functions (MF), and cellular components. The Perseus program was used to clarify the volcano plot and heat map between groups.

### Publication Abstract
Sepsis-induced liver dysfunction (SILD) is a common event and is strongly associated with mortality. Establishing a causative link between protein post-translational modification and diseases is challenging. We studied the relationship among lysine acetylation (Kac), sirtuin (SIRTs), and the factors involved in SILD, which was induced in LPS-stimulated HepG2 cells. Protein hyperacetylation was observed according to SIRTs reduction after LPS treatment for 24 h. We identified 1449 Kac sites based on comparative acetylome analysis and quantified 1086 Kac sites on 410 proteins for acetylation. Interestingly, the upregulated Kac proteins are enriched in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathways in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) category. Among the proteins in the glycolysis pathway, hyperacetylation, a key regulator of lactate level in sepsis, was observed at three pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) sites. Hyperacetylation of PKM2 induced an increase in its activity, consequently increasing the lactate concentration. In conclusion, this study is the first to conduct global profiling of Kac, suggesting that the Kac mechanism of PKM2 in glycolysis is associated with sepsis. Moreover, it helps to further understand the systematic information regarding hyperacetylation during the sepsis process.

### Keywords
Sepsis-induced liver dysfunction; hyperacetylation; sirt; lysine acetylation; pyruvate kinase m2

### Affiliations
Kyungpook national university
kyungpook national university

### Submitter
Ann-Yae Na

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu lee
Kyungpook national university


