### Accession
PXD020540

### Title
Palmitoylated proteins in bovine ovarian cumulus-oocyte complexes

### Description
The palmitoyl-proteome of bovine cumulus-oocyte complexes (COCs) cells was investigated by combining acyl-biotin exchange chemistry and quantitative mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Bovine ovaries (in total, n=480) were collected at a commercial slaughterhouse. Bovine cumulus-oocyte complexes (COCs) were retrieved from the antral follicles 3-6 mm in diameter by aspiration. The method relies on an acyl-biotinyl exchange chemistry (ABE) reported first in 2004 (Drisdel et al. 2004) was used to purify the palmitoylated proteins according to the protocol described by Wan et al (Wan et al. 2007), which we applied with minor modifications. For identification of palmitoylated proteins, samples (HA+, HA- (control)) were fractionated by SDS-PAGE (4-20% polyacrylamide gel). Each lane was sectioned into 11 bands. After in-gel reduction (DTT), alkylation (Iodoacetamide), trypsin digestion in presence of 0.025% ProteasMax, peptides were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS in triplicate, using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Ultimate® 3000 RSLC Ultra High Pressure Liquid Chromatographer (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrum ion searches were performed using Mascot search engine version 2.3.2 via Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software. Interrogation was made against the mammal section of the non-redundant NCBI database. The search parameters included trypsin as a protease with two allowed missed cleavages and carbamidomethylcysteine, methionine oxidation and acetylation of N-term protein as variable modifications. Peptides and proteins identified by MASCOT were subjected to Scaffold v4.8.4 software. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability and contained at least two unique peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. To characterize enriched palmitoylated proteins, +HA and –HA conditions analysed in triplicate (R1, R2, R3) with three technical replicates per bands were compared using Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.4, Proteome Software, Portland, USA). We employed a label-free quantitative approach based on Spectral Count (SC). Quantifications performed with normalized spectral counts (SC) were carried out on distinct proteins using “Weighed Spectra” option. Protein clusters were defined as enriched palmitoylated proteins if they met the following conditions: 1) detection once among the three replicates only in +HA and never in control condition –HA; 2) detection in the both conditions but with an enrichment in +HA with a fold change > 2.

### Publication Abstract
Protein palmitoylation is a reversible post-translational modification by fatty acids (FA), mainly a palmitate (C16:0). Palmitoylation allows protein shuttling between the plasma membrane and cytosol to regulate protein stability, sorting and signaling activity and its deficiency leads to diseases. We aimed to characterize the palmitoyl-proteome of ovarian follicular cells and molecular machinery regulating protein palmitoylation within the follicle. For the first time, 84 palmitoylated proteins were identified from bovine granulosa cells (GC), cumulus cells (CC) and oocytes by acyl-biotin exchange proteomics. Of these, 32 were transmembrane proteins and 27 proteins were detected in bovine follicular fluid extracellular vesicles (ffEVs). Expression of palmitoylation and depalmitoylation enzymes as palmitoyltransferases (ZDHHCs), acylthioesterases (LYPLA1 and LYPLA2) and palmitoylthioesterases (PPT1 and PPT2) were analysed using transcriptome and proteome data in oocytes, CC and GC. By immunofluorescence, ZDHHC16, PPT1, PPT2 and LYPLA2 proteins were localized in GC, CC and oocyte. In oocyte and CC, abundance of palmitoylation-related enzymes significantly varied during oocyte maturation. These variations and the involvement of identified palmitoyl-proteins in oxidation-reduction processes, energy metabolism, protein localization, vesicle-mediated transport, response to stress, G-protein mediated and other signaling pathways suggests that protein palmitoylation may play important roles in oocyte maturation and ffEV-mediated communications within the follicle.

### Keywords
Cumulus-oocyte complexes, Bovine, Palmitoylation

### Affiliations
INRAE
INRAE Val de Loire UMR Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comportements

### Submitter
Valerie LABAS

### Lab Head
Dr Svetlana UZBEKOVA
INRAE Val de Loire UMR Physiologie de la Reproduction et des Comportements


