### Accession
PXD001536

### Title
Fast Profiling of Protease Specificity reveals similar substrate specificities for cathepsins K, L and S

### Description
N-terminal COFRADIC analysis of cathespine K, L and S to obtain the  substrate specificity profile of these cysteine cathepsins.

### Sample Protocol
HL60 cells were cultured in RPMI medium without arginine, lysine and glutamine supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum, 2 mM GlutaMAXTM, 25 units/ml penicillin, 25 µg/ml streptomycin, 146 mg/L L-Lysine.HCl and either natural L-Arginine.HCl or 13C6 L-Arginine.HCl. The concentration of L-Arginine.HCl was reduced to 16.8 mg/L (8.4% of the normal concentration in RPMI) to prevent metabolic conversion of arginine to proline. Cells were cultured at 37°C and in 5% CO2 for at least six population doublings to ensure complete incorporation of the labelled arginine. Upon completion, aliquots of 107 SILAC-labelled cells were washed three times with PBS and cell pellets were frozen at -80˚C until further use. SILAC-labelled cells were lysed in a buffer containing 50 mM 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES), 50 mM sodium phosphate pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT by three rounds of freeze-thawing. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 15 min at 16,000 g, followed by acidification to pH 5.5 using 1 M HCl. For cathepsin treatment, we used a differential sample mixing strategy to allow highly automated, software-based quantification and annotation of protein processing events, as reported previously. Here, the control sample, made from three parts of light-labelled cell lysate, was incubated with 10 µM E-64, whereas the treated sample, made from one part light-labelled and one part heavy-labelled cell lysate, was incubated with 200 nM recombinant cathepsin L, K or S, for 15 min at 37°C. After incubation, the control and cathepsin-treated samples were mixed, 4 M guanidinium hydrochloride was added and the pH was raised to 7.4 to proceed with COFRADIC isolation of N-terminal peptides. The N-terminal COFRADIC protocol was performed as described before. Briefly, proteins were reduced and alkylated using 15 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 30 mM iodoacetamide. After desalting the protein mixtures on NAP-10 columns in 2 M guanidinium hydrochloride and 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer at pH 8, free amino groups were acetylated by incubation with 20 mM of an N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) ester of trideutero-acetate (made in-house) for 1 h at 30°C followed by addition of 10 mM glycine to quench residual NHS esters and 120 mM hydroxylamine to reverse potential O-acetylation and incubation for 20 min at room temperature. The protein samples were again desalted on NAP-10 columns in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, boiled for 5 min, put on ice for 5 min and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) (enzyme/substrate of 1/100, w/w) at 37°C. The resulting peptide mixtures were incubated with 1,250 mU Q-cyclase and 625 mU activated pGAPase to drive the formation of N-terminal pyroglutamate to completion and proteolytically remove this residue, respectively. N-terminal peptides were then pre-enriched by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography on disposable SCX cartridges (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) in a buffer containing 50% acetonitrile in 10 mM sodium phosphate, pH 3.0. N-terminal peptides, which were not retained on the SCX resin under these conditions, were collected in the run-through fraction, concentrated by vacuum drying and re-suspended in 10 mM ammonium acetate pH 5.5 in 2% acetonitrile. Methionine residues were oxidized by incubating the peptides with 0.5% H2O2 for 30 min at 30°C, followed by immediate injection of the samples on a capillary RP-HPLC column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 2.1 mm internal diameter, 150 mm length, Agilent Technologies) for the first COFRADIC separation. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient of acetonitrile (from 2% to 70% in 100 min) and peptides that eluted between 20 and 80 min were collected in 15 primary COFRADIC fractions of 4 min each. Each primary fraction was incubated four times with 15 nmol 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid (TNBS) and each fraction was re-separated by RP-HPLC under the same conditions as during the primary separation. N-terminal peptides, which cannot get modified by TNBS, eluted from the column during the same time interval and were collected in 16 fractions of 0.5 min. Internal and C-terminal peptides, which were modified by TNBS, underwent a hydrophobic shift and were not collected. Secondary fractions with 12 min difference in retention time were pooled to a total of 48 samples for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos or a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and peak list files were generated from the peptide fragmentation spectra as described before. Spectra were searched with MASCOT (version 2.4.0, www.matixscience.com) in the Swiss-Prot database (releases of November 11, 2011, January 25, 2012 and April 18, 2012) with restriction to human proteins and quantified by the MASCOT Distiller software as described elsewhere. Briefly, semiArgC/P was used as enzyme setting with one missed cleavage allowed. Methionine oxidation, trideuteron-acetylation of lysine and alkylation of cysteine were set as fixed modifications, while variable modifications included acetylation and trideutero-acetylation of N-termini and pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine residues. Mass tolerance of precursor and fragment ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. To allow identification of peptides from both light and heavy labelled samples, a quantitation method with two different components was made, defining 12C6 Arg and 13C6 Arg as exclusive modifications at any position. Only peptides that were ranked first and scored above the threshold score set at 99% confidence were withheld. The FDR was calculated for every search as described previously and was always found to be lower than 0.78%. Potential false positive peptide identifications were selected and automatically removed by the Peptizer software application exactly as described before. Only peptides that fulfilled the following three conditions were considered as neo-N-terminal peptides reporting true cathepsin cleavage sites: (1) the start position of the peptide in the protein sequence is >2, (2) the N-terminal alpha amino group of the peptide is modified by trideutero-acetylation and (3) the light/heavy (L/H) ratio is > 2 (L/H ratios of neo-N-terminal peptides are distributed around 1, determination of the ratio cut-off value is based on the boundary of a one-sided 99% quantile of the ratio distribution) as described before [29]. Neo-N-terminal peptides were then loaded into the TOPPR database and re-mapped onto a later version of the Swiss-Prot database (release of January 22, 2014) to generate the final lists of total cleavage sites.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases are important effectors of numerous physiological and pathological processes. Reliable determination of a protease's specificity is crucial to understand protease function and to develop activity-based probes and inhibitors. During the last decade, various proteomic approaches for profiling protease substrate specificities were reported. Although most of these approaches can identify up to thousands of substrate cleavage events in a single experiment, they are often time consuming and methodologically challenging as some of these approaches require rather complex sample preparation procedures. For such reasons their application is often limited to those labs that initially introduced them. Here, we report on a fast and simple approach for proteomic profiling of protease specificities (fast profiling of protease specificity (FPPS)), which can be applied to complex protein mixtures. FPPS is based on trideutero-acetylation of novel N-termini generated by the action of proteases and subsequent peptide fractionation on Stage Tips containing ion-exchange and reverse phase chromatographic resins. FPPS can be performed in 2 days and does not require extensive fractionation steps. Using this approach, we have determined the specificity profiles of the cysteine cathepsins K, L and S. We further validated our method by comparing the results with the specificity profiles obtained by the N-terminal combined fractional diagonal chromatography method. This comparison pointed to almost identical substrate specificities for all three cathepsins and confirmed the reliability of the FPPS approach. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001536 and PXD001553 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001536; http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001553).

### Keywords
Cathespins, N-terminal cofradic

### Affiliations
Ghent University
Ghent University Department of Biochemistry B-9000 Ghent Belgium

### Submitter
Emmy Van Quickelberghe

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
Ghent University Department of Biochemistry B-9000 Ghent Belgium


