### Accession
PXD000986

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of soybean root during recovery after flooding

### Description
Soybean is one of the most economically important legume in the world, providing vegetable protein and oil for millions of people, ingredients for hundreds of nutritional products, but its production being threatened globally by increased flooding events. To unravel the mechanism involved in recovery after flooding in soybean, proteomic analysis was carried out.

### Sample Protocol
Two-day-old soybeans were flooded for 2, 4 days and water was drained. Seedlings were allowed to recover. Proteins were extracted using TCA/Acetone method. Samples were cleaned-up with chloroform/methanol method and then digested with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Using an ultimate 3000 Nano LC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 μm × 5mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from trap column with a linear acetonitrile gradient (8-30% in 120 min) in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The peptides eluted from trap column were separated and sprayed on a C18 NANO HPLC NTTC-360/75-3 capillary tip column (75μm ID × 120 mm, Nikkyo Technos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 KV. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass spectrometer over 400-1500 m/z with a resolution of 30000 Using an ultimate 3000 Nano LC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 μm × 5mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from trap column with a linear acetonitrile gradient (8-30% in 120 min) in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The peptides eluted from trap column were separated and sprayed on a C18 NANO HPLC NTTC-360/75-3 capillary tip column (75μm ID × 120 mm, Nikkyo Technos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 KV. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass spectrometer over 400-1500 m/z with a resolution of 30000. Proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (version 2.3.0.2, Matrix Science, London, UK) of a soybean peptide database (55787 sequences) constructed from soybean genome database (Phytozome version 9.1). The acquired raw data files were processed using proteome discoverer (version 2.3.2), and the parameters used in Mascot searches were as follows: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da, and peptide charge was set at +2, +3, and +4. An automatic decoy database search was performed as part of the search. Mascot results were filtered with the Mascot Percolator package to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification. False discovery rates for peptide identification of all searches were less than1.0%. The Mascot results were imported for SIEVE analysis (version 2.0, Thermofisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Soybean is an important legume crop that exhibits markedly reduced growth and yields under flooding conditions. To unravel the mechanisms involved in recovery after flooding in soybean root, gel-free proteomic analysis was performed. Morphological analysis revealed that growth suppression was more severe with increased flooding duration. Out of a total of 1645 and 1707 identified proteins, 73 and 21 proteins were changed significantly during the recovery stage following 2 and 4 days flooding, respectively. Based on the proteomic, clustering, and in silico protein-protein interaction analyses, six key enzymes were analyzed at the mRNA level. Lipoxygenase 1, which was increased at the protein level during the recovery period, was steadily down-regulated at the mRNA level. The peroxidase superfamily protein continuously increased in abundance during the course of recovery and was up-regulated at the mRNA level. HAD acid phosphatase was decreased at the protein level and down-regulated at the transcript level, while isoflavone reductase and an unknown protein were increased at both the protein and mRNA levels. Consistent with these findings, the enzymatic activity of peroxidase was decreased under flooding stress but increased significantly during the recovery sage. These results suggest that peroxidases might play key roles in post-flooding recovery in soybean roots through the scavenging of toxic radicals.

### Keywords
Recovery stage, Root, Proteomics, Soybean, Flooding

### Affiliations
University of Tsukuba
NARO Institute of Crop Science ; University of Tsukuba

### Submitter
Mudassar Khan

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko Komatsu
NARO Institute of Crop Science ; University of Tsukuba


