### Accession
PXD035971

### Title
RNA-dependent interactome allows network-based assignment of RNA-binding protein function

### Description
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) form highly diverse and dynamic ribonucleoprotein complexes, whose functions determine the molecular fate of the bound RNA. In the model organism S. cerevisiae, the number of proteins identified as RBPs has largely increased over the last decade. However, the cellular function for most of these novel RBPs still remains largely unexplored. We use mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to systematically identify protein-protein interactions (PPIs), and RNA-dependent interactions (RDIs) to create a novel data set for 40 RBPs associated with the mRNA life cycle. Domain, functional, and pathway enrichment analysis revealed an overrepresentation of RNA functionalities among the enriched interactors. With the creation of extensive PPI and RDI networks, we revealed putative new members within RNA-associated pathways, as well as highlighted potential new roles of several RBPs, such as metabolism. Our RBP interactome resource is available through an online interactive platform as a community tool to guide further in-depth functional studies and RBP network analysis.

### Sample Protocol
IP screen elutions and KO screen protein lysates (100 μg in 30 μL LDS + 10mM DTT) were heated for 10 minutes at 70°C.  Proteins were then  separated on either 4-12% (IP screen) or 10% (KO screen) NuPage NOVEX gradient gel (Thermo Scientific) for 8 min at 180 V in 1x MES buffer (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were fixed and stained with a Coomassie solution (0.25% Coomassie Blue G-250 [Roth], 10% acetic acid, 43% ethanol). The gel lane was cut into slices, minced, and destained with 50% ethanol/50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate pH 8.0 . Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C and then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature, in the dark. Proteins were digested with LysC (Wako Chemicals) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel using twice a mixture of acetonitrile (30%) and 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate pH 8.0 solution, and three times with pure acetonitrile, which was subsequently evaporated in a concentrator (Eppendorf) and loaded on activated C18 material (Empore) StageTips as previously described (Rappsilber, Mann, and Ishihama 2007). Peptides were separated on a 25 cm self-packed column (New Objective) with 75 µm inner diameter filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH) for reverse-phase chromatography. An Peptides were eluted from the column in an optimized 90 min (IP screen) or 4 hours (KO screen) gradient from 2 to 40% MS grade acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid solution at a flow rate of 200 nl/min using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The mass spectrometer was used in a data-dependent acquisition mode with one MS full scan and up to 10 MS/MS scans using HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were searched using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011) integrated into MaxQuant software suite 1.6.5.0 (Cox and Mann 2008) using the S288C_Genome_Release_64-2-1_orf_trans_all.fasta) protein sequences from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) (Cherry et al. 2012). For the analysis, carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. The match between runs option was activated.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) form highly diverse and dynamic ribonucleoprotein complexes, whose functions determine the molecular fate of the bound RNA. In the model organism Sacchromyces cerevisiae, the number of proteins identified as RBPs has greatly increased over the last decade. However, the cellular function of most of these novel RBPs remains largely unexplored. We used mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to systematically identify protein-protein interactions (PPIs) and RNA-dependent interactions (RDIs) to create a novel dataset for 40 RBPs that are associated with the mRNA life cycle. Domain, functional and pathway enrichment analyses revealed an over-representation of RNA functionalities among the enriched interactors. Using our extensive PPI and RDI networks, we revealed putative new members of RNA-associated pathways, and highlighted potential new roles for several RBPs. Our RBP interactome resource is available through an online interactive platform as a community tool to guide further in-depth functional studies and RBP network analysis (https://www.butterlab.org/RINE).

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


