### Accession
PXD025560

### Title
Human NSCLC DIA proteomics validation cohort 2

### Description
In this project, one NSCLC cohorts were analyzed by Data Independent Acquisition (DIA-MS). A cohort of early stage NSCLC samples (207) with the aim to demonstrate utility of MS for subtyping and treatment prediction in a clinical setting. Further, six identified NSCLC proteome subtypes were investigated in relation to cancer driver pathways and immune phenotypes based on the generated MS-data.

### Sample Protocol
Each tumor protein extraction was performed by AllPrep kit in RTL buffer and then reduced and alkylated followed by SP3 protein clean up and digestion with LysC (1:50) and trypsin (1:50). The peptides were cleaned by SP3 peptide clean up.  Spectral Library Preparation  A pooled sample containing peptides from 129 different tumor samples was combined for spectral library generation. A total of 2 mg pooled peptides were aliquoted in two parts, each one was subjected to the fractionation of peptides, one by HiRIEF and one by High-pH peptide fractionation.   For HiRIEF pre-fractionation, peptides were separated by immobilized pH gradient - isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF) on pH 3-10 strips. Peptides were extracted from the strips into a plastic device with 72 wells. The extracted peptides were dried in Speed-Vac and dissolved in 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid, and consolidated to a final of 40 fractions.  For High-pH pre-fractionation, peptides were fractionated with basic-pH reverse-phase (BPRP) high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Peptides were loaded and separated on a 25 cm C18 packed column. 96 fractions were collected from the column and consolidated to a final of 40 fractions.  MS data acquisition.   Peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Samples were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap nanotrap column (C18, 3 mm, 100Å, 75 µm x 20 mm, Thermo Scientific), and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (C18, 2 µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a gradient of mobile phase A (5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) and B (90% ACN, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA), ranging from 6% to 30% B in 180 min with a flow of 0.25 ml/min.  To create the spectral library, each of the 80 fractions was analyzed in a data dependent manner (DDA). The method was set for selecting top 10 precursors for fragmentation by HCD. The survey scan was performed at 120,000 resolution from 400-1200 m/z, with a max injection time of 100 ms and target of 1e6 ions. For generation of HCD fragmentation spectra, a max ion injection time of 100 ms and AGC of 2e5 were used before fragmentation at 25% normalized collision energy, 30,000 resolution. Precursors were isolated with a width of 2 Th and put on the exclusion list for 15 s. Single and unassigned charge states were rejected from precursor selection.   For data independent acquisition (DIA) on the individual tumors, data was acquired using a variable window strategy. The survey scan was performed at 120,000 resolution from 400-1200 m/z, with a max injection time of 200 ms and target of 1e6 ions. For generation of HCD fragmentation spectra, max ion injection time was set as auto and AGC of 2e5 were used before fragmentation at 25% normalized collision energy, 30,000 resolution. The sizes of the precursor ion selection windows were optimized to have similar density of precursors m/z based on identified peptides from the spectral library. The median size of windows was 18.3 Th with a range of 15-88 Th covering the scan range of 400-1200 m/z. Neighbor windows have 2 Th overlap.

### Data Protocol
Spectral library generation as well as peptide and protein identification and quantification were performed on Spectronaut software package (version 13.10) from Biognosis. For spectral library generation all 80 Orbitrap raw files were searched by integrated search engine Pulsar. Files were searched against ENSEMBL protein database (GRCh38.92.pep.all.fasta). All parameters were set as default and for each peptide, the best 3 to 6 fragments were used. Results were filtered at all the precursor, peptide and protein levels with 1% FDR. Out of 213392 precursors, the peptide library consists of 160185 peptides representing 11915 protein groups.   For protein identification and quantification, all raw files analyzed by Spectronaut using the spectral library from the LC samples. All parameters were kept as default for protein identification. Briefly, runs were recalibrated using iRT standard peptides in a local and non-linear regression. Precursors, peptides and proteins were filtered with FDR 1%. The decoy database was created by mutation method. For quantification, only peptides unique to a protein group were used. Protein groups were defined base on gene symbols to obtain a gene symbol centric quantification. Stripped peptide quantification was defined as the top precursor quantity. Protein group quantification was calculated by the median value of the top 3 most abundant peptides. Quantification was performed at the MS2 level based on the peak area. The quantitative values were filtered using Qvalue for each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Despite major advancements in lung cancer treatment, long-term survival is still rare, and a deeper understanding of molecular phenotypes would allow the identification of specific cancer dependencies and immune evasion mechanisms. Here we performed in-depth mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteogenomic analysis of 141 tumors representing all major histologies of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We identified six distinct proteome subtypes with striking differences in immune cell composition and subtype-specific expression of immune checkpoints. Unexpectedly, high neoantigen burden was linked to global hypomethylation and complex neoantigens mapped to genomic regions, such as endogenous retroviral elements and introns, in immune-cold subtypes. Further, we linked immune evasion with LAG3 via STK11 mutation-dependent HNF1A activation and FGL1 expression. Finally, we develop a data-independent acquisition MS-based NSCLC subtype classification method, validate it in an independent cohort of 208 NSCLC cases and demonstrate its clinical utility by analyzing an additional cohort of 84 late-stage NSCLC biopsy samples.

### Keywords
Adenocarcinoma, Lung cancer, Classification, Dia, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet, Oncology and pathology department, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Georgios Mermelekas

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Karolinska Institutet, Oncology and pathology department, Stockholm, Sweden


