### Accession
PXD021897

### Title
Drosophila Sex Peptide Controls the Assembly of Lipid Microcarriers in Seminal Fluid

### Description
Seminal fluid plays an essential role in promoting male reproductive success and modulating female physiology and behaviour. In the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, Sex Peptide (SP) is the best-characterised protein mediator of these effects. It is secreted from the paired male accessory glands (AGs), which, like the mammalian prostate and seminal vesicles, generate most of the seminal fluid contents. After mating, SP binds to spermatozoa and is retained in the female sperm storage organs. It is gradually released by proteolytic cleavage and induces several long-term post-mating responses including increased ovulation, elevated feeding and reduced receptivity to remating, primarily signalling through the SP receptor (SPR). We demonstrate a previously unsuspected SPR-independent function for SP. We show that, in the AG lumen, SP and secreted proteins with membrane-binding anchors are carried on abundant, large neutral lipid-containing microcarriers, also found in other SP-expressing Drosophila species. These microcarriers are transferred to females during mating, where they rapidly disassemble. Remarkably, SP is a key microcarrier assembly and disassembly factor. Its absence leads to major changes in the seminal proteome transferred to females upon mating. Males expressing non-functional SP mutant proteins that affect SP binding to and release from sperm in females also do not produce normal microcarriers, suggesting that this male-specific defect contributes to the resulting widespread abnormalities in ejaculate function. Our data reveal a novel role for SP in formation of seminal macromolecular assemblies, which may explain the presence of SP in Drosophila species that lack the signalling functions seen in D. melanogaster. In this experiment we assessed the effect of SP loss-of-function on the transferred seminal proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were stored at -80°C until sample preparation for proteomic analysis. The samples were macerated with a clean pestle and washed with 25Âµl of Pierce RIPA Buffer. Then they were digested using the standard gel-aided sample preparation (GASP) protocol. In brief, samples were reduced with 50mM DTT for 10 to 20 minutes. Protein lysate was mixed with an equal volume of 40% acrylamide/Bis solution (37.5:1. National Diagnostics) and left at room temperature for 30 minutes to facilitate cysteine alkylation to propionamide. 5ul TEMED and 5ul 10% APS were added to trigger acrylamide polymerization. The resulting gel plug was shredded by centrifugation through a Spin-X filter insert without membrane (CLS9301, Sigma/Corning). Gel pieces were fixed in 40% ethanol /5% acetic acid before 2 successive rounds of buffer exchange with 1.5M Urea, 0.5M Thiourea and 50mM ammonium bicarbonate which were removed with acetonitrile. Immobilized proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight and peptides extracted with two rounds of acetonitrile replacements. Peptides were first dried before desalting using Sola SPE columns (Thermo) and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1 % FA buffer prior LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide samples were analysed on a LC-MS/MS platform consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 and a Q-Exactive HF (other datasets) mass spectrometer (Thermo). After peptide loading in 0.1% TFA in 2% ACN onto a trap column (PepMAP C18, 300Âµm x5mm, 5Âµm particle, Thermo), peptides were separated on an easy spray column (PepMAP C18, 75Âµm x 500mm, 2Âµm particle, Thermo) with a gradient 2% ACN to 35% ACN in 0.1% formic acid in 5% DMSO. MS spectra were acquired in profile mode with a resolution of 60,000 with an ion target of 3x106. The instrument was set to pick the 12 most intense features for subsequent MS/MS analysis at a resolution of 30,000, a maximum acquisition time of 45ms, an AGC target of 1x105, an isolation width of 1.6Th (QE-HF: 1.2Th) and a dynamic exclusion of 27 seconds.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were imported into Progenesis QIP (version 3.0.6039.34628) using default settings. MS/MS spectra were exported as MGF files using the 200 most intense peaks without deconvolution for searching with Mascot (v 2.5.1) versus the Drosophila melanogaster UniProt reference proteome (retr 30/03/2015). Parameters: 10 ppm precursor mass accuracy, 0.05 Da fragment mass accuracy, Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N, Q) and Propionamide (K) as variable modifications, Propionamide (C) as a fixed modification, and two missed cleavage sites. We applied 1% FDR at peptide level and an additional Mascot ion score cutoff of 20 before importing search results into Progenesis, where protein quantification was calculated using the Top3 method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Seminal proteins, Reproduction, Secretion, Drosophila, Sex peptide, Triacylglycerides

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Clive Wilson
Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford


