### Accession
PXD013067

### Title
Untargeted histone profiling of human embryonic stem cell conversion over time reveals fundamental epigenetic changes between pluripotent and naive states

### Description
Recently, various groups managed to isolate naïve human embryonic stem cell (hESC) state in vitro has come into acceptance. However, a thorough epigenetic characterization of this human ground state, defined as a state without any epigenetic restrictions, and how that compares to mouse is currently lacking.  Also, the epigenomic remodeling required to obtain the ground state, and the important  transient processes occurring during the remodeling, have remained elusive in human. Here, we address these issues by using an untargeted mass spectrometry-based (MS) approach to profile the histone epigenome in a time-resolved experimental design. Special care was given to defining the naïve hESC state that was reached over 12 passages (P12, 37 days) in feeder-free conditions in this study. We found that conversion is a multi-staged process with a prominent cellular disturbance after stimulation (P3), an increase in cell proliferation between P3 and P6 and a naïve cell state stabilizing between P9 and P12. In total, 20 different histone post-translational modifications (hPTMs) changed significantly over time from primed to naïve hESCs. Most notably, H3K27me3 is the most prominently increasing hPTM in naïve hESCs, in line with what we recently described in mouse. Essentially, we present a first roadmap of the changing human histone epigenome from primed to naïve state and emphasize that the overlap with mouse hints at a conserved Mammalian epigenetic signature of the ground state.

### Sample Protocol
Culture of human embryonic stem cells Primed hESC line H9 was converted to the naïve state under feeder-free conditions using the Enhanced WIS-NHSM protocol. Cells were collected for histone analysis on passages P0 (Primed hESCs), P3, P6, P9 and P12. On P0 and P12 cells were also additionally seeded onto glass coverslips for 3 days for immunofluorescence analysis.   Histone sample preparation and MS analysis Histone extraction and propionylation was performed as previously described by Govaert et al. (2016) and Meert et al (2016). MS-analysis was done as previously described in Van Mierlo et al. (2018). Histones (1.5 µg) were analyzed by micro-RPLC-MS/MS using a Eksigent NanoLC 425 system coupled to a Triple TOF ™ 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada) fitted with a DuoSpray ion source in positive ion mode.  For more details refer to the publication.

### Data Protocol
To perform untargeted screening of all relevant hPTMs and overcome ambiguity of annotation, we performed data analysis using an established method described in Willems et al. (2017). The MSMS spectra were sequentially searched using five sets of six PTMs. For more details refer to the publication.

### Publication Abstract
Recent progress has enabled the conversion of primed human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to the naive state of pluripotency, resembling the well-characterized naive mouse ESCs (mESCs). However, a thorough histone epigenetic characterization of this conversion process is currently lacking, while its likeness to the mouse model has not been clearly established. Here, we profile the histone epigenome of hESCs during conversion in a time-resolved experimental design, using an untargeted mass spectrometry-based approach. In total, 23 histone post-translational modifications (hPTMs) changed significantly over time. H3K27Me3 was the most prominently increasing marker hPTM in naive hESCs. This is in line with previous reports in mouse, prompting us to compare all the shared hPTM fold changes between mouse and human, revealing a set of conserved hPTM markers for the naive state. Principally, we present the first roadmap of the changing human histone epigenome during the conversion of hESCs from the primed to the naive state. This further revealed similarities with mouse, which hint at a conserved mammalian epigenetic signature of the ground state of pluripotency.

### Keywords
Human embryonic stem cells; pluripotency; naïve; epigenetics; histone modification; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Faculity of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology
University Ghent

### Submitter
Maarten Dhaenens

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Dhaenens
University Ghent


