### Accession
PXD001458

### Title
Susceptible interaction Ectocarpus/Eurychasma

### Description
The pathosystem between the model brown alga Ectocarpus siliculsosus and the oomycete pathogen Eurychasma dicksonii was investigated with the aim to identify proteins involved in host repsonse. Comparative 2D electrophoresis was used to identify protein spots differentially expressed between uninfected control and infected algal tissue.

### Sample Protocol
2D electrophoresis followed by gel blue staining  and scanning on a ImageScannerIII. Image analysis was performed using Progenesis SameSpot. Spots with a p-value < 0.05 and a fold change of ≥ 1.5 between control and infection were selected for subsequent in gel disgestion and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide peaks were detected and deconvoluted via the Bruker DataAnalysis software. Mass lists were created in the form of MASCOT generic files and used for the MASCOT MS/MS ions search of the Ectocarpus protein database on the Matrix science web server. The default search parameters used were as follows: enzyme = trypsin, max missed cleavages = 1; fixed modifications = carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications = oxidation (M); peptide tolerance ± 1.5 Da; MS/MS tolerance ± 0.5 Da; peptide charge = 2+ and 3+; instrument = ESI-TRAP. Probability-based MOWSE scores above the threshold value (p < 0.05) were considered for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Pathogens are increasingly being recognized as key evolutionary and ecological drivers in marine ecosystems. Defence mechanisms of seaweeds, however, have mostly been investigated by mimicking infection using elicitors. We have established an experimental pathosystem between the genome brown model seaweed Ectocarpus siliculosus and the oomycete Eurychasma dicksonii as a powerful new tool to investigate algal responses to infection. Using proteomics, we identified 21 algal proteins differentially accumulated in response to Eu.&#x2009;dicksonii infection. These include classical algal stress response proteins such as a manganese superoxide dismutase, heat shock proteins 70 and a vanadium bromoperoxidase. Transcriptional profiling by qPCR confirmed the induction of the latter during infection. The accumulation of hydrogen peroxide was observed at different infection stages via histochemical staining. Inhibitor studies confirmed that the main source of hydrogen peroxide is superoxide converted by superoxide dismutase. Our data give an unprecedented global overview of brown algal responses to pathogen infection, and highlight the importance of oxidative stress and halogen metabolism in these interactions. This suggests overlapping defence pathways with herbivores and abiotic stresses. We also identify previously unreported actors, in particular a Rad23 and a plastid-lipid-associated protein, providing novel insights into the infection and defence processes in brown algae.

### Keywords
Eurychasma dicksonii, Infection, Reactive oxygen species, Model brown alga, Vanadium-dependent bromoperoxidase, Oomycete, Ectocarpus

### Affiliations
The Scottish Accociation for Marine Science Scottish Marine Intsitute  Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology Oban, PA37 1QA United Kingdom
The Scottish Association for Marine Science

### Submitter
Martina Strittmatter

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Claire Gachon
The Scottish Accociation for Marine Science Scottish Marine Intsitute  Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology Oban, PA37 1QA United Kingdom


