### Accession
PXD039586

### Title
MYC enhancer invasion promotes prognostic cancer type-specific gene programs through an epigenetic switch

### Description
The transcription factor MYC is overexpressed in most cancers, where it drives multiple hallmarks of cancer progression. MYC is known to promote oncogenic transcription by binding to active promoters. In addition, MYC has also been shown to invade distal enhancers when expressed at oncogenic levels, but this enhancer binding has been proposed to have low gene-regulatory potential. Here, we demonstrate that MYC enhancer binding directly promotes cancer type-specific gene programs predictive of poor patient prognosis. MYC induces transcription of enhancer RNA through recruitment of RNAPII, rather than regulating RNAPII pause-release as is the case at promoters. This is mediated by MYC-induced H3K9 demethylation by KDM3A and acetylation by GCN5, leading to enhancer-specific BRD4 recruitment through its bromodomains, which facilitates RNAPII recruitment. Thus, we propose that MYC drives prognostic cancer type-specific gene programs by promoting RNAPII recruitment to enhancers through induction of an epigenetic switch.

### Sample Protocol
BT549 celles was subjected to chromatin IP with antibodies specific for MED1 (+/- kjpyr9) and GR (+/- dex). Peptides were purified and labled with TMT 11plex, fractionated by revers phase high pH fractionation on a spin column and subjected to LC-MS using an easy nLC combined with a Q Exactive HF obitrap instrument.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with Proteome Discovere 2.5 using mascot 2.7 as the search engine and the human SwissProt database.The search results were processed using the qPLEXanalyzer workflow.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enhancer invasion, Gcn5, Enhancer transcription, Myc, Glucocorticoid receptor, Breast cancer, Qplexrime, Brd4

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark
Department of Biochemisrty and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Tina Ravnsborg

### Lab Head
Dr Rasmus Siersbæk
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark


