### Accession
PXD040451

### Title
Data independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) analysis of FFPE rectal cancer samples offers in depth proteomics characterization of response to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy

### Description
A total of 97 LARC patients treated at the Institute for Oncology and Radiology of Serbia in the period of 2018-2019 were included in the study. Patients were treated with long-course chemoradiotherapy (CRT): Radiotherapy (RT) was delivered with a total dose of 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions; concomitant chemotherapy (5-FU, 350 mg/m2 daily) and Leucovorin (25 mg/m2 daily) was administered during the first and the fifth week of RT. Patients were evaluated in week 6-8 after treatment completion with pelvic MRI scan and rigid proctoscopy. Pathohistological response after surgery was assessed according to tumor regression grading (TRG) categories by Mandard. Twenty biopsy samples taken at diagnosis were used for proteomic analysis, 9 responders (R, TRG 1-2), and 11 non-responders (NR, TRG 3-5), in order to achieve the maximum range of different molecular features potentially associated with response.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction from FFPE tissue samples From each FFPE sample, 10 sections 15-20 μm thick were cut using a microtome and transferred to 2 mL Eppendorf tubes. From all sections, 3 were selected that contained the largest amount of tissue. Samples were deparaffinized using Xylene in two steps of 5 min and 1 min successively. The samples were centrifuged and in the next step, the pellet tissue was rehydrated using several dilutions of ethanol and finally washed with double distilled water. The tissue pellet was air dried and dissolved in FASP protein extraction buffer (100mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, SDS 4%, 100mM 1,4- Dithioerythtriol (DTE)). The tissue was homogenized, while the disintegration of the cell membrane was achieved by sonication (three cycles of 5 sec with 36% power). The samples were heated at 90℃ for 1 h to extract the cellular proteins into solution. Supernatant contained extracted proteins was transferred to new Eppendorf tube and an appropriate amount of ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer was added. The sample was concentrated using 3 kDa cut-off Amicon filter.   Protein digestion and preparation for LC-MS/MS Analysis The total volume of concentrated proteins was added on SDS PAGE (5% stacking gel, 12% separating gel). Preparative SDS PAG electrophoresis was performed, and gel was fixed, washed and stained with Coomassie colloidal dye (Supp. Material 1). Protein bands were cut from the gel for each sample separately, chopped and transferred to Eppendorf tubes. The strips were decolorized with a solution of 40% Acetonitrile, 50 mM NH4HCO3 until parts of the gel became completely transparent. The samples were reduced with 10mM DTE in 100mM NH4HCO3 and alkylated 10mg/mL Iodoacetamide in 100mM NH4HCO3 and then washed with 100mM NH4HCO3, destain solution and water, respectively. The samples were dried in speed vac until transparent crystals formed. Each sample was trypsinized with trypsin solution which enables the cutting of the substrate in place of the amino acid lysine and arginine. The peptides formed were extracted with NH4HCO3 solution followed by incubation in a 1: 1 solution of 10% Formic acid and Acetonitrile. The peptide solution was purified using PVDF filters (Merck Millipore). The samples were dried in Speed vacuum and prepared for further processing. LC-MS/MS Analysis Samples were run in two technical replicates on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of an Ultimate 3000 RSLC online with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptidic samples were directly injected and separated on a 25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9 μm beads, 75 µm ID) using 90 minutes long runs using aa gradient of 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 36% was used for 70 min, followed by an increase to 95% in 5 min, and a second increase to 99% in 0.5 min and then kept constant for equilibration for 14.5 min. A full MS was acquired in profile mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadropole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, operating in the scan range of 375-1400 m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and max IT of 60ms. Data independent analysis followed, using 8 Th windows (39 loop counts) with 15K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 105 and max IT of 22 ms and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw data was analyzed in DIA-NN 1.8 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) through searching against the reviewed Human Uniprot database (retrieved 4/21) in the library free mode of the software, allowing up to two tryptic missed cleavages. A spectral library was created from the DIA runs and used to reanalyze them. DIA-NN default settings have been used with oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of the protein N-termini set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. N-terminal methionine excision was also enabled. The match between runs feature was used for all analyses and the output (precursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR. Finally, the protein inference was performed on the level of genes using only proteotypic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC) presents a challenge in identifying molecular markers linked to the response to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (nCRT). This study aimed to utilize a sensitive proteomic method, data-independent mass spectrometry (DIA-MS), to extensively analyze the LARC proteome, seeking individuals with favorable initial responses suitable for a watch-and-wait approach. This research addresses the unmet need to understand the response to treatment, potentially guiding personalized strategies for LARC patients. Post-treatment assessment included MRI scans and proctoscopy. This research involved 97 LARC patients treated with intense chemoradiotherapy, comprising radiation and chemotherapy. Out of 97 LARC included in this study, we selected 20 samples with the most different responses to nCRT for proteome profiling (responders vs. non-responders). This proteomic approach shows extensive proteome coverage in LARC samples. The analysis identified a significant number of proteins compared to a prior study. A total of 915 proteins exhibited differential expression between the two groups, with certain signaling pathways associated with response mechanisms, while top candidates had good predictive potential. Proteins encoded by genes <i>SMPDL3A</i>, <i>PCTP</i>, <i>LGMN</i>, <i>SYNJ2</i>, <i>NHLRC3</i>, <i>GLB1,</i> and <i>RAB43</i> showed high predictive potential of unfavorable treatment outcome, while <i>RPA2</i>, <i>SARNP</i>, <i>PCBP2</i>, <i>SF3B2</i>, <i>HNRNPF</i>, <i>RBBP4</i>, <i>MAGOHB</i>, <i>DUT</i>, <i>ERG28</i>, and <i>BUB3</i> were good predictive biomarkers of favorable treatment outcome. The identified proteins and related biological processes provide promising insights that could enhance the management and care of LARC patients.

### Keywords
Data independent acquisition mass spectrometry, Rectal cancer, Proteomics, Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Institute for Oncology and Radiology of Serbia  Department of Experimental Oncology Pasterova 14, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Milena Cavic
Institute for Oncology and Radiology of Serbia  Department of Experimental Oncology Pasterova 14, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia


