### Accession
PXD029836

### Title
dia-PASEF HeLa dilution series 0.2ng - 200ng on Bruker timsTOF Pro 2

### Description
Different sample preparation methods were tested for HeLa proteome analysis. A sample obtained using sodium deoxycholate-based lysis allowed identification of the highest number of proteins. For this sample, a dilution series was acquired in triplicates ranging from 0.2ng to 200ng. All measurements were performed on Bruker timsTOF Pro 2 operated in dia-PASEF mode and analysed library-free using DIA-NN 1.8.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were cultured in Basal Iscove media (Biochrom) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Biochrom) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Biochrom) at 37°C with a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. After three passages cells were treated with Trypsin/EDTA (Biochrom) and centrifuged at 200×g for 5 minutes. The pellet was once washed with Dulbecco's Phosphate Buffered Saline.  We have tested three protocols varying in the protein extraction, digestion and peptide purification methods (P1-3).   P1 (SDC protocol). 2×10^5 cells were resolved in 75 µL Lysis-Reduction-Alkylation Buffer, 10 mM Tris-2(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine-hydrochloride-solution (TCEP, Merck), 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA, Merck), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 and 1% Sodium Deoxycholate (SDC, Merk).  P2 (Urea protocol). 2×10^5 cells were resolved in 75 µL Lysis-Reduction-Alkylation Buffer, 40mM CAA (Merck), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 and 8 M Urea, 10 mM TCEP (Merck).   For P1 and P2, cells were boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes in a thermomixer at 800 rpm. Afterwards the cells were sonicated for 20 minutes on ice in UltraSonic Bath (Branson). The lysate was diluted 1:10 with HPLC-Water for P1, and 1:5 with dilution buffer (10% Acetonitrile (ACN) v/v, 25 mM Tris pH 8.5) for P2.   For P1 and P2, the lysates were digested at 37°C using Trypsin/LysC (Promega) in 1:50 (enzyme:protein) ratio. After overnight the digest was acidified to final concentration 0.5% with Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Thermo).   Peptides were purified using StageTips (C18 disk, Affinisep), activated with 50 µL of Methanol washed/centrifuged in two step procedure, one, with 50 µL 80% ACN / 0.1% FA, and second with 50 µL 0.1% FA. After sample load, the tips were washed with 0.1% FA and Peptides were eluted with 30 µL 80% ACN / 0.1% FA (each time centrifuged for 5 Minutes at 500 x g).  P3 (bulk). 1×10^7 cells were resolved in a 1 mL Lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC)), incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature and 800 rpm in thermomixer (Eppendorf) and the sample was centrifuged for 20 minutes at 14000 rpm. The lysate was reduced with Dithiothreitol (DTT, final concentration 1 mM) for 30 minutes at room temperature and alkylated with Iodoacetamide (IAA, final concentration 5 mM in dark). Sample was diluted 1:3 with 100 mM ABC and digested with Trypsin : Protein (1:50) (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were acidified with TFA (final concentration 1%) and purified with Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge, 50 mg Sorbent (Waters). Eluates were dried in a speed vac (Eppendorf). Samples were resolved in 30 µL 2%ACN/0.1%TFA.  Digests obtained with P1-P3 as well as a commercial HeLa digest (Thermo) were analysed. A dilution series was then obtained for P1, with injection amounts ranging from 0.2ng to 200ng.  The tryptic digests were injected on the 25 cm Aurora Series with emitter column (CSI, 25cm x 75µm ID, 1.6µm C18, IonOpticks, installed in the nano-electrospray source (CaptiveSpray source, Bruker Daltonics, Germany) at 50 C using UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Scientific Dionex) coupled with TIMS quadrupole time-of-flight instrument (timsTOF Pro2, Bruker Daltonics, Germany) and measured in diaPASEF mode. The mobile phases Water/0.1% FA and ACN/0.1% FA (A and B respectively) were applied in the linear gradients starting from 2% B and increasing to 17% in 87 min, followed by an increase to 25% B in 93min, 37% B in 98 min, 80% B in 99 min to 104 min, the column was equilibrated in 2% B by next 15 min. For calibration of ion mobility dimension, three ions of Agilent ESI-Low Tuning Mix ions were selected (m/z [Th], 1/𝐾0 [Th]: 622.0289, 0.9848; 922.0097, 1.1895; 1221.9906, 1.3820). For sample injection, more than 50 ng (less than 50 ng), the diaPASEF windows scheme was ranging in dimension m/z from 400 (396) to 1200 (1103) Th and in dimension 1/𝐾0  (0.6) 0.7 – 1.43 (1.3) Vs cm- 2, with 32 x 25  (59 x 12)  Th windows) with Ramp Time 100 (166) ms. For injections of 50ng and below the mass spectrometer was operated in low sample injection mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry runs were analysed with DIA-NN 1.8 in library-free mode. Maximum mass accuracy tolerances were fixed to 10ppm for both MS1 and MS2, library generation was set to "IDs, RT and IM profiling", quantification strategy was set to "Robust LC (high-precision)". DIA-NN was run with the option --relaxed-prot-inf. For the library-free search, an in silico predicted library was generated from the "human - 2021-02-16-reviewed-contam-UP000005640.fasta" database, using precursor mass range 400-1200 and charge range 2-3. All other settings were left default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dia-pasef diapasef dia-nn hela

### Affiliations
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin

### Submitter
Vadim Demichev

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Ralser
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin


