### Accession
PXD045622

### Title
USP36 stabilizes nucleolar Snail1 to promote ribosome biogenesis and cancer cell survival upon ribotoxic stress

### Description
Tumor growth requires elevated ribosome biogenesis. Targeting ribosomes is an important strategy for cancer therapy. The ribosome inhibitor, homoharringtonine (HHT), is used for the clinical treatment of leukemia, yet it is ineffective for the treatment of solid tumors, the reasons for which remain unclear. Here we show that Snail1, a key factor in the regulation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, plays a pivotal role in cellular surveillance response upon ribotoxic stress. Mechanistically, ribotoxic stress activates the JNK-USP36 signaling to stabilize Snail1 in the nucleolus, which facilitates ribosome biogenesis and tumor cell survival. Furthermore, we show that HHT activates the JNK-USP36-Snail1 axis in solid tumor cells, but not in leukemia cells, resulting in solid tumor cell resistance to HHT. Importantly, a combination of HHT with the inhibition of the JNK-USP36-Snail1 axis synergistically inhibits solid tumor growth. Together, this study provides a rationale for targeting the JNK-USP36-Snail1 axis in ribosome inhibition-based solid tumor therapy.

### Sample Protocol
HEK-293 cells stably expressing HA-Snail1 were transiently transfected with USP36, Vector control(Ctrl) or shUSP36(shU36) for 48 h. Cells were treated with MG132 for 6 h followed by immunoprecipitation. For determining the ubiquitination levels in Snail1, the gel bands obtained from SDS-PAGE were sliced and destained using 50% ethanol. After fully dehydrated using 100% ACN (Acetonitrile), samples were reduced by 1.5 mg/mL DTT at 56 ℃ for 1 hour and then alkylated by 10 mg/mL iodoacetamide in darkness for 45min at room temperature. The gels were then dehydrated in 100% ACN and the proteins were digested by trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (w/w, trypsin/protein) for approximately 16 hours at 37 ℃. The tryptic peptides were extracted sequentially in 50% ACN/5% TFA (Trifluoroacetic Acid), 75% ACN/0.1% TFA, and 100% ACN, then the extracted peptides were combined and dried by SpeedVac (Hunan Herexi) and desalted with C18 ZipTip (Millipore) before LC-MS/MS analysis. The desalted peptides were resuspended using buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and then loaded onto a homemade trap column (2 cm length X 75 μm inner diameter, Spursil C18 5 μm particle size, DIKMA), which was coupled to a homemade capillary column (20 cm length X 75 μm inner diameter, Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm particle size). For LC-MS/MS analysis, an EASY-nanoLC 1000 nanoflow LC instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA) was used in combination with a high-resolution mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated and eluted with a gradient of 13% to 100% HPLC buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile, v/v) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in 98% water, v/v) at a flow rate of 330 nL/min. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed in positive ion mode. Full MS was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the range of m/z 350 to 1,800 with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. The automatic gain control (AGC) value was set at 3x10-6 with a maximum injection time of 20 ms. The top 20 most intense parent ions were selected for MS/MS scans with a 1.6 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27%. The AGC value for MS/MS was set to a target value of 1x10-6, with a maximum injection time of 64 ms and a resolution of 17,500. Parent ions with a charge state of z=1 or 8 or with unassigned charge states were excluded from fragmentation, and the intensity threshold for selection was set to 3.1x10-5.

### Data Protocol
The raw files obtained were searched against the Swiss-Prot human protein sequence database (updated on 01/2017; 20,413 protein sequences) by using MaxQuant (version 1.6). The precursor ion mass errors of all identified peptides were found to be within 10 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da. Lysine ubiquitination was specified as variable modification. The minimum peptide length was set at 6 amino acids. The maximum allowed missed trypsin cleavages were set at 2, and peptides were not nested within another longer peptide. Proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% at both the protein and peptide levels were kept.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Usp36; snail1; ribosome biogenesis; ribotoxic stress

### Affiliations
Center of Growth, Metabolism and Aging, Key Laboratory of Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610064, China
Sichuan university

### Submitter
Yong Yi

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Yi
Center of Growth, Metabolism and Aging, Key Laboratory of Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610064, China


