### Accession
PXD028901

### Title
MSLibrarian: Optimized predicted spectral libraries for DIA proteomics

### Description
Data-independent mass spectrometry is the method of choice for deep, consistent and accurate single-shot profiling in bottom-up proteomics. While classic workflows required auxiliary DDA-MS analysis of subject samples to derive prior knowledge spectral libraries for targeted quantification from DIA-MS maps, library-free approaches based on in silico predicted libraries promise deep DIA-MS profiling with reduced experimental effort and cost. Coverage and sensitivity in such analyses, however, is limited, in part, by large library size and persistent deviations from experimental data. We present MSLibrarian, a workflow and tool to obtain optimized predicted spectral libraries by the integrated usage of spectrum-centric DIA data interpretation via the DIA-Umpire approach to inform and calibrate the in silico predicted library approach. Predicted-vs-observed comparisons enable optimization of intensity prediction parameters, calibration of retention time prediction for deviating chromatographic setups and optimization of library scope and sample representativeness. Benchmarking via a dedicated ground-truth-embedded species mixture experiment and quantitative ratio-validation confirms gains of up to 9 % on precursor and 7 % protein level at equivalent FDR control and validation criteria. MSLibrarian has been implemented as open-source R software package and, with step-by-step usage instructions, is availabe at https://github.com/MarcIsak/MSLibrarian.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and denatured with 8 M urea in 0.1 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and debris remove by centrifugation at 14000 g for 5 minutes. Cysteines were reduced using 50 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) and then alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich).  Protein concentration was determined with the bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Scientific). 50 µg protein extract was digested with 1 µg sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega). The resulting peptides were desalted with C18 reverse phase chromatography (ultra-micro spin-columns) according to manufacturer’s instructions (Harvard Apparatus). The mouse peptides were dried down with a vacuum concentrator (Savant). Yeast tryptic peptides, from Saccharomyces cerevisiae whole-cell protein extract, were purchased from Promega (Promega Cat. no. #V7461)

### Data Protocol
ProteoWizard, MSFragger, DeepLC, Prosit, MSconvert, EncyclopeDIA, DIA-NN, R, MaxQuant, MSlibrarian

### Publication Abstract
Data-independent acquisition-mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) is the method of choice for deep, consistent, and accurate single-shot profiling in bottom-up proteomics. While classic workflows for targeted quantification from DIA-MS data require auxiliary data-dependent acquisition (DDA) MS analysis of subject samples to derive prior-knowledge spectral libraries, library-free approaches based on <i>in silico</i> prediction promise deep DIA-MS profiling with reduced experimental effort and cost. Coverage and sensitivity in such analyses are however limited, in part, by the large library size and persistent deviations from the experimental data. We present MSLibrarian, a new workflow and tool to obtain optimized predicted spectral libraries by the integrated usage of spectrum-centric DIA data interpretation via the DIA-Umpire approach to inform and calibrate the <i>in silico</i> predicted library and analysis approach. Predicted-vs-observed comparisons enabled optimization of intensity prediction parameters, calibration of retention time prediction for deviating chromatographic setups, and optimization of the library scope and sample representativeness. Benchmarking via a dedicated ground-truth-embedded experiment of species-mixed proteins and quantitative ratio-validation confirmed gains of up to 13% on peptide and 8% on protein level at equivalent FDR control and validation criteria. MSLibrarian is made available as an open-source R software package, including step-by-step user instructions, at https://github.com/MarcIsak/MSLibrarian.

### Keywords
Predicted spectral library, Q-exactive, Hf-x, Dia, Lfq bench

### Affiliations
Infection Medicine Proteomics Lab, Division of Infection Medicine (BMC), Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Christofer Karlsson

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malmström
Infection Medicine Proteomics Lab, Division of Infection Medicine (BMC), Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


