### Accession
PXD001528

### Title
Paraquat Exposure and Sod2 Knockdown have Dissimilar Impacts on the Drosophila melanogaster Carbonylated Protein Proteome

### Description
Exposure to Paraquat and RNA interference knockdown of mitochondrial superoxide dismutase (Sod2) are known to result in significant lifespan reduction, locomotor dysfunction, and mitochondrial degeneration in Drosophila melanogaster. Both perturbations increase the flux of superoxide, a progenitor reactive oxygen species, but the molecular underpinnings of the resulting phenotypes are poorly understood. Improved understanding of such processes could lead to advances in the treatment of numerous age-related disorders. Superoxide toxicity can act through protein carbonylation. Analysis of carbonylated proteins is attractive since reactive carbonyl groups are not present in the twenty canonical amino acids and are amenable to labeling and enrichment strategies. Here, carbonylated proteins were labeled with biotin hydrazide and enriched on streptavidin-coated beads. On-bead digestion was used to release carbonylated protein peptides, with relative abundance ratios versus controls obtained using the iTRAQ mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach. While Paraquat exposure and Sod2 knockdown have similar phenotypes, differences in protein carbonylation were anticipated because Paraquat exposure was expected to increase the concentration of superoxide throughout the cell while Sod2 knockdown was only expected to raise the concentration of superoxide in the mitochondrial matrix. Paraquat exposure resulted in widespread increases in carbonylated protein relative abundance: the median Paraquat-exposed to control carbonylated protein relative abundance ratio was 1.53. For Sod2 knockdown, in contrast, the median carbonylated protein relative abundance ratios were 1.13 versus the RNA interference driver control and 1.05 versus the RNA interference transgene control. However, some proteins did show large increases in carbonylated protein relative abundance on Sod2 knockdown, most notably cytochrome c oxidase subunit Vb, possibly providing some indication of the molecular basis of the Sod2-knockdown phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Flies were aged (Sod2-knockdown studies) or exposed to Paraquat until circa 50% were dead. Age-matched populations of control flies were handled in parallel. The Drosophila melanogaster strain used for the Paraquat-exposure study was w1118, while RNA interference Sod2 knockdown was achieved using the da-Gal4 driver to drive ubiquitous expression of the UAS-Sod2-IR24 transgene; two controls were used for the Sod2-knockdown study, one containing the driver alone and one containing the transgene alone. Flies, in batches of circa 500, were sacrificed by freezing overnight at -20°C and then homogenized using 15 strokes of a Dounce homogenizer in 5 mL ice-cold buffer (100 mM sucrose, 100 mM KCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM KH2PO4, 0.1 mM EGTA, adjusted to pH 7.3) containing the protease inhibitors aprotinin, leupeptin, and pepstatin A at 500 ng/mL. Large debris was then removed by centrifugation at 300 × g for 20 min at 4°C. Supernatants were stored at -20°C until further processing could be performed. Biotinylation of reactive protein carbonyls was begun by adding biotin hydrazide to the homogenates to 5 mM and then incubating for 60 min at room temperature with gentle agitation. Sodium dodecyl sulfate was then added to 2% (w/v) to disrupt membranes and dissolve released proteins before a second addition of biotin hydrazide to 5 mM was performed, which was followed by 120-min incubation at room temperature with gentle agitation. The biotin label was fixed by adding sodium cyanoborohydride to 15 mM and incubating at 4°C for 60 min. PD midiTrap G-25 gel filtration cartridges (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) were used to separate labeled proteins from reagents and then a bicinchoninic acid protein concentration assay (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA) was performed. Equal amounts of total protein were added to streptavidin UltraLink resin (Pierce Biotechnology), which had previously be washed with phosphate buffered saline, and incubated at room temperature overnight with slow rotation. Unbound proteins were removed by washing the resin three times with phosphate buffered saline followed by once with 8 M urea and 10 mM dithiothreitol in phosphate buffered saline. Protein denaturation and reduction was allowed to proceed at 37°C for 60 min in 8 M urea and 10 mM dithiothreitol in phosphate buffered saline. Cysteines were capped by adding iodoacetamide to 55 mM and incubating for 60 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess reagents were removed from the beads prior to digestion by washing with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (aq). Digestion with trypsin was allowed to proceed overnight at 37°C and was terminated by acidification with 10% TFA (aq). Carbonylated protein peptides were recovered by extensive washing of the beads with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (aq). Recovered peptide solutions were then evaporated to dryness in a centrifugal evaporator before being labeled with the iTRAQ reagents as recommended by the manufacturer. To enable non-specific binding to the streptavidin-coated beads to be assessed, additional aliquots of Paraquat-exposed and control flies were processed with and without biotin hydrazide. After iTRAQ labeling, samples were combined, evaporated to dryness in a centrifugal evaporator, and then resuspended with 20 µL 0.1% formic acid (aq). Each replicate LC-MS/MS run consumed 2 µL of this iTRAQ-labeled peptide solution. LC-MS/MS data was recorded using a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer interfaced with a Waters nanoACQUITY LC system, using HCD for both peptide identification and to obtain reporter ions. The LC gradient was composed of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B) versus 0.1% formic acid in water (A). Beginning with an equilibration mobile phase of 1% B, the linear gradient initially ran to 15% B over 25 min, then to 25% B over 35 min, then to 35% B over 40 min, and finally to 85% B over 20 min. The flow rate was 400 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from recorded tandem mass spectra using the version of X! Tandem bundled with version 4.6.3 of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline software package (Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA). The protein sequence database used was generated from the whole Drosophila melanogaster proteome (FlyBase version R5.35, FB2011_03; 23361 proteins), 112 common contaminant proteins (Global Proteome Machine; Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins; downloaded on April 8, 2011), and reversed versions of these sequences included for false positive rate estimation. Search parameters included a precursor ion mass tolerance of ±15 ppm, a requirement for at least one trypsin-conforming peptide terminus, and a maximum of one missed cleavage. Fixed mass shifts were applied for alkylation with iodoacetamide at cysteine (+57.021464 Da) and addition of 4-plex iTRAQ labels at lysine and the peptide N-terminus (+144.102063 Da). Differential mass shifts were included for methionine sulfoxide (+15.994915 Da) and for the 4-plex iTRAQ reagents at tyrosine. PeptideProphet, a component of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline software package, was used to filter identifications proposed by X! Tandem, with the minimum score for accepted peptide-spectrum matches being 0.9. Raw ratios were corrected using those observed for trypsin auto-digestion peptides, since the digestion enzyme was added late in the procedure. Proteins were grouped by parent gene, with identified peptides that indicated multiple genes discarded. Carbonylated protein relative abundance ratios were obtained from the supporting tandem mass spectra by calculating the geometric mean.

### Publication Abstract
Exposure to Paraquat and RNA interference knockdown of mitochondrial superoxide dismutase (Sod2) are known to result in significant lifespan reduction, locomotor dysfunction, and mitochondrial degeneration in Drosophila melanogaster. Both perturbations increase the flux of the progenitor ROS, superoxide, but the molecular underpinnings of the resulting phenotypes are poorly understood. Improved understanding of such processes could lead to advances in the treatment of numerous age-related disorders. Superoxide toxicity can act through protein carbonylation. Analysis of carbonylated proteins is attractive since carbonyl groups are not present in the 20 canonical amino acids and are amenable to labeling and enrichment strategies. Here, carbonylated proteins were labeled with biotin hydrazide and enriched on streptavidin beads. On-bead digestion was used to release carbonylated protein peptides, with relative abundance ratios versus controls obtained using the iTRAQ MS-based proteomics approach. Western blotting and biotin quantitation assay approaches were also investigated. By both Western blotting and proteomics, Paraquat exposure, but not Sod2 knockdown, resulted in increased carbonylated protein relative abundance. For Paraquat exposure versus control, the median carbonylated protein relative abundance ratio (1.53) determined using MS-based proteomics was in good agreement with that obtained using a commercial biotin quantitation kit (1.36).

### Keywords
Protein carbonylation, Hcd, Orbitrap, Itraq, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Virginia Commonwealth University, Department of Chemistry
Virginia Commonwealth University

### Submitter
David Simpson

### Lab Head
Dr Scott Gronert
Virginia Commonwealth University


