### Accession
PXD017049

### Title
Excess copper-induced alterations of protein profiles by a 2-DE based MS method and related physiological parameters in Citrus leaves

### Description
After long-term Copper-toxicity treatment,2D electrophoresis and mass spectrum were conducted to investigate different proteiomic profile in Citrus sinensis and Citrus grandis leaves samples.

### Sample Protocol
Before MS/MS analysis, The peptide solution described above was dried under the protection of N2. The 0.7μl matrix solution (5mg/ml α-cyano-4-hydroxy-cinnamic acid diluted in 0.1％TFA, 50％ACN) was pipetted to dissolve it. Then the mixture was spotted on a MALDI target plate (Applied Biosystems). MS analysis of peptide was performed on an AB SCIEX MALDI TOF-TOF5800 Analyzer (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA) equipped with a neodymium: yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser (laser wavelength was 349 nm). Myoglobin digested with trypsin was used to calibrate the mass instrument with internal calibration mode.

### Data Protocol
All acquired spectra of samples were processed using TOF-TOF ExploreTM Software in a default mode. The data were searched by GPS Explorer (V3.6) with the search engine MASCOT(2.1). The search parameters were as follows: NCBI_citrus database (201351 sequences; 85503789 residues), peptide molecular mass ranged from 700 to 4000 Da, trypsin digest with one missing cleavage，MS tolerance was set at 100 ppm，MS/MS tolerance of 0.6 Da. Protein with scores greater than 66 were significant (P<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
This present study examined excess copper (Cu) effects on seedling growth, leaf Cu concentration, gas exchange, and protein profiles identified by a two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) based mass spectrometry (MS) approach after <i>Citrus</i> <i>sinensis</i> and <i>Citrus</i> <i>grandis</i> seedlings were treated for six months with 0.5 (control), 200, 300, or 400 &#x3bc;M CuCl<sub>2</sub>. Forty-one and 37 differentially abundant protein (DAP) spots were identified in Cu-treated <i>C.</i> <i>grandis</i> and <i>C.</i> <i>sinensis</i> leaves, respectively, including some novel DAPs that were not reported in leaves and/or roots. Most of these DAPs were identified only in <i>C.</i> <i>grandis</i> or <i>C.</i> <i>sinensis</i> leaves. More DAPs increased in abundances than DAPs decreased in abundances were observed in Cu-treated <i>C.</i> <i>grandis</i> leaves, but the opposite was true in Cu-treated <i>C.</i> <i>sinensis</i> leaves. Over 50% of DAPs were associated with photosynthesis, carbohydrate, and energy metabolism. Cu-toxicity-induced reduction in leaf CO<sub>2</sub> assimilation might be caused by decreased abundances of proteins related to photosynthetic electron transport chain (PETC) and CO<sub>2</sub> assimilation. Cu-effects on PETC were more pronounced in <i>C.</i> <i>sinensis</i> leaves than in <i>C.</i> <i>grandis</i> leaves. DAPs related to antioxidation and detoxification, protein folding and assembly (viz., chaperones and folding catalysts), and signal transduction might be involved in <i>Citrus</i> Cu-toxicity and Cu-tolerance.

### Keywords
Citrus grandis; citrus sinensis;copper-toxicity;2-de; leaves

### Affiliations
Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University

### Submitter
Lin-Tong Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Lin-Tong Yang
Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University


