### Accession
PXD012254

### Title
Molecular characterization of colorectal adenomas reveals POFUT1 as a candidate driver of tumor progression

### Description
Colorectal adenomas are benign precursor lesions of colorectal cancer (CRC) that arise from normal epithelium1. The prevalence of adenomas in the large intestine is much higher than the incidence of cancer implying that the majority of adenomas will never progress to CRC4. In clinical practice, adenomas detected during colonoscopy are completely removed, and consequently the natural history of disease disrupted. Based on the prevalence of focal cancer in endoscopically removed adenomas, it is estimated that only 5% of adenomas will eventually progress to CRC. The aim of the present study was to characterize adenomas at low and high risk of progressing to cancer by extensive molecular profiling at DNA, RNA, and protein level, allowing to examine the biological processes in which they differ and to discover putative drivers of early colorectal tumor development.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh frozen tissue material from 30 CRCs, 30 adenomas, and 18 normal colorectal mucosa samples was collected at the department of Pathology of the VU University Medical Center in Amsterdam. Proteins were isolated from snap-frozen tissue samples. Twenty tissue sections of 16 μm thickness were lysed in 30µl of reducing sample buffer (65% milli-Q, 25% 4X lithium dodecyl sulfate, 10% 1M DTT) per mg tissue, thoroughly vortexed for 1 minute, heated at 70°C for 10 minutes and sonicated (3 times 20 seconds with 20 second intervals). Lysates were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 20,000g upon which supernatants were transferred to a new tube. Equal amounts of proteins (~50μg) were loaded from each sample using block randomization across the three patient groups and gels (equal number of control, adenoma and CRC patients’ samples in each gel). Proteins were separated on precast 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE gels (Invitrogen) and stained with Coomassie R-250. After washing in MQ, each sample lane was cut from the gel as a single band and subjected to protein digestion. Peptides were extracted and the volume of the peptide fractions was reduced to ~50 µl in a vacuum centrifuge to eliminate ACN from the solution. Peptide extracts were then desalted as an extra cleanup step using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters). Peptide eluates were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and re-dissolved in 4% acetonitrile + 0.5% Trifluoroacetic acid + 0.02% retention time peptides (iRT, Biognosys).  Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands), equipped with a 50 cm x 75 µm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 µm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch,Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid in ultrapure water; buffer B: 80% ACN + 0.5% acetic acid in ultrapure water) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B linear gradient in 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject).  Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Data was measured using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) protocol. The DIA-MS method consisted of an MS1 scan from 400 to 1000 m/z at 15,000 resolution (AGC target of 3E6 and 50 ms injection time). For MS2, 24 variable size DIA segments were acquired at 30,000 resolution (AGC target 3E6 and auto for injection time). The DIA-MS method included 20 windows of 20 m/z, 2 x 40 m/z and 2 x 60 m/z. Collision energy was set at 28%. The spectra were recorded in centroid mode. The default charge state for the MS2 was set to 3+.  LC-MS/MS runs were performed using block randomization across patient’s groups, injecting in alternating order of normal colon-adenoma-cancer samples. Any instrument performance drift was equally distributed over all sample groups, thereby minimizing group bias by experiment design.

### Data Protocol
An in-house spectral library was established using LC-MS/MS data derived from CRCs, colorectal adenomas and normal adjacent colon samples [manuscript in preparation], which was used by Spectronaut using default setting to identify peptides and infer proteins. Separate searches were performed for differential expression analysis between high-risk and low-risk adenomas, and for obtaining protein expression matrix across all sample types. Quality control was performed by comparing the total number of protein groups identified in each sample and by the multidimensional scaling algorithm on Euclidian distance of protein expression profiles.  A sample was considered an outlier if its number of total protein groups was below the range of the average number of protein groups identified per sample in the whole dataset +/- 2 standard deviations of the number of protein groups identified per sample in the whole dataset, and was removed from the proteomics dataset. Protein group intensities were log2 transformed and median-centering normalization was performed. Differentially expressed proteins between high-risk and low-risk adenomas were identified using limma29, Benjamini-Hochberg correction was used to calculate p-value adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing (absolute log2 fold change≥0.6 and p-value≤0.05). Euclidian distance and multidimensional scaling algorithm were used for data visualization.

### Publication Abstract
Removal of colorectal adenomas is an effective strategy to reduce colorectal cancer (CRC) mortality rates. However, as only a minority of adenomas progress to cancer, such strategies may lead to overtreatment. The present study aimed to characterize adenomas by in-depth molecular profiling, to obtain insights into altered biology associated with the colorectal adenoma-to-carcinoma progression. We obtained low-coverage whole genome sequencing, RNA sequencing and tandem mass spectrometry data for 30 CRCs, 30 adenomas and 18 normal adjacent colon samples. These data were used for DNA copy number aberrations profiling, differential expression, gene set enrichment and gene-dosage effect analysis. Protein expression was independently validated by immunohistochemistry on tissue microarrays and in patient-derived colorectal adenoma organoids. Stroma percentage was determined by digital image analysis of tissue sections. Twenty-four out of 30 adenomas could be unambiguously classified as high risk (n =&#x2009;9) or low risk (n =&#x2009;15) of progressing to cancer, based on DNA copy number profiles. Biological processes more prevalent in high-risk than low-risk adenomas were related to proliferation, tumor microenvironment and Notch, Wnt, PI3K/AKT/mTOR and Hedgehog signaling, while metabolic processes and protein secretion were enriched in low-risk adenomas. DNA copy number driven gene-dosage effect in high-risk adenomas and cancers was observed for POFUT1, RPRD1B and EIF6. Increased POFUT1 expression in high-risk adenomas was validated in tissue samples and organoids. High POFUT1 expression was also associated with Notch signaling enrichment and with decreased goblet cells differentiation. In-depth molecular characterization of colorectal adenomas revealed POFUT1 and Notch signaling as potential drivers of tumor progression.

### Keywords
Colorectal adenoma; adenoma-to-carcinoma progression; chromosomal instability; pofut1

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


