### Accession
PXD010821

### Title
Splicing factor PRPF31 retinitis pigmentosa (RP11) is caused by disrupted alternative splicing programmes for genes implicated in pre-mRNA splicing, cellular adhesion and ciliogenesis

### Description
Mutations in pre-mRNA processing factors (PRPFs) cause autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (RP), but it is unclear why mutations in ubiquitously expressed genes cause retinal disease. We have generated transcriptome profiles from RP11 (PRPF31-mutated) patient-derived retinal organoids and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), as well as Prpf31+/- mouse tissues, which revealed that disrupted alternative splicing occurred for specific splicing programmes. Mis-splicing of genes encoding pre-mRNA splicing proteins was limited to patient-specific retinal cells and Prpf31+/- mouse retinae and RPE. Mis-splicing of genes implicated in ciliogenesis and cellular adhesion was associated with severe RPE defects that include disrupted apical-basal polarity, reduced trans-epithelial resistance and phagocytic capacity, and decreased cilia length and incidence. Disrupted cilia morphology also occurred in patient-derived photoreceptors, associated with progressive degeneration and cellular stress. In situ gene-editing of a pathogenic mutation rescued protein expression and key cellular phenotypes in RPE and photoreceptors, providing proof-of-concept for future therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Total cell lysates were prepared from one million RP11VS retinal organoid or RPE cells and the corresponding Cas9-corrected cells according to the protocol described for Pierce Mass Spec Sample Prep Kit (Thermo Scientific). Lysates were diluted to 130 µl and sonicated using Covaris S220 ultrasonicator (Covaris). Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit and 100 µg of the total proteins from patient or Cas9-corrected control cells were processed for isobaric Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labelling using TMTduplex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, samples were reduced by the addition of TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and acetone precipitated. Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate) buffer followed by digestion with trypsin overnight at 37° C. The patient and Cas9-corrected control samples were respectively labelled with TMT-127 and TMT-126 reagents for 1 h at room temperature and the reactions were quenched by 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. Next, 50 µg of TMT-labelled peptides from patient and control cells were combined and cleaned up using C18 spin columns (Harvard Apparatus). The samples were dried down by SpeedVac (Eppendorf) and reconstituted in 100 µl buffer A (10 mM NH4OH). Fifty microliters of peptide mixtures were separated in 80 fractions on an XBridge BEH C18 HPLC column (150 mm x 1 mm ID, 3.5 µm; Waters) using a gradient of buffer B (10 mM NH4OH, 80% acetonitrile) over 90 min. The elution fractions were combined to 20 fractions, dried down by SpeedVac and resuspended in 20 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swiss-Prot human database containing 20,341 reviewed protein entries using Mascot algorithm (Matrix Science) via Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were respectively set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Dalton for raw files from Orbitrap Fusion or 10 ppm and 0.02 Dalton for the ones from Q Exactive HF-X after initial recalibration. Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and glutamine/asparagine deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT2plex on both peptide N-terminus and lysine residue were defined as fixed modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Mascot percolator was applied to improve the accuracy and sensitivity of peptide identification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both the peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and the protein level, respectively, using Mascot Percolator and a built-in Protein FDR Validator node in PD. Quantitative measurement was based on relative abundance of the detected TMT reporter ions in MS3 or MS2 spectra for raw files from the Orbitrap Fusion or Q Exactive HF-X, respectively. At least two quantifiable unique peptides in each replicate were required for protein quantification. Protein ratios were log transformed and then median normalized based on the assumption that the majority of the proteins are unaffected. The reported RP11VS/Cas9-RP11VS ratios are the average of at least two replicates. To identify the differentially regulated proteins, the corresponding Z scores were calculated and those proteins with Z scores less than +1.5 or greater than -1.5 were defined as regulated. 1D annotation enrichment analysis was carried out by the Perseus software version 1.6.0.7 with a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR 2%

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in pre-mRNA processing factors (PRPFs) cause autosomal-dominant retinitis pigmentosa (RP), but it is unclear why mutations in ubiquitously expressed genes cause non-syndromic retinal disease. Here, we generate transcriptome profiles from RP11 (PRPF31-mutated) patient-derived retinal organoids and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), as well as Prpf31<sup>+/-</sup> mouse tissues, which revealed that disrupted alternative splicing occurred for specific splicing programmes. Mis-splicing of genes encoding pre-mRNA splicing proteins was limited to patient-specific retinal cells and Prpf31<sup>+/-</sup> mouse retinae and RPE. Mis-splicing of genes implicated in ciliogenesis and cellular adhesion was associated with severe RPE defects that include disrupted apical - basal polarity, reduced trans-epithelial resistance and phagocytic capacity, and decreased cilia length and incidence. Disrupted cilia morphology also occurred in patient-derived photoreceptors, associated with progressive degeneration and cellular stress. In situ gene editing of a pathogenic mutation rescued protein expression and key cellular phenotypes in RPE and photoreceptors, providing proof of concept for future therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Retinal organoids, Pre-mrna splicing, Ipscs, Rp11

### Affiliations
MPI for Biophysical Chemistry
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry  Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Kuan-Ting Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry  Department of Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen


