### Accession
PXD014032

### Title
Tissue specfic proteome quantitation and Temporal proteome profile of Arabidopsis upon ABA exposure using DIA-MS

### Description
Use of our recent spectral library, we quantify proteomes of 4 tissue type in arabidopsis, and also the proteomes in response to ABA-treatment. We revealed the temproal profiling of ABA-responding genes.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis tissue sample were homogenized and proteins were digested using FASP method. DIA experiments were proformed using Orbitrap Fusion and analyzed in triplicate. The sample were gas-frationanated for the DIA analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using Spectronaut (version 12). the canditate proteins were further analysis using DAVIS functional annotation tools.

### Publication Abstract
Arabidopsis is an important model organism and the first plant with its genome completely sequenced. Knowledge from studying this species has either direct or indirect applications for agriculture and human health. Quantitative proteomics by data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (SWATH/DIA-MS) was recently developed and is considered as a high-throughput, massively parallel targeted approach for accurate proteome quantification. In this approach, a high-quality and comprehensive spectral library is a prerequisite. Here, we generated an expression atlas of 10 organs of Arabidopsis and created a library consisting of 15,514 protein groups, 187,265 unique peptide sequences, and 278,278 precursors. The identified protein groups correspond to ~56.5% of the predicted proteome. Further proteogenomics analysis identified 28 novel proteins. We applied DIA-MS using this library to quantify the effect of abscisic acid on Arabidopsis. We were able to recover 8,793 protein groups of which 1,787 were differentially expressed. MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012708 and PXD012710 for data-dependent acquisition and PXD014032 for DIA analyses.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Dia-ms, Aba treatment

### Affiliations
Core Labs, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, KSA
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Huoming Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Huoming Zhang
Core Labs, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, KSA


