### Accession
PXD009348

### Title
Plasma proteome profiling reveals global and specific changes of inflammatory and lipid homeostasis markers after bariatric surgery

### Description
Obesity-related diseases now affect half of the global population, and bariatric surgery is one of the few interventions with long lasting weight loss and cardio-metabolic effects. Here, we investigated the effect of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery on the plasma proteome, hypothesizing that specific proteins or protein patterns may serve as key mediators and markers of the metabolic response. We performed MS-based proteomics on two longitudinal studies encompassing 47 morbidly obese patients, generating quantitative information on more than 1700 proteins. A global correlation matrix incorporating about 200,000 relationships revealed functional connections between proteins and assigned them to physiological processes. The main classes of significantly altered proteins were markers of systemic inflammation and those involved in lipid metabolism, and our data highlight robust correlative and anti-correlative behavior to each other and to clinical parameters. A group of inflammation-related proteins showed distinct inverse relationships to proteins consistently associated with insulin sensitivity.

### Sample Protocol
The plasma samples for the quantitative analysis of the two bariatric surgery cohorts were prepared for all samples according to our previously published Plasma Proteome Profiling pipeline (Geyer et al., 2016a). In brief, we used optimized conditions for denaturation, alkylation, digestion and peptide purification, followed by attuned liquid chromatography and MS settings. This guaranteed maximal accuracy and reproducibility in the measurement of plasma samples. Sample preparation is carried out in an automated liquid handling platform (Agilent Bravo) in a 96 well format, and takes only 4 h from thawing the sample to peptides which are ready to be injected into the MS. For sample preparation we used the 'iST' Kit for proteomic sample preparation (P.O. 00001, PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany). Note: depletion, a widely used, but error-prone method was only used for the library and not for the study samples. For study samples, we only used native and undepleted plasma.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) and peptide lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (version June 2015). A contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications was used. We set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 0.01 for protein and peptide level with a minimum length of 7 amino acids for peptides and the FDR was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine as expected using trypsin and LysC as proteases, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide identification was performed with an initial precursor mass deviation up to 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. The ‘match between run algorithm’ in the MaxQuant quantification (Nagaraj et al., 2012) was performed after constructing a matching library consistent of depleted and all the undepleted plasma samples from the weight loss study. All proteins and peptides matching to the reversed database were filtered out. Label-free protein quantitation (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1 (Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Obesity-related diseases affect half of the global population, and bariatric surgery is one of the few interventions with long-lasting weight loss and cardio-metabolic effects. Here, we investigated the effect of Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery on the plasma proteome, hypothesizing that specific proteins or protein patterns may serve as key mediators and markers of the metabolic response. We performed mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics on two longitudinal studies encompassing 47 morbidly obese patients, generating quantitative information on more than 1,700 proteins. A global correlation matrix incorporating about 200,000 relationships revealed functional connections between proteins and assigned them to physiological processes. The main classes of significantly altered proteins were markers of systemic inflammation and those involved in lipid metabolism. Our data highlight robust correlative and anti-correlative behaviors of circulating proteins to each other and to clinical parameters. A group of inflammation-related proteins showed distinct inverse relationships to proteins consistently associated with insulin sensitivity.

### Keywords
Biomarker / diabetes / mass spectrometry / obesity / plasma proteome  profiling / serum / gastric bypass surgery / global correlation profiles

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


