### Accession
PXD003827

### Title
Comparative genomic, proteomic and exoproteomic analyses of three Pseudomonas spp. - part 2

### Description
Bacteria that inhabit the rhizosphere of agricultural crops can have a beneficial effect on crop growth,  including through the solubilisation and remineralisation of complex forms of phosphorus (P).  However [1], our understanding of the bacterial proteomic response to P stress is limited. Here, exoproteomic  analysis of three Pseudomonas species was performed in unison[2] with proteomic analysis of Pseudomonas  putida BIRD-1 (BIRD-1) grown [3]under P replete and P deplete conditions. Comparative exoproteomics  revealed marked heterogeneity in the exoproteomes of each Pseudomonas species in response to low  concentrations of P. In addition to well-characterised members of the PHO regulon such as alkaline  phosphatases, several previously undiscovered proteins are responsive to phosphate depletion including  putative nucleases, phosphotriesterases, putative phosphonate transporters and outer membrane proteins.  Moreover, in BIRD-1, mutagenesis of the master regulator, phoBR, led us to confirm the addition of  several novel PHO-dependent proteins. Our data expands knowledge of the Pseudomonas PHO regulon,  including species that are frequently used as bioinoculants, opening up the potential for more efficient  and complete use of soil complexed P.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental procedures  Growth and maintenance of bacterial strains All three Pseudomonas strains were  routinely grown in Luria Bertani (LB) medium at 30 °C. Liquid cultures were incubated with shaking at  180 rpm. Solid media was prepared by the addition of 1.5% (w/v) agar to LB medium. To investigate the  effect of phosphate-depletion on the three strains, each was grown in an adapted Minimal A medium  comprising: Na-Succinate 5.4 g l-1, NaCl 200 mg l-1, NH4Cl 450 mg l-1, CaCl2 200 mg l-1, KCL mg l-1  MgCl2 450 mg l-1, FeCl2 10 mg l-1, MnCl2 10 mg l-1, 10 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic  acid (HEPES) pH 7.2, with KH2PO4 added to a final concentration of either 50 μM or 1.4 mM.   Quantification of alkaline phosphatase activity  0.5 ml culture was incubated with 20 μl N-para- nitrophenolphosphate (PNPP) (final conc. 4mM) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h or when colour  development started to occur. The reaction was stopped using 25 μl NaOH (2 mM) and incubated for 10 min.  Cell debris and precipitants were removed via centrifugation (2 min, 8,000 x g) prior to  spectrophotometry (optical density 405 nm). A standard curve for N-para-nitrophenol was generated using  a range of known concentrations (0, 4, 8, 25, 50,75, 100 mg ml-1). Preparation of exoproteomes, trypsin  in-gel proteolysis, and nano-LC-MS/MS analysis[22] The supernatants of bacterial cultures were harvested  during mid exponential growth (OD600 0.5 - 0.8). Cells were removed via centrifugation (3,200 x g, 10  min) and filtration through a 0.22 μm membrane (Fisherbrand, syringe filter PVDF 33mm). Supernatants  were pre-filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane (Fisherbrand, syringe filter PVDF 33mm). Proteins in the  remaining milieu were concentrated and purified by precipitation with trichloroacetic acid (75% w/v)  [23]and separated using SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Precipitated proteins were  loaded onto a 4-20 % SDS Precast gel (Expedeon). SDS-PAGE was performed by using 20X Teo-Tricine-SDS  running buffer (Expedeon) for at 180 V for 45 min. Gels were stained using Instant Blue (Expedeon).  Polyacrylamide gel bands [24]containing the entire exoproteome were cut and processed for in-gel  proteolysis with trypsin (Roche) as previously described (Christie-Oleza and Armengaud, 2010).  Gel- dependent nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem MS (nano LC-MS/MS) was subsequently performed as  follows: An UltiMate® 3000 HPLC series (Thermo Scientific and Dionex Integrated Solutions, Sunnyvale, CA  USA) was used for peptide concentration and separation. Samples were separated in Nano Series™ Standard  Columns 75 µm i.d. x 15 cm, packed with C18 Acclaim PepMap100, 3 µm, 100Å Thermo Scientific and Dionex  Integrated Solutions, Sunnyvale, CA USA). The gradient used was from 3% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic  acid in acetonitrile) for 30 min. Peptides were eluted directly (~ 300 nL min-1) via a Triversa Nanomate  nanospray source (Advion Biosciences, NY) into a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo  Scientific, Germany). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120 K  resolution (at 200 m/z) with automatic gain control (AGC) to a target value of 4 x 105. Precursor ions  with charge state 2–4 + were isolated and subjected to HCD fragmentation in the ion trap. MS/MS analysis  was performed using collision energy 35, AGC 1 x 104 and max injection time 200 ms. The dynamic  exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance for the selected precursor and its isotopes.  Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s  cycles.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification through MS/MS database searching The recorded MS/MS spectra were searched against  the protein sequence database (P. putida BIRD-1, NC_017530.1; P. fluorescens SBW25, NC_012660.1; P.  stutzeri DSM4166, NC_017532.1). The search was carried out with MASCOT 2.2.04 software (Matrix Science).  Parameters were established as follows: tryptic peptides with a maximum of 1 missed cleavage during  proteolytic digestion, a mass tolerance of 5 ppm on the parent ion and 0.5 Da on the MS/MS, fixed  modification for carboxyamidomethylated Cys[25]teine [26]and variable modification for oxidized  Methionine. MASCOT results were combined and parsed using Scaffold (Proteome Software). A protein  identification was considered valid when at least two different peptides were detected in the same  experiment. The false-positive rate for protein identification was estimated using a reverse decoy  database as below 0.1% with these parameters by peptide prophet as part of Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria that inhabit the rhizosphere of agricultural crops can have a beneficial effect on crop growth. One such mechanism is the microbial-driven solubilization and remineralization of complex forms of phosphorus (P). It is known that bacteria secrete various phosphatases in response to low P conditions. However, our understanding of their global proteomic response to P stress is limited. Here, exoproteomic analysis of Pseudomonas putida BIRD-1 (BIRD-1), Pseudomonas fluorescens SBW25 and Pseudomonas stutzeri DSM4166 was performed in unison with whole-cell proteomic analysis of BIRD-1 grown under phosphate (Pi) replete and Pi deplete conditions. Comparative exoproteomics revealed marked heterogeneity in the exoproteomes of each Pseudomonas strain in response to Pi depletion. In addition to well-characterized members of the PHO regulon such as alkaline phosphatases, several proteins, previously not associated with the response to Pi depletion, were also identified. These included putative nucleases, phosphotriesterases, putative phosphonate transporters and outer membrane proteins. Moreover, in BIRD-1, mutagenesis of the master regulator, phoBR, led us to confirm the addition of several novel PHO-dependent proteins. Our data expands knowledge of the Pseudomonas PHO regulon, including species that are frequently used as bioinoculants, opening up the potential for more efficient and complete use of soil complexed P.

### Keywords
Exoproteome, Pseudomonas

### Affiliations
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Alex Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Jones
University of Warwick


