### Accession
PXD007921

### Title
Global phosphoproteomic analysis of signaling by distinct chimeric antigen receptors reveals kinetic and quantitative differences that influence cell function

### Description
Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) are synthetic proteins that redirect T cell specificity by linking an extracellular ligand binding domain to intracellular T cell signaling domains. CAR-expressing T (CAR-T) cells have demonstrated significant efficacy for the treatment of refractory B cell malignancies and are being evaluated as immunotherapeutic reagents for many other cancers. CAR designs are based on the fundamental principles of TCR recognition and most CARs employ the T cell-activating CD3z endodomain alongside a costimulatory domain from CD28 or 4-1BB. However, emerging data suggest that CD28/CD3z and 4-1BB/CD3z signaling modules promote divergent metabolic pathways, gene expression programs, and cell fates. To determine how CAR phosphoprotein signaling drives these disparate cell fates, we analyzed CAR ligation-induced signaling networks in primary human T cells using shotgun mass spectrometry. We isolated CD8+CD62L+ T cells from healthy donors and introduced a CD28/CD3z or 4-1BB/CD3z CAR by lentiviral transduction. Transduced T cells were purified by FACS and expanded once in vitro. When the cells returned to a resting state, CD28/CD3z or 4-1BB/CD3z CAR-T cells were stimulated for 10 or 45 minutes with magnetic microbeads coated with a monoclonal antibody specific for a 9 amino acid tag in the CAR extracellular sequence. CAR-T cells were also left unstimulated for 10 or 45 minutes to serve as controls. Altogether, 8 unique conditions were tested in an experiment and three independent experiments were performed.

### Sample Protocol
For each independent experiment, lysates were prepared from stimulated or unstimulated CAR-T cells. Lysates were quantified and equal masses were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Individual lysate digests were labeled with a unique tandem mass tag and pooled. The pooled lysate was subjected to p-Tyr immunoprecipitation and the p-Tyr enriched fraction was retained for LC-MS/MS analysis. The flow-through was separated into 13 fractions by basic reverse phase HP-LC and phosphopeptides were further enriched from each fraction by immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC). All 14 eluates (1 p-Tyr + 13 IMAC) were analyzed by LC-MS/MS for identification of phosphopeptides.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra from the analysis were searched against reviewed Human Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) sequence database release 2016_01 using MaxQuant/Andromeda.  The search was performed with tryptic enzyme constraint set for up to two missed cleavages, oxidized methionine and phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylated cysteine set as a static modification.  Peptide MH+ mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm. The overall FDR was set at ≤1%. Quantification of TMT ratios was performed using MaxQuant, Perseus, and Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chimeric antigen receptor, Phosphoproteomics, T cell, Primary t cell, Lc-ms/ms, Basic reverse phase fractionation, Imac enrichment, Phosphoprotein signaling

### Affiliations
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
Immunology, Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA

### Submitter
Jacob Kennedy

### Lab Head
Dr Stanley Riddell
Immunology, Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA


