### Accession
PXD011852

### Title
SUMOylated proteins upon ubiquitin E1 inhibition

### Description
HIS-SUMO2 expressing HeLa and U2OS cells were treated with ubiquitin E1 inhibitor TAK243 with or without the presence of cycloheximide. Subsequently, HIS-SUMO2 conjugates were purified and analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
HIS-SUMO conjugates were purified using NiNTA-based purification as in Hendriks and Vertegaal, Nature Protocols 2016.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.5.1 software

### Publication Abstract
Protein ubiquitination and SUMOylation are required for the maintenance of cellular protein homeostasis, and both increase in proteotoxic conditions (<i>e.g.</i> heat shock or proteasome inhibition). However, we found that when ubiquitination was blocked in several human cell lines by inhibiting the ubiquitin-activating enzyme with TAK243, there was an unexpected, large accumulation of proteins modified by SUMO2/3 chains or SUMO1, but not by several other ubiquitin-like proteins. This buildup of SUMOylated proteins was evident within 3-4 h. It required the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)-conjugating enzyme, UBC9, and the promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) and thus was not due to nonspecific SUMO conjugation by ubiquitination enzymes. The SUMOylated proteins accumulated predominantly bound to chromatin and were localized to PML nuclear bodies. Because blocking protein synthesis with cycloheximide prevented the buildup of SUMOylated proteins, they appeared to be newly-synthesized proteins. The proteins SUMOylated after inhibition of ubiquitination were purified and analyzed by MS. In HeLa and U2OS cells, there was a cycloheximide-sensitive increase in a similar set of SUMOylated proteins (including transcription factors and proteins involved in DNA damage repair). Surprisingly, the inhibition of ubiquitination also caused a cycloheximide-sensitive decrease in a distinct set of SUMOylated proteins (including proteins for chromosome modification and mRNA splicing). More than 80% of the SUMOylated proteins whose levels rose or fell upon inhibiting ubiquitination inhibition underwent similar cycloheximide-sensitive increases or decreases upon proteasome inhibition. Thus, when nuclear substrates of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway are not efficiently degraded, many become SUMO-modified and accumulate in PML bodies.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Sumo

### Affiliations
Associate Professor
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Associate Professor


