### Accession
PXD001798

### Title
System-Wide Identification of Wild-Type SUMO-2 Conjugation Sites

### Description
SUMOylation is a reversible post-translational modification regulating all nuclear processes. Identification of SUMOylation sites by mass spectrometry has been hampered by bulky tryptic fragments, which thus far necessitated the use of mutated SUMO. Here, we present a dataset generated through a SUMO-specific protease-based methodology which circumvents this problem, dubbed Protease-Reliant Identification of SUMO Modification (PRISM). PRISM allows for detection of SUMOylated proteins as well as identification of specific sites of SUMOylation while using wild-type  SUMO. The method is generic and could be widely applied to study lysine post-translational modifications. PRISM was employed in combination with high-resolution mass spectrometry to identify SUMOylation sites from HeLa cells under standard growth conditions and in response to heat shock. 751 wild-type SUMOylation sites on endogenous proteins were identified, including 200 dynamic SUMO sites in response to heat shock. Thus, we have developed the first method capable of quantitatively studying wild-type mammalian  SUMO at the site-specific and system-wide level.

### Sample Protocol
Stable and near-endogenous expression of His10-tagged SUMO-2 wild-type in HeLa cells, medium/heavy SILAC labeling of the cells, optional heat shock of the cells (one SILAC label only), purification by His pulldown to enrich SUMOylated proteins with simultaneous acetylation of all internal lysines in all proteins, concentration and removal of unconjugated SUMO, removal of all SUMO from proteins by His10-SENP2, removal of SENP2 and freed SUMO-2 by His pulldown, concentration and removal of remaining contaminant peptides, trypsin digestion (only cleaving arginines and SENP2-freed lysines), LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 was used to process all data. Search parameters were mostly left at default. Up to 5 missed cleavages were allowed in order to compensate for total internal acetylation in combination with trypsin. Acetylation of lysines was incorporated into the medium/heavy SILAC labeling to enforce this modification on all lysines. In order to identify sites, a "negative" weight acetylation with monoisotopic mass of -42.010565 was allowed on peptide C-terminal lysines.

### Publication Abstract
SUMOylation is a reversible post-translational modification (PTM) regulating all nuclear processes. Identification of SUMOylation sites by mass spectrometry (MS) has been hampered by bulky tryptic fragments, which thus far necessitated the use of mutated SUMO. Here we present a SUMO-specific protease-based methodology which circumvents this problem, dubbed Protease-Reliant Identification of SUMO Modification (PRISM). PRISM allows for detection of SUMOylated proteins as well as identification of specific sites of SUMOylation while using wild-type SUMO. The method is generic and could be widely applied to study lysine PTMs. We employ PRISM in combination with high-resolution MS to identify SUMOylation sites from HeLa cells under standard growth conditions and in response to heat shock. We identified 751 wild-type SUMOylation sites on endogenous proteins, including 200 dynamic SUMO sites in response to heat shock. Thus, we have developed a method capable of quantitatively studying wild-type mammalian SUMO at the site-specific and system-wide level.

### Keywords
Site, Endogenous, Sumo, System-wide, Wild-type, Sumo-2

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands


