### Accession
PXD016849

### Title
Effect of 1-methylcyclopropene (1-MCP) and ozone (Ο 3 ) post-harvest treatments on the proteomic profiling of Granny Smith apple peel (Malus x domestica Borkh) after cold storage

### Description
Superficial scald is a major physiological disorder in apple fruit that is induced by cold storage and is mainly expressed as brown necrotic patches on peel tissue. However, a global view of the gene-protein-metabolite interactome underlying scald prevention/sensitivity is currently missing. Herein, we have found for the first time that cold storage in an atmosphere enriched with ozone (O3) induced scald symptoms in ‘Granny Smith’ apple fruits during subsequent ripening at room temperature. In contrast, treatment with the ethylene perception inhibitor 1-methylcyclopropene (1-MCP) reversed this O3-induced scald effect. Amino acids, including branched-chain amino acids, were the most strongly induced metabolites in peel tissue of 1-MCP treated fruits. Proteins involved in oxidative stress and protein trafficking were differentially accumulated prior to and during scald development. Genes involved in photosynthesis, flavonoid biosynthesis and ethylene signaling displayed significant alterations in response to 1-MCP and O3. Analysis of regulatory module networks identified putative transcription factors (TFs) that could be involved in scald. Subsequently, a transcriptional network of the genes-proteins-metabolites and the connected TFs was constructed. This approach enabled identification of several genes co-regulated by TFs, notably encoding glutathione S-transferase (GST) protein(s) with distinct signatures following 1-MCP and O3 treatments. Overall, this study is an important contribution to future functional studies and breeding programs for this fruit, aiding to the development of improved apple cultivars to superficial scald.

### Sample Protocol
Peel tissue (5 g) were used for protein extraction based on phenol extraction protocol at total volume of 12 mL (Karagiannis et al., 2016). Two-dimensional electrophoresis was performed according to Tanou et al. (2010) using a BIO-RAD system. Following silver nitrate staining (Minas et al., 2016), 2DE-gels were scanned with Bio-Rad GS-800 Calibrated Densitometer equipped with PDQuest Advanced 2-DE Gel Analysis Software. Statistical analysis of three independent biological replicas was done by one-way analysis of variance significance (P ≤ 0.05) and individual means were compared using Student’s t-test (P ≤ 0.05). In addition to the p value criterion, spots showing an at least 2.5 fold change of volume were considered as statistically significant (Tanou et al., 2015). Spots of interest underwent tryptic in-gel digestion and peptide fragments analyzed by MALDI-MS in a TOF-MS (Ultraflex II, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) as detailed by Tanou et al. (2017). Peptide mixtures were analyzed in a MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer (Autoflex-Speed, Bruker Daltonics).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the Uniprot Malus domestica protein database using the (MASCOT Server v2.0). The mass error tolerance on the Mascot server was set to 25 μL L-1 methionine oxidation was considered as a variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation was considered as a fixed modification. All peptide sequences, accession numbers, Mascot scores and sequence coverage. For non-identified spots, peptide fragments were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ Orbitrap XL Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled online with a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) (Ainalidou et al., 2016). Raw files were searched against the ncbi Malus domestica protein database using PD 1.4 and the SEQUEST HT search engine. Protein identification required minimal XCorr values of 2.0, and 2.5 for charge states of doubly, and triply precursor ions respectively. Where protein annotations were missing, manual protein BLAST was performed against the current databases. Identifications are based on at least two peptides per protein. When presented, identifications based on single peptide additional information are provided. This work is MIAPE compliant.

### Publication Abstract
Superficial scald is a major physiological disorder in apple fruit that is induced by cold storage and is mainly expressed as brown necrotic patches on peel tissue. However, a global view of the gene-protein-metabolite interactome underlying scald prevention/sensitivity is currently missing. Herein, we have found for the first time that cold storage in an atmosphere enriched with ozone (O<sub>3</sub>) induced scald symptoms in 'Granny Smith' apple fruits during subsequent ripening at room temperature. In contrast, treatment with the ethylene perception inhibitor 1-methylcyclopropene (1-MCP) reversed this O<sub>3</sub>-induced scald effect. Amino acids, including branched-chain amino acids, were the most strongly induced metabolites in peel tissue of 1-MCP treated fruits. Proteins involved in oxidative stress and protein trafficking were differentially accumulated prior to and during scald development. Genes involved in photosynthesis, flavonoid biosynthesis and ethylene signaling displayed significant alterations in response to 1-MCP and O<sub>3</sub>. Analysis of regulatory module networks identified putative transcription factors (TFs) that could be involved in scald. Subsequently, a transcriptional network of the genes-proteins-metabolites and the connected TFs was constructed. This approach enabled identification of several genes coregulated by TFs, notably encoding glutathione <i>S</i>-transferase (GST) protein(s) with distinct signatures following 1-MCP and O<sub>3</sub> treatments. Overall, this study is an important contribution to future functional studies and breeding programs for this fruit, aiding to the development of improved apple cultivars to superficial scald.

### Keywords
Ripening, Glutathione s-transferases, Metabolites, Proteomics, Ozone, Superficial scald, Apple fruit, Ethylene inhibition

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
School of Agriculture Aristotle University of Thessaloniki 541 24 Thessaloniki, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Athanassios Molassiotis
School of Agriculture Aristotle University of Thessaloniki 541 24 Thessaloniki, Greece


