### Accession
PXD016885

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the proteins secreted by the infection cushions of Botrytis cinerea.

### Description
Gray mold disease affects fruits, vegetables and ornemental plants around the world, causing considerable losses every year. Its causing agent, the fungus Botrytis cinerea, produces infection cushions (IC) that are complex appressorial structure dedicated to the penetration of the plant tissues. A microarray analysis identified 1,231 up-regulated genes in IC-enriched mycelium, among which several genes coding for putative secreted proteins. These data were supported by qPCR analysis in vitro and in planta. They highlight a secretion of proteins involved in virulence like proteases, plant cell wall degrading enzymes and necrosis inducers. To validate these transcriptomic data, a proteomic analysis of the IC exo-proteome is required.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel. Migration was stopped when samples were entered the resolving gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut and protein were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin. Online nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). 500 ng of each peptide extract was loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 75 µm ID x 25 cm C18 Acclaim PepMap® RSLC column (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 108 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8 kV needle voltage. Data was acquired using Xcalibur 3.1 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 300-1600) were recorded at a resolution of R = 70000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 3×106 ions collected within 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and top 12 ions were selected from fragmentation in HCD mode. MS/MS scans with a target value of 1×105 ions were collected with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and a resolution of R = 17500. Additionally, only +2 and +3 charged ions were selected for fragmentation. Other settings were as follows: no sheath and no auxiliary gas flow, heated capillary temperature, 200°C; normalized HCD collision energy of 27 eV and an isolation width of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were done in Proteome Discoverer 2.3. MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.4 algorithms were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Ensembl Botrytis cinerea B05.10 database (ASM83294v1, 13 749 entries, release 98.3). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation (M), acetylation (K) and deamidation (N, Q) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm [3] and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate at peptide level. Minora feature detector node (LFQ) was used along with the feature mapper and precursor ions quantifier. The normalization parameters were selected as follows : (1) Unique peptides (2) Precursor abundance based on intensity (3) Normalization mode : total peptide amount (4) Protein abundance calculation : summed abundances (5) Protein ratio calculation : pairwise ratio based and (6) Hypothesis test : t-test (background based). Quantitative data were considered for master proteins, quantified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides, a fold changes above 2 and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The necrotrophic plant-pathogen fungus Botrytis cinerea produces multicellular appressoria dedicated to plant penetration, named infection cushions (IC). A microarray analysis was performed to identify genes upregulated in mature IC. The expression data were validated by RT-qPCR analysis performed in vitro and in planta, proteomic analysis of the IC secretome and biochemical assays. 1231 upregulated genes and 79 up-accumulated proteins were identified. The data support the secretion of effectors by IC: phytotoxins, ROS, proteases, cutinases, plant cell wall-degrading enzymes and plant cell death-inducing proteins. Parallel upregulation of sugar transport and sugar catabolism-encoding genes would indicate a role of IC in nutrition. The data also reveal a substantial remodelling of the IC cell wall and suggest a role for melanin and chitosan in IC function. Lastly, mutagenesis of two upregulated genes in IC identified secreted fasciclin-like proteins as actors in the pathogenesis of B. cinerea. These results support the role of IC in plant penetration and also introduce other unexpected functions for this fungal organ, in colonization, necrotrophy and nutrition of the pathogen.

### Keywords
Shotgun secretomics, Fungi, Botrytis, Infection cushion

### Affiliations
UMR5240 - Microbiologie, Adaptation et Pathogénie. CNRS / UCBL / INSA / Campus de la Doua - 10 Rue Dubois 69622 Villeurbanne, FRANCE
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Poussereau
UMR5240 - Microbiologie, Adaptation et Pathogénie. CNRS / UCBL / INSA / Campus de la Doua - 10 Rue Dubois 69622 Villeurbanne, FRANCE


