### Accession
PXD037574

### Title
TMT-based Comparative Peptidomic Analysis of Rice Seedlings under Salt Stress

### Description
A tandem mass tag (TMT)-based comparative peptidomics analysis of rice seedlings under salt stress was conducted. Rice seedlings were exposed to 50 and 150 mM NaCl for 24 and 72 h, respectively, and the root and shoot tissues of different treatment groups were collected separately for the peptidomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein samples were extracted using the trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone method with minor modifications. The protein concentration of each sample was equalized by using PBS buffer containing 8 M urea, and the solution containing 3 mg of protein per sample was transferred to a new tube followed by acidification with 0.5 M HCl until the pH reached 2-3. After incubation on ice for 10 min and centrifugation at 12,000 rpm at 4°C for 30 min, the supernatant was collected and filtered through 10 kDa Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filter units. Peptides contained in the ultrafiltrate were desalted and concentrated on PierceTM C18 spin columns. The eluents containing peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifugal evaporator and stored at -80°C before being labeled with TMT reagent.Labeled samples were purified and desalted on PierceTM C18 spin columns.The pooled samples were redissolved in 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid and gently shaken. The supernatant was then separated on an Acclaim Pep-Map RSLC C-18 analytical column at a flow rate of 3.0 μL/min. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and acetonitrile, respectively. Separated peptides were then analyzed by a mass spectrometer in higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation mode. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 2.1 software in a data-dependent mode. Full MS1 scans were acquired at a 240-K resolution with a mass range of 300 to 1800 m/z and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4.0e5. MS2 was conducted at a 30-K resolution with HCD collision energy of 38% and an AGC target of 5.0e5. Additionally, positively charged ions from 2 to 6 were selected for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.1 was used to analyze the MS raw files obtained and TMT quantification. Sequest HT node was used as the search engine module, and the rice protein database was downloaded from UniProt. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at a peptide level of <1%. To ensure high confidence identifications, PSMs and peptides were filtered using target FDR (strict) and target FDR (relaxed) at 0.01 and 0.05, respectively. Only those peptides with no missing values in all 6 channels were considered for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Rice (<i>Oryza sativa</i> L.) is an important staple crop, particularly in Asia, and abiotic stress conditions easily reduce its yields. Salt stress is one of the critical factors affecting rice growth and yield. In this study, a tandem mass tag (TMT)-based comparative peptidomics analysis of rice seedlings under salt stress was conducted. Rice seedlings were exposed to 50 and 150 mM NaCl for 24 and 72 h, respectively, and the root and shoot tissues of different treatment groups were collected separately for peptidomics analysis. A total of 911 and 1263 nonredundant peptides were identified in two pooled shoot tissue samples, while there were 770 and 672 nonredundant peptides in two pooled root tissue samples, respectively. Compared with the control groups, dozens to hundreds of differentially expressed peptides (DEPs) were characterized in all treatment groups. To explore the potential functions of these DEPs, we analyzed the basic characteristics of DEPs and further analyzed the annotated Gene Ontology terms according to their precursor proteins. Several DEP precursor proteins were closely related to the response to salt stress, and some were derived from the functional domains of their corresponding precursors. The germination rate and cotyledon greening rate of transgenic <i>Arabidopsis</i> expressing two DEPs, OsSTPE2 and OsSTPE3, were significantly enhanced under salt stress. The described workflow enables the discovery of a functional pipeline for the characterization of the plant peptidome and reveals two new plant peptides that confer salinity tolerance to plants. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD037574.

### Keywords
Rice seedlings, Salt stress, Nano lc-ms/ms, Comparative peptidomics

### Affiliations
The National Engineering Laboratory of Crop Resistance Breeding, School of Life Sciences, Anhui Agricultural University
Anhui Agricultural University

### Submitter
Wanlu Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Xin Zhang
The National Engineering Laboratory of Crop Resistance Breeding, School of Life Sciences, Anhui Agricultural University


