### Accession
PXD021884

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of an Alexander Disease Murine Model with Severe Reactive Gliosis

### Description
We performed label-free micro-data-independent acquisition (µDIA) to assay brain proteins from a severe model of Alexander disease (AxD, lethal at postnatal day ~35).  Of the 5,005 proteins quantified, we observed upregulation of adipocytokine signaling, PPAR, insulin resistance, and glutathione pathways with concomitant downregulation of platelet activation, ether lipid synthesis, and steroid biosynthesis pathways.  To validate these DIA results, we setup a targeted parallel reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry assay (PRM-MS) for selected proteins with altered relative concentrations.  The PRM-MS assays confirmed the upward or downward relative concentration differences in 16/16 (100%) of the proteins targeted, with 15/16 (94%) of these proteins reaching statistical significance (P-value < 0.05).

### Sample Protocol
All mass spectrometry samples were subjected to reduction and alkylation with iodoacetamide followed by tryptic digestion.  The µDIA analyses utilized an in-gel tryptic digest for sample preparation and the validation assays by PRM applied an in-solution Lys-c/trypsin digestion procedure.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were analyzed using Protalizer µDIA software (v1.1.3154) from Vulcan Biosciences (Birmingham, AL.  The original MS2 spectra were deconvoluted and the mass-isolation windows reduced from 12 m/z to 4 m/z using a previously described approach with a 15 ppm fragment ion matching tolerance across MS2 scans.  Peptide and protein identifications were made using the Protein Farmer search engine against the forward and reversed mus musculus Swiss-Prot database (2017-10 release) containing 16,704 sequences (not including decoys) with a 10 ppm parent and fragment ion mass tolerance.  Potential modifications searched for included oxidation of methionine residues, N-terminal protein acetylation, N-terminal protein methionine cleavage and acetylation, and pyro-glu of N-terminal glutamine and glutamic acid residues.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was searched as a fixed modification.  Peptides with one trypsin miscleavage were included in the analysis.  A strict false discovery rate (FDR) based on a reversed database search of < 1% at the peptide level and < 5% at the protein level was applied for each sample analyzed.

### Publication Abstract
Alexander disease (AxD) is a rare and fatal neurodegenerative disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). In this report, a mouse&#xa0;model of AxD (GFAP<sup>Tg</sup>;Gfap<sup>+/R236H</sup>) was analyzed that contains a heterozygous R236H point mutation in&#xa0;murine Gfap as well as a transgene with a GFAP promoter to overexpress human GFAP. Using label-free quantitative proteomic comparisons of brain tissue from GFAP<sup>Tg</sup>;Gfap<sup>+/R236H</sup>&#xa0;versus wild-type mice confirmed upregulation of the glutathione metabolism pathway and indicated proteins were elevated in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) signaling pathway, which had not been reported previously in AxD. Relative protein-level differences were confirmed by a targeted proteomics assay, including proteins related to astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. Of particular interest was the decreased level of the oligodendrocyte protein, 2-hydroxyacylsphingosine 1-beta-galactosyltransferase (Ugt8), since Ugt8-deficient mice exhibit a phenotype similar to GFAP<sup>Tg</sup>;Gfap<sup>+/R236H</sup> mice (e.g., tremors, ataxia, hind-limb paralysis). In addition, decreased levels of myelin-associated proteins were found in the GFAP<sup>Tg</sup>;Gfap<sup>+/R236H</sup> mice, consistent with the role of Ugt8 in myelin synthesis. Fabp7 upregulation in GFAP<sup>Tg</sup>;Gfap<sup>+/R236H</sup> mice was also selected for further investigation due to its uncharacterized association to AxD, critical function in astrocyte proliferation, and functional ability to inhibit the anti-inflammatory PPAR signaling pathway in models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Within Gfap<sup>+</sup> astrocytes, Fabp7 was markedly increased in the hippocampus, a brain region subjected to extensive pathology and chronic reactive gliosis in GFAP<sup>Tg</sup>;Gfap<sup>+/R236H</sup> mice. Last, to determine whether the findings in GFAP<sup>Tg</sup>;Gfap<sup>+/R236H</sup> mice are present in the human condition, AxD patient and control samples were analyzed by Western blot, which indicated that Type I AxD patients have a significant fourfold upregulation of FABP7. However, immunohistochemistry analysis showed that UGT8 accumulates in AxD patient subpial brain regions where abundant amounts of Rosenthal fibers are located, which was not observed in the GFAP<sup>Tg</sup>;Gfap<sup>+/R236H</sup> mice.

### Keywords
Brain proteome, Reactive gliosis, Alexander disease, Parallel reaction monitoring, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Virginia Tech School of Neuroscience Life Sciences Building (LS 1) Room 213, Lab 212 Blacksburg VA, 24061
CSO

### Submitter
Michael Heaven

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle L Olsen
Virginia Tech School of Neuroscience Life Sciences Building (LS 1) Room 213, Lab 212 Blacksburg VA, 24061


