### Accession
PXD034188

### Title
Proteome analysis of transgenic 1D1a mice

### Description
T cells specifically recognize an antigen with a T cell receptor (TCR) consisting of α- and β-chain. The transgenic 1D1a mice were generated on the genetic background of the B10.D2(R101) line and expressed in their T cells the α-chain TCR (TCRα) specific to the allogeneic MHC molecule Н2-Kb. To evaluate effects of TCRα transgenesis on the qualitative and quantitative composition of plasma proteins, comparative proteome analysis was performed for both female and male transgenic 1D1a and wild-type B10.D2(R101) mice aged 3-, 6-, and 12-months.

### Sample Protocol
The transgenic TCRα originated from the TCR of memory T cells specific to Н2-Kb. To generate memory T cells, B10.D2(R101) mice (H-2KdDb) were immunized with EL-4 lymphoma cells expressing H-2Кb. Memory T cells with TCRs specific to the H-2Кb molecule accumulated in the spleen of immunized mice two months after immunization. To selectively activate specific memory T cells, spleen lymphocytes of immunized mice were in vitro re-stimulated with allogeneic splenocytes of C57BL/6 mice (H-2b) subjected to acute heat shock (45ºC, 1 h). Activated lymphocytes were then cloned by limiting dilutions and cultured with interleukin-2 for 1 month. The long-lived clone capable of prolonged reproduction in vitro was fused with BW5147 thymoma cells to generate the 1D1 hybridoma. Sequencing revealed that the TCRα of the 1D1 hybridoma belonged to the V11.3 family (TCRADV4-3). For transgenesis, the genetic construct containing the 1D1 TCRα gene was generated based on the pTa cassette vector (Dian Mathis, France). Primary 1D1a transgenic mice were created by microinjection of the expression vector into the pronucleus of fertilized oocytes. To generate the transgenic mice line, 1D1a mice were backcrossed with B10.D2(R101) mice for 6 generations. Functional analyses of 1D1a transgenic mice showed that they had the inborn pre-formed pool of СD8+ effector T cells specific to the H-2Kb molecule and exhibited facilitated response to EL-4 lymphoma bearing the specific antigen both in vitro and in vivo that 2.0-fold surpassed the dynamics of EL-4 elimination in wild-type mice.  Sample preparation Blood plasma obtained from female and male transgenic 1D1a and wild-type B10.D2(R101) mice aged 3-, 6-, and 12-months were processed with a ProteoMiner protein enrichment kit. Reduction, alkylation and digestion of the proteins were performed as described previously with minor modifications. Briefly, 20 l of sodium deoxycholate (SDC) reduction and alkylation buffer pH 8.5 contained 100 mM TRIS, 1% (w/v) SDC, 10 mM TCEP and 20 mM 2-chloroacetamide were added to a 20 g protein sample. The sample was sonicated in an ultrasonic water bath for 1 min, heated at 95oC for 10 min, cooled to a room temperature and the equal volume of trypsin solution in 100 mM TRIS pH 8.5 was added in a 1:50 (w/w) ratio. After overnight digestion at 37oC, peptides were acidified by 40 l of 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) mixed with 80 l of ethyl acetate and loaded on SDB-RPS StageTips contained two 14-gauge SDB-RPS plugs, and the StageTip was centrifuged at 300 g until all solution go through the StageTip (typically 5 min). After washing the StageTips with a 100 l of 1% TFA/ethyl acetate 1:1 mixture (2 times) and 100 l of 0.2% TFA, peptides were eluted in a clean tube by 50 l 50% acetonitrile/5% ammonia mixture using centrifugation at 300 g. The collected material was vacuum-dried and stored at -80oC. Before analyses peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA buffer at a concentration of 0.5 g/l and sonicated for 1 min. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry.  Samples were loaded to a Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (100 m x 2 cm) trap column in the loading mobile phase (2% acetonitrile (ACN), 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 l/min flow and separated at 40oC on a 500 mm 75m inner diameter Thermo ScientificTM Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC column with particle size 2 m. Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to the Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) was used as mobile phase A and ACN containing 0.1% FA (v/v), 20% (v/v) H2O as mobile phase B. Peptides were eluted from the trap column with a linear gradient: 3–35% solution B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) for 105 min; 35-55% B for 18 min, 55-99% B for 0.1 min, 99% B during 10 min, 99-2%B for 0.1 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was reequilibrated with A for 10 min. MS data was collected in DDA mode (TopN=15). MS1 parameters were as follows: 120K resolution, 350-1400 scan range, max injection time – 50 msec, AGC target – 3x106. Ions were isolated with 1.2 m/z window, preferred peptide match and isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out at 15K resolution with HCD collision energy 28, max injection time – 80 msec, AGC target – 1x105. Other settings: charge exclusion - unassigned, 1, >7.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed using in MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 and Perseus. The data was searched against Mus musculus Uniprot Tremble database, containing canonical and isoform proteins, version from 06.2016 MaxQuant search was performed with the default parameter set, including Trypsin/p protease specificity, max 2 missed cleavages, Met oxidation, Protein N-term acetylation and NQ deamidation as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification, max 5 modifications per peptide, 1% PSM and protein FDR. The following options were turned on: second peptide, maxLFQ, match between runs. All runs were analyzed as independent experiments and processed in Perseus.  In Perseus the protein group results were filtered for contaminants, reverse and “identified only by site” proteins. Only the proteins with maxLFQ values for all 3 LC-MS runs in at least one group were used. For them, missing values were imputed from normal distribution with 0.3 intensity distribution sigma width and 1.8 intensity distribution center downshift. Two-sample t-test with Permutation based FDR 5% was applied to search for significantly changing proteins.

### Publication Abstract
A T cell receptor (TCR) consists of &#x3b1;- and &#x3b2;-chains. Accumulating evidence suggests that some TCRs possess chain centricity, i.e., either of the hemi-chains can dominate in antigen recognition and dictate the TCR's specificity. The introduction of TCR&#x3b1;/&#x3b2; into naive lymphocytes generates antigen-specific T cells that are ready to perform their functions. Transgenesis of the dominant active TCR&#x3b1; creates transgenic animals with improved anti-tumor immune control, and adoptive immunotherapy with TCR&#x3b1;-transduced T cells provides resistance to infections. However, the potential detrimental effects of the dominant hemi-chain TCR's expression in transgenic animals have not been well investigated. Here, we analyzed, in detail, the functional status of the immune system of recently generated 1D1a transgenic mice expressing the dominant active TCR&#x3b1; specific to the H2-K<sup>b</sup> molecule. In their age dynamics, neither autoimmunity due to the random pairing of transgenic TCR&#x3b1; with endogenous TCR&#x3b2; variants nor significant disturbances in systemic homeostasis were detected in these mice. Although the specific immune response was considerably enhanced in 1D1a mice, responses to third-party alloantigens were not compromised, indicating that the expression of dominant active TCR&#x3b1; did not limit immune reactivity in transgenic mice. Our data suggest that TCR&#x3b1; transgene expression could delay thymic involution and maintain TCR&#x3b2; repertoire diversity in old transgenic mice. The detected changes in the systemic homeostasis in 1D1a transgenic mice, which are minor and primarily transient, may indicate variations in the ontogeny of wild-type and transgenic mouse lines.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Blood plasma, Transgenic 1d1a mice

### Affiliations
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry Russian Academy of Sciences
Laboratory of Regulatory Mechanisms in Immunity Institute of Carcinogenesis Federal State Budgetary Institution "N. N. Blokhin National Medical Research Center of Oncology" of the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation

### Submitter
Rustam Ziganshin

### Lab Head
Dr Dmitry Kazansky
Laboratory of Regulatory Mechanisms in Immunity Institute of Carcinogenesis Federal State Budgetary Institution "N. N. Blokhin National Medical Research Center of Oncology" of the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation


