### Accession
PXD042381

### Title
An integrated multi-omics analysis of identiﬁes distinct molecular characteristics in pulmonary infections of Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) can cause severe acute infections, including pneumonia and sepsis, and also cause chronic infections commonly in patients with structural respiratory diseases. However, the molecular and pathophysiological mechanisms of P. aeruginosa respiratory infection are largely unknown. Here, we profiled performed to assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq), transcriptomics, and quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics and ubiquitin-proteomics in P. aeruginosa-infected lung tissues for multi-omics analysis, while ATAC-seq and transcriptomics were also examined in P. aeruginosa-infected mouse macrophages. To find the pivotal transcription factors that are likely involved in host immune defense, we integrally investigated systematic changes in chromatin accessibility and gene expression in P. aeruginosa-infected lung tissues combined with proteomics and ubiquitin-proteomics studies. We discovered that Stat1 and Stat3 were altered in various omics and found similar results in mouse alveolar macrophages. Taken together, these findings indicate that these crucial transcription factors and their downstream signaling molecules play a critical role in the mobilization of host immune response against P. aeruginosa infection and may serve as potential targets for bacterial infections and inflammatory diseases, as well as provide clear insights and resources for using integrative histological analyses.

### Sample Protocol
To precipitate protein, the sample was slowly added to a final concentration of 20% (m/v) TCA, vortexed to mix, and incubated for 2 hours at 4 °C. Centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 minutes at 4 °C was used to collect the precipitate. The precipitated protein was washed three times with pre-cooled acetone and dried for one minute. The protein sample was then ultrasonically dispersed after being redissolved in 200 mM TEAB. For the initial digestion, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio overnight. The sample was reduced for 60 minutes at 37 °C with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated for 45 minutes at room temperature in darkness with 11 mM iodoacetamide. The peptides were then desalted using a Strata X SPE column.

### Data Protocol
To enrich modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM1104, PTM Bio). The beads were then washed four times in NETN buffer and twice in H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resultant peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer's instructions for LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and separated by a NanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). TimsTOF Pro mass spectrometry was used to separate the peptides after they were separated using a UHPLC system. Ubiquitinated site protein abundance was obtained after quantitative analysis using Spectronaut (v 17).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacterial infection, Atac-seq, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Transcription factor, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy West China Hospital, Sichuan University
State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy

### Submitter
Yang Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Yang Yang
State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy West China Hospital, Sichuan University


