### Accession
PXD033676

### Title
Isolation of a novel heterodimeric PSII complex involved in PSII repair

### Description
The multi-subunit membrane protein complex Photosystem II (PSII) catalyzes the light driven oxidation of water and with this the initial step of photosynthetic electron transport in plants, algae, and cyanobacteria. Its biogenesis is coordinated by a network of auxiliary proteins that facilitate the stepwise assembly of individual subunits and cofactors, forming various intermediate complexes until fully functional mature PSII is present at the end of the process. In the current study, we purified PSII complexes from a mutant line of the thermophilic cyanobacterium Thermosynechococcus elongatus in which the extrinsic subunit PsbO, characteristic for active PSII, was fused with an N-terminal TwinStrep-Tag. Three distinct PSII complexes were separated by ion exchange chromatography after the initial affinity purification. Two complexes differ in their oligomeric state (monomeric and dimeric) but share the typical subunit composition of mature PSII. They are characterized by very high oxygen evolving activity of approx. 6,000 µmol O2· (mg Chl·h)-1. Analysis of the third (heterodimeric) PSII complex revealed lower oxygen evolving activity of approx. 3000 µmol O2· (mg Chl·h)-1 and a manganese content of 2.7 (± 0.2) per reaction center compared to 3.7 (± 0.2) of fully active PSII. Mass spectrometry and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy further indicated that PsbO is partially replaced by Psb27 in this PSII fraction, thus implying a role in repair of the complex.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were reduced with TCEP and cysteines alkylated with IAA (Thermo Fisher, Germany). Subsequent proteolytic digests were performed using S-TRAPs (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were further desalted and purified on Isolute C18 SPE cartridges (Biotage, Sweden) and dried in an Eppendorf concentrator (Eppendorf, Germany) as described by Zabret et al., Nature Plants, 2021. After solubilization in 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ACN/water (95/5, v/v), samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC (Thermo Fisher, Germany) system, equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap C18 trap column (2 cm · 75 µm, particle size: 3 µm; Thermo Fisher) and a C18 analytical column (50 cm · 75 µm, particle size: 1.7 µm; CoAnn Technologies) with an integrated liquid-junction and fused silica emitter coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Germany).  Trapping was performed for 6 min with a flow rate of 6 µl · min-1 using loading buffer (98/2 (v/v) water/ACN with 0.05% TFA) and peptides were separated on the analytical column at a flow rate of 250 nl · min-1 with the following gradient: 4 - 48% B in 90 min, 48 - 90% B in 1 min and constant 90% B for 5 min followed by 18 min column re-equilibration at 4% B with buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and buffer B (0.1% FA in 80/20 (v/v) ACN/water). Peptides eluting from the column were ionised online using a Nano Flex ESI-source and analysed in data-dependent-mode. Survey scans were acquired over the mass range from 350 - 1400 m/z in the Orbitrap (maximum injection time: 50 ms, AGC (automatic gain control) fixed at 2·10E5 with 120K mass resolution) and sequence information was acquired by a top speed method with a fixed cycle time of 2 s for the survey and following MS/MS-scans. MS/MS-scans were acquired for the most abundant precursors with a charge state from 2 - 10 and an intensity minimum of 3x10E4. Picked precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with a 1.4 m/z isolation window and fragmented using HCD (NCE (normalized collision energy) = 30%). For MS/MS spectra, an AGC of 10E4 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms were used and detection was carried out in the Orbitrap using 30K mass resolution. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Unless stated otherwise, all reagents and solvents were obtained from Sigma Aldrich, Germany.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed in Fragpipe 17.1 using MSFragger 3.4 for database searches. Raw files were recalibrated and searched against the Uniprot proteome for Thermosynechococcus vestitus BP1 (formerly known as Thermosynechococcus elongatus BP1)(UP000000440; obtained 2022-03-17) along with the modified PsbO sequence. The search space was restricted to tryptic peptides with a length of 7 - 50 amino acids, allowing for up to two missed cleavages and with a minimum of one unique peptide per protein group. Carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine as well as N-terminal formylation and acetylation were set as variable modification. Match between runs was enabled and Percolator was used to estimate the number of false positive identifications. Results filtered for a strict target false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The multi-subunit membrane protein complex photosystem II (PSII) catalyzes the light-driven oxidation of water and with this the initial step of photosynthetic electron transport in plants, algae, and cyanobacteria. Its biogenesis is coordinated by a network of auxiliary proteins that facilitate the stepwise assembly of individual subunits and cofactors, forming various intermediate complexes until fully functional mature PSII is present at the end of the process. In the current study, we purified PSII complexes from a mutant line of the thermophilic cyanobacterium Thermosynechococcus vestitus BP-1 in which the extrinsic subunit PsbO, characteristic for active PSII, was fused with an N-terminal Twin-Strep-tag. Three distinct PSII complexes were separated by ion-exchange chromatography after the initial affinity purification. Two complexes differ in their oligomeric state (monomeric and dimeric) but share the typical subunit composition of mature PSII. They are characterized by the very high oxygen evolving activity of approx. 6000&#xa0;&#x3bc;mol&#xa0;O<sub>2</sub>&#xb7;(mg&#xa0;Chl&#xb7;h)<sup>-1</sup>. Analysis of the third (heterodimeric) PSII complex revealed lower oxygen evolving activity of approx. 3000&#xa0;&#x3bc;mol&#xa0;O<sub>2</sub>&#xb7;(mg&#xa0;Chl&#xb7;h)<sup>-1</sup> and a manganese content of 2.7 (&#xb1;0.2) per reaction center compared to 3.7 (&#xb1;0.2) of fully active PSII. Mass spectrometry and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy further indicated that PsbO is partially replaced by Psb27 in this PSII fraction, thus implying a role of this complex in PSII repair.

### Keywords
Psbo, Cyanobacteria, Photosystem ii, Photosynthesis, Thermosynechococcus elongatus

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
MPI of Biophysics, MPI for Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Langer
MPI of Biophysics, MPI for Brain Research


