### Accession
PXD035748

### Title
DNMT and HDAC inhibition induces immunogenic neoantigens from human endogenous retroviral element-derived transcripts

### Description
Immunotherapies targeting cancer-specific immunogenic neoantigens have revolutionized the treatment of cancer patients. Recent evidence suggests that epigenetic therapies could synergize with immunotherapies, mediating the de-repression of endogenous retroviral element (ERV)-encoded promoters, and the initiation of transcription. Here we use RNA sequencing from cancer cells treated with DNMT and/or HDAC inhibitors, to assemble a de novo transcriptome and identified 3,023 ERV-derived, treatment-induced novel polA+ transcripts (TINPATs), encoding for 61,426 novel open reading frames. We further demonstrate, using human leukocyte antigen immunopeptidomics, the existence of treatment-induced neoepitopes (t-neoepitopes) derived from TINPATs. We demonstrated the potential of the identified t-neoepitopes to elicit an immunogenic T-cell response and cancer cell killing. The presence of t-neoepitopes was further verified in AML patient samples 48 h and /96 h after in vivo treatment with the DNMT inhibitor Decitabine. Our findings highlight a novel mechanism of ERV-derived neoantigens in epigenetic and immune therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Samples that were treated either with the inhibitors or DMSO were incubated in the presence of azidohomoalanine (AHA). For the control condition the cells were cultured in medium SILAC conditions whereas for the inhibitors in heavy. Newly synthesized proteins were enriched as described in detail in the materials and methods sections and peptides weere prepared for MS after HpH fractionation in order to achieve high proteomic depth. Each of the biological replicated was concatenated into 8 fractions each which was analyzed by MS.

### Data Protocol
The generated raw files were search again the produced TINPAT database using the Maxquant version 2.0.3. Multiplicity was set to 3 to account for all three labels which were defined as Arg6 and Lys4 for the medium one and Arg10 and Lys8 for the heavy one. Variable modifications were set as N-term protein acetylation, Methionine Oxidation and NQ deamidation. Maxquant version 1.6.8.0 was used for searching the raw fileas against the human canonical database by applying the settings stated above with the exception of using the canonical reviewed human database downloaded from Uniprot. The exact details of Maxquant are mentioned in the materials and methods section of the manuscript. R statistical enviroment version 4.0.3 was used for the analysis of the output tables from Maxquant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dnmt, Immunopeptidomics, Immunotherapy, Erv, Decitabine, Mhc, Ltr, Hla, Hdac, Neoantigen, Cancer, Sb939

### Affiliations
Division of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty, Heidelberg, Germany
Post-Doctoral Scientist

### Submitter
Dimitris Papageorgiou

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
Division of Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany Heidelberg University, Medical Faculty, Heidelberg, Germany


