### Accession
PXD014253

### Title
The HLA-DRB1*03:01 ligandome is highly conserved on N- and C-terminal residues outside the peptide-binding cleft

### Description
Human CD4+ T lymphocytes play an important role in inducing potent immune responses. They are activated and stimulated by peptides presented in Major Histocompatibility Complex Class II molecules. These MHC class II molecules typically present peptides of between 12 and 20 amino acids in length. The region that interacts with the MHC molecule, designated as the binding core, is highly conserved in the residues which anchor the peptide to the molecule. In addition, as these peptides are the product of proteolytic cleavages, certain conserved residues may be expected at the N- and C-termini outside the binding core. To study whether similar conserved residues are present in different types of cells , the ligandomes of HLA-DRB1*03:01 derived from two different cell types (dendritic cells and EBV-transformed B-cells) were identified with mass spectrometry and the binding core and N- and C-terminal residues were analysed using the frequencies of the amino acids in the human proteome. Similar binding motifs were found as well as comparable conservations in the N- and C-terminal residues. Furthermore, these terminal conservations of the HLA-DRB1*03:01 ligandome were compared to the N- and C-terminal conservations of the HLA-DRB1*04:01 ligandome acquired from dendritic cells. Again, comparable conservations were evident with only minor differences. Taken all together, these analyses show that there are conservations in the terminal residues of peptides, presumably the result of the activity of proteases involved in antigen processing.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of HLA eluted peptides was performed as described previously[22] with some modifications. After elution, the unfiltered eluate and HLA molecules and HLA-binding peptides were separated by selective elution from a small C18 column in two fractions with 20% and 30% acetonitrile[23]. Subsequently the HLA-peptides were analysed via on-line C18-nano-HPLC-MS with a system consisting of an Easy nLC 1000 gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). Fractions were injected onto a homemade precolumn (100 μm × 15 mm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (15 cm × 50 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3 um). The gradient was run from 0% to 30% solvent B (10/90/0.1 water/ACN/FA v/v/v) in 120 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼5 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The Q-Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in top10-mode. Parameters were resolution 70,000 at an AGC target value of 3 million maximum fill time of 100 ms (full scan), and resolution 35,000 at an AGC target value of 1 million/maximum fill time of 128 ms for MS/MS at an intensity threshold of 785,000. Apex trigger was set to 1 to 5 seconds, and allowed charges were 1-3. All fractions were measured twice.

### Data Protocol
In a post-analysis process, raw data were converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer 2.1. For peptide identification, MS/MS spectra were submitted to the Homo Sapiens database (67211 entries) using Mascot Version 2.2.04 (Matrix Science) with the following settings: 10 ppm and 20 millimass units deviation for precursor and fragment masses, respectively; no enzyme was specified. In percolator an FDR of 1% was set, with the additional condition of a mascot score of at least 35.

### Publication Abstract
Human CD4+ T lymphocytes play an important role in inducing potent immune responses. T cells are activated and stimulated by peptides presented in human leucocyte antigen (HLA)-class II molecules. These HLA-class II molecules typically present peptides of between 12 and 20 amino acids in length. The region that interacts with the HLA molecule, designated as the peptide-binding core, is highly conserved in the residues which anchor the peptide to the molecule. In addition, as these peptides are the product of proteolytic cleavages, certain conserved residues may be expected at the N- and C-termini outside the binding core. To study whether similar conserved residues are present in different cell types, potentially harbouring different proteolytic enzymes, the ligandomes of HLA-DRB1*03:01/HLA-DRB&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;1 derived from two different cell types (dendritic cells and EBV-transformed B cells) were identified with mass spectrometry and the binding core and N- and C-terminal residues of a total of 16,568 peptides were analysed using the frequencies of the amino acids in the human proteome. Similar binding motifs were found as well as comparable conservations in the N- and C-terminal residues. Furthermore, the terminal conservations of these ligandomes were compared to the N- and C-terminal conservations of the ligandome acquired from dendritic cells homozygous for HLA-DRB1*04:01. Again, comparable conservations were evident with only minor differences. Taken together, these data show that there are conservations in the terminal residues of peptides, presumably the result of the activity of proteases involved in antigen processing.

### Keywords
Ducaf; hla-drb1*03:01

### Affiliations
LUMC Head Proteomics group Centre for Proteomics and Metabolomics LUMC
Leiden University Medical Center

### Submitter
G Janssen

### Lab Head
Dr Peter A van Veelen
LUMC Head Proteomics group Centre for Proteomics and Metabolomics LUMC


