### Accession
PXD009577

### Title
Getting to the heart of the matter: Multispecies heart tissue proteome characterization

### Description
Structural birth defects are the leading cause of infant mortality in the US and Europe. Among these, congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common. Historically, Xenopus, mouse, and pig have provided models for CHD. However, it remains unknown what proteins and pathways are conserved between these species and human. Furthermore, the proteome driving the differences between three-chambered (Xenopus) and four-chambered (mammalian) hearts is unknown. Comparative proteomics of heart tissue from species at different evolutionary points can reveal molecular processes underlying heart function. We examined heart tissue proteomes of Xenopus tropicalis, Xenopus laevis, Mus musculus, and Sus scrofa and assessed protein expression changes in the context of pathways and protein complexes, and enrichment of corresponding genes in human heart diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were cryogenically ground, then lysed via sequential solubilization to generate three extracts.  Each extract was fractionated into 5 fractions via SDS-PAGE.  Samples were in-gel trypsin digested and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Sequest HT in PD2.1, and assembled in Scaffold 4.7.3 using the clustering algorithm.  The identified proteins were then mapped to human accessions and analyzed via several different bioinformatic algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the western world. Attaining a mechanistic understanding of human heart development and homeostasis and the molecular basis of associated disease states relies on the use of animal models. Here, we present the cardiac proteomes of 4 model vertebrates with dual circulatory systems: the pig (Sus scrofa), the mouse (Mus musculus), and 2 frogs (Xenopus laevis and Xenopus tropicalis). Determination of which proteins and protein pathways are conserved and which have diverged within these species will aid in our ability to choose the appropriate models for determining protein function and to model human disease. We uncover mammalian- and amphibian-specific, as well as species-specific, enriched proteins and protein pathways. Among these, we find and validate an enrichment in cell-cycle-associated proteins within Xenopus laevis. To further investigate functional units within cardiac proteomes, we develop a computational approach to profile the abundance of protein complexes across species. Finally, we demonstrate the utility of these data sets for predicting appropriate model systems for studying given cardiac conditions by testing the role of Kielin/chordin-like protein (Kcp), a protein found as enriched in frog hearts compared to mammals. We establish that germ-line mutations in Kcp in Xenopus lead to valve defects and, ultimately, cardiac failure and death. Thus, integrating these findings with data on proteins responsible for cardiac disease should lead to the development of refined, species-specific models for protein function and disease states.

### Keywords
Heart tissue, Multispecies, Heart proteome, Label-free quant

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, United States

### Submitter
Joel Federspiel

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, United States


