### Accession
PXD046949

### Title
Harnessing PROTAC technology to combat stress hormone receptor activation

### Description
We want to quantify the proteome alteration following PROTAC mediated Glucocorticoid receptor depletion in vitro.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS sample preparation To each sample 100 µl of lysis buffer (4 % Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.2) were added. Protein extraction was carried out using a tissue homogenizer (TissueLyser II, QUIAGEN) by applying 2x2min cycles at 30 Hz. The samples were boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes while shaking at 800 rpm on a Thermoshaker (Eppendorf) and treated with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) for 1 minute at an ultrasonic amplitude of 100 % before centrifugation at 20000 x g for 10 min. Protein  concentration was determined using the Lunatic UV/Vis polychromatic spectrophotometer (Unchained Labs). The amount corresponding to 50 µg of protein were reduced with 5 mM Dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide at 50 °C for 30 min in the dark. Samples were processed using the single‐pot solid‐phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3) [Hughes CS, Foehr S, Garfield DA, Furlong EE, Steinmetz LM, Krijgsveld J. Ultrasensitive proteome analysis using paramagnetic bead technology. Mol Syst Biol. 2014 Oct 30;10(10):757. doi: 10.15252/msb.20145625; BB – Leutert M, Rodriguez‐Mias RA, Fukuda NK, Villén J (2019) R2‐P2 rapid‐robotic phosphoproteomics enables multidimensional cell signaling studies. Mol Syst Biol 15: e9021]. In short, protein purification, digest and peptide clean-up were performed using a KingFisher Flex System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Carboxylate-Modified Magnetic Particles (GE Life Sciences; GE65152105050250, GE45152105050250). Beads were conditioned following the manufacturer’s instructions, consisting of 3 washes with water at a concentration of 1 µg/µl. Samples were diluted with 100% ethanol to a final concentration of 60% ethanol. The beads, wash solutions and samples were loaded into 96 deep well- or micro-plates and transferred to the KingFisher.  Following steps were carried out on the robot: collection of beads from the last wash, protein binding to beads, washing of beads in wash solutions 1-3 (80% ethanol), protein digestion (overnight at 37°C with a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50 in 50 mM Triethylammoniumbicarbonat) and peptide elution from the magnetic beads using MilliQ water. The digest solution and water elution were combined and dried to completeness and re-solubilized in 20 µL of MS sample buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data acquisition LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to an M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition of the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 99.9% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for channel B. Column temperature was 50°C. For each sample the equivalent of 300 ng of peptides were loaded on a commercial ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) connected to a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. After a 3 min initial hold at 5% B, a gradient from 5 to 22 % B in 80 min and 22 to 32% B in additional 10 min was applied. The column was cleaned after the run by increasing to 95 % B and holding 95 % B for 10 min prior to re-establishing loading condition.  Samples were measured in randomized order. For the analysis of the individual samples, the mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent mode (DIA). DIA scans covered a range from 396 to 956 m/z in windows of 8 m/z. The resolution of the DIA windows was set to 15’000, with an AGC target value of 500’000, the maximum injection time set to 22 ms and a fixed normalized collision energy (NCE) of 33 %. Each instrument cycle was completed by a full MS scan monitoring 396 to 1000 m/z at a resolution of 60’000.  The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS) [AA - C. Turker, F. Akal, D. Joho, C. Panse, B. Oesterreicher, H. Rehrauer, R. Schlapbach. « B-Fabric: The Swiss Army Knife for Life Sciences”. EDBT 2010, March 22–26, 2010, Lausanne, Switzerland (DOI 10.1145/1739041.1739135)] and all relevant data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride) partner repository.  LC-MS/MS data analysis The acquired MS raw data were processed for identification and quantification using FragPipe (version 18.0), MSFragger (version 3.5), and Philosopher (version 4.4.0) [AA -Yu F, Teo GC, Kong AT, Li GX, Demichev V, Nesvizhskii AI. One-stop analysis of DIA proteomics data using MSFragger-DIA and FragPipe computational platform, biorxiv (2022).]. Spectra were searched against <fgcz_9606_reviewed_cnl_d_20230330.fasta> , concatenated to its reversed decoy database, and common protein contaminants. MSFragger-DIA mode for direct identification of peptides from DIA data was used. Strict trypsin digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavages was set. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. EasyPQP was used to generate a DIA-NN-compatible spectral library. Subsequent quantification was performed with DIA-NN version 1.8.2.  The R package prolfqua [Wolski, W. E., Nanni, P., Grossmann, J., d'Errico, M., Schlapbach, R., & Panse, C. (2022). prolfqua: A Comprehensive R-package for Proteomics Differential Expression Analysis. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.2c00441.] was used to analyze the differential expression and to determine group differences and false discovery rates for all quantified proteins. The protein lists were filtered with a threshold of 1 log2 FC and an FDR of 0.05%. The analysis was run on the local computing infrastructure [Panse, C., Trachsel, C., & Türker, C. (2022). Bridging data management platforms and visualization tools to enable ad-hoc and smart analytics in life sciences. Journal of Integrative Bioinformatics. 10.1515/jib-2022-0031].

### Publication Abstract
Counteracting the overactivation of glucocorticoid receptors (GR) is an important therapeutic goal in stress-related psychiatry and beyond. The only clinically approved GR antagonist lacks selectivity and induces unwanted side effects. To complement existing tools of small-molecule-based inhibitors, we present a highly potent, catalytically-driven GR degrader, KH-103, based on proteolysis-targeting chimera technology. This selective degrader enables immediate and reversible GR depletion that is independent of genetic manipulation and circumvents transcriptional adaptations to inhibition. KH-103 achieves passive inhibition, preventing agonistic induction of gene expression, and significantly averts the GR's genomic effects compared to two currently available inhibitors. Application in primary-neuron cultures revealed the dependency of a glucocorticoid-induced increase in spontaneous calcium activity on GR. Finally, we present a proof of concept for application in vivo. KH-103 opens opportunities for a more lucid interpretation of GR functions with translational potential.

### Keywords
A549, Lc-ms/ms, Gr protac

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, D-HEST
ETH Zurich – Institute for Neuroscience, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Lab of Epigenetics and Neuroendocrinology, Neuroscience Center Zürich

### Submitter
Prof. Dr. Katharina Gapp

### Lab Head
Professor Dr. Katharina Gapp
ETH Zurich – Institute for Neuroscience, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Lab of Epigenetics and Neuroendocrinology, Neuroscience Center Zürich


