### Accession
PXD021173

### Title
The mitochondrial surface receptor Tom70 protects the cytosol against mitoprotein-induced stress

### Description
Most mitochondrial proteins are synthesized as precursor proteins in the cytosol and post-translationally transported into mitochondria. The mitochondrial surface protein Tom70 acts at the interface of the cytosol and mitochondria. In vitro import experiments identified Tom70 as targeting receptor, particularly for hydrophobic carriers. Using in vivo methods, we revisited the Tom70 function, confirming that it supports the biogenesis of carriers and other mitochondrial proteins which considerably expands the set of Tom70-dependent mitochondrial proteins. However, the crucial activity of Tom70 is its recruitment of cytosolic chaperones to the outer membrane. Surprisingly, tethering an unrelated chaperone-binding domain onto the mitochondrial surface complements most of the defects caused by the absence of Tom70. In vivo, small single spanning inner membrane proteins can be particularly problematic when present in excess and the chaperone-binding ability of Tom70 is crucial to suppress their proteotoxicity. Thus, the predominant function of Tom70 is more that of a cytosolic co-chaperone, and its role as mitochondria-specifying receptor apparently is of less immediate relevance.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry sample preparation, strains were pregrown in S-medium containing 2% galactose at 30°C and either shifted to 37°C or kept at 30°C for 16h. 50 OD600 of cells were harvested at each time point by centrifugation (17,000 g, 3 min, 2°C), washed with prechilled water, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Cells lysates were prepared in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 5% (w/v) SDS) using a FastPrep-24 5G homogenizer (MP Biomedicals, Heidelberg, Germany) with 3 cycles of 30 s, speed 8.0 m/s, 120 s breaks, glass beads). Lysates were diluted to 2% (w/v) SDS and protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, #23225). 20 µg of each lysate were subjected to an in-solution tryptic digest using a modified version of the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) protocol {Hughes, 2014 #7472}{Hughes, 2019 #7897}. Here, lysates were added to Sera-Mag Beads (Thermo Scientific, #4515-2105-050250, 6515-2105-050250) in 10 µl 15% formic acid and 30 µl of ethanol. Binding of proteins was achieved by shaking for 15 min at room temperature. SDS was removed by 4 subsequent washes with 200 µl of 70% ethanol. Proteins were digested with 0.4 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, #V5111) in 40 µl Hepes/NaOH, pH 8.4 in the presence of 1.25 mM TCEP and 5 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, #C0267) overnight at room temperature. Beads were separated, washed with 10 µl of an aqueous solution of 2% DMSO and the combined eluates were dried down. In total three biological replicates were prepared (n=3). Each replicate included samples of all 5 strains at 30°C or 37°C (in total 10 samples per replicate). Peptides were reconstituted in 10 µl of H2O and reacted with 80 µg of TMT10plex (Thermo Scientific, #90111)22 label reagent dissolved in 4 µl of acetonitrile for 1 h at room temperature. Excess TMT reagent was quenched by the addition of 4 µl of an aqueous solution of 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma, 438227). Peptides were mixed to achieve a 1:1 ratio across all TMT-channels. Mixed peptides were desalted on home-made StageTips containing Empore C18 disks {Rappsilber, 2007 #7985}. The samples were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Scientific) as previously described. Briefly, peptides were separated using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a trapping cartridge (Precolumn; C18 PepMap 100, 5 lm, 300 lm i.d. × 5 mm, 100 A°) and an analytical column (Waters nanoEase HSS C18 T3, 75 lm × 25 cm, 1.8 lm, 100 A°). Solvent A: aqueous 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (all solvents were of LC-MS grade). Peptides were loaded on the trapping cartridge using solvent A for 3 min with a flow of 30 µl/min. Peptides were separated on the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 µl/min applying a 1 h gradient of 2 – 28% of solvent B in A, followed by an increase to 40% B. Peptides were directly analyzed in positive ion mode applying with a spray voltage of 2.3 kV and a capillary temperature of 320°C using a Nanospray-Flex ion source and a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 lm OD × 20 lm ID; 10 lm tip (New Objective). MS spectra with a mass range of 375–1.200 m/z were acquired in profile mode using a resolution of 70.000 [maximum fill time of 250 ms or a maximum of 3e6 ions (automatic gain control, AGC)]. Fragmentation was triggered for the top 10 peaks with charge 2–4 on the MS scan (data-dependent acquisition) with a 30 s dynamic exclusion window (normalized collision energy was 32). Precursors were isolated with a 0.7 m/z window and MS/MS spectra were acquired in profile mode with a resolution of 35,000 (maximum fill time of 120 ms or an AGC target of 2e5 ions).

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was done using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) {Cox, 2008 #6855;Cox, 2011 #6895;Tyanova, 2016 #7545} and a Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database obtained from Uniprot. 10plex TMT was chosen in Reporter ion MS2 quantification, up to 2 tryptic miss-cleavages were allowed, protein N-terminal acetylation and Met oxidation were specified as variable modifications and Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The “Requantify” and “Second Peptides” options were deactivated. False discovery rate was set at 1% for peptides, proteins and sites, minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids. The output files of MaxQuant were processed using the R programming language. Only proteins that were quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered for the analysis. Moreover, only proteins that were identified in at least two out of three MS runs were kept. A total of 2920 proteins passed the quality control filters. Raw signal sums were cleaned for batch effects using limma {Ritchie, 2015 #7479} and further normalized using variance stabilization normalization {Huber, 2002 #7480}. Proteins were tested for differential expression using the limma package for the indicated comparison of strains. A reference list of yeast mitochondrial proteins was obtained from {Morgenstern, 2017 #7275}. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using Fisher’s exact test. A Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was used to account for multiple testing, where this was performed {Benjamini, 1995 #7424}.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chaperones; mitochondria; outer membrane; proteostasis; tom70

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Robin Roth

### Lab Head
Dr Zuzana Storchova
Technische Universität Kaiserslautern


