### Accession
PXD026929

### Title
miR141 Proteomic profile in Ovarian Cancer

### Description
Over the last two decades, mounting evidence has demonstrated the aberrant expression of miRNAs in different human malignancies, including ovarian carcinomas. In this study, we found that miR-141 were secreted by ovarian cancer cells and transferred to the stromal cells by exosomal pathway. To clarify the mechanisms that miR-141 remodeling stromal fibroblast and reprogramming the relevant signals, miR-141 were overexpressed in WPMY-1 and their respective scrambled control were send for proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, sample processing, and trypsin digestion  Cells / tissues were suspended in the S-TRAP lysis buffer (For cell extraction, 2.5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB) or Urea lysis buffer (For tissue extraction, 8M Urea in 50mM TEAB); proteins were extracted first by bead beating using Precellys homogenization (Bertin technologies) and probe sonication (MSE Soniprep), followed by centrifugation at 15000 g at 4°C for 25 min. Supernatant fraction was collected for protein quantitation using BCA assay (Thermo Pierce) or Bradford assay (Bio-rad). Protein digestion was performed using the Suspension-trapping (STRAP) strategy (For cell samples, HaileMariam et al. 2018) or the FASP strategy (For tissue samples, Wiśniewski et al. 2009). For S-TRAP, 50 µg proteins (from each sample) were subjected to reduction and alkylation by 20 mM DTT and 40mM iodoacetamide, respectively. For FASP, 200 µg proteins (from each sample) were subjected to reduction and alkylation by 50 mM TCEP and 50mM 2-chloroacetamide, respectively. Protein digestion was performed by adding trypsin (Promega, 1:25 enzyme-to-substrate ratio) and incubating for 1.5 hr at 47 °C (for S-TRAP) or 18 hr at 37 °C (for FASP). Subsequent tryptic peptides were Speedvac dried and then desalted using C18 StageTips for LC-MS/MS analysis. Eluted peptides were analyzed with Dionex Ultimate3000 nanoRSLC system coupled to Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion Tribid Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on a commercial C18 column (75 μm i.d. × 50cm length  × 2μm particle size) coupled to a NanoTrap column (75 μm i.d. × 2cm length  × 3μm particle size) (Thermo Fisher). Separation was attained using a linear gradient of increasing buﬀer B (80% ACN and 0.1% FA) and declining buﬀer (0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. Buﬀer B was increased to 30% B in 200 min and ramped to 40% B in 15 min followed by a quick ramp to 90% B, where it was held for 10 min before a quick ramp back to 5% B, where it was held and the column was re-equilibrated. Mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with capillary temperature of 300 °C. Full MS survey scan resolution was set to 120 000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4 × 105, maximum ion injection time (IT) of 30 ms, and for a scan range of 400−1500 m/z. A data-dependent top speed method with a time interval of 3s between every survey scan was operated during which higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used. Spectra were obtained at 30000 MS2 resolution with AGC target of 4 × 105 and maximum ion injection time (IT) of 60 ms, 1.6 m/z isolation width, and normalized collisional energy of 30. Preceding precursor ions targeted for HCD were dynamically excluded of 50 s.

### Data Protocol
The high resolution, high mass accuracy MS data obtained were processed using Maxquant version 1.6.14.0, wherein data were searched using the Andromeda algorithm against Mouse UniProt FASTA database (May 2020) containing 55, 398 entries/Human UniProt FASTA database (Apr 2020) containing 74, 824 entries, using settings as below: oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (Protein N-term) were selected as dynamic modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications with minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was enabled. Confident proteins were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database, strict false-discovery rate 1% at peptide and PSM level. Proteins identified from both conditions were quantified using the peptide LFQ intensities and their ratio obtained were used for label free quantitation to calculate the fold change. Data visualization and statistical data analysis were performed by Perseus software version 1.6.13.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exosome, Lfq, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
the University of Hong Kong
Assistant Professor DEPARTMENT OF OBSTETRICS & GYNAECOLOGY  Faculty of Medicine The University of HOng Kong

### Submitter
Xueyu WANG

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. David W. CHAN
Assistant Professor DEPARTMENT OF OBSTETRICS & GYNAECOLOGY  Faculty of Medicine The University of HOng Kong


