### Accession
PXD011766

### Title
Editing the immunopeptidome of melanoma cells using a potent inhibitor of ER aminopeptidase 1

### Description
The efficacy of cancer immunotherapy, including treatment with immune-checkpoint inhibitors, is often limited by ineffective presentation of antigenic peptides that can elicit T-cell mediated anti-tumor cytotoxic responses. Therefore, manipulating antigen presentation is an emerging approach for enhancing the immunogenicity of tumors in immunotherapy settings. ER aminopeptidase 1 (ERAP1) is an intracellular enzyme that trims peptides that can bind onto MHC class I molecules (MHC-I). We hypothesized that pharmacologically inhibiting ERAP1 in cells can regulate the global cellular immunopeptidome. To test this hypothesis, we treated the A375 melanoma cell line with a recently developed potent ERAP1 inhibitor and analyzed the presented MHC-I peptide repertoire by isolating MHC-I, eluting the bound peptides and identifying them using capillary chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry. Although the inhibitor did not negatively affect overall MHC-I presence on the cell surface, it induced significant changes on the presented peptidomes, both at the qualitative and quantitative levels. Specifically, inhibitor treatment altered about half of the total 3204 identified peptides and about one third of the peptides predicted to be good ligands for MHC-I, affected length and sequence without however interfering with basic binding motifs. Strikingly, the inhibitor enhanced overall MHC-I binding affinity by reducing presentation of sub-optimal long peptides and generating many high-affinity 9-12mers, suggesting that baseline ERAP1 activity in this cell line is destructive for many potential epitopes. Our results suggest that chemical inhibition of ERAP1 is a valid approach for manipulating the immunopeptidome of cancer and autoimmunity.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of immunoaffinity columns    W6/32 antibody (2mg per column) was dialyzed in coupling buffer (NaHCO3 0.1M, NaCl 0.5M pH 8.3) overnight. To generate one 1ml bed volume of CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B (GE Healthcare 17-0430-01) 0.285g of dry beads were weighted. The Sepharose was moisturized with 1mM HCl for 30min and then washed thoroughly with coupling buffer. The solution of the antibody was added to the beads and left for coupling overnight at 4°C. After coupling, the beads were washed with coupling buffer and then with blocking buffer (Tris-HCl 0.1M, pH 8.0). After the washes the beads were transferred to a 50ml tube with blocking buffer and were mixed for 3h at room temperature. Finally, the beads were washed with 3 cycles of acidic (CH3COONa 0.1M, NaCl 0.5M, pH 4.0) and basic (Tris-HCl 0.1M, NaCl 0.5M, pH 8.0) buffer and then with 20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl. For the pre-columns the exact same procedure was followed with the exception of the W6/32 coupling step. The columns and the pre-columns were stored at 4°C until needed.        Isolation of MHCI immunopeptidome   For the isolation of the immunopeptidome 5x108 cells per sample were used. Cells were lysed with 20ml lysis buffer (Tris-HCL pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% Igepal CA-630, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1mM EDTA pH 8.0, 1x complete EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail tablets) for 1h at 4°C. The cell lysate was cleared with ultracentrifugation at 100000g for 1h at 4°C and then loaded onto a CN-Br activated Sepharose pre-column, blocked as described above. The flow through from the pre-column was passed through W6/32 coupled beads three times and then washed with 20 bed volumes 20mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl, 20 bed volumes 20mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 400mM NaCl, 20 bed volumes 20mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl and finally with 40 bed volumes 20mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. The MHCI-peptide complexes were eluted from the immunoaffinity column with 1% TFA. The peptides were separated from the MHCI molecules using reversed phase C18 disposable spin columns (Thermo Scientific). The fraction containing the peptides was dried prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry analysis     Each sample was analyzed in a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously 67. The peptides were resolved using 7– 40% acetonitrile gradients with 0.1% formic acid for 180 min and 0.15 l/min on a 0.075 mm x 30 cm capillary column pressure-packed with Reprosil C18-Aqua (Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) as described previously 68. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s; the selected masses were fragmented from the survey scan of mass to charge ratio (m/z) 300 –1,800 atomic mass units at resolution of 70,000. MS/MS spectra were acquired starting at m/z 200 with a resolution of 17,500. The target value was set to 1x105, and the isolation window was set to 1.8 Da.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences were assigned from the MS/MS spectra using Max-Quant software (version 1.5.0.25) 69 with the Andromeda search engine 70 and the human UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 2015_07: 69,693 entries) under the following parameters: precursor ion mass and fragment mass tolerance, 20 ppm; false discovery rate, 0.01; peptide-spectrum matching FDR, 0.05; and oxidation (Met), acetyl (protein N terminus), and Gln to Pyro-Glu as variable modifications. Identifications derived from the reverse database and known contaminants were eliminated.

### Publication Abstract
The efficacy of cancer immunotherapy, including treatment with immune-checkpoint inhibitors, often is limited by ineffective presentation of antigenic peptides that elicit T-cell-mediated anti-tumor cytotoxic responses. Manipulation of antigen presentation pathways is an emerging approach for enhancing the immunogenicity of tumors in immunotherapy settings. ER aminopeptidase 1 (ERAP1) is an intracellular enzyme that trims peptides as part of the system that generates peptides for binding to MHC class I molecules (MHC-I). We hypothesized that pharmacological inhibition of ERAP1 in cells could regulate the cellular immunopeptidome. To test this hypothesis, we treated A375 melanoma cells with a recently developed potent ERAP1 inhibitor and analyzed the presented MHC-I peptide repertoire by isolating MHC-I, eluting bound peptides, and identifying them using capillary chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Although the inhibitor did not reduce cell-surface MHC-I expression, it induced qualitative and quantitative changes in the presented peptidomes. Specifically, inhibitor treatment altered presentation of about half of the total 3204 identified peptides, including about one third of the peptides predicted to bind tightly to MHC-I. Inhibitor treatment altered the length distribution of eluted peptides without change in the basic binding motifs. Surprisingly, inhibitor treatment enhanced the average predicted MHC-I binding affinity, by reducing presentation of sub-optimal long peptides and increasing presentation of many high-affinity 9-12mers, suggesting that baseline ERAP1 activity in this cell line is destructive for many potential epitopes. Our results suggest that chemical inhibition of ERAP1 may be a viable approach for manipulating the immunopeptidome of cancer.

### Keywords
Erap1, Immunopeptidome, Inhibitor

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Eilon Barnea

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology


