### Accession
PXD024432

### Title
Cryo-EM structure of the mature and infective Mayaro virus at 4.4 Å resolution reveals new features of arthritogenic alphaviruses

### Description
Characterize the glycosylation sites in E1 and E2, which are transmembrane proteins that are organized in heterodimers.

### Sample Protocol
¬¬Protein extraction and digestion. The proteins were separated in SDS-PAGE and the band containing E1 and E2 proteins was cut from the gel and submitted or not to de-N-glycosylation protocol. Fifteen micrograms of proteins were deglycosylated using 50 U Peptide-N-Glycosidase F (PNGase F, 500.000 U/mL, New England Biolabs) in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.5, 16 h at 37°C, and other 15 µg of proteins were digested using EndoH (Endoglycosidase H, 500.000 U/mL, New England Biolabs). PNGase F or Endo H digested proteins and a non-digested protein sample (15 µg) were then reduced with dithiothreitol (10 mM for 30 min), alkylated with iodoacetamide (50 mM for 30 min at room temperature, in the dark) and digested with trypsin (1 µg) for 16 h at 37°C 1. The peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid and 50% acetonitrile. The sample was dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid.   Mass spectrometry analysis. The peptide mixture (1.3 µL) was analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems) with a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were subsequently separated in a 2–90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using a PicoFrit analytical column (20 cm × ID75, 5 µm particle size, New Objective) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 65 min, in which a gradient of 35% acetonitrile is reached in 32 min. The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 2.2 kV, and the source temperature was set to 275°C. The instrument methods employed for LTQ Orbitrap Velos were set up in DDA mode. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 1e6. Resolution in the Orbitrap was set to r = 60,000, and the 5 most intense peptide ions (top 5) with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 50,000 and fragmented in higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 40%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 400 peptides, an exclusion duration of 60 s and a repetition count of 2. An activation time of 0.10 ms were used.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis of LC-MS/MS files. Peak lists (msf) were generated from the raw data files using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Sequest search engine and searched against The Human UniProt database (released January 2020, 98,510 sequences, and 38,155,965 residues) containing E1 and E2 Mayaro proteins sequences (2 sequences, 858 residues). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da) was considered a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da), deamidation (+0.984 Da), N-acetylglucosamine (+203.079 Da) and fucosylated N-acetylglucosamine (+349.333 Da) of asparagine as variable modifications, one trypsin missed cleavage and a tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. A maximum of a 1% false discovery rate was set for both the protein and peptide identification. Possible N-Glycosylation sites were considered in deamidated asparagine, or asparagine with N-acetylglucosamine or fucosylated N-acetylglucosamine, in the motif N-X-S/T/C, with X≠P.

### Publication Abstract
Mayaro virus (MAYV) is an emerging arbovirus of the Americas that may cause a debilitating arthritogenic disease. The biology of MAYV is not fully understood and largely inferred from related arthritogenic alphaviruses. Here, we present the structure of MAYV at 4.4&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution, obtained from a preparation of mature, infective virions. MAYV presents typical alphavirus features and organization. Interactions between viral proteins that lead to particle formation are described together with a hydrophobic pocket formed between E1 and E2 spike proteins and conformational epitopes specific of MAYV. We also describe MAYV glycosylation residues in E1 and E2 that may affect MXRA8 host receptor binding, and a molecular "handshake" between MAYV spikes formed by N262 glycosylation in adjacent E2 proteins. The structure of MAYV is suggestive of structural and functional complexity among alphaviruses, which may be targeted for specificity or antiviral activity.

### Keywords
Cryo-em structure; alphaviruses; mass spectrometry; glycosylation

### Affiliations
National Laboratory of Biosciences (LNBio), CNPEM, Brazil.
CNPEM

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
National Laboratory of Biosciences (LNBio), CNPEM, Brazil.


