### Accession
PXD003856

### Title
¬¬ZMYND8 co-localizes with NuRD on target genes and regulates poly-ADP-ribose dependent recruitment of GATAD2A/NuRD to sites of DNA damage

### Description
The NuRD complex is generally thought to repress transcription at both hyper- and hypomethylated regions in the genome. In addition, the complex is involved in the DNA damage response. Here, we show that ZMYND8 bridges NuRD to a number of putative DNA-binding zinc finger proteins. The ZMYND8 MYND domain directly interacts with PPPLΦ motifs in the NuRD subunit GATAD2A. Furthermore, GATAD2A and GATAD2B exclusively form homodimers and they thus define mutually exclusive NuRD subcomplexes. ZMYND8 and MBD3 share a large number of genome-wide binding sites, mostly active promoters and enhancers. Depletion of ZMYND8 does not affect NuRD occupancy genome-wide and expression of NuRD/ZMYND8 target genes in steady-state asynchronous cells. However, ZMYND8 facilitates immediate recruitment of GATAD2A/NuRD to induced sites of DNA damage in a PAR-dependent manner. These results thus show that a specific substoichiometric interaction with a NuRD subunit paralogue provides unique functionality to a distinct NuRD subcomplex.

### Sample Protocol
GFP affinity purification Nuclear extracts were derived from HeLa cells, either transiently or stably expressing the GFP-tagged constructs. We always transfected all cells to avoid side effects of PEI or ZMYND8 overexpression on gene expression. In the HeLa FRT-TO system, we likewise induced all cells with doxycycline. Nuclear extracts were prepared according to Dignam et al. (Dignam et al., 1983). GFP purifications were performed essentially as described by Baymaz et al.(Baymaz et al., 2014). Purifications for label-free quantification were always performed in triplicates. In SILAC experiments, both control and specific purifications for SILAC were performed once using heavy and once using light extract, leading to 4 purifications that are mixed and lead to two mass spec runs. Blocked agarose-beads (Chromotek) were used as a negative control for the GFP-purifications performed with GFP-trap beads (Chromotek). Incubation and wash buffers are as described before (Baymaz et al., 2014); incubation in Buffer C (300 mm NaCl, 20 mm Hepes/KOH, pH 7.9, 20% v/v glycerol, 2 mm MgCl2, 0.2 mm EDTA, complete protease inhibitors) with 0.25% NP40 and 50 ug/mL ethidium bromide. After one hour incubation, 6 washes were performed: 2 with Buffer C and 0.5% NP-40, 2 with PBS and 0.5% NP-40, and 2 with PBS. On-bead digestion was performed using Trypsin(Baymaz et al., 2014), followed by desalting of the peptides on StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Mass spectrometry Mass spectrometry measurements were performed on an easy nanoHPLC-1000 (Proxeon) operating a C18 column online with either an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, LTQ-Orbitrap QExactive or an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted from the column using a 2-hour gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 80%) and B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile). The gradient consists of two phases; a slow increase from 10 to 30 % buffer B, and a faster increase from 30 to 95% buffer B. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in top15 CID mode with an exclusion list of 30 proteins for 30 seconds. The LTQ-Orbitrap QExactive was operation mode selects top 10 intensity peaks for fragmentation. The LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent top speed mode with dynamic exclusion set at 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software package 1.5.1.0. Default settings were used, except for the below options. For SILAC experiments we used multiplicity 2 for SILAC experiments (Cox and Mann, 2008), with heavy labels Arginine10 and Lysine8. Furthermore, ‘re-quantify’was enabled. We filtered for potential contaminants and reverse hits using Perseus. The normalized forward and reverse ratios were logarithmized and significance B was calculated, after which scatterplots were made using R. For label-free quantification (LFQ) (Cox et al., 2014), MaxQuant was applied using multiplicity 1 and boxes for ‘match between runs’ and ‘iBAQ quantification’ checked. We filtered for contaminants and reverse hits using Perseus. The LFQ intensities were logarithmized and triplicates were assigned to the same group. We then filtered for 3 valid values in at least one group, assuming that specific interactors may only be identified in the triplicates of that specific purification. Missing values were imputed using a normal distribution and default settings. A two-sample t-test was performed between the control and the experiment to obtain p-values for each protein, after which volcano plots were made using R. Stoichiometry determination was performed as described in Smits et al. for the significant proteins (Smits et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
NuRD (nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylase) is a versatile multi-protein complex with roles in&#xa0;transcription regulation and the DNA damage response. Here, we show that ZMYND8 bridges NuRD to a number of putative DNA-binding zinc finger proteins. The MYND domain of ZMYND8 directly interacts with PPPL&#x3a6; motifs in the NuRD subunit GATAD2A. Both GATAD2A and GATAD2B exclusively form homodimers and define mutually exclusive NuRD subcomplexes. ZMYND8 and NuRD share a large number of genome-wide binding&#xa0;sites, mostly active promoters and enhancers. Depletion of ZMYND8 does not affect NuRD occupancy genome-wide and only slightly affects expression of NuRD/ZMYND8 target genes. In contrast, the&#xa0;MYND domain in ZMYND8 facilitates the rapid,&#xa0;poly(ADP-ribose)-dependent recruitment of GATAD2A/NuRD to sites of DNA damage to promote repair by homologous recombination. Thus, these results show that a specific substoichiometric interaction with a NuRD subunit paralogue provides unique functionality to distinct NuRD subcomplexes.

### Keywords
Zmynd8, Gfp-affinity purification, Lfq, Epigenetics, Silac, Nurd

### Affiliations
RIMLS, RU, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Molecular Biology, RIMLS, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Cornelia Spruijt

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Molecular Biology, RIMLS, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


