### Accession
PXD007239

### Title
BL6vsTLR7-/- label-free analysis

### Description
Analysis of proteins differentially regulated in the presence or absence of TLR7 (in murine C57BL/6-derived cells)

### Sample Protocol
FASP-based tryptic digest of SDS-lysed C57BL/6-derived BMMs. Samples were alkylated with idoacetamide prior to digestion and eluted peptides purified and concentrated by C18-tips. Analysed on a Thermo QExactive Plus instrument.

### Data Protocol
Data analysed with Maxquant (v1.5.2.8) using LFQ settings, searched against the Uniprot reference proteome for Mus musculus. LFQ data were analysed in Perseus (v1.5.3).

### Publication Abstract
Murine models of <i>Salmonella enterica</i> serovar Typhimurium infection are one of the commonest tools to study host-pathogen interactions during bacterial infections. Critically, the outcome of <i>S</i>. Typhimurium infection is impacted by the genetic background of the mouse strain used, with macrophages from C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice lacking the capacity to control intracellular bacterial replication. For this reason, the use of congenic strains, which mix the genetic backgrounds of naturally protected mouse strains with those of susceptible strains, has the capacity to significantly alter results and interpretation of <i>S</i>. Typhimurium infection studies. Here, we describe how macrophage knockout cell lines generated by CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing can help determine the contribution of background contaminations in the phenotypes of primary macrophages from congenic mice, on the outcome of <i>S</i>. Typhimurium infection studies. Our own experience illustrates how the CRISPR/Cas9 technology can be used to complement pre-existing knockout models, and shows that there is great merit in performing concurrent studies with both genetic models, to exclude unanticipated side-effects on host-pathogen interactions.

### Keywords
C57bl/6, Tlr7

### Affiliations
Monash University
Monash University, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Clayton, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Nathan Croft

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Purcell
Monash University, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Clayton, Victoria, Australia


