### Accession
PXD037854

### Title
A role for the Trim33 ubiquitin ligase in cellular response to replicative stress

### Description
Deregulation of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) by oncoproteins, such as transcription factor Myc,  interferes with DNA replication and is a major source of DNA damage and genomic instability. Ubiquitination is a key pathway controlling RNAPII activity via modification of RNAPII subunits or associated regulatory proteins. We uncover a mechanism for genome maintenance by ubiquitin ligase Trim33 and transcription factor E2f4. We show that Trim33 promotes E2f4 protein turnover, restricting interactions of E2f4 with chromatin and with the Recql DNA helicase. Replicative stress blunts Trim33-dependent regulation, which stimulates E2f4 and Recql recruitment to chromatin and facilitates recovery of DNA replication. Deletion of Trim33 triggers chronic recruitment of Recql to chromatin and accelerates DNA replication under stress, accompanied by compromised DDR signaling and DNA repair. Depletion of Trim33 in Myc-overexpressing cells leads to accumulation of replication-associated DNA damage and delays Myc-driven tumorigenesis. We propose that the Trim33-E2f4-Recql axis provides a mechanism to control DNA replication at transcriptionally active chromatin to maintain genome integrity.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Ultimate3000 RSLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer as described before with minor modifications (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (Reference: DOI https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-14224-9 ). Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a µPAC Trapping column with pillar diameter 5µm, inter pillar distance 2.5µm, pillar length/bed depth 18µm, external porosity 9%, bed channel width of 2mm and a length of 10 mm, pillar are superficially porous with a porous shell thickness of 300nm and pore sizes in the order of 100 to 200 Å at a flowrate 10µl/min nano-trap column (300μm i.d. × 5mm precolumn, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5μm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC grade water. Peptides were eluted and separated on the PharmaFluidics µPAC nano-LC column – 50 cm µPAC C18 with a pillar diameter of 5µm, inter pillar distance 2.5µm, pillar length/bed depth 18µm, external porosity 59%, bed channel width 315µm and a bad length 50cm, pillar are superficially porous with a porous shell thickness of 300nm and pore sizes in the order of 100 to 200 Å analytical column (75μm i.d. × 25cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2μm, 100Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300nl/minute. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B, the total gradient run was 120 min. MS parameters were as follows: for full MS spectra, the scan range was 335–1,500 with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z=200. MS/MS acquisition was performed in top speed mode with 3 seconds cycle time. The maximum injection time was 50ms. The AGC target was set to 400,000, and the isolation window was 1.6 m/z. Positive Ions with charge states 2-7 were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 seconds and the lock mass option was activated and set to a background signal with a mass of 445.12002

### Data Protocol
MS Data analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software (DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2016.136) (version 1.6.17.0). Trypsin was selected as the digesting enzyme with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine and GlyGly on the lysine were specified as variable modifications. The data were analyzed using the Label Free Qantification (LFQ) method. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 5ppm. For peptide and protein identification the mouse subset of the SwissProt database (Release 2020_10) was used, and contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 1 and a minimum length of 6 amino acids was tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for LFQ quantification. The match between run option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. For Maxquant identification search, protein and peptide spectral match FDR were set to a minimum of  0.01, and proteins were only accepted to be quantified if they were identified in at least 2 replicates out of 3 biological replicates for each baits group.  The statistical analysis including LFQ ratio, and one sided significance A test  calculation and  to identify putative interactors of bait proteins was done using the Perseus suite software (DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3901) (version 1.6.15.0). Statistical evaluation was performed using the software Perseus (version 1.6.15.0) from MaxQuant. After removing potential contaminants and normalization of LFQ intensities using log2(LFQ), only hits with at least two out of three valid detectable signals were referred to further analysis. Missing values were replaced by 1 and median LFQ intensities were divided by the control, resulting in the so-called fold change. The significance of the hits was assessed using a left-sided statistical test ‘Significance A’ with a p-value of 0.05 to identify putative interactors of each bait.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap. ap-ms. lc-ms. ubiquitination. trim33. e2f4. stress response

### Affiliations
Senior Scientist Project manager Core Facility for Medical Bioanalytics Proteomics Platform Tübingen (PxP) Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 7 D-72076 Tuebingen. Germany.
Medical Bioanalytics, University Clinic Tuebingen

### Submitter
Mohamed Ali Jarboui

### Lab Head
Dr Mohamed Ali Jarboui
Senior Scientist Project manager Core Facility for Medical Bioanalytics Proteomics Platform Tübingen (PxP) Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 7 D-72076 Tuebingen. Germany.


