### Accession
PXD038521

### Title
Kansl2 dependent acetylome study in primary Kansl2 (fl/fl) murine embryonic fibroblasts

### Description
As one of the most important post-translational protein modifications, lysine acetylation is catalyzed by lysine acetyltransferases (KATs), which catalyze the covalent attachment of an acetyl group to the N epsilon–residue of lysine. The histone acetyltransferase MOF, which represents the main histone H4 lysine-16 specific acetyltransferase, is the KAT subunit of two mutually exclusive multiprotein complexes in metazoa, namely the MSL (male-specific lethal) and the NSL (non-specific lethal) complex. Depletion of both, MOF and the NSL complex subunit Kansl2 result in selective changes of the cellular acetylome. As a consequence, modulation of nuclear lamin lysine acetylations correlate with profound changes in nuclear morphology, like micronuclei formation.

### Sample Protocol
The cellular pellet of SILAC-labeled control and Kansl2(-/-) MEFs was collected in urea buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 8 M urea, 4 mM dithiothreitol), briefly sonicated and centrifuged at 20,000g for 15 min (room temperature). Labelled samples were mixed 1:1 and incubated for 20 min in the dark (room temperature with iodoacetamide (10 mM)). Protein digestion was started with LysC endoproteinase (Wako) (total protein/enzyme ratio = 100:1) for 3 h (room temperature) followed by dilution with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and a second digestion step with trypsin (Promega) overnight (room temperature) (total protein/enzyme ratio = 50:1). The next day, digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1% final concentration and peptides were subjected to SepPak C18 purification. SepPak cartridges (WAT054960, 50 mg sorbent, Vac tC18 1 cc) were conditioned with 1.0 ml methanol and washed twice with 1.0 ml neat acetonitrile, equilibrated with 1 × 1.0 ml 0.1% TFA/70% acetonitrile followed by two washes with 1.0 ml 0.1% TFA, and subsequently peptide solution was loaded. The cartridge was washed twice with 1.0 ml 0.5% acetic acid. The peptides were eluted with 3 different acetonitrile fractions (in MilliQ water), 20%, 45% and 80%, and subsequently snap frozen on dry ice for 2 h to overnight. Peptides were lyophilized for a minimum of 2 d. Tryptic peptides were reconstituted in anti-acetyl (lysine) immunoprecipitation binding buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM sodium chloride). The solution was centrifuged at 10,000xg for 5 min (4 °C) and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. One percent of the total solution was stored (INPUT) and the rest was incubated with anti-acetyl (lysine) antibody beads for 12–16 h under rotation (4 °C). Beads were washed four times with anti-acetyl (lysine) immunoprecipitation binding buffer at 2,000g for 30 s followed by 2 washes with MilliQ water. The peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA and subjected to StageTip clean-up. After peptide elution from anti acetyl(K) beads, samples were desalted on C18 Stop And Go Extraction tips. StageTip purification was conducted using two layers of 1.0 x 1.0mm C18 Empore Disks (3M). Prior to peptide sample loading, StageTips were conditioned with 80 μl of neat methanol, washed with 50 μl of buffer B* (80% acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA) and equilibrated with 100 μl of buffer A* (0.1 % TFA). Peptide samples were diluted 1:1 with buffer A* and loaded onto StageTips. Flow-through after this step was loaded onto the same StageTips once again. Next, StageTip columns were washed twice with 200 μl of buffer A*. Peptides were eluted with 50 μl of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) directly to a 96-well plate and vaporized in a vacuum concentrator to a final volume of 2 μl. Finally, 6 μl of 0.1% formic acid was added to reach a final volume of 8 μl prior loading of the samples onto the liquid chromatography nano-column. Digested and desalted peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using nanoflow UHPLC (Easy nLC1200, Thermo Scientific) coupled with a QExactive or QExactive Plus hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo nanoflex). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm long, 75 μm I.D. analytical column filled in-house with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Reprosil Pur-120 C18 AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) at a flow rate of 600 nl/min. Elution profile was individually adjusted to each IP fraction. For all samples the elution was preceded with a 5 minute column equilibration (5 % buffer A) followed by a 150 minutes long peptide separation segment at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Each segment started with a buffer containing 5 % less acetonitrile than it was used to initially prepare (C18 SepPak) the particular IP fraction (ACN-20 %, ACN-45 and ACN-80 %) and continued to linearly increase until to a buffer mixture contained 5 % more acetonitrile than it was used to prepare the particular IP fraction. Elution was completed with 25 minutes of column wash (80 % buffer B) for all fractions. The MS instrument was operated in positive mode, employing data-dependent acquisition of fragmentation spectra of multiple-charged peptides for their identification. Each instrument cycle consisted of a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 at 400 m/z (AGC target 3E6, maximum injection time 50 ms) followed by up to 10 data-dependent MS2 spectra at a resolution of 35,000 (AGC target 2E5, maximum injection time 120 ms, isolation window 1.6 a.m.u.). To prevent resequencing dynamic exclusion of already analyzed ions was set to an interval of 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.3) was used for raw file peak extraction and protein identification. Integrated Andromeda database search engine used Mouse UniprotKB protein sequence database (January 2017 - 83,962 entries) modified by addition of common protein contaminant sequences. Multiplicity “2” was chosen with no labels for light channel, and Lys8/Arg10 for heavy channel quantification. Search parameters for peptides included trypsin as cleaving enzyme with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages, minimum 7 amino acids per peptide, 4.5 ppm MS peptide mass tolerance and 20 ppm MS/MS tolerance. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while acetylation at the protein N-terminus and at lysine residues, deamidation of asparagine or glutamine, monomethylation of lysine and arginine as well as oxidation of methionine were set as variable modification. Peptide and protein False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to a maximum of 0.01 using the target-decoy database search strategy. Additionally, “match between runs” was used with a matching time window of 1 min and alignment time window of 20 minutes. Protein ratios were calculated only for those proteins that possessed at least two quantifiable SILAC pairs. The final results exclusively employed the ACN-45% and ACN-80% Waters C18 SepPak fractions.

### Publication Abstract
While nuclear lamina abnormalities are hallmarks of human diseases, their interplay with epigenetic regulators and precise epigenetic landscape remain poorly understood. Here, we show that loss of the lysine acetyltransferase MOF or its associated NSL-complex members KANSL2 or KANSL3 leads to a stochastic accumulation of nuclear abnormalities with genomic instability patterns including chromothripsis. SILAC-based MOF and KANSL2 acetylomes identified lamin A/C as an acetylation target of MOF. HDAC inhibition or acetylation-mimicking lamin A derivatives rescue nuclear abnormalities observed in MOF-deficient cells. Mechanistically, loss of lamin A/C acetylation resulted in its increased solubility, defective phosphorylation dynamics and impaired nuclear mechanostability. We found that nuclear abnormalities include EZH2-dependent histone H3 Lys&#x2009;27 trimethylation and loss of nascent transcription. We term this altered epigenetic landscape "heterochromatin enrichment in nuclear abnormalities" (HENA). Collectively, the NSL-complex-dependent lamin A/C acetylation provides a mechanism that maintains nuclear architecture and genome integrity.

### Keywords
Kat8 regulatory nsl complex subunit 2; mef (murine embryonic fibroblast); primary inducible kansl2 knock-out;  cre-ert2; anti acetyl-lysine antibody; ptm enrichment;

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Proteomics Unit, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics

### Submitter
Gerhard Mittler

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Mittler
Proteomics Unit Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics


