### Accession
PXD045463

### Title
Locus-specific proteome decoding reveals Fpt1 as a chromatin-associated negative regulator of RNA Polymerase III assembly

### Description
Transcription of tRNA genes by RNA Polymerase III (RNAPIII) is tuned by signaling cascades. The emerging notion of differential tRNA gene regulation implies the existence of additional regulatory mechanisms. However, tRNA gene-specific regulators have not been described. Decoding the proteome of a native tRNA gene in yeast revealed reprogramming of the RNAPIII transcription machinery upon nutrient perturbation. Among the dynamic proteins, we identified Fpt1, a protein of unknown function that uniquely occupied RNAPIII regulated genes. Fpt1 binding at tRNA genes correlated with the efficiency of RNAPIII eviction upon nutrient perturbation and required the transcription factors TFIIIB and TFIIIC but not RNAPIII. In the absence of Fpt1, eviction of RNAPIII was reduced and the shutdown of ribosome biogenesis genes was impaired upon nutrient perturbation. Our findings provide support for a chromatin-associated mechanism required for RNAPIII eviction from tRNA genes and for tuning the physiological response to changing metabolic demands.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in 100 mL YEPD (YEP + 2% glucose) until mid-log phase and cultures were split in two before harvesting. Half of the culture (50 mL) was spun down by a 5-minute spin at 840 × g and the cell pellet was resuspended in 50 mL YEPgly (YEP + 2% glycerol) at 37°C, and subsequently grown for 2 hours at 37°C. Samples were harvested by a 5-minute spin at 840 × g at 4°C, and washed once with 10 mL cold PBS. Pellets were stored at -80°C until further processing. Cell pellets were resuspended in 400 µL lysis buffer (6 M guanidinium hydrochloride [GuHCl], 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 10 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris-HCl [pH = 8.5]) and lysed using zirconia silica beads (Biospec, 0.5 mm) and bead beating in 3x 1.5-minute intervals. Protein lysates were boiled for 10 minutes at 95°C. To pellet debris, lysates were spun 5 minutes at maximum speed. Protein concentration was determined with a Pierce Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After dilution to 2M GuHCl, aliquots corresponding to 200 µg of protein were digested twice (overnight and 4h) with trypsin at 37°C, enzyme/substrate ratio 1:75. Digestion was quenched by the addition of formic acid (final concentration 5%), after which the peptides were desalted on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were reconstituted in 2% formic acid. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer equipped with an EASY-NLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Samples were directly loaded onto the analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, packed in-house). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Samples were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nL/min in a 90-minute gradient, containing a 78-minute linear increase from 6% to 30% solvent B, followed by a 12-minute wash at 90% solvent B. The Exploris 480 was run in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode, with full MS resolution set to 120,000 at m/z 200, MS1 mass range was set from 350-1400, normalized AGC target was 300% and maximum IT was 45ms. DIA was performed on precursors from 400-1000 in 48 windows of 12.5 m/z with an overlap of 1 m/z. Resolution was set to 30,000 and normalized CE was 27.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by DIA-NN (version 1.8) without a spectral library and with “Deep learning” option enabled. The Swissprot Yeast database (6,727 entries, release 2023_07) was added for the library-free search. The Quantification strategy was set to Robust LC (high accuracy) and MBR option was enabled. The other settings were kept at the default values. The protein groups report from DIA-NN was used for downstream analysis in Perseus (version 2.0.10.0). Values were Log2-transformed, after which proteins were filtered for at least 75% valid values in at least one sample group. Missing values were replaced by imputation based a normal distribution using a width of 0.3 and a minimal downshift of 2.4. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a Student's t-test (minimal threshold: –log(p-value) ≥ 1.3 and [x-y] ≥ 0.5 | [x-y] ≤ -0.5).

### Publication Abstract
Transcription of tRNA genes by RNA polymerase III (RNAPIII) is tuned by signaling cascades. The emerging notion of differential tRNA gene regulation implies the existence of additional regulatory mechanisms. However, tRNA gene-specific regulators have not been described. Decoding the local chromatin proteome of a native tRNA gene in yeast revealed reprogramming of the RNAPIII transcription machinery upon nutrient perturbation. Among the dynamic proteins, we identified Fpt1, a protein of unknown function that uniquely occupied RNAPIII-regulated genes. Fpt1 binding at tRNA genes correlated with the efficiency of RNAPIII eviction upon nutrient perturbation and required the transcription factors TFIIIB and TFIIIC but not RNAPIII. In the absence of Fpt1, eviction of RNAPIII was reduced, and the shutdown of ribosome biogenesis genes was impaired upon nutrient perturbation. Our findings provide support for a chromatin-associated mechanism required for RNAPIII eviction from tRNA genes and tuning the physiological response to changing metabolic demands.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Tdna, Transcription, Trna, Rna polymerase iii, Chromatin-proteomics, Nutrient signaling

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Mass Spectrometry/Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

### Submitter
Liesbeth Hoekman

### Lab Head
Dr Onno Bleijerveld
Mass Spectrometry/Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands.


