### Accession
PXD016205

### Title
Global acetylation profiling for multiple Arabidopsis thaliana plastid N-terminal acetyltransferases

### Description
Protein acetylation is a universally conserved modification occurring on N-termini (N-Terminal acetylation, NTA). Although recent reports indicate that NTA occur frequently in plant plastids, little is known about the machinery involved in plastid acetylation and why these modifications are that frequent in this organelle. Searches for new putative N-acetyltransferase genes in Arabidopsis thaliana highlighted eight putative candidates located at plastid subcellular location. In this study, we investigated the N-acetyltransferase specificity of these enzymes using  the global acetylome profiling test (GAP test).

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cells over-expressing specific N-acetyltransferases were centrifuged at 5000 rpm 4°C and pellets frozen at -80°C. The cell pellets were resuspended in 50 mM Tris pH 8 plus 250 mM NaCl, subjected to sonication and cell debris were removed by centrifugation. This lysate (1 mg of material) was subjected to chemical acetylation of the free N-terminus amino groups with N-acetoxy-[2H3]-succinimide required for Stable Isotope Labelling Protein N-terminal Acetylation (SILProNAc) quantitation. After a desalting step, the samples were subjected to protein digestion with trypsin. Then N-terminal peptides were enriched using strong cation exchange-LC (SCX-LC) and collected every 2 min on 40 min separation gradients. The previous fractions 2-5, 6-8 and 9-11 were combined together 10 µl of each mixture were loaded on the pre-column (NS-MP-10, Nano-separation) of the Easy nLC II system (Thermo Scientific) followed by the separation on a C18 reverse phase column (Nikkyo Technos capillary column,) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min on 100 min gradient (5-35% Acetonitrile). The nano-LC was coupled to an Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific). The survey scan was acquired by Fourier-Transform MS scanning 400-2000 Da at 30,000 resolution using internal calibration (lock mass) using the Top-20 acquisition method with 20 seconds exclusion time. Each sample was acquired twice including or excluding singly charge ions for signal triggering to acquire MS/MS spectra.

### Data Protocol
SILProNAQ processing was applied to determine proteins N-terminus and N-terminus acetylation quantitation using Mascot Distiller (Ver. 2.5.1, Matrix Science) and the EnCOUNTer script (Ver. 1b7). Extraction parameters were optimized for the OrbiTrap acquisition files with a minimum S/N of 1, precursor charges considered 1-5, Corr. Thr. > 0.7 and no grouping assignments. Protein identification were performed using the Mascot identification tool against the E. coli K12 strain reference proteome subset extracted from UniProtKB (Version 112). Trypsin/P rule was used with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 10 ppm and 0.7 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine and d3-acetyl on Lys were considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, protein NTA and d3-NTA were considered as variable modifications. All data were filtered at 1% protein false discovery rate and only peptides with score higher than 30 were retained for the final data processing.

### Publication Abstract
Protein acetylation is a highly frequent protein modification. However, comparatively little is known about its enzymatic machinery. N-&#x3b1;-acetylation (NTA) and &#x3b5;-lysine acetylation (KA) are known to be catalyzed by distinct families of enzymes (NATs and KATs, respectively), although the possibility that the same GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase (GNAT) can perform both functions has been debated. Here, we discovered a new family of plastid-localized GNATs, which possess a dual specificity. All characterized GNAT family members display a number of unique features. Quantitative mass spectrometry analyses revealed that these enzymes exhibit both distinct KA and relaxed NTA specificities. Furthermore, inactivation of GNAT2 leads to significant NTA or KA decreases of several plastid proteins, while proteins of other compartments were unaffected. The data indicate that these enzymes have specific protein targets and likely display partly redundant selectivity, increasing the robustness of the acetylation process in&#xa0;vivo. In summary, this study revealed a new layer of complexity in the machinery controlling this prevalent modification and suggests that other eukaryotic GNATs may also possess these previously underappreciated broader enzymatic activities.

### Keywords
Silpronaq, Quantitative proteomics, N-terminal acetylation, N-acetylome, Acetyltransferase, Gap test

### Affiliations
CNRS
Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, Univ Paris-Sud, CNRS, AgroParisTech, GQE - Le Moulon, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy Bienvenut
Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, Univ Paris-Sud, CNRS, AgroParisTech, GQE - Le Moulon, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France


