### Accession
PXD046992

### Title
Unveiling Seasonal Adaptive Molecular Mechanisms in Marine Phytoplankton during Diel Cycles through Multiomics Integration

### Description
Earth tilted rotation and translation around the Sun produce one of the most pervasive rhythms on our planet, giving rise to seasonal variations in diel cycles. Although marine phytoplankton plays a key role on ecosystems, multiomics analysis of its response to these periodic environmental signals remains largely unexplored. The marine picoalga Ostreococcus tauri, which resides at the base of the green lineage, has been chosen as model organism due to its high abundance in marine phytoplankton and its cellular and genomic simplicity, making it the smallest free living eukaryote. Ostreococcus was subjected to different light regimes: summer long days, winter short days, constant light and constant dark conditions, to investigate these responses. Although 80% of the transcriptome presented diel rhythmicity, less than 5% maintained oscillations under constant conditions. A drastic reduction in proteome rhythmicity was observed with 55% of the proteins oscillating. Seasonal specific rhythms were found for key physiological processes such as cell cycle, photosynthesis, carotenoid biosynthesis, starch accumulation and nitrate assimilation. In this study, a global orchestration between transcriptome, proteome and physiological dynamics was characterised identifying specific seasonal temporal offsets between peaks in transcripts, proteins, and physiological responses.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection was performed for three consecutive days under summer long day and winter short day conditions every 4 hours. For cell disruption, 1 mL of TRIsureTM, 100 μL of acid washed glass beads (0.25–0.3 mm diameter) and 40 μL of Protein Inhibitor Cocktail, PIC (25x) were added onto frozen pellets, followed by 3 disruption cycles (60 s agitation – 60 s incubation on ice) using a Mini-Beadbeater (BioSpec Products). Proteins were extracted using TRIsureTM Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting proteins pellets were resuspended with 2mL of 0.3 M guanidine solution in 95% EtOH using 10 sonication cycles (30 s sonication - 30 s of incubating at 4 ºC) and then centrifuged at 4 ºC during 5 min at 8000 x g. This washing process was repeated twice, followed by two additional washes using 90% EtOH. The final pellets were resuspended in NH4HCO3 50 mM/0.2% Rapidgest (Waters) and total proteins were quantified using a Qubit device. For each sample, 50 μg of proteins were incubated with dithiothreitol (DTT, final concentration 4.5 mM) for 30 min at 60 ºC. Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated for 30 min, under total darkness at room temperature. An overnight trypsin treatment was done at 37 ºC in a 1:40 trypsin:protein. Subsequently, formic acid was added and incubated at 37ºC for 1h. Finally, 2% acetonitrile (v/v) were added to reach a concentration of the digested sample of approximately 0.5 μg of protein/μL.  We utilized a label free quantification platform that employs independent data acquisition (DIA) called SWATH-MS (Sequential Windowed Acquisition of all THeoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS)71⁠ using a time-of-flight TOF triple quadrupole hybrid mass spectrometer MS (5600 plus, Sciex) equipped with a nano electrospray source coupled to a nanoHPLC Eksigent model 425. The Sciex software Analyst TF 1.7 was used for the equipment control and data acquisition. Peptides were first loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 100 µm id × 20 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) under isocratical order in 0.1 % formic acid/2% acetonitrile (v/v) at a flow rate of 3 μL/min for 10 min. Subsequently, they were eluted on a reversed-phase analytical column, Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm id × 250 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, coupled to a PicoTip emitter (F360-20-10-N-20_C12 from New Objective). Formic acid 0.1 % (v/v) was used as solvent A and 2% acetonitrile with formic acid 0.1 % (v/v) as solvent B. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5-35 % (v/v) of solvent B in 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The source voltage was selected at 2600 V and the temperature was maintained at 100 ºC. Gas 1 was selected at 20 PSI, gas 2 at zero, and curtain gas at 25 PSI.

### Data Protocol
For proteins identification, a TOF-MS with a scan window of 400-1250 m/z (accumulation time of 250 ms) was used followed by 50 MS/MS with a scan window of 230-1500 m/z (accumulation time of 65 ms) and with a cycle time of 2574 s.  Spectral libraries for LD and SD conditions were constructed by making one run with a mixture of the biological replicates corresponding to each time point. ProteinPilot v5.0.1 software (Sciex) was used to identify the proteins in the library. A pooled search of all runs was performed. The parameters of the Paragon method were: trypsin as enzyme and iodoacetamide as cysteine alkylating agent. The Ostreococcus tauri annotated proteome v3.0 file from https://phycocosm.jgi.doe.gov/Ostta4221_3/Ostta4221_3.home.html linked to a Sciex Contaminants database were used in library construction. A false positive analysis (FDR) was performed and those with FDR < 0.01 were considered. For each sample, the equivalent of 1 µg of digested protein was injected into each run. Previously, the equipment was self-calibrated using a standard, MS synthetic peptide calibration kit from Sciex, to control sensitivity and chromatographic conditions. Protein identification and quantification were performed using SWATH runs with 60 ms of accumulation time and 3.7s of cycle time. Three technical replicates for each one of the three biological replicates were analysed resulting in 9 replicates per time point.  The generated libraries (1% FDR) were analysed using the Sciex software PeaKView 2.2 with the microapp SWATH 2.0, together with the data obtained from the SWATH runs. Using this software, the chromatographic traces of the ions were extracted and dumped into the Marker view 1.2.1.1 program where the list of identified proteins with their corresponding areas were generated. The parameters for extraction of ions and areas were: 10 peptides per protein, 7 transitions of each peptide, threshold of confidence of the peptides set at 90 and FDR 1%. The software NormalyzerDE was used to performed Quantile normalization. Data were imputed with mean imputation method between the nine technical and biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Marine phytoplankton, Ostreococcus, Multiomics, Diel cycles, Diurnal cycles

### Affiliations
Institute for Plant Biochemistry and Photosynthesis Department of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence University of Seville  Spain
Dpt Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence
Institute for Plant Biochemistry and Photosynthesis
Universidad de Sevilla

### Submitter
Francisco J. Romero-Campero

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco J. Romero-Campero
Institute for Plant Biochemistry and Photosynthesis Department of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence University of Seville  Spain


