### Accession
PXD029391

### Title
Hidden in plain sight; challenges in proteomics detection of small ORF-encoded polypeptides.

### Description
Genomic studies of bacteria have long pointed towards widespread prevalence of small open reading frames (sORFs) encoding for short proteins, less than 100 amino acids in length. Despite the mounting genomic evidence of their robust expression, little progress has been made in their mass spectrometry-based validation. Various blanket   statements have been used to explain this discrepancy with the potentially low expression levels and protein instability being put forward most often. In this study we provide the first systemic investigation of the challenging nature of proteomic detection of such small proteins. A panel of physiochemical properties alongside recently developed mass spectrometry detectability metrics is interrogated to provide the first evidence-based study of SEP detectability. Moreover, a large scale proteomics and genomics compendium of proteins produced by Salmonella Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium), a model human pathogen, across a panel of growth conditions is presented and used to further support our in silico analysis. This integrative riboproteogenomic   approach is used to provide a data-driven census of small proteins expressed by S. Typhimurium across growth phases and infection-relevant conditions. Taken together our study delineates current limitations in proteomics based validation of novel small proteins currently missing from bacterial genome annotations.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in Gu.HCl lysis buffer (4 M Gu.HCl, 50 mm NH4HCO3 (pH 7.9)) with volumes according to the O.D. values and lysed by three rounds of freeze-thaw lysis in liquid nitrogen. The lysates were sonicated (Branson probe sonifier output 4, 50% duty cycle, 2×30 s, 1 sec pulses) followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 16,100 x g (4 °C), the supernatant removed and protein concentration determined by Bradford measurement according to the manufacturer’s instructions. An aliquot equivalent of 400 µg (~2x10^9 bacteria) protein lysate was transferred to a clean tube, diluted to 2,7 mg/ml with lysis buffer, 2x diluted with HPLC grade water, and precipitated with 4× volumes of −20 °C acetone overnight. The precipitated protein material was recovered by centrifugation for 15 min at 3,500x g (4 °C), pellets washed twice with −20 °C 80% acetone, and air dried upside down for ~10 min at room temperature or until no residual acetone odor remained. Pellets were resuspended in 200 µl TFE (2,2,2-trifluoroethanol) digestion buffer (10% TFE, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) with sonication until a homogenous suspension was reached. All samples were digested overnight at 37°C using mass spec grade trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega, Madison, WI) (enzyme/substrate of 1:100 w/w) while mixing (550 rpm). Samples were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 0.5%. Samples were cleared from insoluble particulates by centrifugation for 10 min at 16,100 x g (4°C) and the supernatant transferred to clean tubes. Methionine oxidation was performed by the addition of H2O2 to reach a f.c. of 0.5% for 30’ at 30°C.  Solid phase extraction of peptides was performed using C18 reversed phase sorbent containing 100 µl pipette tips (Bond Elut OMIX 100 µl C18 tips (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The pipette tip was conditioned by aspirating the maximum pipette tip volume of water:acetonitrile, 50:50 (v/v) and the solvent discarded. After equilibration of the tip by washing 3 times with the maximum pipette tip volume in 0.1% TFA in water, 100 µl of the acidified samples (~200 µg) were dispensed and aspirated for 10 cycles for maximum binding efficiency. The tip was washed 3 times with the maximum pipette tip volume of 0.1% TFA in water:acetonitrile, 98:2 (v/v) and the bound peptides eluted in LC-MS/MS vials with the maximum pipette tip volume of 0.1% TFA in water:acetonitrile, 30:70 (v/v). The samples were vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and re-dissolved in 25 µL of 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) in 2% acetonitrile spiked with an iRT peptide mix3 and the uiguivalent of 10 µg (~10 µl) injected on the Q-exactive HF and analyzed by a 3 hrs run.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched using MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and spectra searched against the ENSEMBL database with taxonomy set to Salmonella Thyphimurium strain SL1344 (version 2015_10_27, containing 4,672 protein entries) to which potential contaminants present in the contaminants.fasta file that comes with MaxQuant were automatically added, with the following settings. Multiplicity was set to 1, indicating that no labels were used. Furthermore, we performed label-free quantitation (LFQ) with MaxQuant's standard settings. and allowed MaxQuant to perform matching between runs with a match time window of 1.2 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. As a fixed modification, methionine oxidation (to methionine-sulfoxide) was selected as all methionines were uniformly oxidized to Met-sulfoxides using hydrogen peroxide. We used the enzymatic rule of trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and the ion trap MS/MS match tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide-to-spectrum match level was set at 1% FDR with an additional minimal Andromeda score of 40 for modified peptides as these settings are most commonly used by researchers. Protein FDR was set at 1% and estimated by using the reversed search sequences. The maximal number of modifications per peptide was set to 5. For protein quantification in  the proteinGroups.txt file, we used only unique peptides and allowed all modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Genomic studies of bacteria have long pointed toward widespread prevalence of small open reading frames (sORFs) encoding for short proteins, &lt;100 amino acids in length. Despite the mounting genomic evidence of their robust expression, relatively little progress has been made in their mass spectrometry-based detection and various blanket statements have been used to explain this observed discrepancy. In this study, we provide a large-scale riboproteogenomics investigation of the challenging nature of proteomic detection of such small proteins as informed by conditional translation data. A panel of physiochemical properties alongside recently developed mass spectrometry detectability metrics was interrogated to provide a comprehensive evidence-based assessment of sORF-encoded polypeptide (SEP) detectability. Moreover, a large-scale proteomics and translatomics compendium of proteins produced by <i>Salmonella</i> Typhimurium (<i>S</i>. Typhimurium), a model human pathogen, across a panel of growth conditions is presented and used in support of our <i>in silico</i> SEP detectability analysis. This integrative approach is used to provide a data-driven census of small proteins expressed by <i>S</i>. Typhimurium across growth phases and infection-relevant conditions. Taken together, our study pinpoints current limitations in proteomics-based detection of novel small proteins currently missing from bacterial genome annotations.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Seps, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
iRIP Unit, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium
Ugent

### Submitter
Igor Fijalkowski

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
iRIP Unit, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium


