### Accession
PXD042035

### Title
Anti-methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus Peptides

### Description
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is a highly prioritized pathogen proposed by World Health Organization (WHO). It is listed to encourage researchers to search for effective antimicrobial agents. Previously, we isolated soil Brevibacillus sp. strain SPR19, which showed anti-MRSA activity. However, the active substances were still unknown. This study aimed to isolate and identify the anti-MRSA substances from this bacterium. The cell-free supernatant of SPR19 was subjected to salt precipitation, cation exchange, and re-versed-phase chromatography. Bioassay-guided fractionation was used to screen active sub-stances

### Sample Protocol
The purified peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and 1% ACN and then subjected to a high-resolution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Briefly, three µL of the sample was loaded on a C18 column under the gradient of washing solution (0.1% formic acid) and eluting solution (0.1% formic acid in ACN) at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. The high voltage (3.2 kV) at 300 C was applied to the tip of a capillary in the electrospray ion-ization source to generate the protonated peptides. De novo sequencing was used to de-termine a full-length peptide sequence. The LC-MS/MS in full scanning mode analyzed the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) between 400 and 2200 with a MS resolution of 120,000 us-ing an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1 × 106 and a maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms. Freestyle software (version 1.4) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) was used to process full scan LC-MS files, and a parameter-less peak detection (PPD) al-gorithm was applied for automated peak-tracking. The samples were repeatedly intro-duced to LC-MS/MS in the parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mode with MS2 resolution of 30,000, AGC target value of 5 × 105, maximum IT of 150 ms, and m/z isolation window of 1.4 to acquire the full ion spectrum of each identified peak in the inclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Peak Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, CA, USA) was used for peptide identi-fication. The acceptable de novo peptide sequences were achieved by filtering the av-erage local confidence (ALC) higher than 80%. The mass, pI, net charge, and hydrophobi-city of the identified peptides were predicted by HeliQuest.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Biofilm, Bacteria

### Affiliations
Mahidol University
School of Pharmacy, Walailak University, Nakhon Si Thammarat, 80161, Thailand

### Submitter
Sucheewin Krobthong

### Lab Head
Dr Apichart Atipairin
School of Pharmacy, Walailak University, Nakhon Si Thammarat, 80161, Thailand


