### Accession
PXD005128

### Title
Proteomic analysis of adipocyte insulin resistance

### Description
Insulin resistance is a major risk factor for human metabolic diseases including type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and some cancers. We analysed the  proteome analyses across in vitro and in vivo models of insulin resistance to find common features of insulin resistance and identified lower expression of enzymes within the mevalonate pathway. mitochondrial CoQ was lower in all models of insulin resistance. Specifically, the coenzyme Q (CoQ) biosynthetic proteins Coq 7 and 9 were decreased in adipose tissue from a mouse model of diet-induced obesity, and mitochondrial CoQ was lower in all models of insulin resistance. Moreover, the mitochondrial content of CoQ in adipose tissue correlated positively with insulin sensitivity in obese humans. Inhibition of CoQ biosynthesis induced insulin resistance, while replenishment of CoQ restored insulin sensitivity in cell culture models and in animals, demonstrating that loss of CoQ is both necessary and sufficient for adipocyte insulin resistance. Mechanistically, loss of CoQ increased mitochondrial peroxides. These findings place defective mitochondrial CoQ homeostasis upstream of increased mitochondrial oxidants in the induction of insulin resistance in adipocytes and highlight the CoQ biosynthetic pathway as an appealing therapeutic target to combat insulin resistance.

### Sample Protocol
3T3-L1 adipocytes. SILAC 3T3-L1 adipocytes were left untreated (insulin sensitive) or treated to induce insulin resistance (insulin resistant). SILAC mixes were made so that a SILAC doublet contained a constant untreated sample acting as a reference for each insulin resistant model. Insulin resistant samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio based on total protein concentration with an insulin sensitive control to form a SILAC doublet. Mixed lysates were centrifuged at 18,000 x g for 15 min at 4 oC to pellet insoluble material. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube (RIPA-soluble fraction). To maximise protein recovery, the insoluble pellet was dissolved in RIPA buffer containing 4% SDS, sonicated (1s x 12), and centrifuged at 18,000 x g for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube (RIPA-insoluble fraction). Following this preparation, there were two samples (RIPA-soluble and RIPA-insoluble) per SILAC doublet. Sample pH was adjusted to approximately 8 with Tris, pH 8.8 to 50 mM and reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 95 oC for 3 min and alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 20 min. Proteins were precipitated in 5 volumes of acetone at -20 oC overnight. Precipitated protein was pelleted at 15,000 x g, allowed to air dry before being resuspended in 4% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 6.8. The protein concentration of each sample was determined by BCA assay.  RIPA-soluble and RIPA-insoluble samples for each SILAC doublet were separated by SDS-PAGE on 4-20% gradient gels. Gels were stained with SyproRuby stain (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer's instructions. Each RIPA-soluble sample was divided into 11 slices, and each RIPA-insoluble sample was divided into 8 slices. Digestion with trypsin was carried out overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted with acetonitrile. Finally, peptide solutions were dried, resuspended in 1% TFA and desalted on C18 Stagetips. Peptides were loaded onto a 20 cm column with 75 µM inner diameter, packed in-house with 3 µM C18 ReproSil particles (Dr Maisch GmbH). Reversed-phase chromatography was performed on either the Dionex Ultimate 3000 or the Easy nLC II HPLC. Ionized peptides were analysed on an Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, acquiring survey scans of 1 million ions at a resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z. Three survey-scan ranges (350-1050 m/z, 850-1750 m/z and 350-1750 m/z) were utilized to enhance dynamic range. Five (for the first two mass windows) or seven (for the last mass window) of the most abundant isotope patterns from each of the survey scans with charge state ≥2  were selected with an isolation window of 2 Th, and fragmented in the HCD cell with NCE of 40. Maximum ion fill times for the MS/MS scans were 150 ms, target fill value was 4e4 ions, and ion selection thresholds were 1e4. Fragmented ions were analysed with high resolution (7500 resolution at 400 m/z) in the Orbitrap analyser. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration of 60 s and a mass window of ±7ppm. Lock-mass was enabled using 445.120025.  Adipose tissue. Epididymal adipose tissue was lysed in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.9 containing phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktails (Roche). The fat cake was removed and the supernatant precipitated with 6 volumes of acetone, overnight, -20ºC. Protein pellets were resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM TEAB, pH 7.9. 100 µg of protein was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 60 min at 25ºC and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 25ºC in the dark. The reaction was quenched with DTT and samples were digested with Lys-C at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio for 2 h at 25ºC. The mixture was diluted 5-fold with 25 mM TEAB and digested with trypsin at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio for 12 h at 30 ºC. The peptide mixture was acidified to 2% formic acid, 0.1% trifuoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were desalted using HLB-SPE cartridges, eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and dried. Peptides were loaded onto a 50 cm column with 75 µM inner diameter, packed in-house with 1.9 µM C18 ReproSil particles (Dr Maisch GmbH). Reversed-phase chromatography was performed on an Easy nLC1000 HPLC. Ionized peptides were analysed on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, acquiring survey scans of 3 million ions at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. Twenty of the most abundant isotope patterns from each of the survey scans with charge state ≥2 were selected with an isolation window of 2 Th, and fragmented in the HCD cell with NCE of 25. Maximum ion fill times for the MS/MS scans were 120 ms, target fill value was 1e5 ions with an underfill ratio of 20%. Fragmented ions were analysed with high resolution (35,000 at 400 m/z) in the Orbitrap analyser. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data processing.  For SILAC cell culture experiments, raw mass spectrometry data were processed using the MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5 using the default settings with minor changes: Oxidised Methionine (M) and Acetylation (Protein N-term) were selected as variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, as well as double SILAC labels (either Arg 0/Lys 0 and Arg 10/Lys 8 or Arg 6/Lys 4 and Arg 10/Lys 8). A maximum of two missed cleavages was permitted, 10 peaks per 100 Da, MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm, and a minimum peptide length of 6. The “matching between runs” algorithm was enabled with a time window of 2 min to transfer identifications between adjacent gel slices, only for samples analysed using the same nanospray conditions. Database searching was performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment against the mouse Uniprot proteome database, concatenated with known contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. Protein, peptide and site FDR was controlled at a maximum of 1% respectively.   For adipose tissue experiments, raw mass spectrometry data were processed using the MaxQuant software version 1.4.0.8 using the default settings with minor changes: Oxidised Methionine (M) and Acetylation (Protein N-term) were selected as variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification. A maximum of two missed cleavages was permitted, 10 peaks per 100 Da, MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm, and a minimum peptide length of 6. The “matching between runs” algorithm was enabled with a time window of 2 min to transfer identifications between adjacent samples. Database searching was performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment against the mouse Uniprot proteome database, concatenated with known contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. Protein, peptide and site FDR was controlled at a maximum of 1% respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adipocyte, Adipose tissue, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Insulin resistance, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Charles Perkins Centre, School of Life and Environmental Sciences and Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, Australia
University of Sydney

### Submitter
Daniel Fazakerley

### Lab Head
Dr David James
Charles Perkins Centre, School of Life and Environmental Sciences and Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, Australia


