### Accession
PXD015255

### Title
Human neuronal extracellular vesicles contain a transcriptional network and tetraspanin-defined subpopulations

### Description
Healthy brain function is mediated by several complementary signalling pathways, many of which are driven by extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVs are heterogeneous in both size and cargo and are constitutively released from cells into the extracellular milieu. They are subsequently trafficked to recipient cells, whereupon their entry can modify the cellular phenotype. Here, in order to further understand the functional role of EVs in neurons, we isolated EVs by size exclusion chromatography from human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons. Electron microscopy and dynamic light scattering revealed that the isolated EVs had a diameter of 30-100 nm. Transcriptomic and proteomics analyses of the EVs and neurons identified key molecules enriched in the EVs involved in cell surface interaction (integrins and collagens), internalisation pathways (clathrin- and caveolin-dependent), downstream signalling pathways (phospholipases, integrin-linked kinase and MAPKs), and long-term impacts on cellular development and maintenance. Overall, we show that key signalling networks and mechanisms are enriched in EVs isolated from human iPSC-derived neurons, and identify subpopulations of EVs defined by differential tetraspanin expression.

### Sample Protocol
Methods Cell culture The iPSC line, OX1-19 (obtained from S. Cowley, University of Oxford) was maintained on Matrigel (BD Biosciences, Wokingham, Berkshire, UK) in mTeSR1 medium (StemCell Technologies, Cambridge, UK) containing 50 U/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, Dorset, UK) in a humidified incubator at 37°C in a 5% CO2, 95% air atmosphere. Pluripotency and successful cortical neuron differentiation were confirmed using immunofluorescence microscopy with appropriate markers (pluripotency: Sox2, SSEA4, Oct4 and Nanog; mature neuron: MAP2, βIII tubulin, Tbr1 and Sat2b). The iPSCs were differentiated to cortical neurons as described previously (Shi et al., 2012), using dual-SMAD inhibition by 1 µM dorsomorphin and 10 µM SB431452 (Tocris, Bio-techne). Following successful differentiation, neural progenitor cells were re-plated on day 35 post-induction at 300,000 cells/ well onto poly-ornithine and laminin-coated (Sigma-Aldrich) 6-well polystyrene tissue culture plates (Greiner Bio One, Stonehouse, Glos, UK) and neurons cultured until day 75+ post-induction with media changes every 2-3 days. Post-induction culture medium was 1:1 DMEM F12: neurobasal medium containing B27 and N2 supplements, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 µM 2-mercaptoethanol, 25 µM insulin, 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 µg/mL streptomycin (all Life Technologies) and 0.5% non-essential amino acids (Sigma-Aldrich) at 200µl.cm-2 culture area. Minimal cell death was observed microscopically during the culture period.  EV isolation Conditioned medium from 5x106 cells was harvested by pipetting from neuronal cultures (approximately 50 ml total) and centrifuged in polypropylene tubes (300 g for 10 min, then 2000 g for 20 min at 4°C with maximum brake). Medium was then filtered through a 0.22 µm filter into a Vivaspin 20 (100kDa MWCO) centrifugal concentrator, followed by centrifugation at 3900 g (4°C, maximum brake) to reduce the volume to 0.5 ml. The concentrated medium was then added to a qEV original column (Izon Sciences, Oxford, UK) and separated by size exclusion chromatography (SEC). The first six fractions represented the void volume, with vesicles eluted in filtered phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) in subsequent fractions of 0.5 ml. Conditioned medium was stored in polypropylene tubes at -80°C and thawed at 37°C. Storage conditions were consistent for all biological repeats for each experiment type. After EV isolation, RNA/ protein cargo was isolated immediately. SEC is considered an intermediate recovery, intermediate specificity technique. Separate inductions from iPSCs to neurons were regarded as biological replicates and n=3, unless otherwise stated.  Mass spectrometry Vesicular fractions (fractions 7-9) were pooled and subjected to SDS-PAGE alongside equivalent total amounts of cellular protein. Electrophoresis was terminated once all sample had entered the resolving gel, such that proteins were present as a single band. Gel tops were stained with Coomassie Blue, destained and the protein band excised from the gel and dehydrated using acetonitrile followed by vacuum centrifugation.  Dried gel pieces were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide.  Gel pieces were then washed alternately with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile.  This was repeated, and the gel pieces dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Samples were digested with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were separated using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% FA in water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 44 min at 300 nl min-1, using a 75 mm x 250 μm i.d. 1.7 mM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters, Elstree, Herts, UK).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis. Data produced were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science UK), against the SwissProt_2018_01 database and validated using Scaffold (Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Healthy brain function is mediated by several complementary signalling pathways, many of which are driven by extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVs are heterogeneous in both size and cargo and are constitutively released from cells into the extracellular milieu. They are subsequently trafficked to recipient cells, whereupon their entry can modify the cellular phenotype. Here, in order to further analyse the mRNA and protein cargo of neuronal EVs, we isolated EVs by size exclusion chromatography from human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons. Electron microscopy and dynamic light scattering revealed that the isolated EVs had a diameter of 30-100&#xa0;nm. Transcriptomic and proteomics analyses of the EVs and neurons identified key molecules enriched in the EVs involved in cell surface interaction (integrins and collagens), internalisation pathways (clathrin- and caveolin-dependent), downstream signalling pathways (phospholipases, integrin-linked kinase and MAPKs), and long-term impacts on cellular development and maintenance. Overall, we show that key signalling networks and mechanisms are enriched in EVs isolated from human iPSC-derived neurons.

### Keywords
Human, Neuron, Ipsc, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Manchester

### Submitter
David Hicks

### Lab Head
Dr David Hicks
University of Manchester


