### Accession
PXD022036

### Title
Characterisation of the Semliki Forest Virus-host cell interactome reveals the viral capsid protein as an inhibitor of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay

### Description
Understanding the complex interactions between the viral and the host cell proteins is crucial for elucidating the mechanisms underlying successful virus replication strategies and for developing specific antiviral interventions. This project presents the first comprehensive protein-protein interaction map between the proteins of Semliki Forest Virus (SFV), a mosquito-borne member of the alphaviruses, and host cell proteins. We additionally overlay an SFV siRNA screen to assign pro- or antiviral functions to the interactors. Among the many identified cellular interactors of SFV proteins, there was an enrichment of factors involved in translation and nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). Validating these findings, we observed a general inhibition of NMD during SFV infection and demonstrated that transient expression of the SFV capsid protein was sufficient to inhibit NMD in cells.

### Sample Protocol
anti-FLAG IPs: The protein compositions of the eluates from the SFV affinity purifications were analysed by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. The eluates (20 μL) were electrophoresed in 1xMOPS running buffer about 1 cm into the 26-well NuPAGE™ gels and then stained with coomassie-blue (10 % phosphoric acid, 10 % ammonium sulfate, 0.12 % coomassie G-250, 20 % methanol) as described previously [1]. Images were taken using the gel documentation system. Rectangular segments (10 mm x 3 mm) for each lane were cut from the gels using sterile blades. The gel pieces were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin as described elsewhere [2]. The digests were analysed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS (PROXEON coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher Scientific), injecting 5 μL of the digests. Peptides were trapped on a µPrecolumn C18 PepMap100 (5μm, 100 Å, 300 μm×5mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) and separated by backflush on a C18 column (5 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm×15 cm, C18) by applying a 60-minutes gradient of 5 % acetonitrile to 40 % in water, 0.1 % formic acid, at a flow rate of 350 nL/min. The Full Scan method was set with resolution at 60,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E06 and maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. The data-dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation was applied with the following settings: resolution 15,000, AGC of 1E05, maximum ion time of 110 milliseconds, mass window 1.6 m/z, collision energy 27, under fill ratio 1%, charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, and peptide match preferred, respectively.    UPF1 IPs: The compositions of the eluates were quantified by mass spectrometry, following the same protocol as above.   [1] Candiano, G. et al. Blue silver: A very sensitive colloidal Coomassie G-250 staining for proteome analysis. Electrophoresis 25, 1327–1333 (2004). [2] K. Gunasekera, D. Wuethrich, S. Braga-Lagache, M. Heller and T. Ochsenreiter BMC Genomics, 13:556 (2012) Proteome remodeling during development from blood to insect form Trypanosoma brucei parasites quantified by SILAC and mass spectrometry, doi:10.1186/1471-2164-13-556.

### Data Protocol
anti-FLAG IPs:  Proteins in the different samples were identified and quantified with MaxQuant [1] against the human swissprot [2] database (release June 2019), in addition to custom nsP1, nsP2, nsP3-Z, nsP4, capsid and Env sequences. The following MaxQuant settings were used: separate normalisation groups for the +Rnase A and -Rnase A samples, mass deviation for precursor ions of 10 ppm for the first search, maximum peptide mass of 6000Da, match between runs activated with a matching time window of 0.7 min only allowed across replicates; cleavage rule was set to strict trypsin, allowing for 3 missed cleavages; allowed modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionines, deamination of asparagines and glutamines and acetylation of protein N-termini.   UPF1 IPs:  Samples were processed against the same sequence database as above, by Transproteomics pipeline (TPP) [3] tools. Four database search engines were used (Comet [4], Xtandem [5], MSGF [6] and Myrimatch [7], with search parameters as above. Each search was followed by the application of the PeptideProphet [8] tool; the iprophet [9] tool was then used to combine the search results, which were filtered at the false discovery rate of 0.01; furthermore, the identification was only accepted if at least two of the search engines agreed on the identification. Protein inference was performed with ProteinProphet [10]. For those protein groups accepted by a false discovery rate filter of 0.01, a Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor (NSAF) [11] was calculated based on the peptide to spectrum match count; shared peptides were accounted for by the method of [12], giving normalised spectral abundance factor (dNSAF) values.    [1] J.Cox and M.Mann, Nature Biotechnology 26 (2008), p1367-1372, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification, doi:10.1038/nbt.1511 [2] The uniprot consortium, Nucleic Acids Res. 47: D506-515 (2019), UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge, doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1049 [3] E. W. Deutsch, L. Mendoza,D. Shteynberg, T. Farrah, H. Lam, N. Tasman, Z. Sun, E. Nilsson, B. Pratt, B. Prazen, J. K. Eng, D. B. Martin, A. Nesvizhskii and R. Aebersold, Proteomics 10 (2010), p1150–1159,  A guided tour of the Trans‐Proteomic Pipeline, doi.org/10.1002/pmic.200900375 [4] J. K. Eng, M. R. Hoopmann, T. A. Jahan, J. D. Egertson, W. S. Noble and M. J. MacCoss, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 26 (2015), p1865-1874, A Deeper Look into Comet—Implementation and Features, doi.org/10.1007/s13361-015-1179-x [5] R. Craig and R. C. Beavis, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 17 (2003), p2310-2316, A method for reducing the time required to match protein sequences with tandem mass spectra, doi: 10.1002/rcm.1198  [6] S. Kim and P. A. Pevzner, Nature Communications 31 (2014), 5:5277, MS-GF+ makes progress towards a universal database search tool for proteomics, doi: 10.1038/ncomms6277  [7] D. L. Tabb, C. G. Fernando and M. C. Chambers, Journal of Proteome Research 6 (2007), p654-661, MyriMatch:  Highly Accurate Tandem Mass Spectral Peptide Identification by Multivariate Hypergeometric Analysis, doi.org/10.1021/pr0604054 [8] H. Choi, D. Ghosh and A. I. Nesvizhskii, Journal of Proteome Research 7 (2008), p286-292, Statistical Validation of Peptide Identifications in Large-Scale Proteomics Using the Target-Decoy Database Search Strategy and Flexible Mixture Modeling, doi:10.1021/pr7006818 [9] D. Shteynberg, E. W. Deutsch, H. Lam, J. K. Eng, Z. Sun, N. Tasman, L. Mendoza, R. L. Moritz and R. Aebersold, and Alexey I. Nesvizhskii, Mol Cell Proteomics 10 (2011), M111.007690, iProphet: multi-level integrative analysis of shotgun proteomic data improves peptide and protein identification rates and error estimates, doi: 10.1074/mcp.M111.007690 [10]A. I. Nesvizhskii and R. Aebersold, Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 4.10 (2005), p. 1419-1440, Interpretation of shotgun proteomic data: the protein inference problem, doi: 10.1074/mcp.R500012-MCP200   [11] B. L. Zybailov, L. Florens and M. P. Washburn, Mol. BioSyst. 3 (2007), p354–360, Quantitative shotgun proteomics using a protease with broad specificity and normalized spectral abundance factors, doi: 10.1039/b701483j [12] Y. Zhang, Z. Wen, M. Washburn and L. Florens, Anal. Chem. 82 (2010), p2272–2281, Refinements to label free proteome quantitation: how to deal with peptides shared by multiple proteins, doi: 10.1021/ac9023999

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Semliki forest virus; sfv; capsid; sirna screen; alphavirus; rna virus; nmd; virus-host protein interactions, Nonsense-mediated mrna decay

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry University of Bern Freiestrasse 3 3012 Bern Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Mühlemann
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry University of Bern Freiestrasse 3 3012 Bern Switzerland


