### Accession
PXD000380

### Title
KMH2 control treatment -  Global mass spectrometry and transcriptomics array based drug profiling provides novel insight into glucosamine induced ER stress

### Description
We investigate molecular effects of glucosamine supplements, a popular safe alternative to non-steroidal anti-inflamatory drugs for decreasing pain, inflammation and keeping joints healthy. Numerous publications state an array of different molecular effects upon glucosamine treatment. We question whether these differences resulted mainly from focusing on a specific sub proteome or because different cell lines or tissues were used in the previous studies. To address this question global MS- and transcription array-based glucosamine drug profiling were performed on lymphocyte derived cell lines. We combined global label free MS-based protein quantitation with an open search strategy to obtain the best possible proteome coverage. Our result in large part support previous findings in a variety of cell models. Glucosamine induce O-GlcNAcylation but we also observe global changes in acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation. Furthermore, we mapped novel O-GlcNAc sites, on ER lumen proteins, regulated upon glucosamine treatment which provides novel insights into the role of glucosamine in ER stress. Preprocessing of MS data: All Q-Exactive data were calibrated using polycyclodi-methylsiloxane (PCMs—outgassed material from semiconductors) present in the ambient air and Bis(2-Ethylhexyl)(Phthalate) (DEHP—from plastic)1, 2 using both MaxQuant version 1.3.0.53 and modular VEMS mVEMS4. mVEMS4 further allows alternative parent ion annotations for each MS/MS spectrum which is needed if two peptide elution profiles overlap in the m/z and retention time dimension. By allowing alternative parent ion annotation for each MS/MS spectrum, provides a space efficient data format. Furthermore these alternative parent ion annotations were taken into account during the search. Database dependent search of MS data: All data were searched with MaxQuant version 1.3.0.53 and VEMS5. Mass accuracy was set to 10 ppm for peptides and 10 mDa for peptide fragments. Four missed cleavages were specified and the database UniProtKB/TrEMBL were used including permutated protein sequences, leaving Lys and Arg in place, together with common contaminants such as human keratins, bovine serum proteins and proteases6. Fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine was included in the search parameters. In MaxQuant the following variable modifications were considered: Met-loss (UNIMOD 765), Oxidized methionine (UNIMOD 885), O-GlcNAc (HexNAc, UNIMOD 43). In VEMS a list of variable 36 modifications were considered for all data against the full protein database were performed. Protein N-terminal Met-loss is not in the list of VEMS modifications since VEMS by default always looks for N-terminal Met-loss. The modifications Phosphate-ribosylation (UNIMOD 1356), ADP ribose (UNIMOD 213), hydroxylation (UNIMOD 35) and Myristoylation (UNIMOD 45) were not frequent at a 1% FDR threshold and the search was therefore repeated excluding these modifications.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
We investigated the molecular effects of glucosamine supplements, a popular and safe alternative to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, for decreasing pain, inflammation, and maintaining healthy joints. Numerous studies have reported an array of molecular effects after glucosamine treatment. We questioned whether the differences in the effects observed in previous studies were associated with the focus on a specific subproteome or with the use of specific cell lines or tissues. To address this question, global mass spectrometry- and transcription array-based glucosamine drug profiling was performed on malignant cell lines from different stages of lymphocyte development. We combined global label-free MS-based protein quantitation with an open search for modifications to obtain the best possible proteome coverage. Our data were largely consistent with previous studies in a variety of cellular models. We mainly observed glucosamine induced O-GlcNAcylation/O-GalNAcylation (O-HexNAcylation); however, we also observed global and local changes in acetylation, methylation, and phosphorylation. For example, our data provides two additional examples of "yin-yang" between phosphorylation and O-HexNAcylation. Furthermore, we mapped novel O-HexNAc sites on GLU2B and calnexin. GLU2B and calnexin are known to be located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and involved in protein folding and quality control. The O-HexNAc sites were regulated by glucosamine treatment and correlated with the up-regulation of the ER stress marker GRP78. The occupancy of O-HexNAc on GLU2B and calnexin sites differed between the cytosolic and nuclear fractions with a higher occupancy in the cytosolic fraction. Based on our data we propose the hypothesis that O-HexNAc either inactivates calnexin and/or targets it to the cytosolic fraction. Further, we hypothesize that O-HexNAcylation induced by glucosamine treatment enhances protein trafficking.

### Keywords
Kmh2 ptms drug profilling

### Affiliations
Population genetics

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head


