### Accession
PXD009589

### Title
Proteomes of paired human cerebrospinal fluid and plasma

### Description
Shotgun proteomics using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC MS/MS) can characterize in-depth human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma proteomes. Nonetheless, association between the proteomes in each compartment has not been described to the full extent using such technology due to sample size limitations. We deployed MS-based proteomics in paired CSF and plasma samples volunteered by 120 elders with (n = 72) and without cognitive impairment (n = 48) to comprehensively examine the compartmental differences and the influence of blood-brain barrier (BBB) integrity. We further tested the hypothesis that BBB breakdown can be identified from CSF and plasma proteome alterations in non-demented elders.

### Sample Protocol
A volume of 400 µL of CSF sample was evaporated with a vacuum centrifuge. The dried CSF samples were diluted in 125 µL of depletion Buffer A (Agilent Technologies) containing 0.00965 mg·mL−1 β-lactoglobulin (LACB). A volume of 30 µL of plasma sample was diluted in 90 µL of Buffer A containing 0.0134 mg·mL−1 LACB. All samples were filtered using a 0.22 µm filter plate (Millipore). Immuno-affinity depletion was performed by removing 14 highly abundant proteins from the 100 µL filtered CSF and plasma sample solutions. Samples were depleted with multiple affinity removal system (MARS) columns (Agilent Technologies), following the manufacturer instructions and using high performance liquid chromatography (LC) systems (Thermo Scientific) equipped with HTC-PAL (CTC Analytics) fraction collectors. After immuno-depletion, samples were snap-frozen and stored at -80 °C. Buffer exchange was performed with reversed-phase (RP) cartridges mounted on a 96-hole holder and a vacuum manifold. Samples were subsequently evaporated with a vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Scientific) and stored at -80 °C. Reduction with tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, alkylation with iodoacetamide, digestion with Lys-C/trypsin (Promega), tandem mass tag (TMT) 6-plex labeling (Thermo Scientific), sample pooling, and solid-phase extraction purification (Oasis HLB (Waters) and strong cation-exchange (Phenomenex)) were performed on a 4-channels Microlab Star liquid handler (Hamilton). The pooled 6-plex TMT-labeled samples were then evaporated to dryness before storage at -80 °C. The CSF and plasma samples were dissolved in 200 µL and 500 µL H2O/CH3CN/FA 96.9/3/0.1, respectively, for RP-LC MS/MS. RP-LC MS/MS was performed with a hybrid linear ion trap-Orbitrap (LTQ-OT) Elite and an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific). Proteolytic peptides (injection of 5 µL of sample) were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 75 µm × 2 cm (C18, 3 µm, 100 Å) pre-column and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm × 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) column (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a stainless steel nanobore emitter (40 mm, OD 1/32”) mounted on a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific). The analytical separation was run for 150 min using a gradient that reached 30% of CH3CN after 140 min and 80% of CH3CN after 150 min at a flow rate of 220 nL·min−1. For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was 120000 (ion population of 1 × 106) with an m/z window from 300 to 1500. For MS/MS with higher-energy collisional dissociation at 35% of the normalized collision energy, ion population was set to 1 × 105 (isolation width of 2), with a resolution of 15000, first mass at m/z = 100, and a maximum injection time of 250 ms in the OT. A maximum of 10 (most intense) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was set for 60 s within a ± 5 ppm window. A lock mass of m/z = 445.1200 was used. Each sample was analyzed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) was used as data analysis interface. Identification was performed against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (08/12/2014 release) including the LACB sequence (20194 sequences in total). Mascot (version 2.4.2, Matrix Sciences) was used. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidated asparagine/glutamine, and 6-plex TMT-labeled peptide amino terminus (+ 229.163 Da). 6-plex TMT-labeled lysine (+ 229.163 Da) was set as fixed modifications as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, with a maximum of two potential missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment ion tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. All Mascot result files were loaded into Scaffold Q+S 4.4.1.1 (Proteome Software) to be further searched with X! Tandem (version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1), the GPM, http://thegpm.org/). Both peptide and protein FDRs were fixed at 1% maximum, with a 2 unique peptide criterion to report protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
The systems-level relationship between the proteomes of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma has not been comprehensively described so far. Recently developed shotgun proteomic workflows allow for deeper characterization of the proteomes from body fluids in much larger sample size. We deployed state-of-the-art mass spectrometry-based proteomics in paired CSF and plasma samples volunteered by 120 elders with and without cognitive impairment to comprehensively characterize and examine compartmental proteome differences and relationships between both body fluids. We further assessed the influence of blood-brain barrier (BBB) integrity and tested the hypothesis that BBB breakdown can be identified from CSF and plasma proteome alterations in nondemented elders. We quantified 790 proteins in CSF and 422 proteins in plasma, and 255 of the proteins were identified in both compartments. Pearson's statistics determined 28 proteins with associated levels between CSF and plasma. BBB integrity as defined with the CSF/serum albumin index influenced 76 CSF/plasma protein ratios. In least absolute shrinkage and selection operator models, CSF and plasma proteins improved identification of BBB impairment. In conclusion, we provide here a first comprehensive draft map of interacting human CSF and plasma proteomes, in view of their complex and dynamic compositions, and influence of the BBB.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Blood-brain barrier, Csf, Lc-ms/ms, Shotgun, Clinical proteomics, Alzheimer

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences
Proteomics Team, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Loïc Dayon

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Dayon
Proteomics Team, Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland


