### Accession
PXD020390

### Title
Functional analysis of a gene-edited mouse to gain insights into the disease mechanisms of a TITIN missense variant

### Description
Aims: Pathogenic truncating variants in the largest human protein TITIN are a leading cause of dilated cardiomyopathy. Because of the size of the gene encoding TITIN, many missense variations are identified. These are difficult to evaluate in genetic testing, as even individually rare variants are common in aggregate in normal populations. While the majority will be benign, a small subset is pathogenic, but distinction is challenging. Here, we describe the generation of a mouse model to investigate the underlying disease mechanism of a previously reported TITIN A178D missense variant identified in a family with non-compaction and dilated cardiomyopathy. Methods and Results: Heterozygous and homozygous mice carrying the TITIN A178D missense variant were characterised in vivo. Heterozygous mice had no detectable phenotype at any time point observed (up to 1 year). By contrast, homozygous mice developed dilated cardiomyopathy from 3 months. Chronic adrenergic stimulation aggravated the phenotype. Targeted transcript profiling revealed induction of the fetal gene programme and hypertrophic signalling pathways in homozygous mice, and these were confirmed at the protein level. Unsupervised proteomics identified down-regulation of TELETHONIN and FOUR-AND-A-HALF LIM DOMAIN 2, as well as the up-regulation of heat shock proteins and MYELOID LEUKEMIA FACTOR 1. Loss of TELETHONIN from the cardiac Z-disc was accompanied by proteasomal degradation; however, TELETHONIN also accumulated in the cytoplasm. In parallel, a proteo-toxic response was observed in the mice. Conclusions: We have shown that the TITIN A178D missense variant is pathogenic in homozygous mice, resulting in cardiomyopathy. We also provide evidence of the disease mechanism. Because the TITIN A178D variant abolishes binding of TELETHONIN, this leads to its abnormal cytoplasmic accumulation. Subsequent degradation of TELETHONIN by the proteasome results in proteasomal overload, and activation of a proteo-toxic response. The latter appears to be a driving factor for the cardiomyopathy observed in the mouse model.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for mass spectrometry were prepared using an S-Trap 96-well plate (Protifi LLC) following the protocol as provided by the manufacturer (for details please refer to the supplemental methods section).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analysed in PEAKS 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). PEAKS LFQ Top3 normalised values were loaded into Perseus version 1.6.6.0 and subjected to log2 transformation and median subtraction. Student’s T-Test with permutation based FDR correction was used to identify peptides differentially represented between groups. A q-value of ≤ 0.05 was considered differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Titin truncating variants are a well-established cause of cardiomyopathy; however, the role of titin missense variants is less well understood. Here we describe the generation of a mouse model to investigate the underlying disease mechanism of a previously reported titin A178D missense variant identified in a family with non-compaction and dilated cardiomyopathy. Heterozygous and homozygous mice carrying the titin A178D missense variant were characterised in vivo by echocardiography. Heterozygous mice had no detectable phenotype at any time point investigated (up to 1&#xa0;year). By contrast, homozygous mice developed dilated cardiomyopathy from 3&#xa0;months. Chronic adrenergic stimulation aggravated the phenotype. Targeted transcript profiling revealed induction of the foetal gene programme and hypertrophic signalling pathways in homozygous mice, and these were confirmed at the protein level. Unsupervised proteomics identified downregulation of telethonin and four-and-a-half LIM domain 2, as well as the upregulation of heat shock proteins and myeloid leukaemia factor 1. Loss of telethonin from the cardiac Z-disc was accompanied by proteasomal degradation; however, unfolded telethonin accumulated in the cytoplasm, leading to a proteo-toxic response in the mice.We show that the titin A178D missense variant is pathogenic in homozygous mice, resulting in cardiomyopathy. We also provide evidence of the disease mechanism: because the titin A178D variant abolishes binding of telethonin, this leads to its abnormal cytoplasmic accumulation. Subsequent degradation of telethonin by the proteasome results in proteasomal overload, and activation of a proteo-toxic response. The latter appears to be a driving factor for the cardiomyopathy observed in the mouse model.

### Keywords
Cardiomyopathy, Proteomics, Proteo-toxic response, Mouse model, Titin missense variant, Telethonin, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford Target Discovery Institute, NDMRB Oxford, OX3 7FZ
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Raphael A Heilig

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford Target Discovery Institute, NDMRB Oxford, OX3 7FZ


