### Accession
PXD018160

### Title
Plasma Protein Corona on Polystyrene Nanoparticles Facilitates their Transfer across the Human Placenta

### Description
Nanoparticles exposed to biological fluids are rapidly surrounded by proteins. It is known that this formed protein corona influences the interplay of nanoparticles with cells or tissue barriers. In this study, we report the impact of a formed human plasma protein corona on the transfer of 80 nm polystyrene (PS) nanoparticles across the human placenta. We used the human ex-vivo placental perfusion model, as it reflects the intact and physiological tissue barrier between mother and unborn. Our results show an enhanced transfer of polystyrenes, exposed to human plasma, across the placenta compared to bovine serum albumin which served as control setting. We isolated nanoparticles before and after tissue exposure and analyzed their protein corona via shotgun proteomics and LC-MS/MS. The corona profile of particles that crossed the placenta highlighted several proteins as possible drivers for elevated tissue transfer. Subsequently two distinct proteins, human albumin and immunoglobulin G, were selected and incubated with the nanoparticles to form a sole protein corona. Strikingly, the protein corona formed by albumin induced significantly the transfer of polystyrenes across the tissue as compared to corona formed by immunoglobulins.  To conclude, our study provides a comparative analysis between different formed protein coronas on nanoparticles and a corona dependent transfer behavior of polystyrenes across placental tissue. Our findings suggest that protein corona analyses of nanoparticles might help to understand better their properties at biological barriers.

### Sample Protocol
To investigate the differences of corona proteins on PS surface, 6 ml of maternal and fetal medium after 360 min tissue perfusion and 2 ml of non-perfused PS-medium pre-incubated with plasma were collected and processed. In order to remove cellular debris and un- or weakly bound proteins all samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 5000 g at 4 °C.  The supernatant was collected and immediately processed as described, except for the used centrifugal force (21000 g). The gathered pellets were stored at -80°C. LC-MS/MS analysis. Polystyrene bound corona protein samples were re-dissolved in TFE-digestion buffer (25% 2.2.2-Trifluoroethanol (TFE) in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH= 8.5) and subsequently centrifuged (15300 g, 4°C, 10 min.). Reduction and alkylation were carried out using 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 1 hour at 37 °C. Samples were diluted to 10 % TFE with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested using rLysC in a protein: enzyme ratio of 100:1 at 37 °C for 3.5 hours, followed by modified trypsin protein: enzyme ratio of 50:1 at 37 °C overnight (both enzymes from Promega, Germany). The enzymatic reaction was stopped by adding 5 % formic acid to reach 0.1 % final concentration. The resulting peptide solution was then filtered through a 10 kDa cut-off filter to remove PS and then injected into a nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) coupled to a maXis II ETD mass spectrometer (Bruker, Vienna, Austria).

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analyzed by data analysis software (Bruker Austria GmbH, Vienna, Austria), using the Sum Peak algorithm, and by MaxQuant 1.5.8.3 by searching the public Swissprot database with taxonomy homo sapiens (downloaded on 02.03.2017) and common contaminants (20233 sequences). Carbamidomethylation on Cys was entered as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 0.006 Da; product mass tolerance +/- 40 ppm; acceptance parameters for identification: 1% PSM FDR; 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR). Besides an intensity base quantitation including the match between runs feature of MaxQuant was performed requiring a minimum of 2 quantified razor and unique peptides. The software Perseus version 1.6.12.0 was used for further data processing. Intensities were log2 transformed and reduced to proteins detected in all samples of at least one sampling cohort, plasma, maternal or fetal. For missing protein values in the corresponding cohorts, intensity values were imputed. Briefly, missing values were replaced with random values taken from a shifted Gaussian distribution of all valid values (width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8 separately for each column), in order to simulate an intensity value for those low abundant protein groups. For statistical analysis, multiple t-testing corrected with Permutation-based FDR method was used to identify significant proteins between groups. To estimate the relative distribution of the significantly enriched identified proteins in the plasma coronas and the fetal coronas, relative intensity calculation was performed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human placenta, Biocorona, Plasma proteins, Nanoparticle, Transfer, Polystyrene, Dual ex vivo placental perfusion

### Affiliations
Omics Center Graz
Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Vienna University of Technology—TU Wien, Vienna, Austria;  Institute of Pathology, Diagnostic and Research Center for Molecular BioMedicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria;  Omics Center Graz, BioTechMed-Graz, Graz, Austria

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Vienna University of Technology—TU Wien, Vienna, Austria;  Institute of Pathology, Diagnostic and Research Center for Molecular BioMedicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria;  Omics Center Graz, BioTechMed-Graz, Graz, Austria


