### Accession
PXD022472

### Title
Comparative proteomics of Brucella melitensis 16M and REV1

### Description
Brucellosis is a zoonosis of the Mediterranean and Middle-East regions linked to important economic losses and reduced animal welfare. To date, no effective diagnostic and/or prophylactic measures are available for the control of brucellosis, due to the residual virulence of the bacterial strain administered for vaccinal purposes and the difficulties in distinguishing vaccinated from infected animals. To overcome these issues, studies are desired to elucidate the bacterial biology and the pathogenetic mechanisms of both the vaccinal strain and the pathogenic strains. Here, we employed a label-free shotgun proteomics to investigate the protein repertoire of the vaccinal strain B. melitensis Rev.1 and compare it with the proteome of the Brucella melitensis 16 M, one of the most common field strains isolated from ruminants. Comparative proteomics profiling underlines common and diverging traits between the two strains, providing suggestions on the potential biochemical routes responsible of the residual virulence of the vaccinal strain; whilst the diverging traits are suggestive biochemical signatures to be further investigated to provide an optimized diagnostics capable of discriminating the vaccinated from infected animals.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strains 16 M e Rev.1 were provided by the OIE Reference Laboratory for Brucellosis at the Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale di Abruzzo and Molise (IZSAM). BM 16M, a virulent Brucella melitensis biovar I reference strain, provided by the Central Veterinary Laboratory (CVL, Weybridge, England), while Rev.1 strain was obtained from the European Reference Laboratory for Brucellosis (EURL, ANSES – Maison Alfort - France). Brucella strains (5 × 106 cells each), were resuspended in 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.9 containing 6 M urea and lysed through multiple steps of centrifugation and sonication with a sonication probe at 50% amplitude and 0.5 cycle. Extracted proteins were quantified spectrophotometrically at a wavelength of 595 nm using a Bradford-based Protein assay.Protein Digestion has been performed according to the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol. Briefly, reduction (DTT 8 mM in urea buffer-8 M urea and 100 mM Tris), alkylation (IAA 50 mM in urea buffer 8 M urea and 100 mM Tris) and digestion by trypsin (final trypsin concentration of 0.01 μg/μl) have been performed on filter tubes (Nanosep centrifugal device with Omega membrane-10 K MWCO).  Label-free proteomic analysis was performed. Firstly, 300 fmol/L of digestion of Enolase from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (P00924) was added to each sample as an internal standard, and then, separation of tryptic peptides was performed on an ACQUITY MClass System (Waters Corporation). Each digested sample (0.25 μg) was loaded onto a Symmetry C18 5 _m, 180 _m _ 20 mm pre-column (Waters Corp.), and was subsequently separated by a 120-min reversed-phase gradient at 300 nL/min (linear-gradient, 2–40% ACN over 90 min) using an HSS T3 C18 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 150 mm nanoscale LC column (Waters Corp.) maintained at 40 °C. Separated peptides were analyzed using a high-definition Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters Corp) directly coupled to the chromatographic system. Differential protein abundance was evaluated using High Definition expression configuration mode (HDMSE) a data-independent acquisition (DIA) protocol where ion mobility separation (IMS) has been integrated into LC-MSE workflow. Each sample pool was run in four technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Label-free protein quantification was performed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics v4.0.6403.35451 (Waters Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne).The samples were automatically aligned according to retention time. The peak processing method was performed in profile data mode and the peptide ion detection method was set in high-resolution mode. Peptides with charges that range between +2- +7 were retained. Database search was performed using the ion accounting method against a UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Brucella melitensis biotype 1, UniProtKB UP000000419). Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.01 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. The search results were filtered to obtain a protein false discovery rate of 1%. Protein quantification was based on relative quantitation using non-conflicting peptides methods and averaging the individual intensities for every unique peptide ion for each protein and comparing the relative abundance across sample runs and between the experimental groups. Proteins were considered differentially expressed according to the following criteria: protein identified in at least three out of four runs of the same sample with a fold change of regulation >± 30%; only modulated proteins with a p-value <0.05, according to the analysis of variance (ANOVA), were considered significant

### Publication Abstract
Brucellosis caused by <i>Brucella melitensis</i> is a zoonosis frequently reported in the Mediterranean and Middle-East regions and responsible for important economic losses and reduced animal welfare. To date, current strategies applied to control or eradicate the disease relies on diagnostic tests that suffer from limited specificity in non-vaccinated animals; while prophylactic measures, when applied, use a live attenuated bacterial strain characterized by residual virulence on adult pregnant animals and difficulties in distinguishing vaccinated from infected animals. To overcome these issues, studies are desired to elucidate the bacterial biology and the pathogenetic mechanisms of both the vaccinal strain and the pathogenic strains. Proteomics has a potential in tackling issues of One-Health concern; here, we employed label-free shotgun proteomics to investigate the protein repertoire of the vaccinal strain <i>B. melitensis</i> Rev.1 and compare it with the proteome of the <i>Brucella melitensis</i> 16&#xa0;M, a reference strain representative of <i>B. melitensis</i> field strains. Comparative proteomics profiling underlines common and diverging traits between the two strains. Common features suggest the potential biochemical routes responsible for the residual virulence of the vaccinal strain, whilst the diverging traits are suggestive biochemical signatures to be further investigated to provide an optimized diagnostic capable of discriminating the vaccinated from infected animals. The data presented in this study are openly available in PRIDE data repository at https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/, reference number PXD022472.

### Keywords
Hdmse, 16m, Rev1, Label-free, Brucella melitensis

### Affiliations
University of Milan
Department of Biomedical, Surgical and Dental Sciences. University of Milan, Milan, Italy

### Submitter
alessio soggiu

### Lab Head
Dr Alessio Soggiu
Department of Biomedical, Surgical and Dental Sciences. University of Milan, Milan, Italy


