### Accession
PXD023821

### Title
Analysis of podocyte adhesome proteomes

### Description
To elucidate potential mechanisms how EPB41L5 modulates integrin adhesion complex maturation, we performed quantitative SILAC-based integrin adhesome proteomics. For MS analysis of the podocyte adhesome, EPB41L5 or Luciferase (as negative control) was transient expressed in SILAC labeled podocytes by nucleofection (Amaxa Nucleofector, Lonza, Switzerland). Podocytes were seeded on cell culture dishes for 24 hours. Isolation of integrin adhesion complexes from podocytes was performed prior LC-MSMS analysis.In a second set of experiments adhesion complexes of collagen IV and fibronectin coated dishes were purified and analysed by LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were separated by SDS-PAGE and gel lanes were cut in 5 slices. Proteins were in gel digested with LysC (instead of trypsin), peptides eluted and analysed by data dependent LC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 and searched against a full length human uniprot database, version July 2012.

### Publication Abstract
The integrity of the kidney filtration barrier essentially relies on the balanced interplay of podocytes and the glomerular basement membrane (GBM). Here, we show by analysis of in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo models that a loss of the podocyte-specific FERM-domain protein EPB41L5 results in impaired extracellular matrix (ECM) assembly. By using quantitative proteomics analysis of the secretome and matrisome, we demonstrate a shift in ECM composition characterized by diminished deposition of core GBM components, such as LAMA5. Integrin adhesome proteomics reveals that EPB41L5 recruits PDLIM5 and ACTN4 to integrin adhesion complexes (IACs). Consecutively, EPB41L5 knockout podocytes show insufficient maturation of integrin adhesion sites, which translates into impaired force transmission and ECM assembly. These observations build the framework for a model in which EPB41L5 functions as a cell-type-specific regulator of the podocyte adhesome and controls a localized adaptive module in order to prevent podocyte detachment and thereby ensures GBM integrity.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Adhesome, Ecm

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631


