### Accession
PXD013509

### Title
System OMICs analysis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Beijing B0/W148 cluster

### Description
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Beijing B0/W148 is one of the most widely distributed clusters in the Russian Federation and in some countries of the former Soviet Union. Recent studies have improved our understanding of the reasons for the “success” of the cluster but this area remains incompletely studied. Here, we focused on the system omics analysis of the RUS_B0 strain belonging to the Beijing B0/W148 cluster. Completed genome sequence of RUS_B0 (CP020093.1) and a collection of WGS for 200 cluster strains from the NCBI were used to describe the main genetic features of the population, as well as the level of resistance. In turn, proteome and transcriptome studies allowed to confirm the genomic data and to identify a number of finds that have not previously been described. Our results demonstrate that expression of the whiB6 which contains cluster-specific polymorphism (T4338371G) increased by more than 50 times in RUS_B0. Additionally, the level of ethA transcripts in RUS_B0 is increased almost 30 times compared to the H37Rv. Start sites for 10 genes were corrected based on the combination of proteomic and transcriptomic data. Additionally, based on the omics approach, we identified 5 new genes.

### Sample Protocol
The bacterial cells were suspended in 50 μL lysozyme and 100 μL 100mМ TrisHСl pH 7.6 with 3 µL of Protease inhibitor Mix (GE Healthcare).  Cells disrupted on a bead-beating homogenizer (MPBio, FastPrep-24) with 0.5-mm silica-zirconium beads, time at 4 min followed by 5 min on ice. To reduce disulfide bonds and to block cysteine residues the collected suspension was added by SDS to a final concentration of 10 % and DTT (BioRad) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated at 60 °C for 30 min.  The sample was by centrifugation at 13,000 g, 4 °С for 5 min. Protein concentration was measured by the Bradford method using the Bradford Protein Assay Kit (BioRad). Proteins were then separated on a 7.5% 1D SDS-PAGE on a PROTEAN II (Bio-Rad) at 20 mA for 20 min and 40 mA overnight. The gel was stained with Colloidal blue. Proteins were excised in 1x1 mm pieces that were destined in 10mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 56oC, followed by a second wash in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% (v/v) ACN (1-2 h, 50oC). Proteolytic digestion was performed with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) in a 1:50 enzyme:protein (w/w) ratio at 37 °C overnight (approx 16 h). The cleavage was stopped by adding 5% TFA and peptides were extracted in a solution containing 50% ACN and 5% TFA (2v/v) followed by extraction in 75% ACN and 5% TFA (2v/v). Peptides were concentrated by speedvac and dissolved in 20 μL 1% acetic acid. The supernatant peptides were removed and used for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. Total run time including 15 min to reach 99 % buffer B, flushing 10 min with 99 % buffer B and 15 min re-equilibration to buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) amounted 65 mins. Further analysis was performed with a Q Exacitve HF mass spectrometer (Q ExactiveTM HF Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM Mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (MS) and 15,000 (MS/MS) in a range of 400-1,500 m/z (MS) and 200-2,000 m/z (MS/MS). An isolation threshold of 67,000 was determined for precursors selection and up to top 25 precursors were chosen for fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 25 V and 100 ms activation time. Precursors with a charged state of +1 were rejected and all measured precursors were excluded from measurement for 20 s. 2-4 technical runs were measured for each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Beijing B0/W148 is one of the most widely distributed clusters in the Russian Federation and in some countries of the former Soviet Union. Recent studies have improved our understanding of the reasons for the "success" of the cluster but this area remains incompletely studied. Here, we focused on the system omics analysis of the RUS_B0 strain belonging to the Beijing B0/W148 cluster. Completed genome sequence of RUS_B0 (CP020093.1) and a collection of WGS for 394 cluster strains were used to describe the main genetic features of the population. In turn, proteome and transcriptome studies allowed to confirm the genomic data and to identify a number of finds that have not previously been described. Our results demonstrated that expression of the whiB6 which contains cluster-specific polymorphism (a151c) increased almost 40 times in RUS_B0. Additionally, the level of ethA transcripts in RUS_B0 was increased by more than 7 times compared to the H37Rv. Start sites for 10 genes were corrected based on the combination of proteomic and transcriptomic data. Additionally, based on the omics approach, we identified 5 new genes. In summary, our analysis allowed us to summarize the available results and also to obtain fundamentally new data.

### Keywords
Label-free proteomic analysis, Proteogenomics, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Proteomics, Beijing b0/w148

### Affiliations
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
Laboratory of molecular genetics of microorganisms, Federal research and clinical center of physical-chemical medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Alexander Smolyakov

### Lab Head
Dr Shitikov E.A.
Laboratory of molecular genetics of microorganisms, Federal research and clinical center of physical-chemical medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, Russia


