### Accession
PXD028087

### Title
Dnj4HA AP-MS in Cryptococcus neoformans

### Description
Proteins which act as histone chaperones ensure genomic integrity during routine processes such as DNA replication and transcription as well as DNA repair upon damage. Herein, we identify a nuclear J domain protein, Dnj4, which interacts with histones 3 and 4 as well as Hsp71 as demonstrated in an AP-MS experiment suggesting that it integrates the heat shock chaperone machinery into histone chaperoning. In support of this, a deletion mutant lacking DNJ4 had higher levels of DNA damage than the wild type or complemented strains and was hypersensitive to DNA damaging agents. The transcriptional response to DNA damage in a mutant lacking DNJ4 was impaired. Genes related to DNA damage and iron homeostasis functions were up-regulated in the wild type strain in response to hydroxyurea treatment, however their up-regulation was either absent or reduced in a dnj4∆ mutant. Accordingly, excess iron rescued the mutant’s growth in response to hydroxyurea treatment. Iron homeostasis is crucial for virulence in Cryptococcus neoformans, however Dnj4 was found to be dispensable for virulence in a mouse model of cryptococcosis. Finally, we confirmed a conserved role of Dnj4 in histone chaperoning by expressing it in S. cerevisiae and showing that it disrupted endogenous histone chaperoning. Altogether, this study highlights the importance of a JDP co-chaperone in histone chaperoning in C. neoformans.

### Sample Protocol
Three overnight cultures per group (wild type and Dnj4HA tagged) were diluted 1 in 10 in fresh YPD and grown in a final volume of 50 ml for 6 hours at 30°C with shaking. Cell pellets were collected by centrifigution, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and mechanically disrupted in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. Protein extracts were obtained by resuspending cell debris in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, and 1X EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), vortexing, and water bath sonication of 5 X 30 s cycles with 1 min in between cycles at 4°C using a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode). Protein concentration was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay kit following manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher). 1.5 mg of protein lysate were added to 25 μL of Pierce anti-HA magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher). Immunoprecipitation was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions using a basic elution. Eluted proteins were chloroform methanol precipitated for further processing and eventual MS analysis. Precipitated proteins were digested in RapiGest (Waters) following the manufacturer’s in-solution digest protocol using 0.1% RapiGest. The solution containing the peptides was acidified to pH < 2 using trifluoroacetic acid and the Rapigest surfactant was precipitated out prior to desalting using STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips with C18 medium. The resulting peptides were resuspended in sample buffer containing 98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid. All solvents for STAGE tipping were prepared using Optima LC-MS quality reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 2 µL of each sample were subjected to reverse phase liquid chromatography for peptide separation using an RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column (100 µm x 2 cm, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 20 µL/min for 3 min. Analytical separation of peptides was performed on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 µm x 50 cm, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The solvent composition was gradually changed within 94 min from 96 % solvent A (0.1 % formic acid) and 4 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) to 10 % solvent B within 2 minutes, to 30 % solvent B within the next 58 min, to 45% solvent B within the following 22 min, and to 90 % solvent B within the last 12 min of the gradient. All solvents and acids were Optima grade for LC-MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluting peptides were on-line ionized by nano-electrospray (nESI) using the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Scientific) at 1.5 kV (liquid junction) and transferred into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full scans in a mass range of 300 to 1650 m/z were recorded at a resolution of 30,000 followed by data-dependent top 10 HCD fragmentation at a resolution of 15,000 (dynamic exclusion enabled). LC-MS method programming and data acquisition was performed with the XCalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.016 was used for protein identification and label-free quantification by searching MS/MS2 data against the Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii H99 protein database (UP000010091, downloaded October 19, 2018). Default settings of MaxQuant were used with the addition of label free quantification selected in group specific parameters. The results of the MaxQuant analysis were further processed and statistically analyzed using Perseus 1.6.0.7. Two groups were used for analysis, the first was the wild type (LH_Q_05, L_Q_09, LH_Q_13) and the second was the Dnj4HA (LH_Q_04, LH_Q_08, LH_Q_12). Statistical significance of the enriched proteins in the tagged strain was evaluated using a one-sided t-test with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05 in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cryptococcus neoformans, Co-chaperone, J domain protein, Histone

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Canada

### Submitter
Linda Horianopoulos

### Lab Head
Dr James W. Kronstad
Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Canada


