### Accession
PXD028566

### Title
Dissection of TET1 catalytic and non-catalytic functions reveals DNA demethylation independent gene and ERV regulation

### Description
Surveillance of DNA methylation in mammals is critical for genome stability and epigenetic regulation. The discovery of the ten-eleven translocation (TET) proteins catalyzing the oxidation from 5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), 5-formylcytosine (5fC), and 5-carboxylcytosine (5caC) revolutionized the understanding of DNA methylation dynamics. Interestingly, in recent years evidence accumulated that TET1 also harbours non-catalytic functions. However, the role and mechanism of TET1 DNA demethylation independent functions still remain poorly understood. Here, we use genome engineering and quantitative multi-omics approaches to dissect the non-catalytic role of TET1. Strikingly, we find that the majority of transcriptional regulation depends on non-catalytic functions of TET1.  To gain insights into possible mechanisms by which TET1 regulates transcription independent of DNA demethylation, we asked if the loss of TET1 is accompanied by changes in the histone modificaiton landscape. To this end, we compared the relative abundances of core histone modifications between Tet1 KO, Tet1 CM and WT mESCs using quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis. Surprisingly, we observed a profound global reduction of pH4Kac and H4K20me3 as well as H3K27me3 in Tet1 KO mESC. Vice versa, the monomethylation states of the latter two residues, H3K27me1 and H4K20me1 were significantly increased in Tet1 KO. Similar to the results from the transcriptome data, most of these changes were specific to Tet1 KO cells.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were acid extracted as described previously (85). In brief, mESCs were lysed in 10X cell pellet volume of ice-cold hypotonic lysis buffer (15 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 60 mM KCl, 11 mM CaCl2, 5 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 250 mM sucrose, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 10 mM sodium butyrate) supplemented with 0.1% NP-40 on ice for 5 min. Nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation (1000g, 2 min, 4○C) and washed twice in ice-cold hypotonic lysis buffer w/o NP-40. Nuclei were resuspended in 5X nuclei pellet volumes of ice-cold 0.2M sulfuric acid and mixed on a rotation wheel for 120 min at 4○C. Insolubilized nuclear debris was pelleted by centrifugation (16,000g, 10 min, 4○C). Supernatant was transferred to a fresh low-protein binding Eppendorf tube and histone proteins were precipitated by adding ice-cold trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to the final concentration of 20% (v/v) followed by 60 min incubation on ice. Precipitated histone proteins were pelleted by centrifugation  (16,000g, 10 min, 4○C), washed 3 times with acetone (-20○C) and resuspended in MS grade water. Extracted histones were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis using hybrid chemical derivatization method as described previously (86). In brief, 4 μg aliquots of purified histones were diluted with MS grade water to a total volume of 18 μl and buffered to pH 8.5 by addition of 2 μl of 1M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB). Propionic anhydride was mixed with MS grade water in a ratio of 1:100 and 2 μl of the anhydride-mixture was added immediately to the histone sample, with vortexing, and the resulting mixture was incubated for 5 min at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by adding 2 μl of 80 mm hydroxylamine followed by 20 min incubation at room temperature. Tryptic digestion was performed overnight with 0.5 μg trypsin per sample at 37○C. A 1% v/v solution of phenyl isocyanate (PIC) in acetonitrile was freshly prepared and 6 μl added to each sample and incubated for 60 min at 37 °C. Samples were acidified by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to the final concentration of 1%. Peptides were de-salted with C18 spin columns (Pierce ™) following the manufacture protocol. Peptides were eluted from C18 spin columns with 70% acetonitrile, partially dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 30 μl 0.1% TFA. The resulting peptide mixtures were analyzed using nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano- UPLC (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) in data-dependant acquisition (DDA) mode. ~300 ng peptide aliquot was used per one sample per one injection. Peptides were loaded automatically on a trap column (300 µm inner diameter ×5 mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, USA) prior to C18 reversed phase chromatography on the analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm × 250 mm; Waters, Milford, USA). Peptides were separated at flowrate of 0.250 μl per minute by a linear gradient from 1% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 98% (v/v) acetonitrile) to 25% buffer B over 40 min followed by a linear gradient to 40% B in 20 min, then to 85% B in 5 min. After 5 min at 85% buffer B , the gradient was reduced to 1% buffer B over 2 min and then allowed to equilibrate for 8 min. Full mass range spectra were at 60,000 resolution (at m/z 400), and product ions spectra were collected in a “top 15” data dependent scan cycle at 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
RAW MS data were analyzed using EpiProfile 2.0 software (87). The reported relative abundances of histone modifications were validated bymanual re-quantification using an open-source Skyline software.

### Publication Abstract
DNA methylation (5-methylcytosine (5mC)) is critical for genome stability and transcriptional regulation in mammals. The discovery that ten-eleven translocation (TET) proteins catalyze the oxidation of 5mC to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), 5-formylcytosine (5fC), and 5-carboxylcytosine (5caC) revolutionized our perspective on the complexity and regulation of DNA modifications. However, to what extent the regulatory functions of TET1 can be attributed to its catalytic activity remains unclear. Here, we use genome engineering and quantitative multi-omics approaches to dissect the precise catalytic vs. non-catalytic functions of TET1 in murine embryonic stem cells (mESCs). Our study identifies TET1 as an essential interaction hub for multiple chromatin modifying complexes and a global regulator of histone modifications. Strikingly, we find that the majority of transcriptional regulation depends on non-catalytic functions of TET1. In particular, we show that TET1 is critical for the establishment of H3K9me3 and H4K20me3 at endogenous retroviral elements (ERVs) and their silencing that is independent of its canonical role in DNA demethylation. Furthermore, we provide evidence that this repression of ERVs depends on the interaction between TET1 and SIN3A. In summary, we demonstrate that the non-catalytic functions of TET1 are critical for regulation of gene expression and the silencing of endogenous retroviruses in mESCs.

### Keywords
Histone ptms, Tet1, Acetylation, Methylation

### Affiliations
Department of Biology II and Center for Molecular Biosystems (BioSysM), Human Biology and BioImaging, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich 81377, Germany
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg 85764, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Bultmann
Department of Biology II and Center for Molecular Biosystems (BioSysM), Human Biology and BioImaging, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich 81377, Germany


