### Accession
PXD012067

### Title
Functional relationship of GUN1 and FUG1 in plastid proteostasis

### Description
We have previously identified the chloroplast translation initiation factor IF-2, or FUG1, as a GUN1 interactor based on co-immunoprecipitation and co-expression analysis (Tadini et al., 2016). To further investigate the functional relationship between these two proteins, the double mutant gun1-103 fug1-3 was generated by crossing the single gun1-103 knock-out mutant and the fug1-3 knock-down mutant. We performed comparative proteomics on gun1-103 and fug1-3, as well as on the double mutant gun1-103 fug1-3.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from 4-day-old wild type, gun1-103, fug1-3 and gun1-103 fug1-3 seedlings (four biological replicates for each genotype) by grinding 200 mg of frozen plant material into fine powder in liquid nitrogen. After suspending the powder in 1 ml of extraction buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM DTT, 1% (w/v) SDS, 1X Roche cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail), samples were sonicated with 3 cycles, 10 s ON/OFF. Cell debris were removed by centrifugation. Proteins were then precipitated in chloroform-methanol, pellets solubilized in 6 M guanidine hydrochloride and protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic assay (BCA). Proteome aliquots of 100 μg were reduced with 10 mM DTT (30 min, 37 °C), alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, RT, in the dark), and purified by chloroform-methanol precipitation before trypsin digestion (proteome/enzyme ratio 100:1 w/w) at 37 °C overnight. Resulting peptides were desalted with home-made C18 stage tips, vacuum dried to near dryness and stored at –80 °C. LC-MS/MS was performed on a nano-LC-system (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Bruker Impact II Q-TOF. The nano-LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (C18, 100 Å, 100 μm × 2 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptide mixture was separated over a 150-minute linear gradient of 5-45% (v/v) acetonitrile at constant flow rate of 250 nl / min. The column was kept at 50°C in a column oven throughout the run. MS1 spectra were acquired at 3 Hz with a mass range from m/z 200–2000, with the Top 18 most intense peaks selected for MS/MS analysis using an intensity dependent spectra acquisition time between 4 and 16 Hz. Dynamic exclusion duration was 0.5 min.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). Peak lists were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana Uniprot database (February 2017) using the built-in Andromeda search engine with default parameters. Proteins were quantified across samples using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
GUN1 integrates retrograde signals in chloroplasts but the underlying mechanism is elusive. FUG1, a chloroplast translation initiation factor, and GUN1 are co-expressed at the transcriptional level, and FUG1 co-immunoprecipitates with GUN1. We used mutants of GUN1 (gun1-103) and FUG1 (fug1-3) to analyse their functional relationship at the physiological and system-wide level, the latter including transcriptome and proteome analyses. Absence of GUN1 aggravates the effects of decreased FUG1 levels on chloroplast protein translation, resulting in transiently more pronounced phenotypes regarding photosynthesis, leaf colouration, growth and cold acclimation. The gun1-103 mutation also enhances variegation in the var2 mutant, increasing the fraction of white sectors, while fug1-3 suppresses the var2 phenotype. The transcriptomes of fug1-3 and gun1-103 plants are very similar, but absence of GUN1 alone has almost no effect on protein levels, whereas steady-state levels of chloroplast proteins are markedly decreased in fug1-3. In fug1 gun1 double mutants, effects on transcriptomes and particularly on proteomes are enhanced. Our results show that GUN1 function becomes critical when chloroplast proteostasis is perturbed by decreased rates of synthesis (fug1) or degradation (var2) of chloroplast proteins, or by low temperatures. The functions of FUG1 and GUN1 appear to be related, corroborating the view that GUN1 helps to maintain chloroplast protein homeostasis (proteostasis).

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Gun1, Impactii, Arabidopsis seedlings

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU)
Department Biology I
Plant Molecular Biology (Botany)
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Faculty of Biology, Chair of Plant Molecular Biology (Botany), Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried,Germany

### Submitter
Giada Marino

### Lab Head
Dr Dario Leister
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Faculty of Biology, Chair of Plant Molecular Biology (Botany), Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried,Germany


