### Accession
PXD034015

### Title
Comparative whole cell proteomics data of Vibrio cholerae O1 biovar El Tor str. N16961 versus full length cgtA knockdown and CgtA(∆CTD) during nutrient limiting condition

### Description
Adapting to nutritional downshifts is crucial for the survival of Vibrio cholerae. CgtA, a 50S ribosome-associated essential GTPase, is a bonafide stringent response protein. CgtA, in association with SpoT, modulates the intracellular (p)ppGpp alarmone levels in a nutrient-rich environment. We studied the influence of CgtA during the growth of V. cholerae in a minimal medium in contrast to its pre-defined role in a nutrient-rich medium. Here, we show the pleiotropic effects of CgtA on growth, viability, motility, morphology, and persister phenotype of a V. cholerae strain where the full-length wildtype (Wt) cgtA was deleted. An in-frame deletion of the 52 amino acids long unstructured C-terminal domain of the CgtA GTPase defined its in vivo functionality. Proteomic analyses revealed that loss of CgtA significantly altered 311 proteins involved in diverse cellular processes. However, the CgtA C-terminus deleted strain altered 240 proteins with a major overlap with the full-length cgtA deleted condition. A sustained mRNA expression pattern of CgtA is observed in a minimal medium. Whereas, in nutrient-rich LB medium, intermittent expression of cgtA is observed with the highest expression during the late-logarithmic to early-stationary phase. We propose that minimal media-associated nutrient stress coupled to cgtA depletion aggravates the intracellular stress in V. cholerae, leading to abnormal protein synthesis, altered DNA replication, and transcriptional machinery, negatively affecting cellular energy metabolism and many vital processes. This study suggests that the nutrient-media-dependent controlled expression of CgtA is a mechanism by which V. cholerae can remodel its transcriptome and proteome. Our study reveals an alternative facet of the survival of V. cholerae during nutritional downshift and the consequences concomitantly with cgtA knockdown as evident from the complex altered regulatory network.

### Sample Protocol
The experiment was performed in three biological replicates of V. cholerae strains: Wt, ∆cgtA:: kanr V. cholerae, ∆CTD cgtA:: kanr V. cholerae. Single colonies of each of the V. cholerae strains grown on LB agar plates were inoculated in LB broth with arabinose overnight. The cultures were washed in M9 minimal media twice and diluted (1:50) into fresh M9 minimal media supplemented with casamino acids. The cells were harvested in the mid-logarithmic phase and lysed to obtain the protein extracts. 25 μl extracted protein samples were taken and reduced with 5 mM TCEP and further alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and then digested with Trypsin (1:50, Trypsin/lysate ratio) for 16 h at 37 °C. Digests were cleaned using a C18 silica cartridge to remove the salt and dried using a speed vac. The dried pellet was resuspended in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Experiments were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled with a Thermo QE Plus. 1μg was loaded on C18 column 50 cm, 3.0μm Easy-spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a 0–40% gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min) and injected for MS analysis. The liquid chromatography gradients were run for a total period of 100 minutes. The MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 70k resolution. Dynamic exclusion was employed for 10s, excluding all charge states for a given precursor. The MS2 spectra were acquired at 17500 resolutions.

### Data Protocol
The raw files generated after sample processing were analyzed with the software "Proteome Discoverer (2.2)" against the "UniProt" proteome database. The two algorithms used for identifying the peptides out of the mass spectrometry data are "SEQUEST" and "Amanda." SEQUEST is a gold standard algorithm for the accurate identification of peptides. In comparison, Amanda is very robust due to the high speed of identification of the spectrum. Both the algorithms are used synchronously to get a high overlap of identified spectra of peptides. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances for both the algorithms were set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. All the statistical analyses were performed using filtered raw abundance values based on valid values followed by log2 transformation. Missing values were imputed using the normal distribution of the data. The imputed dataset was further standardized using Z-score. Z-data gives an idea about the distance between the data point and the mean. It is used to standardize a distribution. If the value of the Z-score is above the mean, then its value is positive. If the value of the Z-score is below the mean, then its value is negative. ANOVA test was used for all three conditions: Wt, full-length CgtA depletion, and C-terminal domain truncated condition. T-tests were used to compare Wt and full-length CgtA depletion or Wt and C-terminal domain truncated conditions. Significance was calculated using q-values ( corrected p-values) using a cut-off value of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cgta gtpase, Ribosome, Pleiotropic effects, Vibrio cholerae, C-terminal domain cgta truncation, Nutrient limitation, Cgta knockdown

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Kolkata, Mohanpur, District: Nadia, West Bengal, Pin Code: 741246, India
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Kolkata

### Submitter
Partha Pratim Datta

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Partha Pratim Datta
Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Kolkata, Mohanpur, District: Nadia, West Bengal, Pin Code: 741246, India


