### Accession
PXD035953

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Arylamine N-Acetyltransferase 1 Knockout Breast Cancer Cells

### Description
Description A phase II metabolic enzyme, NAT1 is frequently upregulated in breast cancers. Previous studies have shown that inhibition or depletion of NAT1 in breast cancer cell lines leads to growth retardation both in vitro and in vivo, suggesting that NAT1 contributes to rapid growth of breast cancer cells. This project evaluated the effects of NAT1 knockdown on the proteome of a breast cancer cell line.hese groups include a parental MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and two separate NAT1 knockout (KO) cell lines differing by proliferation rates.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation used a FASP approach including Lys-C and trypsin digestion prior to TMT10plex labeling comparing three three groups (n=3 per group) plus a pooled internal standard/normalization channel.  Admixed samples were fractionated by high pH RP-HPLC and then concatenated into 18 fractions. Each fraction was analyzed using 1DLC-MS and analyzed by PD1.4 using SequestHT and Mascot.

### Data Protocol
Relative protein abundances were compared by Scaffold Q+S v4.4.5 at the 99.9% CI at the peptide and protein levels to estimate protein group identification and differential abundances by Kruskal-Wallis and log fold change differences. MetaCore was used to explore pathway analyses and to identify Gene Ontology biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components that were enriched in each data set.

### Publication Abstract
Arylamine <i>N</i>-acetyltransferase 1 (<i>NAT1</i>) is frequently upregulated in breast cancer. An unbiased analysis of proteomes of parental MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells and two separate <i>NAT1</i> knockout (KO) cell lines were performed. Among 4,890 proteins identified, 737 and 651 proteins were found significantly (<i>p</i>&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.01) upregulated and downregulated, respectively, in <i>NAT1</i> KO cells, compared to the parental cells. Each set of proteins was analyzed to identify Gene Ontology biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components that were enriched in the set. Among the proteins upregulated in <i>NAT1</i> KO cells, processes associated with MHC major histocompatibility complex I-mediated antigen presentation were significantly enriched. Multiple processes involved in mitochondrial functions were collectively downregulated in <i>NAT1</i> KO cells, including multiple subunits of mitochondrial ATP synthase (Complex V of the electron transport chain). This was accompanied by a reduction in cell cycle-associated proteins and an increase in pro-apoptotic pathways in <i>NAT1</i> KO cells. The current dataset contains additional representations of the biological processes and components that are differentially enriched in <i>NAT1</i> KO MDA-MB-231 cells and will serve as a basis for generating novel hypotheses regarding the role of NAT1 in breast cancer. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD035953.

### Keywords
Nat1, Tmt10plex, Breast cancer, Mda

### Affiliations
David W. Hein,  Peter K. Knoefel Endowed Chair of Pharmacology Professor and Chairman  Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine,  University of Louisville,  505 S. Hancock Street, CTR Rm 303, Louisville, Kentucky 40202. U.S.A. Phone: 502-852-6252. Email: david.hein@louisville.edu
University of Louisville School of Medicine

### Submitter
Michael Merchant

### Lab Head
Dr David W. Hein, PhD
David W. Hein,  Peter K. Knoefel Endowed Chair of Pharmacology Professor and Chairman  Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine,  University of Louisville,  505 S. Hancock Street, CTR Rm 303, Louisville, Kentucky 40202. U.S.A. Phone: 502-852-6252. Email: david.hein@louisville.edu


