### Accession
PXD012480

### Title
Combined expression of plasma CA19-9 and thrombospondin-2 for accurate diagnosis of pancreatic cancer and distal cholangiocarcinoma– A proteome approach

### Description
Minimally- invasive diagnostic biomarkers for patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and distal cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) are warranted to enhance early and accurate diagnosis. This study identified tumor tissue secreted proteins, the “secretome”, which was analysed for differential candidate diagnostic plasma proteins. Secretome of tumor and normal tissue was collected directly after resection of the primary tumor from 4 patients with PDAC and distal CCA. The tissue secretome was investigated by label-free LC-MSMS, and database searching identified a total of 5179 proteins.  696 proteins were differentially enriched in tumor secretome compared to normal tissue. Thrombospondin-2 (THBS2) emerged as most promising candidate diagnostic biomarker. Subsequent analysis of THBS2 in plasma samples of patients with PDAC and distal CCA by ELISA showed significantly higher abundance compared to healthy individuals (p<0.001) and resulted in an AUC of 0.844.

### Sample Protocol
Based on gross macroscopy, tissues from tumorous areas and adjacent normal pancreas were collected from resected specimens from seven consecutive patients with suspected malignancy of the pancreas at the department of Surgery of the Amsterdam UMC – VU University Medical Center (the Netherlands). The collection of samples and clinical data was approved by the local medical ethical committee in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki. Tissue secretome from tumor tissue and adjacent normal pancreatic tissue was collected. In short, fresh small tissue blocks of approximately 5x5 mm were transferred to sterile tubes and immediately transported to the laboratory within an hour after resection. Samples were rinsed in PBS at room temperature (RT) to remove blood and necrotic excretions. Subsequently, samples were incubated in 100 µl PBS at 37 °C for 1 hour at 5% CO2 atmosphere. PBS containing secreted proteins was centrifuged at 250 x g at 4 °C to remove cell debris, and stored at -80 °C until further analysis. Three PDAC cell lines (Suit-2, PANC1, AsPC1) and a normal epithelial pancreatic cell line (HPDE) were cultured in RPMI medium (Lonza, Switzerland) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS, Biowest, USA) and 1% penicillin (10.000 UI/ml) and streptomyocin (10.000 UI/ml, P/S, Lonza, Switzerland). STR analysis was performed to confirm purity of the cell lines (BaseClear B.V., the Netherlands). For cell line secretome analysis, cells were cultured until they reached 70% confluence. Plates were washed three times with PBS. Next, cells were incubated overnight in serum free medium (SFM). SFM containing secreted proteins was collected after ~16 hours, centrifuged for 5 min at 250 x g at 4 °C, filtered through a 0.45 µm filter (Millipore, the Netherlands) and stored at -80 °C until further analysis.  Prior to in-gel-digestion, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Switzerland) was added and secretomes were concentrated from 4 mL to approximately 15 µl with 3kD MWCO centrifugal concentrator tubes (Amicon Ultra -4°C, Millipore, the Netherlands). Concentrated secretomes were mixed with reducing sample buffer (SB) and separated on NUpage 4-12% gradient gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA), fixed in a solution of 50% ethanol and 3% phosphoric acid and stained with a 0.1% Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 solution (containing 34% methanol, 3% phosphoric acid and 15% ammonium sulfate). Proteins were in-gel reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 54 mMIodoacetamide (Sigma, Missouri, USA), respectively. Secretome lanes were cut in five fractions, and each fraction was cut to 1 mm3 cubes. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (6.25 ng/ml) (Promega, WI, USA) overnight and extracted from the gel with 1%  formic acid and 2x with 5% formic acid in 50% ACN. Peptide extracts were pooled and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge, dissolved in 50µl 0.5% TFA + 4% ACN and filtered through 0.22 µm membrane filters (Millipore, Burlington, MA). Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua in 0.05% formic acid. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% gradient (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) in 70 min (100 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 60 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swissprot FASTA file (release march 2017, 42161 entries, canonical and isoforms) using MaxQuant 1.5.8.0. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Label free quantitation Proteins were quantified by spectral counting. Spectral counts were normalized on the sum of the counts per sample and differential protein analysis between groups was performed using a paired beta-binominal test for tumour tissue vs normal tissue secretome comparisons. PDAC cell line secretomes were compared to HPDE normal pancreatic epithelium cell line secretomes using a group-based beta-binominal test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thrombospondin-2, Pdac, Pancreatic cancer, Label-free, Thbs2, Early detection, Cholangiocarcinoma

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


