### Accession
PXD016843

### Title
Characterization of plasma proteins of  HIV/AIDS patients underfirst line anti-retroviral therapy

### Description
The retrospective cohort study was focused on the first line ART patients who were enrolled in the antiretroviral therapy center, Sarojini Naidu Medical College, Agra, India from December 2009 to November 2016. The main criteria for inclusion was based on the immunological marker, i.e. CD4+ count (<350). The all age group adults and adolescents were included in this study. The informed consents were obtained from all patients. A patient information leaflet was used for collection of sociodemographic and clinical profile data. This study protocol was approved by Institute human ethics committee. The Institute ethics committee is constituted as per the guidelines directed by Indian Council of MedicalResearch. Ten ml of blood samples were collected from a total of six AIDS patients after counselling whose CD4+ count was <350 cells/µl. Then plasma was separated by centrifugation at 2000g for 10 minutes. Then plasma was stored at -800C for estimation of viral load and genotyping was carried out  at NIRT, ICMR, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India.The viral load was estimated using Abbott automated m2000rt instrument. Those who were having>1000 copies/ml called as a drug resistant and < 1000 copies/ml called as drug responder. Among them, 3 patients were having high viral load >1000 copies/ml (drug resistant and 3 patients were with <1000 copies/ml (drug responder). The 3 treatment failure (>1000 copies/ml) samples were further considered for genotype analysis. Highly abundant proteins (Albumin and IgG) were depleted using the Aurum–Serum protein mini kit (Biorad, USA). The depleted plasma samples were analyzed in SWATH-MS. Then, the proteins were identified and characterized using the SWATH analysis.

### Sample Protocol
10µg of proteins from each samples  were reduced with 25mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56°C, followed by alkylation using 55mM  IAA at room temperature for 15-20 minutes, and trypsin digestion in 1:10 ratio (Trypsin: protein) for 18 hours at 37°C. Tryptic digested peptides were vacuum dried in vacuum concentrator. 300µg of proteins were digested and eight different fractions were obtained by SCX cartridge separation for SWATH library generation.10µl of each fraction was loaded on the Micro-Trap column and desalted for 10min. Once desalted, the peptides were eluted on a C18 column at the flow rate of 5µl per min with  buffer A Water plus 0.1% formic acid and buffer B Acetonitrile plus 0.1% Formic acid . The buffer composition was for 0 min 97% A and 3% B and while increasing it at 68min at 75% A and 25% B. The samples were acquired on TTOF 6600 coupled with Eksigent Nano-LC system. Source parameters are Curtain gas at 25, ion source gas (GS1) at 10, ion spray voltage floating at 5500, and temperature at 200. For TOF-MS the parameters are scanning range was at 400 to 1250Da with an accumulation time of 25ms, De-Clustering potential at 100 and collision energy at 10.In product ion mode mass range at 400-1250 Da in high resolution mode.

### Data Protocol
For identification of the proteins using SWATH analysis, we used the human serum library consist of 235 proteins. SWATH peaks were extracted using this library in peak view software (Version 2.1). Parameters in peak view are no. of peptides per proteins are 10, no. of transitions per peptide are 5, peptide confidence threshold 95%, XIC window 85 min,  FDR 1%, XIC width ppm 50. Correction of retention time of each sample was done manually by selecting high abundant peptides of high abundant proteins and RT fit was calculated, and applied to chromatogram. At last, while calibrating the retention time the final data exported in.mrkvw  format and analyzed using marker view software.

### Publication Abstract
The identification and characterization of plasma proteins in drug resistant and drug sensitive in HIV-1 infected/AIDS patients were carried out using the SWATH-MS protocol. In total, 204 proteins were identified and quantified, 57 proteins were differentially expressed, out of which 25 proteins were down regulated and 32 proteins were up regulated in drug resistant patients. Six proteins such as complement C4-A, immunoglobulin heavy variable 1-2, carboxylic ester hydrolase, fibulin-1, immunoglobulin lambda constant7, secreted phosphoprotein 24 were differentially expressed in individuals with drug resistant HIV as compared to individuals with drug sensitive HIV. Gene ontology of 57 differentially expressed proteins was analysed and documented.

### Keywords
Art, Hiv, Aids, Swath-ms, Human  plasma proteins

### Affiliations
ICMR-National JALMA Institute for Leprosy and Other Mycobacterial Diseases
Dr(Mrs) Keshar Kunja Mohanty Scientist F, National JALMA Institute for Leprosy and Other Mycobacterial Diseases, Taj Ganj, Agra - 282004, Uttar Pradesh, India

### Submitter
Keshar Kunja Mohanty

### Lab Head
Dr Dr(Mrs) Keshar Kunja Mohanty
Dr(Mrs) Keshar Kunja Mohanty Scientist F, National JALMA Institute for Leprosy and Other Mycobacterial Diseases, Taj Ganj, Agra - 282004, Uttar Pradesh, India


