### Accession
PXD029368

### Title
Rat parathyroid glands LC-MS/MS

### Description
The mechanisms of chronic kidney disease-associated secondary hyperparathyroidism are partially understood. In this project we aimed to gain new information and propose research hypotheses by proteome and phosphoproteome profiling of normal and hyperplastic rat parathyroid glands. Glands were microdissected from rats on normal control diet or CKD-inducing high adenine diet enriched with phosphorus to produce secondary hyperparathyroidism. Protein extracts were pooled from 4 glands (2 rats) for proteome profiling (3 normal and 3 CKD pools), and from 12 glands (6 rats) for phosphoproteome profiling (2 normal and 2 CKD pools).

### Sample Protocol
The samples were subjected to tryptic digestion using an S-trap, followed by a phosphor-enrichment using Immobilized Metal (Fe +3) Affinity Chromatography on a robotic system (Bravo).The resulting peptides were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity) coupled to high resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometry (Q Exactive HF).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.6.0. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the mice proteome database appended with common lab protein contaminants and the following modifications: Fixed modification- cysteine carbamidomethylation. Variable modifications- methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, asparagine- or glutamine-deamidation and serine-, threonine or tyrosine-phosphorylation. Data filtration was performed using Perseus v1.6.2.3. Decoy hits, as well as proteins that were identified on the basis of a modified peptide only were filtered out. The intensity values were log transformed and only phosphosites that had at least one valid values in at least one experimental group were kept. The data was normalized by subtracting the median. Missing values were imputed and the two groups were compared. All values (intensities and ratios) were transformed back from their log values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rat, Chronic kidney disease, Parathyroid, Secondary hyperparathyroidism

### Affiliations
Hadassah - Hebrew University Medical Center, Department of Nephrology
Hadassah - Hebrew University Medical Center

### Submitter
Iddo Ben-Dov

### Lab Head
Dr Iddo Zeev Ben-Dov
Hadassah - Hebrew University Medical Center, Department of Nephrology


