### Accession
PXD027894

### Title
Cross-species analysis of viral nucleic acid interactors identifies TAOKs as immune regulators

### Description
The cell intrinsic antiviral response of multicellular organisms developed over millions of years and critically relies on the ability to sense and eliminate viral nucleic acids. Here we used an affinity proteomics approach in evolutionary distant species (human, mouse and fly) to identify proteins that are conserved in their ability to associate with diverse viral nucleic acids. This approach revealed a conserved core of proteins targeting viral genetic material and species-specific interactants. Functional characterization of the influence of 181 candidates on replication of 6 distinct viruses in human cells and flies identified 128 nucleic acid binding proteins with an impact on virus growth. We identified the family of TAO kinases (TAOK1, -2 and -3) as dsRNA-interacting antiviral proteins and show their requirement in type-I interferon induction. Depletion of TAO kinases in mammals or flies led to an impaired response to virus infection characterized by a reduced induction of interferon stimulated genes in mammals and impaired expression of srg1 and diedel in flies. Overall, our study reveals a by far larger interaction space between viral genetic material and host factors than anticipated so far, attesting to the ancestral roots of innate immunity and to the lineage-specific pressures exerted by viruses.

### Sample Protocol
Synthetic oligoribonucleotides with a 3’-terminal C6 amino linker matching the first 22 nucleotides of the 5’ untranslated region of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus HKU-39849 [PPP-r(AUAUUAGGUUUUUACCUACCC)-NH2] and a corresponding 2’O-ribose methylated RNA oligomer [PPP-r(AmUAUUAGGUUUUUACCUACCC)-NH2] were ordered from ChemGenes Corporation (Wilmington, MA, USA) and capped as described previously using the m7G Capping System (CellScript). Capped RNA oligomers were then HPLC-purified, biotinylated with biotin-N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (Epicentre) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and again HPLC-purified. As control we used a corresponding 3’-terminal biotinylated and HPLC-purified oligoribonucleotide harboring a 5’ hydroxyl group [OH-r(AUAUUAGGUUUUUACCUACCCU)-biotin]. Biotinylated 2’5’OAs were synthesized according to the protocol described in Turpaev et al 92, using a RESOURCE column, bioatinylated ATP was purchased from Perkin Elmer (NEL544001EA). Biotinylated in vitro synthesized PPP-RNA (7SKas RNA) was described earlier 19. For quantitative purification of proteins binding to biotinylated synthetic or in vitro transcribed nucleic acids, streptavidin affinity resin was first incubated either with 100 pmol aliquots of biotin-labelled 7SKas RNA, 5 nmol of RNA oligomers, 100 pmol 2’5’OAs, 100 pmol ATP or 100 pmol ISD in TAP buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 5% (v/v) glycerol, 0.2 % (v/v) Nonidet-P40, 1.5 mM MgCl2 and protease inhibitor cocktail (EDTA-free, cOmplete; Roche)) in the presence of 40 U RNase inhibitor (Fermentas) for 60 min at 4 °C on a rotary wheel. Poly(C) (Sigma P9827) or poly(U) (Sigma P8563) agarose beads (20 µl bed volume) were either incubated with excess poly(I) (Sigma P4154) or poly(A) (Sigma P9403), respectively, or left untreated. Beads were washed three times with TAP buffer to remove excess of unbound nucleic acids. Cell lysates from murine RAW macrophages, human THP-1 macrophages and drosophila S2 cells were prepared by flash-freezing cells in liquid nitrogen, followed by lysis in TAP buffer for 30 min on ice. Whole flies were mixed with TAP buffer and lysed by bead milling using the FastPrep-24 (MPBio) with Lysing Matrix D (MPBio) at 5,500 rpm 2 times for 25 sec. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 10 min. Nucleic acid coated beads were incubated with 2 mg protein of cell lysates for 60 min, washed three times with TAP buffer, and twice with TAP buffer lacking Nonidet-P40 to remove residual detergent. Four independent affinity purifications were performed for each bait. Following affinity purification, bound proteins were denatured by incubation in U/T denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 1 mM DTT (Sigma), 10 mM HEPES, pH 8) for 30 min and alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 20 min. After digestion through the addition of 1 µg LysC (WAKO Chemicals USA) at room temperature for 3 h, the suspension was diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8). The beads were removed by filtration through 96-well multiscreen filter plates (Millipore, MSBVN1210), and the protein solution was digested with 0.5 µg trypsin (Promega) overnight at room temperature. Peptide purification based on C18 Empore filter discs (3M) was carried out as described previously 56 and peptides were resuspended in buffer A* (0.2% TFA, 2% ACN) for LC–MS/MS analysis. Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase column (15-20 cm Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.8 µM and 200 x 0.075 mm or 3 µM and 150 x 0.075 mm; Dr. Maisch) and separated using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 5% to 30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.5% acetic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over a period of 95 min. The nanoLC system was directly coupled to the electrospray ion source of an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in a data dependent mode with a full scan at a resolution of 60,000 with concomitant isolation and fragmentation of the ten most abundant ions in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
RAW files of NA-AP datasets were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.0) using the standard settings, label free quantitation (LFQ) and match between runs enabled. Spectra were searched against forward and reverse sequences of the reviewed human proteome including isoforms (Uniprot KB) by the built-in Andromeda search engine. The MaxQuant output was further analyzed using Perseus (version 1.5.2.1). Detected protein groups within the proteinGroups output table identified as known contaminants, reverse sequence matches, only identified by site or quantified in less than 3 out of 4 replicates in at least one condition were excluded. LFQ values were log2-transformed and missing values were replaced by sampling values from a normal distribution calculated from the measured data (width=0.3 s.d., downshift=-1.8×s.d.). To identify enriched proteins in the NA-AP dataset, the intensity values in MS runs of NA baits were compared against the controls using a two-sided Welch’s t-test (S0 = 1; min. 2 valid values in at least one group) with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 (for the poly(I:C) enrichment in fly a FDR of 0.001 was used).

### Publication Abstract
The cell intrinsic antiviral response of multicellular organisms developed over millions of years and critically relies on the ability to sense and eliminate viral nucleic acids. Here we use an affinity proteomics approach in evolutionary distant species (human, mouse and fly) to identify proteins that are conserved in their ability to associate with diverse viral nucleic acids. This approach shows a core of orthologous proteins targeting viral genetic material and species-specific interactions. Functional characterization of the influence of 181 candidates on replication of 6 distinct viruses in human cells and flies identifies 128 nucleic acid binding proteins with an impact on virus growth. We identify the family of TAO kinases (TAOK1, -2 and -3) as dsRNA-interacting antiviral proteins and show their requirement for type-I interferon induction. Depletion of TAO kinases in mammals or flies leads to an impaired response to virus infection characterized by a reduced induction of interferon stimulated genes in mammals and impaired expression of srg1 and diedel in flies. Overall, our study shows a larger set of proteins able to mediate the interaction between viral genetic material and host factors than anticipated so far, attesting to the ancestral roots of innate immunity and to the lineage-specific pressures exerted by viruses.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology, Technical University Munich
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Urban

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany


