### Accession
PXD034385

### Title
Mechanistic insight into elasnin’s inhibitory effect on marine biofilms

### Description
One-week marine biofilms grown on elasnin-based coatings subjected to proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
One-week-biofilms grown on the coated glass petridishes were collected in the matrix extraction buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 M NaCl, and protease inhibitor cocktail) and and transported back to the laboratory in a cooler. The total protein and matrix-associated protein of biofilms were extracted immediately after collection. Briefly, biofilms in matrix extraction buffer were incubated for 30 min at 25 ℃ with gentle rotation followed by centrifugation. The supernatant with matrix-associated proteins was collected for acetone precipitation and the total protein was extracted from the cell pellet by using Thermo Scientific B-PER Reagent (supplemented with lysozyme and DNase I) and sonication.  Collected proteins were desalted with Thermo Pierce C18 spin tips and digested with trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, MS Grade) before injecting into the Bruker timsTOF Pro Mass-spectrometer (Bruker Headquarters Billerica, Massachusetts, US) with Capitve Spray Ion source. Approximately 200 ng of the digested protein was injected into the Bruker nanoElute system and separated on a C18 column (ionoptiks Aurora UPLC column, Part no. AUR2-25075C18A-CSI) that was eluted with a 30 min gradient of 2–95% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The m/z range acquired in the MS full scan was 100 to 1700 Da.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were converted to mgf files by Bruker Compass DataAnalysis (version 5.2), and subsequently converted to mzML files by msconvert of the ProteoWizard (version 3.0.20229 64-bit). The mzML files were searched using Comet (version 2021.01 rev.0) with a custom database constructed from metagenomics data. The sequences of common contaminants, such as trypsin and human keratins, and decoy sequences generated by shuffling amino acid sequences between tryptic cleavage sites were added to the database. The decoy sequences in the database are used for the false discovery rate (FDR) estimation of the identified peptides. The search parameters criteria were set as follows: 40 ppm peptide mass tolerance, monoisotopic mass type, fully digested enzyme termini, 0.05 amu fragment bin tolerance, 0 amu fragment bin offset, carbamidomethylated cysteine, and oxidated methionine as the fixed and variable modifications respectively. The search results from Comet were processed by PeptideProphet, iProphet, and ProteinProphet of the Trans-Proteomics Pipeline (TPP) in the decoy-assisted non-parametric mode. Every mzML run was analyzed independently. Protein identifications were filtered at a false discovery rate of 0.01 as predicted by ProteinProphet.  The identified proteins were annotated using BLASTp (version 2.7.1) from NCBI to get the corresponding UniProt IDs. In the case for proteins with multiple UniProt ID annotations, the one with the lowest e-value was chosen. To further remove false hits from the database searching, we generated a histogram of the number of proteins (y-axis) identified in each of the bacterial species (x-axis) from each sample. Bacterial species with proteins below 5 were regarded as false positives which were identified because of similarity in certain protein sequences among different bacterial species, and the proteins associated with those species were removed from the identification list. The proteins identified in the two technical replicates were combined, and the proteins identified in at least two out of three biological replicates were used for further functional analysis. The Gene Ontology (GO) information (biological process, molecular function, and cellular component) and KEGG pathway information associated with each of the proteins were extracted from UniProt.

### Publication Abstract
Marine biofilms are multispecies microbial communities on surfaces that are crucial to the marine environment. They cause marine corrosion, biofouling, and transmission of marine pathogens and thus pose a great threat to public health and the maritime industry. To control marine biofilms, effective and environmentally friendly antibiofilm compounds are highly needed. Elasnin is a potent antibiofilm compound that exhibits high efficiency in inhibiting marine biofilms and biofouling, but its mode of action remains unclear. In the present study, multiomic analysis combined with quorum-sensing assays and <i>in silico</i> study revealed that elasnin acted as a signaling molecule in the microbial community. Elasnin promoted the growth of dominant species in the biofilm but deprived their ability of sensing and responding to environmental changes by disturbing their regulations of the two-component system, <i>i.e.</i>, the ATP-binding cassette transport system and the bacterial secretion system. Consequently, biofilm maturation and subsequent biofouler settlement were inhibited. Elasnin also exhibited higher antibiofilm efficiency than dichlorooctylisothiazolinone and had low toxicity potential on the embryos and adults of marine medaka fish. Overall, this study provided molecular and ecological insights into elasnin's mode of action, highlighting its application potential in controlling marine biofilms and the feasibility and advantages of using signal molecules to develop eco-friendly technologies.

### Keywords
Marine biofilms, Marine, Biofilms, Proteomics, Elasnin

### Affiliations
Chemical and Biological Engineering Department, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)

### Submitter
Jordy Evan Sulaiman

### Lab Head
Dr Henry Lam
Chemical and Biological Engineering Department, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST)


