### Accession
PXD008950

### Title
Lipid droplet proteomics of THP1 macrophages infected with Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Description
Growing evidence suggests the importance of lipid metabolism in pathogenesis of tuberculosis. Neutral lipids form the majority of lipids in caseous granulomas characteristic of tuberculosis. Macrophage lipid droplets form the store house of these lipids, yet infection induced changes in the proteome of these dynamic organelles remains elusive. Here we employed quantitative proteomics to identify alterations induced upon infection with live Mycobacterium tuberculosis in comparison with heat killed bacilli and uninfected macrophages. Association of specific proteins coupled with lysosomal function was found to be increased upon infection with live M. tuberculosis. Biochemical and microscopy based evidence validated the enrichment of the small GTPase Arl8b, the guanine nucleotide effector LAMTOR1, and the scavenger receptor SCARB2 on lipid droplets during live Mtb infection. We validated the localization of Arl8b on lipid droplets using super-resolution microscopy. Increased abundance of these lysosomal proteins on lipid droplets upon infection with live Mtb suggests active manipulation of the host lipid droplets by the pathogen. Furthermore, depletion of lipid droplets upon stable knockdown of diacylglycerol O-acyltransferase led to reduction in lysosomal acidification of infected cells, suggesting an active role of lipid droplets in lysosomal function during infection.

### Sample Protocol
Macrophages were infected with heat killed or live Mtb and lipid droplets were isolated using density gradient centrifugation. Protein pellets were obtained from the lipid droplet fraction by mixing with 4 volumes of ice cold acetone and incubating overnight at -80C. The protein pellets were air dried and then resuspended in 100 ul of 50mM Triethylammonium bicarbonatebuffer pH8.0 (TEABC). The samples were alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide for 10 min at room temperature in the dark. For trypsin digestion, samples were treated with trypsin overnight at 37ºC.The extracted peptides were lyophilized and stored at −80 ºC until further analysis. Equal amount of peptides (0.8mg) from each condition was used for 8-plex TMT labeling. The vaccum dried samples were reconstituted in 100µl of 50mM TEABC (pH. 8.0). The individual samples were mixed with corresponding TMT reagents and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour. The reaction was quenched by adding 8µl of 5% hydroxylamine and incubated at room temperature for 15 min.  The peptides were dried and resuspended in 30 µL of 0.1% TFA and desalted using C18 StageTips. The eluted peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched against human RefSeq protein database with common contaminants appended (version 75) using SequestHT and Mascot search algorithms available through Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software suite (version 2.1.0.81).  The search parameters included: maximum missed cleavage of 1, trypsin specified as proteolytic enzyme with minimum peptide length set to 7 amino acids. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively.TMT modification at peptide N-termini and lysine residues and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Reporter ion quantifier node was employed for peak integration and reporting intensties at MS3 level.

### Publication Abstract
Growing evidence suggests the importance of lipid metabolism in pathogenesis of tuberculosis. Neutral lipids form the majority of lipids in a caseous granuloma, a pathology characteristic of tuberculosis. Cytosolic lipid droplets (LDs) of macrophages form the store house of these lipids and have been demonstrated to contribute to the inflammatory response to infection. The proteome of lipid droplets reflects the mechanisms of lipid metabolism active under a condition. However, infection induced changes in the proteome of these dynamic organelles remains elusive. Here, we employed quantitative proteomics to identify alterations induced upon infection with live Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) in comparison with heat killed bacilli or uninfected macrophages. We found increased abundance of proteins coupled with lipid metabolism, protein synthesis, and vesicular transport function in LDs upon infection with live Mtb. Using biochemical methods and microscopy, we validated ADP-ribosyltransferase (Arf)-like 8 (ARL8B) to be increased on the lipid droplet surface of live Mtb infected macrophages and that ARL8B is a bonafide LD protein. This study provides the first proteomic evidence that the dynamic responses to infection also encompass changes at the level of LDs. This information will be important in understanding how Mtb manipulates lipid metabolism and defense mechanisms of the host macrophage.

### Keywords
Tuberculosis, Subcellular proteomics, Lipid droplets, Lysosomes, Macrophage, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
CSIR-IGIB
CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology

### Submitter
Sheetal Gandotra

### Lab Head
Dr Sheetal Gandotra
CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology


