### Accession
PXD010034

### Title
Origin and evolution of neural microexons

### Description
The mechanisms by which entire programs of gene regulation emerged during evolution are poorly understood. Neuronal microexons represent the most conserved class of alternative splicing in vertebrates and are critical for proper brain development and function. Here, we discover neural microexon programs in non-vertebrate species and trace their origin to bilaterian ancestors through the emergence of a previously uncharacterized ‘enhancer of microexons' (eMIC) protein domain. The eMIC domain originated as an alternative, neural-enriched splice isoform of the pan-eukaryotic Srrm2/SRm300 splicing factor gene, and subsequently became fixed in the vertebrate and neuronal-specific splicing regulator Srrm4/nSR100 and its paralog Srrm3. Remarkably, the eMIC domain is necessary and sufficient for microexon splicing, and functions by interacting with the earliest components required for exon recognition. The emergence of a novel domain with restricted expression in the nervous system thus resulted in the evolution of splicing programs that contributed to qualitatively expand neuronal molecular complexity in bilaterians.

### Sample Protocol
6 µg of apbb1 RNA bearing 3 MS2 stem loops at their 3’ end were boiled for 1 min, cooled on ice for 5 minutes, mixed with 20-fold excess of MS2-MBP recombinant protein in 20 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9 and further incubated for 30 minutes on ice to allow the formation of protein-RNA complexes.  The complexes were mixed with HeLa cells nuclear extracts (CilBiotech) in a final volume of 250 µl containaing  24 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 65 mM KCl, 0,0024 mM MgCl2, 2 mM ATP, 20 mM CP, 40% nuclear extracts and complemented or not with 875 ng His-tagged C3 peptide (3.5 ng / µl) and incubated for 9 minutes at 30ºC. 240 µl were loaded on a 4 ml 10-30% glycerol gradient (Beckman Coulter Polypropylene ultra centrifugation tubes) and run for 3 hours at 55000 rpm (SW60Ti rotor). The gradient was fractionated in 3 parts (top-middle-bottom), the middle and bottom parts were mixed and incubated with 90 µl slurry amylose resin (NEB) pre-equilibrated in 20 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 200 mM NaCl. The samples were incubated HOT for 10 minutes at 4ºC, beads were washed 5 times with 1 ml of 20 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 0.05 % NP40, 150 mM NaCl and eluted with 12 mM maltose added to this last buffer.  Eluted proteins were precipitated in ethanol for 20 minutes at -20°C and centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4°C, one third of the precipitated proteins were loaded on a 10% SDS-PAGE and silver stained using the Silver Quest Staining kit (Invitrogen). The remaining two thirds of each replicate were sent to LC-MSMS mass spectrometry analysis for identification. Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EasyLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto a 2-cm pre-column and separated by reverse-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 5 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 97% buffer A and 3% buffer B with a flow rate of 300 nl/min, and gradually increased to 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B in 1 min, and to 65% buffer A / 35% buffer B in 60 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 10% buffer A / 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 250°C. Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer was used for external calibration prior the analyses. Moreover, an internal calibration was also performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The instrument was operated in DDA mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1e6, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan the top ten most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the Ion Trap, AGC was set to 5e4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, activation time of 0.1 ms and maximum injection time of 100 ms was used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). Peak lists were searched using Mascot software version 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, UK) against the human swissProt database (version of April 2017) containing 20,797 protein entries, a list of 600 common contaminants, and all the corresponding decoy entries. The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Up to three missed cleavages were allowed, and Oxidation (M) and Acetylation (Protein N-term) were defined as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification. The resulting proteins and peptides were filtered using 5% FDR. Protein-protein interactions have been assessed with SAINT (Significance Analysis of INTeractome) algorithm

### Publication Abstract
The mechanisms by which entire programmes of gene regulation emerged during evolution are poorly understood. Neuronal microexons represent the most conserved class of alternative splicing in vertebrates, and are critical for proper brain development and function. Here, we discover neural microexon programmes in non-vertebrate species and trace their origin to bilaterian ancestors through the emergence of a previously uncharacterized 'enhancer of microexons' (eMIC) protein domain. The eMIC domain originated as an alternative, neural-enriched splice isoform of the pan-eukaryotic Srrm2/SRm300 splicing factor gene, and subsequently became fixed in the vertebrate and neuronal-specific splicing regulator Srrm4/nSR100 and its paralogue Srrm3. Remarkably, the eMIC domain is necessary and sufficient for microexon splicing, and functions by interacting with the earliest components required for exon recognition. The emergence of a novel domain with restricted expression in the nervous system thus resulted in the evolution of splicing programmes that qualitatively expanded the neuronal molecular complexity in bilaterians.

### Keywords
Human, Nuclear extract, Ribonucleoprotein complex, Microexon

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation
Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona 08003, Spain

### Submitter
Antonio Torres Mendez

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Irimia Martinez
Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona 08003, Spain


