### Accession
PXD014084

### Title
XAB2 involved in RNA processing.

### Description
RNA splicing and the DNA damage response are intriguingly linked in mammals but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Using an in vivo biotinylation tagging approach in mice we show that XAB2, the human homologue of the yeast pre-mRNA-splicing factor SYF1 has a functional role in Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER) and the DNA damage   response (DDR) in mammals. XAB2 interacts with spliceosome factors    and is part of the core spliceosome that binds to spliceosomal U4 and U6 snRNAs during hepatic development. Ablation of XAB2 leads to defective NER, intron retention, the aberrant accumulation of pre-mRNAs and to a faulty ATM/ATR DDR signaling. Using functional approaches, we find that XAB2 dissociates from RNA targets upon persistent DNA damage or transcription blockage and from spliceosomal RNAs in the NER-defective developing livers. Thus, XAB2 functionally links NER to the spliceosomal response to DNA damage during hepatic development with important ramifications for transcription-coupled DNA repair disorders.

### Sample Protocol
To identify interactors of XAB2 in vivo, we have generated a knock-in mouse model that carries a biotinylation tag fused with the protein of interest (XAB2). The tag is subsequently biotinylated by the bacterial ligase birA which is expressed in these mice by a transgene. We have performed streptavidin pull-downs in nuclear extracts from livers of 15 days old mice  (bXab2+/+;birA). As a control we use pull-downs in nuclear extracts from livers of 15 days old mice  that carry only the birA transgene (birA).  Proteins were reduced and alkylated with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoaceta¬mide and digested with trypsin. Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) was performed on an EASY-nLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo) or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo), both oper¬ating in positive mode. Peptides were separated on a ReproSil-C18 reversed-phase column (Dr Maisch; 15 cm × 50 μm) using a linear gradient of 0–80% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) during 90 min at a rate of 200 nl/min. The elution was directly sprayed into the electrospray ionization (ESI) source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode by HCD.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software suite. The A false discovery rate of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids were set. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the mouse Uniprot database concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da for HCD spectra. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Both the PSM and protein FDR  were set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
RNA splicing, transcription and the DNA damage response are intriguingly linked in mammals but the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Using an in vivo biotinylation tagging approach in mice, we show that the splicing factor XAB2 interacts with the core spliceosome and that it binds to spliceosomal U4 and U6 snRNAs and pre-mRNAs in developing livers. XAB2 depletion leads to aberrant intron retention, R-loop formation and DNA damage in cells. Studies in illudin S-treated cells and Csb<sup>m/m</sup> developing livers reveal that transcription-blocking DNA lesions trigger the release of XAB2 from all RNA targets tested. Immunoprecipitation studies reveal that XAB2 interacts with ERCC1-XPF and XPG endonucleases outside nucleotide excision repair and that the trimeric protein complex binds RNA:DNA hybrids under conditions that favor the formation of R-loops. Thus, XAB2 functionally links the spliceosomal response to DNA damage with R-loop processing with important ramifications for transcription-coupled DNA repair disorders.

### Keywords
Xab2, Interaction analysis, In vivo biotinylation, Rna processing, Nucleotide excision repair, Snrnas, Pre-mrnas

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands


