### Accession
PXD011917

### Title
Activated sludge of landfill leachate

### Description
Landfill leachate water is often treated in a biological processing step. In most cases a stable operation of the industrial scale plants is controlled by sum parameters such as process relevant ion concentrations, dry matter concentration and dissolved oxygen concentration. A deeper understanding of the current status of the individual cell or the biocoenosis would help to understand malfunctions or the reason for inefficient plant performance. In a simple batch experimental setup, samples of two different conditions have been generated to unravel bacterial proteome changes in response to medium term lack of oxygen supply and landfill leachate addition. The first condition was an activated sludge sample condition from an industrial scale landfill leachate treatment plant with the process stages of nitrification and denitrification. After 45 days without aeration and with addition of leachate and carbon sources as fed batch, the second sample (condition 2) was taken. A comprehensive LC-MS/MS based protemic screen was performed aiming for the identification and quantification of waste water specific bacteria proteomes. To this end, a novel combination of two protein extraction methods has been established meeting the requirements for LC-MS/MS anaylsis. Around 600 proteins were identified of which 90 % were quantified in at least 3 replicates. Numerous essential proteins to maintain the cell redox homeostasis are overexpressed in the condition 1 which was aerated with oxygen and stressed by the ultrafiltration compared to condition 2, which was not aerated in a lab experiment. In addition, heat and cold shock proteins and two proteins related to the apoptosis of organisms (spermidine/putrescine transport system and apoptosis-inducing factor) were identified.

### Sample Protocol
For compatible protein extraction an extraction protocol of activated sludge 20 was utilized and adjusted to meet the requirements for LC-MS/MS analysis 21. The following procedure was performed at 4 °C. Samples were washed by centrifugation two times with Tris/EDTA buffer (pH = 7,5, 10 mM Tris, 5 mM EDTA, Sigma), the pellet was resuspended in 20 mL Tris/EDTA buffer complemented with protease inhibitors (Roche) and homogenized. Samples were sonicated and clarified by centrifugation for 10 min (12,000 × g) at 4 °C. Proteins were precipitated by 100 μl of 100 % Trichloroacetic Acid (TCA, Sigma) and after centrifugation three times washed 3 times with ice-cold acetone (90% V/V). Pellet was dried under a fume hood for approx. 5 min and the pellet was resuspended in Urea buffer (6 M Urea, 2M Thi-Urea in 10 mM HEPES pH = 7.5). Proteins were reduced by DTT (10 mM for 30 min at RT) and alkylated by IAA (55 mM for 40 min at RT in the dark). Then, the endopeptidase Lys-C was added at enzyme-protein ratio of 1 to 100 and incubated for 2 h at RT. The Urea concentration was reduced from 6M to 2M using 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate and Trypsin (Sigma) was added at an enzyme- protein ratio of 1 to 100 for overnight digestion. Digestion was stopped by acidification adding acetonitrile and TFA to a final concentration of 5 % and 0.5 % respectively. Peptides were desalted prior LC-MS/MS analysis using the StageTip technique Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry Samples were measured by the Proteomics Facility of the CECAD institute. In brief, for peptide identification and quantification, a nano LC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to the quadrupole based high-resolution mass spectrometer QExactive Plus was used. For peptide separation according their hydrophobicity, a binary solvent system was utilized: (A) 0.1 % formic acid and (B) 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Samples were analyzed after in-solution digestion using a 4 h gradient with linearly increasing concentrations of solvent B for 220 min, followed by 5 min at 95 % B washing and 5 min re-equilibration to 5 % solvent B on a 50 cm column (i.d. 75 μm), packed in house with 2.7 μm C18 beads (ReproShell). MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70 000 at 200 m/z. An automated gain control (AGC) target of 3 × 106 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms were used. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra were acquired in a top 10 data dependent mode using a resolution of 17 500 at 200 m/z after accumulation of 1 × 106 AGC targets within an injection time of 60 ms. Ions were isolated at a 2.1 Th isolation window and fragmented in the HCD cell at 27 normalized energy. Dynamic exclusion was set to 25 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (1.5.3.8). Electrospray (ESI)-MS/ MS spectra were correlated for protein assignment to several Uniprot bacteria protein sequences using the implemented Andromeda Search engine 23,24. A list of common contaminants was included for filtering. Mass tolerances for MS/MS spectra in first search was set to 20 ppm and for main search to 4.5 ppm. Acetylation at the N-term (Protein) and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification, while carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Peptide-spectra-match FDR and Protein FDR was set to 0.01, using the decoy algorithm in revert mode in MaxQuant. The match-between-runs algorithm was enabled and used with default settings. Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (1.5.3.8). Electrospray (ESI)-MS/ MS spectra were correlated for protein assignment to several Uniprot bacteria protein sequences using the implemented Andromeda Search engine 23,24. A list of common contaminants was included for filtering. Mass tolerances for MS/MS spectra in first search was set to 20 ppm and for main search to 4.5 ppm. Acetylation at the N-term (Protein) and oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification, while carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Peptide-spectra-match FDR and Protein FDR was set to 0.01, using the decoy algorithm in revert mode in MaxQuant. The match-between-runs algorithm was enabled and used with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Landfill leachate, Bacteria proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), 50931 Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics and Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD)

### Submitter
Hendrik Nolte

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
Institute for Genetics, Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), 50931 Cologne, Germany


