### Accession
PXD029382

### Title
Graphene Oxide Attenuates Toxicity of Amyloid-β Aggregates in Yeast by Promoting Disassembly and Boosting Cellular Stress Response

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of neurodegenerations, with oligomerization and aggregation of amyloid-β peptides (Aβ) being one of its histopathological hallmarks. Recently, graphene oxide (GO) nanoflakes have attracted significant attention in biomedical fields by suppression of protein aggregation in vitro. However, the impact of GO on aggregated proteins in vivo is poorly understood. In earlier work, we developed a humanized AD model in yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by constitutively expressing Aβ42 peptides to mimic the chronic cytotoxicity during AD progression. Here we apply this in vivo model system to investigate the impact of GO on Aβ42 aggregates and cytotoxicity.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis on harvested cells was performed by resuspending the cell pellet in lysis buffer containing 8M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail. The cell suspension was subjected to bead beating at 4 °C. Cells were then spun at 13,400 rpm for 30 min at 4 °C to obtain a clear cell lysate. Proteins were precipitated using a mixture of ice-cold acetone and methanol. 15 µg of total protein were subjected to reduction and alkylation. Protein digestion was carried out using LysC and Trypsin. The resultant peptide mixtures were next desalted using C18 stage-tips.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.6.7.0), integrated with an Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy database of Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288c downloaded from UniProt (taxonomy ID 559292), containing 6,749 protein entries, and additionally including also 246 commonly observed laboratory contaminants. Endoprotease Trypsin/P was set as the protease with a maximum missed cleavage of two. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as a fixed modification. Label free quantification was enabled with a minimum ratio count of two. A false discovery rate of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein level individually for filtering identifications. All other parameters were maintained as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, Graphene oxide, Amyloid-β, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Copenhagen University Hospital
Professor Head of Divison of Systems and Synthetic Biology Department of Biology and Biological Engineering  Chalmers University of Technology Kemivägen 10, SE-412 96 Göteborg, SWEDEN

### Submitter
Vaishnavi Ravikumar

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Mijakovic
Professor Head of Divison of Systems and Synthetic Biology Department of Biology and Biological Engineering  Chalmers University of Technology Kemivägen 10, SE-412 96 Göteborg, SWEDEN


