### Accession
PXD017040

### Title
Cullin 3 Mouse Brain TMT-based Proteomics Analysis

### Description
This project consists in 3 datasets: - Samples from adult mouse brains (Hippocampus, Cortex and Cerebellum): Cul3 +/- or +/+; 5 animals per condition. - Samples from embryonic mouse cortex: either Cul3 +/- or +/+ - Samples from embryonic mouse cortex: Cul3 fl/fl Emx-1-Cre ("hom"); Cul3 +/fl Emx1-Cre ("het") or Cul3+/fl ("control")

### Sample Protocol
Samples preparation: Adult male Cul3+/- and Cul3+/+ wildtype littermate animals (n = 5 littermate mice/genotype) were deeply anesthetized and transcardially perfused with 15 ml of ice-cold 0.9% NaCl to clear the brain from blood. The cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum were rapidly dissected on ice, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80° until protein extraction. Embryonic E16.5 forebrain tissue (developing cortex and hippocampus; male embryos n(constitutive) = 5 mice/genotype, n(Emx1Cre conditional) = 3 mice/genotype) was dissected on ice, meninges were removed and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80° until protein extraction. Tissues were homogenized 1:5 (w:v) in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1mM EDTA, 10mM NaF) and freshly added protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche 04 693 159 001 and 04 906 837 001) and lysed for 30-45 min on ice, while occasionally being vortexed gently. Each sample was sonicated twice at 180 W in an ice-cold water bath and centrifuged at 10.000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. Lysates were quantified using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher, Cat. no. 23225). TMT Labeling and High pH reversed-phase chromatography: Aliquots of 100 μg of each sample were digested with trypsin (2.5 μg trypsin per 100 μg protein; 37°C, overnight), labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 11plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and pooled. For the adult dataset, where the number of samples exceeded the number of available TMT channel, one combined TMT sample was generated for each tissue. Pooled samples were evaporated to dryness, re-dissolved in 5% formic acid and then desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA). Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was again evaporated to dryness and re-dissolved in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 μm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in 90% acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 mins. The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness and redissolved in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Nano-LC Mass Spectrometry: High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides in 1% (V/V) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (V/V) acetonitrile 0.1% (V/V) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7 gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0 kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C.  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 4.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200,000 and a max injection time of 50 ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5,000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to Peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10,000, max injection time of 70 ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50,000 resolution with an AGC target of 50,000 and a max injection time of 105 ms. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield. Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
Peptides Identification and TMT Reporter Quantitation: Acquired raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Mus musculus database (downloaded November 2018: 81925 sequences) using the SEQUEST algorithm. The raw files from the embryonic and adult samples were processed in two separate batches. For each, peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine (+79.966) as variable peptide modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021) and the addition of the TMT mass tag (+229.163) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Acetylation (+42.011) and Met-loss + Acetylation (-89.030) were included as possible modifications to the protein N-terminus. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The reverse database search option was enabled and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
De novo loss of function mutations in the ubiquitin ligase-encoding gene Cullin3 (CUL3) lead to autism spectrum disorder (ASD). In mouse, constitutive Cul3 haploinsufficiency leads to motor coordination deficits as well as ASD-relevant social and cognitive impairments. However, induction of Cul3 haploinsufficiency later in life does not lead to ASD-relevant behaviors, pointing to an important role of Cul3 during a critical developmental window. Here we show that Cul3 is essential to regulate neuronal migration and, therefore, constitutive Cul3 heterozygous mutant mice display cortical lamination abnormalities. At the molecular level, we found that Cul3 controls neuronal migration by tightly regulating the amount of Plastin3 (Pls3), a previously unrecognized player of neural migration. Furthermore, we found that Pls3 cell-autonomously regulates cell migration by regulating actin cytoskeleton organization, and its levels are inversely proportional to neural migration speed. Finally, we provide evidence that cellular phenotypes associated with autism-linked gene haploinsufficiency can be rescued by transcriptional activation of the intact allele in vitro, offering a proof of concept for a potential therapeutic approach for ASDs.

### Keywords
Mouse brain cullin 3 cul3 autism cortex cerebellum hippocampus embryonic adult tmt dda high ph rp

### Affiliations
IST Austria
Genetic and Molecular Basis of Neurodevelopmental Disorders, IST Austria, Klosterneuburg, Lower Austria, Austria

### Submitter
Armel Nicolas

### Lab Head
Dr Gaia Novarino
Genetic and Molecular Basis of Neurodevelopmental Disorders, IST Austria, Klosterneuburg, Lower Austria, Austria


