### Accession
PXD032402

### Title
Cryo-EM Structures of Prion protein filaments from Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease

### Description
Aggregation of the prion protein (PrP) and formation of PrP amyloid (APrP) is severe in some Prion diseases. In the dominantly inherited prion protein amyloidosis known as Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker (GSS) disease, plaques made of PrP amyloid are a distinct feature.  The TTC to TCC mutation in Prion protein gene (PRNP), resulting in a phenylalanine to serine amino acid substitution at PrP residue 198, causes a severe amyloidosis in a well-studied GSS variant. The neuropathologic phenotype of this neurodegenerative disease is characterized by the presence of numerous extracellular APrP plaques and intracytoplasmic tau neuronal inclusions which are identical to neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer disease.  Using cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM), we determined for the first time the structures of filaments of human APrP, isolated post-mortem from the brain of a symptomatic PRNP F198S mutation carrier. We report that in GSS (F198S) APrP filaments are composed of dimeric, trimeric and tetrameric left-handed protofilaments with their protomers sharing a common protein fold. The protomers in the cross-β spines consist of sixty-two amino acids and span from glycine 80 to phenylalanine 141, adopting a previously unseen spiral fold with a thicker outer layer and a thinner inner layer. Each protomer comprises nine short β-strands. The β1 and β8 strands as well as the β4 and β9 strands are engaged in a steric zipper.  The new data, obtained by Cryo-EM, provide insights into the complexity of the structure of pathogenic PrP, and reveal the difference of PrP’s structure in brain disease versus that of recombinant PrP, highlighting the urgency of extending our knowledge of the structure of the amyloid filaments involved in human neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
APrP was extracted using a modified water extraction protocol (Pras 1968). Three grams of cerebellar or cerebral grey matter were homogenized in 10 ml·g-1 TE buffer (0.1 M Tris, pH 7.4, 5 mM EDTA), and protease inhibitors (Complete, 1 mM pepstatin, 100 mM TLCK-HCl, 200 mM TPCK, and 1 mM leupeptin; all from Roche Molecular). After homogenization, 2 mM CaCl2, 0.3 mg·ml-1 collagenase III and 10 µg·ml-1 DNase I (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were added. After 16 h at 37°C, samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 30 min at 4°C. The pellet was resuspended in 8 ml of 0.15M NaCl and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 30 min at 4°C. This step was repeated until the OD280 of the supernatant was less than 0.075. The resulting pellet was then resuspended in 10 ml·g-1 dH2O and centrifuged at 30,000 g for 1 h at 4°C. This step was repeated 5 times, and the final supernatant was centrifuged at 250,000 g for 2 h at 4°C. The pellet was resuspended in 100 µl·g-1 tissue in PBS with 0.5% sulfobetaine (SB3-14), and stored at 4°C.  Each sample was diluted in 8M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP- HCl) for 30 min at 370 C and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at room temperature, in the dark, for 30 min.  Samples were digested in two steps with LysC/trypsin (Promega V5072).  After overnight trypsin digestion in 2 M Urea, the samples were applied to Pierce detergent removal spin columns (Thermo Scientific cat no 87777) and then desalted on SepPak 18 cartridge (WAT054955, Waters, washed with 1 mL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), eluted in 600 µL 70% Acetonitrile 0.1 % formic acid (FA)), and dried by speed vac.   LC/MS/MS Samples were reconstituted in 50 µL of 0.1 % FA and 7 µL were injected on an an Easynano LC1200 coupled with Aurora 25cm column (IonOptiks) in sonation column oven (40 °C) on an Eclipse Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were eluted on a 115 minute gradient from 5-35 % B, increasing to 95% B over 10 minutes, and decreasing to 5% B for 5 minutes (Solvent A: 0.1% FA; Solvent B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA).  The instrument was operated with FAIMS pro 4 CVs (-30, -45, -55, --65 V), positive mode, 0.6 second cycle time per CV with APD and Easy-IC on.  Full scan 400-1500 m/z with 60000 resolution, standard AGC and auto max IT, 40% RF lens, 5e4 intensity threshold, charge states 2-8, 30 sec dynamic exclusion with common settings.  MS2 parameters of 1.6 m/z quadrupole isolation, 30% fixed HCD CE, 15000 orbitrap resolution, standard AGC and dynamic IT.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were loaded into PEAKS X Pro Studio 10.6 Build 20201221 (Bioinformatics Solutions ) precursor ion tolerance was 10 ppm 0.02 Da, specific trypsin digestion, database searches of the reviewed Uniprot_Swissprot Homo sapiens database containing sequence variants of Prio at M129V and F198S plus common contaminants (20437 entries) with variable modifications of acetylation (K, n-terminal), oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY), carbamidomethylation (C), and ubiquitination (K).  PEAKS PTM and SPIDER searches were enabled to search all de novo peptides above 15% score for over 300 potential PTMs and mutations.  A 0.1 % peptide FDR cutoff (-10lgP≥21.8), PTM Ascore > 10, mutation ion intensity >1 and de novo only score > 80% were applied to the data.

### Publication Abstract
Prion protein (PrP) aggregation and formation of PrP amyloid (APrP) are central events in the pathogenesis of prion diseases. In the dominantly inherited prion protein amyloidosis known as Gerstmann-Str&#xe4;ussler-Scheinker (GSS) disease, plaques made of PrP amyloid are present throughout the brain. The c.593t&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;c mutation in the prion protein gene (PRNP) results in a phenylalanine to serine amino acid substitution at PrP residue 198 (F198S) and causes the most severe amyloidosis among GSS variants. It has been shown that neurodegeneration in this disease is associated with the presence of extracellular APrP plaques and neuronal intracytoplasmic Tau inclusions, that have been shown to contain paired helical filaments identical to those found in Alzheimer disease. Using cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM), we determined for the first time the structures of filaments of human APrP, isolated post-mortem from the brain of two symptomatic PRNP F198S mutation carriers. We report that in GSS (F198S) APrP filaments are composed of dimeric, trimeric and tetrameric left-handed protofilaments with their protomers sharing a common protein fold. The protomers in the cross-&#x3b2; spines consist of 62 amino acids and span from glycine 80 to phenylalanine 141, adopting a previously unseen spiral fold with a thicker outer layer and a thinner inner layer. Each protomer comprises nine short &#x3b2;-strands, with the &#x3b2;1 and &#x3b2;8 strands, as well as the &#x3b2;4 and &#x3b2;9 strands, forming a steric zipper. The data obtained by cryo-EM provide insights into the structural complexity of the PrP filament in a dominantly inherited human PrP amyloidosis. The novel findings highlight the urgency of extending our knowledge of the filaments' structures that may underlie distinct clinical and pathologic phenotypes of human neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Cryo-em structures of prion protein filaments from gerstmann-sträussler-scheinker disease

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Amber Mosley
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine


