### Accession
PXD015061

### Title
Proteome response of the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum to short term shifts in nitrogen source and availability.

### Description
The photosynthetic model marine diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum was cultured with varying nitrogen sources and availability to elicit shifts in the proteome. Cells were grown to mid-exponential phase on ammonium (880 uM), collected by centrifugation and resuspended in N-free media for 2 hrs, and spiked with nitrate (150 uM) for 90 min. Cells were again collected by centrifugation, washed in N-free media, and resuspended in experimental treatments with no nitrogen (N-) and a nitrogen source (300 uM) provided as ammonium, nitrite, or nitrate. Each experimental treatment was sampled after 15 min, 45 min, and 18 hr.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MS-GF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Diatoms outcompete other phytoplankton for nitrate, yet little is known about the mechanisms underpinning this ability. Genomes and genome-enabled studies have shown that diatoms possess unique features of nitrogen metabolism however, the implications for nutrient utilization and growth are poorly understood. Using a combination of transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, fluxomics, and flux balance analysis to examine short-term shifts in nitrogen utilization in the model pennate diatom in Phaeodactylum tricornutum, we obtained a systems-level understanding of assimilation and intracellular distribution of nitrogen. Chloroplasts and mitochondria are energetically integrated at the critical intersection of carbon and nitrogen metabolism in diatoms. Pathways involved in this integration are organelle-localized GS-GOGAT cycles, aspartate and alanine systems for amino moiety exchange, and a split-organelle arginine biosynthesis pathway that clarifies the role of the diatom urea cycle. This unique configuration allows diatoms to efficiently adjust to changing nitrogen status, conferring an ecological advantage over other phytoplankton taxa.

### Keywords
Ammonium, Nitrate, Diatom, Iron, Nitrite, Nitrogen, Diel

### Affiliations
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew E. Allen
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California


