### Accession
PXD040146

### Title
Enhanced protein secretion in reduced genome strains of Streptomyces lividans

### Description
S. lividans TK24 is a popular host for the production of small molecules and for the secretion of heterologous proteins. TK24 has a large genome with at least 29 secondary metabolite gene clusters that are non-essential for viability and undergo complex regulation. To optimize heterologous protein secretion, we previously constructed ten chassis strains that are devoid of several secondary metabolite gene clusters. Genome reduction was aimed at reducing carbon flow to secondary metabolites and pigmentation in the spent growth medium and improving colony morphology. Strains RG1.0-RG1.10 contain various deletion combinations of the blue actinorhodin cluster (act), the calcium-dependent antibiotic (cda), the undecylprodigiosin (red) and coelimycin A (cpk) clusters, the melanin cluster (mel), the matAB genes that affect mycelial aggregation and the non-essential sigma factor hrdD that controls the transcription of Act and Red regulatory proteins. Two derivative strains, RG1.5 and 1.9, showed a ~15% reduction in growth rate, >2-fold increase in the total mass yield of their native secretome and altered abundance of several specific proteins compared with TK24. Metabolomics and RNAseq analysis revealed that genome reduction led to rapid cessation of growth due to aminoacid depletion and caused both redox and cell envelope stresses, upregulation of the Sec-pathway components secDF and chaperones and a cell envelope two component regulator. RG1.9 maintained elevated heterologous secretion of mRFP and mTNFα by 12-70%. An integrated model is presented linking genome reduction and enhanced secretion. Importance: S. lividans TK24 encode 29 secondary metabolite gene clusters controlled with highly complex systems. This study established an important step toward understanding how secondary metabolite clusters can be manipulated to construct a surrogate TK24 platform with optimized metabolite funnelling. Using integrative multi-omics tools with protein secretion we provide an in-depth view of this fascinating complex process and its mechanistic regulation.

### Sample Protocol
A volume corresponding to the secreted polypeptides derived from 3 x 106 cells (usually a volume equivalent to 20-40 µL of the initial cell culture) was used for in-solution tryptic digestion. The protein solution was initially diluted into urea (2 M final concentration in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate solution (ABS), followed by reduction of cysteines with 1 mM DTT (45 min; 56 oC), alkylation using 10 mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) (45 min; 22 oC; dark) and digestion using 0.015 µg Trypsin for 1.5 μg protein (Trypsin Gold, Promega, Fitchburg, Wisconsin; ratio trypsin/protein 1/100; overnight; 37 oC). Digested peptide solutions, were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH<2, desalted using STAGE tips (91, 92), and stored lyophilized at -20 oC, until the MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Lyophilized peptide samples were re-suspended in an aqueous solution containing 0.1% v/v formic acid (FA) and 5% v/v Acetonitrile (ACN) and analyzed using nano-Reverse Phase LC coupled to a QExactive Hybrid Quadrupole - Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were initially separated using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system on an EasySpray C18 column (Thermo Scientific, OD 360 μm, ID 50 μm, 15 cm length, C18 resin, 2 μm bead size) at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. The LC mobile phase consisted of two different buffer solutions, an aqueous solution containing 0.1% v/v FA (Buffer A) and an aqueous solution containing 0.08% v/v FA and 80% v/v ACN (Buffer B). A 60 min multi-step gradient was used from Buffer A to Buffer B as follows [0–3 min constant (96:4), 3–15 min (90:10); 15–35 min (65:35); 35–40 min (35:65); 40-41 min (5:95); 41-50 min (5:95); 50-51 min (95:5); 51-60 min (95:5)]. The separated peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap QE operated in positive ion mode (nanospray voltage 1.5 kV, source temperature 250 °C). The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a survey MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 FWHM for the mass range of m/z 400-1600 for precursor ions, followed by MS/MS scans of the top 10 most intense peaks with +2, +3 and +4 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 16,000 at 35,000 resolution. MS/MS was performed using normalized collision energy of 25% with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z, an apex trigger 5-15 sec and a dynamic exclusion of 10 s. Data were acquired with Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific). Raw MS files were analyzed by the MaxQuant v1.5.3.3 proteomics software package (Cox, Mann 2008). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot S. lividans TK24 proteome (taxonomy: 457428, last modified May, 2016, 7320 protein entries; (23) and common contaminants (e.g. trypsin, keratins). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Dynamic (methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation) and fixed (S-carbamidomethylation of cysteinyl residues) modifications were selected. Precursor and MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (for the identification of the maximum number of peptides for mass and retention time calibration) and 4.5 ppm for the main search (for the refinement of the identifications). Protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) were set to 1%. FDR was calculated based on the number of spectra matched to peptides of a random proteome database (reversed sequence database) in relation to the number of spectra matching to the reference proteome. Peptide features were aligned between different runs and masses were matched (“match between runs” feature), with a match time window of 3 min and a mass alignment window of 20 min. Protein quantification was performed using the iBAQ algorithm (93) through MaxQuant software. Differentially abundant proteins were selected using the t-test and by comparing the fold difference of average protein intensities between the samples. P-values were further corrected for multiple hypothesis testing error using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (94).Thresholds for the analysis were set to adjusted p-value < 0.05 and fold difference > 2. Functional characterization of proteomics results was performed after filtering the dataset only to secreted proteins, excluding cytoplasmic contamination, using proteome annotation as described in the SToPSdb (95) (www.stopsdb.eu).The percentage of differentially abundant proteins that match a specific term over the total differentially abundant proteins for each condition was plotted. Keywords were derived after manual curation of the proteome.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Reduced genome strains, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Secretome, Heterologous secretion

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular Bacteriology Rega Institute, Dpt of Microbiology and Immunology, KULeuven 7th floor, (office 07.B174) Herestraat 49, PO box 1037 3000 Leuven, Belgium tel. +3216 379273
Postdoctoral Researcher, VIB-KU Leuven

### Submitter
Mohamed Belal Hamed Soliman

### Lab Head
Dr Molecular Bacteriology
Laboratory of Molecular Bacteriology Rega Institute, Dpt of Microbiology and Immunology, KULeuven 7th floor, (office 07.B174) Herestraat 49, PO box 1037 3000 Leuven, Belgium tel. +3216 379273


