### Accession
PXD027722

### Title
Dynamic human liver proteome atlas reveals functional insights into disease pathways

### Description
Deeper understanding of liver pathophysiology would benefit from a comprehensive quantitative proteome resource at cell-type resolution. Here, we quantify more than 10,000 proteins and 150,000 sequence-unique peptides across total liver, the major liver cell types, time-course of primary cell cultures and liver disease states. Bioinformatic analysis reveals that half of hepatocyte protein mass is comprised of enzymes and 23% of mitochondrial proteins, twice the proportion of other liver cell types. Using primary cell cultures, we capture dynamic proteome remodeling from tissue states to cell line states, providing useful information for biological or pharmaceutical research. Our extensive data serves as spectral library to characterize a human cohort of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis and cirrhosis. Dramatic proteome changes in liver biopsies include signatures of stellate cell activation resembling liver cirrhosis, providing functional insights.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were ground to a frozen powder in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. Powdered samples were then resuspended in 350μl of SDC reduction and alkylation buffer (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) and boiled for 10 min while vortexing at 1200 rpm to denature proteins (Kulak et al., 2014). The lysates were sonicated at full power for 30 cycles with 30s interval using a water bath sonicator (Diagenode Bioruptor®, Liège, Belgium). Protein content was determined by Tryptophan assay and an aliquot of 150μl homogenate was digested overnight with LysC and trypsin in a 1:50 ratio (μg of enzyme to μg of protein) at 37°C and 1700rpm. On the following day, boiling and sonicating was repeated followed by an additional step of digestion for 2h (1:100 ratio). Peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to quench the digestion reaction. Peptide concentration was estimated using Nanodrop and 20 μg of peptides was loaded on two 14-gauge Stage-Tip plugs. Peptides were washed first with isopropanol/1% TFA (200μl) and then 0.2% TFA (200μl) using an in-house-made Stage-Tip centrifuge at 2000xg. Peptides were eluted with 60μl of elution buffer (80% acetonitrile/1% ammonia) and dried at 60°C using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus). Dried peptides were redissolved and sonicated in 5% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and concentration measured using Nanodrop. About 50 μg of peptides were fractionated into 8 fractions using basic reverse phase high-pH fractionation with SPIDER fractionator (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany). Cell lines, isolated and cultured human primary cells were processed similarly to the tissue samples without liquid nitrogen crushing.  All samples were measured using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) interfaced on-line with a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap or Orbitrap Exploris 480 equipped with a FAIMS Pro Interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The latter LC-MS instrumentation setup was used in the time-course experiment of primary cell culture. For all samples, purified peptides were separated on 42.5 cm HPLC-columns (ID: 75 µm; in-house packed into the tip with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)). For each LC-MS/MS analysis, around 0.5 µg peptides were injected for the 100 min gradients. Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted with a linear 82 min gradient of 3-23% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile), followed by a 8 min increase to 40% of buffer B. The gradients then increased to 98% of buffer B within 6 min, which was kept for 4 min. Flow rates were kept at 350 nl/min. Re-equilibration was done for 4 μl of 0.1% buffer A at a pressure of 980 bar. Column temperature was kept at 60 °C using an integrated column oven (PRSO-V2, Sonation, Biberach, Germany).  In terms of spectra acquisition methods, for high PH-reversed phase fractionated samples, a top-15 DDA method was used. For single-shot analysis of unfractionated liver biopsy samples in the clinical cohort (N=45), a DIA method consisted of a survey scan at 60,000 resolution followed by 66 DIA cycles at resolution of 15,000 was used, with PhiSDM activated. For samples in the time-course experiment of primary cell culture, a FAIMS Pro Interface was implemented between the ESI and the Orbitrap Exploris 480. Mass spectra were acquired with a method of intra-analysis compensation voltage (CV)-switching at three CV settings (-40V, -55V and -70V). Within each CV setting, the acquisition method consisted of a survey scan at resolution of 120,000 followed by 22 DIA cycles at resolution of 15,000. A spectral library based on gas phase fractionation (GPF) was created to boost the identifications. DIA methods of different CV settings (-40V, -45V, -50V, -55V, -60V, -65V, and -70V) consisted of a survey scan at resolution of 120,000 followed by 66 DIA cycles at resolution of 15,000 were used for creating the GPF-based spectral library.

### Data Protocol
All raw files of fractionated samples were analyzed by MaxQuant v.1.5.3.30 software (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the integrated Andromeda Search engine (Cox et al., 2011) and searched against the Uniprot human database (April 2017 release including isoforms and sequence variants). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages and the search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and oxidation on methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications with a minimum length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set to PSM and protein levels. The ‘match between runs’ algorithm was activated to transfer MS/MS identifications between runs where applicable (Nagaraj et al., 2012). Label-free quantification was performed with the integrated MaxLFQ algorithm using a minimum ratio count of 2 (Cox et al., 2014). A spectral library was generated from the fractionated samples for single-injection DIA analysis of patient samples in the clinical cohort (N=45). All raw files of patient samples were analyzed by Spectronaut (version 13.3) with default settings except that the normalization strategy for ‘cross-run normalization’ was wet to ‘local normalization’ based on rows with “Qvalue complete” (Bruderer et al., 2015). A FDR of 1% was set to peptide precursor level and 1% to protein level. The FDR method of Storey was used (Storey and Tibshirani, 2003). The library generated from fractionated samples described above was used in the targeted analysis of single-shot DIA data against the human Uniprot fasta database (January 2018 release including isoforms and sequence variants).  All raw files in the time-course experiment of primary cell culture were analyzed by Spectronaut (version 14) in directDIA mode against the human Uniprot fasta database (January 2018 release including isoforms and sequence variants). Default settings were used except that the normalization strategy for ‘cross-run normalization’ was wet to ‘local normalization’ based on rows with “Qvalue complete”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Atlas, Cirrhosis, Liver, Liver disease, Nash, Primary cell culture

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Lili Niu

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


