### Accession
PXD025555

### Title
Hyperphosphorylation of sarcomeric proteins in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: selective reversal of PKC hyperactivity by cell therapy

### Description
Phosphorylation of sarcomeric proteins has been implicated in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF); such changes may contribute to diastolic dysfunction by altering contractility, cardiac stiffness, Ca2+-sensitivity and mechanosensing. Treatment with cardiosphere-derived cells (CDCs) restores normal diastolic function, attenuates fibrosis and inflammation, and improves survival in a rat HFpEF model. Here, we quantified the phosphorylation changes that underlie HFpEF and those reversed by CDC therapy, with a focus on the sarcomeric subproteome.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly harvested rat left ventricle (LV) tissue was shortly rinsed in ice-cold homogenization buffer (300 mM sucrose, 250 mM HEPES-NaOH, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) supplemented with a broad-spectrum protease inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) for total protein analysis, or phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher) for protein phosphorylation analysis. Samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Left ventricle tissue was fractionated into cytosolic-, myofilament-, and in-soluble-enriched fractions by the “in sequence” method as previously described (27). Briefly, the left ventricle was cryohomogenized at an approximate ratio of tissue weight: buffer volume 1:4 in homogenization buffer for cytosolic fraction in homogenization buffer with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for myofilament fraction, and in homogenization buffer with 2% SDS for receiving the in-soluble fraction. Protein concentration was determined by BCA (Pierce). Quantification of total peptides and quantification of phospho-enriched peptides were performed in separate MS runs due to enrichment required for isolation of the phospho-peptides. One hundred µg of each fraction (total protein quantification) or 1 mg of protein of each fraction (phosphorylation quantification) were reduced using 1 mM TCEP. Sample clean-up and alkylation, filter-aided sample preparation (FASP 10 kDA, Promega) was used. Samples were digested for 15–18h at 37°C using ultra-grade Trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 enzyme: protein ratio. Samples were desalted using Oasis HLB plates (30 µm and 5 mg sorbent, Waters), vacuum dried and stored at -80°C until analysis. For analyzing phosphorylated peptides, samples were enriched post-digestion and desalted using TiO2 beads as previously described (28).  Additionally, in-gel digestion of the titin band cut from a 4% SDS Coomassie Blue stained gel was performed as previously described (29). The gels were loaded with 400 ug protein and selectively the titin bands were digested with either 2.5 ug Lys C or Trypsin. The digested peptides were extracted from the gel by adding 1:2 (vol/vol) 5% formic acid/acetonitrile.  Samples obtained from cell culture were lysed in 8 M Urea in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate and sonicated with 70% amplitude for 10 min. Prior to reduction, alkylation and digestion, Urea was diluted with 5 times volume of buffer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data files were converted to mzXML format using MSconvert version v.3.0.6002 from ProteoWizard (31) for peaklist generation and used for database searching using two engines, X!Tandem (32) algorithm version 2013.06.15.1 and Comet (33) algorithm version 2014.02 rev.2. The dataset was searched against the concatenated target/decoy (34) rat (8,231 proteins), mouse (32,741 proteins) and human (20,218 proteins) in the Uniprot database (35) and additionally included non-reviewed protein IDs of the rat database (163,172 proteins on April 07, 2016). The uniqueness of identified sequences assigned to non-reviewed proteins was validated by manual Bastp search, thus filtering multiple assigned peptides.  Protein isoforms were only reported if a peptide comprising an amino acid sequence that was unique to the isoform was identified. The MS/MS proteomics data will be deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://www.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (36) upon manuscript acceptance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein kinase c (pkc), Cardiosphere-derived cell (cdc), Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (hfpef); diastolic dysfunction; myofilament phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Director, Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Vidya Venkatraman

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jennifer Van Eyk
Director, Advanced Clinical Biosystems Research Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center


