### Accession
PXD044838

### Title
Conformational plasticity of RAS Q61 family of neoepitopes results in distinct features for targeted recognition.

### Description
We utilize hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to probe the solvation and conformational dynamics of HLA-A*01:01/hβ2m complexes that are emptied or loaded with NRAS Q61K peptide, as well as wild-type (Q61) and three additional, common neoepitopes (Q61H, Q61L, Q61R).

### Sample Protocol
30 μM stock pMHC-I proteins were dialyzed into HDX Buffer 1 (50 mM NaCl, 20 mM sodium phosphate pH 6.5 in H2O). Emptied MHC-I was prepared using the method outlined in the section “Generation of empty HLA-A*01:01/hβ2m complexes.” For reference experiments (i.e. all H or no HDX), 5 μL of 30 μM emptied MHC-I or in vitro refolded pMHC-I was added to 20 μL HDX Buffer 1 and mixed. Next, 25 μL of HDX Quench Buffer (50 mM NaCl, 1M TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine), 20 mM sodium phosphate pH 2.35 in H2O) was added and the sample was mixed. The 50 μL samples were immediately injected for LC-MS/MS, which combines pepsin digestion, LC separation using a C8 5 μm column (TARGA, Higgins Analytical, TP-M501-C085), and MS/MS measurement on a Q Exactive Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following LC-MS/MS experiments for all H samples, peptide fragments corresponding to HLA-A*01:01 (96% sequence coverage), hβ2m (95% sequence coverage), and various NRAS peptides (100% sequence coverage) were identified using Thermo Proteome Discoverer v2.4. For HDX reactions, 5 μL of 30 μM pMHC-I was added to HDX Buffer 2 (50 mM NaCl, 20 mM sodium phosphate pD 6.5 in D2O), mixed, and incubated for 20, 60, 180, or 600 sec, followed by the addition of 25 μL of HDX Quench Buffer. Dfrac (fraction D/H) in the final HDX reactions was 0.8. The 50 μL samples were immediately injected into the LC-MS and underwent pepsin digestion, LC separation using a C8 5 μm column, and MS measurement. HDX data points were corrected for back-exchange by performing an additional experiment (i.e. all D) where peptide-free or peptide-loaded samples were heated to 35°C and 46°C to induce partial unfolded (5-10% unfolded) for 15 minutes, respectively, followed by HDX data collection.

### Data Protocol
HDX data points were corrected for back-exchange using the formula: % Deuterium Uptake=  (m_t-m_(0%))/(m_(100%)-〖Dm〗_(0%) )×100% where mt = peptide centroid mass at a given time point, m0% is the peptide centroid mass for the non-deuterated peptide obtained from the all H sample, and m100% is peptide centroid mass for the maximally peptide obtained from the all D sample. HDX reactions were performed at 25°C followed by pepsin digestion and MS data collection at 0°C. ExMS2 software was used to identify and analyze deuterated peptides. Percent deuterium uptakes (back-exchange corrected) were resolved to individual peptide fragments and obtained in biological triplicates (three independent in vitro refolding for each protein). Mean % deuterium uptakes for peptide fragments at 600s were calculated based on triplicate measurements and averaged to each amino acid based on the start and end position and the length of each peptide. The kinetic plots and the B factor for the structure plot were generated by python3 and PyMOL.

### Publication Abstract
The conformational landscapes of peptide/human leucocyte antigen (pHLA) protein complexes encompassing tumor neoantigens provide a rationale for target selection towards autologous T cell, vaccine, and antibody-based therapeutic modalities. Here, using complementary biophysical and computational methods, we characterize recurrent RAS<sub>55-64</sub> Q61 neoepitopes presented by the common HLA-A*01:01 allotype. We integrate sparse NMR restraints with Rosetta docking to determine the solution structure of NRAS<sup>Q61K</sup>/HLA-A*01:01, which enables modeling of other common RAS<sub>55-64</sub> neoepitopes. Hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry&#xa0;experiments alongside molecular dynamics simulations reveal differences in solvent accessibility and conformational plasticity across a panel of common Q61 neoepitopes that are relevant for recognition by immunoreceptors. Finally, we predict binding and provide structural models of NRAS<sup>Q61K</sup> antigens spanning the entire HLA allelic landscape, together with in vitro validation for HLA-A*01:191, HLA-B*15:01, and HLA-C*08:02. Our work provides a basis to delineate the solution surface features and immunogenicity of clinically relevant neoepitope/HLA targets for cancer therapy.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Nras

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital of Phildelphia and University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania/Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Yi  Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Nikolaos Sgourakis
Children's Hospital of Phildelphia and University of Pennsylvania


