### Accession
PXD012302

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Dpy19l2-deficient human globozoospermia reveals multiple molecular defects

### Description
Globozoospermia is a severe teratozoospermia characterized by round-headed spermatozoa without acrosomes, resulting in male infertility. The clinical treatment of globozoospermia involves primarily intracytoplasmic sperm injection because of the low fertilization rate. The deletion of Dpy19l2 is known to be the major cause of globozoospermia. The defects in Dpy19l2-deficient human sperm at the protein level were characterized by performing a isotope-based quantitative proteomic analysis between Dpy19l2-deficient globozoospermic spermatozoa and normal controls. A total of 2,549 proteins were identified, including 495 differentially expressed proteins (fold-change >2), of which 322 were upregulated and 123 were downregulated. The levels of several important proteins, including SPACA 1, IZUMO1, ZPBP1, and PLCZ1, were decreased in globozoospermic sperm. Bioinformatics analysis indicated the Dpy19l2-deficient sperm presented molecular defects in acrosome, chromatin, sperm-egg interaction, and fertilization. This study may provide insights into the mechanism of globozoospermia and help develop better treatments to increase the success rate of fertilization.

### Sample Protocol
Purified sperm cells were digested and labeled with TMT, Twenty-one fractions were obtained using Strong cation exchange chromatograph and sequentially analyzed with LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric data (RAW files) were searched against the human Uniprot database, including target and decoy sequences of common contaminants, using MaxQuant version 1.2.2.5 and the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of ±20 parts per million (ppm); product ion mass tolerance of 0.5-dalton; trypsin digestion; up to two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and TMT reagent adducts (+229.1629) on lysine and peptide amino termini as fixed modifications; and oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification. The false discovery rates (FDRs) of the identified peptides and proteins were estimated by searching against the database containing the decoy sequences. Only peptides with six amino acids and an FDR of 1% were selected for identification. The relative protein abundance ratios of the two groups were calculated from TMT reagent reporter ion intensities from HCD spectra using the Libra algorithm (Wen, Guo, Hu, Liu, Wang, Wang, Yu, Tang, Yang, Zhou, Xie, Sha, Guo and Li, 2016). A protein was considered statistically differentially expressed if the p-value was <0.05 using Student’s t-test and the fold-change in mean expression between the groups was higher than two.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Round-headed, Proteomics, Globozoospermia, Dpy19l2

### Affiliations
Nanjing Medical University
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 140 Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, Peoples R China.

### Submitter
Xiaofei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
Nanjing Med Univ, State Key Lab Reprod Med, Dept Histol & Embryol, 140 Hanzhong Rd, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, Peoples R China.


