### Accession
PXD045079

### Title
The inhibitor protein IF1 from mammalian mitochondria inhibits ATP hydrolysis but not ATP synthesis by the ATP synthase complex

### Description
The hydrolytic activity of the ATP synthase in bovine mitochondria is inhibited by a protein called IF1, but bovine IF1 has no effect on the synthetic activity of the bovine enzyme in mitochondrial vesicles in the presence of a proton motive force. As part of an investigation into the inhibitory effects on the hydrolytic and synthetic activities of ATP synthase in bovine sub-mitochondrial particles, the absolute quantities of both the ATP synthase complex and the IF1 protein have been measured.

### Sample Protocol
ATP synthase content of SMPs. Bovine SMPs (41 mg/ml) were diluted to 10 mg/ml and extracted for 15 min at 4oC with buffer containing 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, 0.2 mM neutral tris(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine) (TCEP, Sigma) and 1% (w/v) n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (DDM; final concentration). The sample was centrifuged (14,000 x g, 15 min, 4°C) and proteins in the supernatant at a concentration of 1 mg/ml, estimated with BCA, were digested for 2-2.5 h at 37oC with trypsin (sequencing grade from Roche; trypsin:protein, 1:100, w/w) in the presence of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, 0.2 mM TCEP and 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate. Then digestion was continued for a further 18 h at 37°C in the presence of a second portion of trypsin, and finally in the presence of a third portion of trypsin for 1.5-2 h. The concentrations of synthetic peptides containing stable isotopes (Cambridge Research Biochemicals, Cleveland, U. K.) dissolved in 10% (v/v) aqueous acetonitrile were determined by amino acid analysis. A known amount of this internal reference standard was added to the digest, plus an equal volume of ethyl acetate saturated with water and containing formic acid (ca. 4%, v/v). The sample was vortexed, then centrifuged (14,000 x g, 2 min, 18°C) to separate the phases. Portions of the lower aqueous phase containing the peptides were analysed by lc/ms.

### Data Protocol
Peak areas for the labelled and endogenous peptides (charge state 2+) were calculated from the extracted ion chromatograms of the parent ions with Xcalibur (ThermoFisher) with an m/z tolerance of 5 ppm, and used to determine both the subunit ratio and absolute amount of ATP synthase.

### Publication Abstract
The hydrolytic activity of the ATP synthase in bovine mitochondria is inhibited by a protein called IF<sub>1</sub>, but bovine IF<sub>1</sub> has no effect on the synthetic activity of the bovine enzyme in mitochondrial vesicles in the presence of a proton motive force. In contrast, it has been suggested based on indirect observations that human IF<sub>I</sub> inhibits both the hydrolytic and synthetic activities of the human ATP synthase, and that the activity of human IF<sub>1</sub> is regulated by the phosphorylation of serine-14 of mature IF<sub>1</sub>. Here, we have made both human and bovine IF<sub>1</sub> which are 81 and 84 amino acids long, respectively, and identical in 71.4% of their amino acids, and have investigated their inhibitory effects on the hydrolytic and synthetic activities of ATP synthase in bovine sub-mitochondrial particles. Over a wide range of conditions, including physiological conditions, both human and bovine IF<sub>1</sub> are potent inhibitors of ATP hydrolysis, with no effect on ATP synthesis. Also, substitution of serine-14 with phosphomimetic aspartic and glutamic acids had no effect on inhibitory properties, and serine-14 is not conserved throughout mammals. Therefore, it is unlikely that the inhibitory activity of mammalian IF<sub>1</sub> is regulated by phosphorylation of this residue.

### Keywords
Bovine mitochondria, Atp synthase, Absolute quantification, If1 protein

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge UK
Medical Research Council Mitochondrial Biology Unit
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Ian M. Fearnley

### Lab Head
Professor John E. Walker
Medical Research Council Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge UK


