### Accession
PXD009483

### Title
Inner ear exosomes and their potential use as biomarkers

### Description
Exosomes are nanovesicles involved in intercellular communications. They are released by a variety of cell types; however, their presence in the inner ear has not been described in the literature. The aims of this study were to determine if exosomes are present in the inner ear and, if present, characterize the changes in their protein content in response to ototoxic stress. In this laboratory investigation, inner ear explants of 5-day-old Wistar rats were cultured and treated with either cisplatin or gengentamicin. Exosomes were isolated using ExoQuick, serial centrifugation, and mini-column methods. Confirmation and characterization of exosomes was carried out using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), ZetaView, BCA protein analysis, and proteomics. Vesicles with a typical size distribution for exosomes were observed using TEM and ZetaView. Proteomic analysis detected typical exosome markers and markers for the organ of Corti. There was a statistically significant reduction in the exosome protein level and number of particles per cubic centimeter when the samples were exposed to ototoxic stress. Proteomic analysis also detected clear differences in protein expression when ototoxic medications were introduced. This is the first report describing exosomes derived from the inner ear. Because these exosomes varied in number and protein composition when the inner ear was exposed to ototoxic stress, the exciting possibility exists that they might be used as biomarkers to monitor inner ear function.

### Sample Protocol
The exosome samples were also analyzed using a label-free quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics approach at the Proteomics Core Facility of the University of Basel, Switzerland, as recently described [8]. In brief, samples were dissolved in lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1M ammoniumbicarbonate), reduced with 5mM TCEP for 15 min at 95°C and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide for 30min in the dark at room temperature. Samples were diluted, digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight (protein to trypsin ratio: 50:1) and desalted on C18 reversed phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Microspin, Harvard Apparatus). 1µg of peptides of each sample were subjected to LC–MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75μm × 30cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 28% solvent B over 75min at a flow rate of 0.2μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 240,000 full width at half-maximum (at m/z 400) followed by MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense ions. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20s. The ion accumulation time was set to 300ms (MS) and 50ms (MS/MS). The collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. For all LC-MS measurements, singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events.

### Data Protocol
To determine changes in protein expressions across samples, a MS1 based label-free quantification was carried out. Therefore, the generated raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Version 2.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS-data were exported directly from Progenesis QI in mgf format and searched against a decoy database of the forward and reverse sequences of the predicted proteome from rattus norvegicus (Uniprot, download date: 24/03/2017, total of 72,508 entries) using MASCOT. The search criteria were set as following: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); 3 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) as variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. Results from the database search were imported into Progenesis and the protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using the number of reverse hits in the dataset. The final protein lists of all quantified peptides for each protein were exported and further statically analyzed using an in-house developed R script (SafeQuant, https://github.com/eahrne/SafeQuant).

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are nanovesicles involved in intercellular communications. They are released by a variety of cell types; however, their presence in the inner ear has not been described in the literature. The aims of this study were to determine if exosomes are present in the inner ear and, if present, characterize the changes in their protein content in response to ototoxic stress. In this laboratory investigation, inner ear explants of 5-day-old Wistar rats were cultured and treated with either cisplatin or gentamicin. Hair cell damage was assessed by confocal microscopy. Exosomes were isolated using ExoQuick, serial centrifugation, and mini-column methods. Confirmation and characterization of exosomes was carried out using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), ZetaView, BCA protein analysis, and proteomics. Vesicles with a typical size distribution for exosomes were observed using TEM and ZetaView. Proteomic analysis detected typical exosome markers and markers for the organ of Corti. There was a statistically significant reduction in the exosome protein level and number of particles per cubic centimeter when the samples were exposed to ototoxic stress. Proteomic analysis also detected clear differences in protein expression when ototoxic medications were introduced. Significant changes in the proteomes of the exosomes were previously described in the context of hearing loss and ototoxic treatment. This is the first report describing exosomes derived from the inner ear. These findings may present an opportunity to conduct further studies with the hope of using exosomes as a biomarker to monitor inner ear function in the future.

### Keywords
Exosome, Inner ear, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


