### Accession
PXD017741

### Title
A new regulatory interface on RIPK2 controls XIAP binding and NOD signaling activity

### Description
Signaling via the intracellular pathogen receptors Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing proteins NOD1 and NOD2 requires Receptor Interacting Kinase 2 (RIPK2), an adaptor kinase that can be targeted for the treatment of various inflammatory diseases. However, the molecular mechanisms of how RIPK2 contributes to NOD signaling are not completely understood. We generated FLAG-tagged RIPK2 knock-in mice using CRISPR/Cas9 technology to study NOD signaling mechanisms on an endogenous level. Using cells from these mice we were able to generate a detailed map of post-translational modifications on RIPK2 during NOD signaling using mass spectrometry analysis and we identified a new regulatory interface on RIPK2, which dictates the crucial interaction with the E3 ligase XIAP.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem immunoprecipitations were performed to enrich for modified RIPK2 including UBA-beads and anti-FLAG beads. Eluted protein material was subjected to tryptic digestion using the FASP protein digestion method prior to nano flow HPLC coupled to an Q-Exactive classic mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant for feature detection and protein identification. Extracted peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mus Musculus or Homo Sapiens databases.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Ripk2, Xiap

### Affiliations
WEHI
Inflammation Division The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Researc 1G Royal Parade Parkville VIC 3052 Australia

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Ueli Nachbur
Inflammation Division The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Researc 1G Royal Parade Parkville VIC 3052 Australia


