### Accession
PXD015312

### Title
New insights into amebiasis using a human 3D-intestinal model

### Description
Entamoeba histolytica, the agent of amebiasis, colonizes the human colon and can invade the lining of the colon to disseminate in the deep layers of the intestine. Amebiasis mainly affects poor people in developing countries, where the barriers between human feces and food or water are inadequate. Humans are the only reservoir of E. histolytica and are the sole target organism of the development of the disease, which limits our knowledge of the crosstalk between the colon and the parasite, especially during the acute phase of amebiasis. In the present work, we constructed a three-Dimensional (3D)-intestinal model capable of reproducing important features of the human intestine. Using this model and leading-edge technologies, including tissue and cell imaging, transcriptomics, and proteomics, as well as ELISA-based immune response inspection, the early stages of amebic infection have been studied. The data obtained highlight the importance of several virulence markers already shown in patients or experimental models, but also underscore the involvement of other factors that appear to be key regulators of gene expression or important in the secretome of the infected tissue. In addition, we characterized  the cellular stress responses against amebiasis and novel regulatory mechanisms utilized by this parasite to modulate the immune response and survive within the human intestine.

### Sample Protocol
A nanochromatographic system (Proxeon EASY‐nLC 1000; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was coupled online to a Q Exactive™ Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each sample, 1μg of peptides was injected onto a 50‐cm homemade C18 column (1.9-μm particles, 100-Å pore size, ReproSil‐Pur Basic C18 Dr. Maisch; GmbH) and separated with a multi‐step gradient from 2% to 45% ACN at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over 240 min. The column temperature was set at 60°C. The data were acquired as previously described [Lago et al., 2017].

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software ver. 1.5.3.8 [19029910], [27809316] with database search parameters as described in [Lago et al., 2017]. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot proteome database of Entamoeba histolytica (October 26, 2018, 7,959 entries) and Human (V 2017, 20,432 entries), and the usual MS contaminants. Data were quantified with the MaxLFQ algorithm by requiring a minimal peptide ratio count of 2.

### Publication Abstract
Entamoeba histolytica is the causative agent of amebiasis, an infectious disease targeting the intestine and the liver in humans. Two types of intestinal infection are caused by this parasite: silent infection, which occurs in the majority of cases, and invasive disease, which affects 10% of infected persons. To understand the intestinal pathogenic process, several in vitro models, such as cell cultures, human tissue explants or human intestine xenografts in mice, have been employed. Nevertheless, our knowledge on the early steps of amebic intestinal infection and the molecules involved during human-parasite interaction is scarce, in part due to limitations in the experimental settings. In the present work, we took advantage of tissue engineering approaches to build a three-dimensional (3D)-intestinal model that is able to replicate the general characteristics of the human colon. This system consists of an epithelial layer that develops tight and adherens junctions, a mucus layer and a lamina propria-like compartment made up of collagen containing macrophages and fibroblast. By means of microscopy imaging, omics assays and the evaluation of immune responses, we show a very dynamic interaction between E. histolytica and the 3D-intestinal model. Our data highlight the importance of several virulence markers occurring in patients or in experimental models, but they also demonstrate the involvement of under described molecules and regulatory factors in the amoebic invasive process.

### Keywords
Infection, 3d-intestinal model, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Pasteur
Institut Pasteur, Paris, F-75015, France

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr Nancy Guillen
Institut Pasteur, Paris, F-75015, France


