### Accession
PXD030712

### Title
Salivary Hemoglobin Protects against Erosive Tooth Wear in Gastric Reflux Patients

### Description
Saliva is the most important biological factor to protect against erosive tooth wear (ETW). Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) patients have an increased risk of ETW due to the frequent presence of intrinsic acids in the oral cavity. Remarkably, not all GERD patients suffer from ETW, which might be due to differences in the composition of the saliva.

### Sample Protocol
The protocol of the study was approved by the Ethics Committees of Bauru and Ribeirão Preto School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo (CAAE 44007415.1.0000.5417 and 44007415.1.3001.5419,respectively). The same patients who had taken part in our previous AEP study [Martini et al., 2019] also took part in this study (n = 8 per group), after signing an informed consent. They were of both genders and between 20 and 60 years of age. The inclusion and exclusion criteria, as well as clinical examination, have been described previously [Martini et al., 2019]. The patients were divided into 2 groups, as follows [Martini et al., 2019]:  1 patients with GERD-related symptoms and ETW (GE; n = 8): the inclusion criteria for ETW were basic erosive wear examination (BEWE) score ≥9 or grade 3 in the upper anterior sextant (with all incisors affected) [Bartlett et al., 2008]; 2 patients with GERD-related symptoms without ETW (GNE; n = 8): patients without ETW were included in this group (BEWE = 0) [Bartlett et al., 2008]. Saliva Collection:Unstimulated saliva collection was performed during the morning, as previously described [Ventura et al., 2018]. The patients rested for 15 min sitting upright and were asked not to speak or eat before collection initiated. They rinsed their mouths with deionized water (5 mL) and swallowed the saliva for 5 min. After this period, they tilted their heads forward and down, allowing saliva to drool out in a plastic tube immersed in ice for 10 min (nonstimulated flow). The saliva samples were immediately centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min at 4 ° C. The supernatant from each sample was collected and individually frozen at –80 ° C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis of saliva was performed as previously described [Ventura et al., 2018]. Individual samples (1 mL) were extracted with an equal volume of a solution containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8. The samples were vortexed at 4 ° C for 10 min, sonicated for 5 min and centrifuged at 14,000 g at 4 ° C for 10 min. This step was repeated once more. The samples were then concentrated to 150 μL using Falcon Amicon tubes (Merck Millipore®, Tullagreen, Ireland). After concentration, the samples were reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol) for 40 min at 37 ° C and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide) for 30 min in the dark. Then 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added, and digestion was performed at 37 ° C overnight by adding 2% (w/w) trypsin (Promega ®, Madison, USA). Ten microliters of 5% formic acid was added and the samples were purified and desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific®, Rockford, IL, USA). A 1-μL aliquot was removed for protein quantification, performed by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad®, Hercules, CA, USA). Samples were resuspended in a solution containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid prior to analysis by mass spectrometry (MS). The peptide identification was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC-Xevo QTof MS system (Waters, Manchester, UK), using the ProteinLynx Global Server software, as previously described [Ventura et al., 2018]. Proteins were identified with the embedded ion accounting algorithm in the software and a search of the Homo sapiens database (reviewed only, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot) downloaded in February 2018 from UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org/). Difference in abundance between the groups was obtained using the Monte-Carlo algorithm in the ProteinLynx Global Server software and expressed as p < 0.05 for downregulated proteins and 1 – p > 0.95 for upregulated proteins. Proteins with expression significantly altered were organized according to the GNE:GE ratio.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gastroesophageal reflux, Proteomics, Tooth wear, Saliva, Hemoglobins

### Affiliations
University of São Paulo
Bauru School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil

### Submitter
Tatiana Martini

### Lab Head
Dr Tatiana Martini
Bauru School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil


