### Accession
PXD000677

### Title
14-3-3 affinity capture to identify new targets of 14-3-3 signaling during dsRNA-stimulation in human keratinocytes.

### Description
We have combined two proteomic approaches, phosphoproteomics and 14-3-3 affinity capture, to examine the signaling pathways in which 14-3-3 proteins participate and to identify new targets of 14-3-3 signaling during dsRNA-stimulation.

### Sample Protocol
HaCaT cells (~100 million cells) were tranfected with polyI:C for 4-5 h, which after the cells were extracted in 5 ml lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris, 1 % Tx-100, 350 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 50 mM NaF supplemented with Protease inhibitor cocktail and Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 1 and 3 (Sigma). The clarified solutions were pre-cleared with blocked CH Sepharose 4B for 1 h at 4 degrees Celsius. Purified BMH1 and BMH2 were coupled to Sepharose (Moorhead et al, 1999), and HaCaT cell lysates were mixed with the affinity matrix for 1 h at 4 degrees Celsius. As control, we used BSA coupled Sepharose. The mixture was washed extensively with 500 mM NaCl, and proteins that bind to the phosphopeptide-binding site of 14-3-3s were eluted with 1 mM ARAApSAPA phosphopeptide (Pozuelo Rubio et al, 2004).  The eluted phosphoproteins were concentrated to 200 µl with Amicon-4 centrifugal filter units (cut-off 3 kDa) and precipitated with 2-D Clean-Up Kit. The 14-3-3-affinity-purified proteins were resuspended with iTRAQ dissolution buffer followed by protein alkylation, trypsin digestion and iTRAQ labelling of the resulting peptides according to manufacturer´s instructions (Applied Biosystems). After labelling the samples were pooled and dried, and the peptides were fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography using an Ettan HPLC system (Amersham Biosciences) connected to a PolySULFOETHYL A column. Peptide elution was performed with a 30 min linear gradient of 0-500 mM KCl (in 20 mM KH2PO4, pH 3) at a flow rate 0.2 ml/min and 1 min fractions were collected. Each SCX-fraction containing labelled peptides was analyzed twice with LC-MS/MS. MS data were acquired automatically using Analyst QS 2.0 software. Three independent biological experiments were performed.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantitation of 14-3-3 interacting proteins was performed using ProteinPilot 4.0 interface (Applied Biosystems) and Paragon algorithm. Data files from both technical replicates of an iTRAQ sample set were processed together. Database searching was done against UniProt human protein sequences (08/2012). The search criteria were: cysteine alkylation with MMTS, trypsin digestion, biological modifications allowed, thorough search and detected protein threshold of 95% confidence (Unused ProtScore > 1.3). Automatic bias correction was used in quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is the most important viral structure recognized by cytosolic pattern-recognition receptors of the innate immune system, and its recognition results in the activation of signaling cascades that stimulate the production of antiviral cytokines and apoptosis of infected cells. 14-3-3 proteins are ubiquitously expressed regulatory molecules that participate in a variety of cellular processes, and 14-3-3 protein-mediated signaling pathways are activated by cytoplasmic dsRNA in human keratinocytes. However, the functional role of 14-3-3 protein-mediated interactions during viral dsRNA stimulation has remained uncharacterized. Here, we used functional proteomics to identify proteins whose phosphorylation and interaction with 14-3-3 is modulated by dsRNA and to characterize the signaling pathways activated during cytosolic dsRNA-induced innate immune response in human HaCaT keratinocytes. Phosphoproteome analysis showed that several MAPK- and immune-response-related signaling pathways were activated after dsRNA stimulation. Interactome analysis identified RelA-associated inhibitor, high-mobility group proteins, and several proteins associated with host responses to viral infection as novel 14-3-3 target proteins. Functional studies showed that RelA-associated inhibitor regulated dsRNA-induced apoptosis and TNF production. Integrated network analyses of proteomic data revealed that sirtuin1 was a central molecule regulated by 14-3-3s during dsRNA stimulation. Further experiments showed that sirtuin 1 negatively regulated dsRNA-induced NF&#x3ba;B transcriptional activity, suppressed expression of antiviral cytokines, and protected cells from apoptosis in dsRNA-stimulated and encephalomyocarditis-virus-infected keratinocytes. In conclusion, our data highlight the importance of 14-3-3 proteins in antiviral responses and identify RelA-associated inhibitor and sirtuin 1 as novel regulators of antiviral innate immune responses.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Hacat keratinocytes, Itraq

### Affiliations
Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Finland
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula A Nyman
Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Finland


