### Accession
PXD010780

### Title
Yeast N-terminome SILAC -  Formyl-methionine as an N-degron of a eukaryotic N-end rule pathway

### Description
Discerning yeast N-termionome with SILAC method. To analyze qualitative and quantitative analysis of N-formyl-methionine when introducing environmental stress.

### Sample Protocol
We prepped with iNrich method which comprised with labeling with D6-acetic anhydride to proteins and digested with trypsin, followed by NHS depletion of internal peptides. After desalting with SPE column, we fractionated using Basic RP fractionation method.

### Data Protocol
MSGF+ searching with N-formyl, N-acetyl, N-D3Acetyl modification. K was set as fixed D3-acetyl mod., C was set as fixed carbamidomethylation mod. FDR was set less than 1% which implemented in MSGF+.

### Publication Abstract
In bacteria, nascent proteins bear the pretranslationally generated N-terminal (Nt) formyl-methionine (fMet) residue. Nt-fMet of bacterial proteins is a degradation signal, termed fMet/N-degron. By contrast, proteins synthesized by cytosolic ribosomes of eukaryotes were presumed to bear unformylated Nt-Met. Here we found that the yeast formyltransferase Fmt1, although imported into mitochondria, could also produce Nt-formylated proteins in the cytosol. Nt-formylated proteins were strongly up-regulated in stationary phase or upon starvation for specific amino acids. This up-regulation strictly required the Gcn2 kinase, which phosphorylates Fmt1 and mediates its retention in the cytosol. We also found that the Nt-fMet residues of Nt-formylated proteins act as fMet/N-degrons and identified the Psh1 ubiquitin ligase as the recognition component of the eukaryotic fMet/N-end rule pathway, which destroys Nt-formylated proteins.

### Keywords
Yeast, Formyl, N-terminome, Silac

### Affiliations
KIST
KIST, korea

### Submitter
Shinyeong Ju

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
KIST, korea


