### Accession
PXD021665

### Title
Importance of choroid plexus-mediated extracellular vesicle secretion in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease

### Description
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a major neurodegenerative disease characterized by extracellular amyloid β (Aβ) plaques and intracellular hyperphosphorylated tau (P-tau). Increasing evidence indicates that extracellular vesicles (EVs) play an important role in AD pathogenesis. We previously reported that the choroid plexus epithelial (CPE) cells, present at the interface between blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), show increased secretion of EVs into the CSF in response to peripheral inflammation. Here, we studied the importance of CP-derived EVs in AD pathogenesis. We observed increased EV levels in the CSF of 7 weeks old transgenic APP/PS1 mice, correlating with higher Aβ CSF levels at this age, while levels normalized with age. To study whether the elevated Aβ CSF levels might be responsible for this increase, mice were intracerebroventricularly (icv) injected with Aβ oligomers (AβO) which revealed a significant increase in the amount of CD9 and CD81 positive EVs in the CSF. The importance of the CPE cells as EV source was shown by in vitro analysis of AβO stimulated primary CPE cells and in vivo analysis of the CP by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Evaluation of EV marker immunostaining, both from AβO icv injected mice and APP/PS1 mice, confirmed the upregulation of EV biogenesis in the CP. Interestingly, AβO-induced, CP-derived EVs induced pro-inflammatory effects in mixed cortical cultures (MCC) whereas proteome analysis revealed the presence of complement protein C3, amongst other inflammatory proteins. Additionally, we could show for the first time that AβO induce an upregulation of C3 in CPE cells. These data highlight the CP and CP-derived, C3-containing EVs as novel players in the emerging importance of the complement pathway in the pathogenesis of AD. Strikingly, inhibition of EV production using GW4869 resulted in protection against the AβO-induced cognitive decline. In conclusion, our results show that intraventricular AβO induce both C3 activation and EV secretion by the CP and that these EVs contain pro-inflammatory molecules, including C3, which play a role in neuroinflammation and loss of cognition. This suggests that inhibition of EV production by the CP might be an interesting therapeutic approach to be explored in the prevention or treatment of AD.

### Sample Protocol
For the experiments with icv injections of AβO, C57BL/6J mice were housed in a specific pathogen-free (SPF) animal facility. B6-Tg (Thy1-APPswe; Thy1-PSEN1 L166P) mice in a C57BL/6J background, further referred to as APP/PS1tg/wt mice, and corresponding non-transgenic littermates (APP/PS1wt/wt) were bred in a conventional animal facility. These mice harbor human transgenes for both the amyloid precursor protein (APP) bearing the Swedish mutation (KM670/671NL) and presenilin 1 (PSEN1) bearing an L166P mutation, both under the control of the neuron-specific Thy1 promotor. All animals were housed in groups of 4–6 per cage with ad libitum access to food and water and a 14 h light/10 h dark cycle. Both male and female mice were used, except for the cognition experiments where we solely worked with female mice. C57BL/6J mice were between 8 and 10 weeks of age and APP/PS1 mice were between 7 and 40 weeks of age at the time of the experiments.  AβO were prepared as described previously (Brikic et al.).  For icv injections, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and mounted on a stereotactic frame. A constant body temperature of 37°C was maintained using a heating pad. Injection coordinates were measured relative to the bregma intersection (anteroposterior 0.07 cm, mediolateral 0.1 cm, dorsoventral 0.2 cm) and were determined using the Franklin and Paxinos mouse brain atlas. By using a Hamilton needle, 5 µl of either scrambled peptide (1 µg/ml) or AβO (1 µg/ml) was injected into the left lateral ventricle. For co-injections, 2.5 µl (2 µg/ml) of either scrambled peptide or AβO was mixed with either 2.5 µl of GW4869 (4.3 mM in DMSO; D1692; Sigma) or vehicle (DMSO). CSF was collected using the cisterna magna puncture method as described earlier(Brikic et al.)  For RNA analysis, mice were transcardially perfused with a mixture of D-PBS (Sigma), 0.002% heparin sodium (5000 IU/ml; Wockhardt) and 0.5% bromophenol blue (Sigma). Next, CP was dissected from the brain tissue. Isolated CP samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for RNA analysis. For immunohistochemical analysis, mice were transcardially perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) after which brain samples were post-fixed in 4% PFA overnight (ON) followed by paraffin embedding. CP explant cultures were prepared as we described previously (Balusu et al.)  MCC were prepared as we described previously(Balusu et al.).  Primary mouse CPE cultures were prepared as we described previously(Balusu et al.).  Conditioned medium of CP explant cultures obtained from AO or scrambled peptide icv injected mice or non-injected mice was collected after 16 h of incubation at 37°C and 5% CO2. Next, the conditioned medium was centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min at 4°C to remove debris. For the qEV quality control experiment, the conditioned medium of several CP explants derived from non-injected mice was pooled and concentrated using the Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracel-10 membrane (UFC801024; Amicon). Next, the supernatant was diluted in PBS to obtain a final volume of 500 µl, after which the EVs were immediately (without intermediate storage) purified using the qEV original columns (qEV original/70 nm SEC columns; Izon Science) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After discarding the void volume (3 ml), the EVs were eluted in PBS in 500 µl fractions. For the qEV quality control experiment, fractions 1 to 20 were collected using the Automatic Fraction Collector (Izon Science) and stored ON at 4°C after which they were subjected to ZetaView analysis and protein concentration measurement. After storage at -20°C, fractions 2 and 3 were analyzed by ExoView analysis and negative staining. For the AO experiment, fractions 2 and 3 were collected, pooled and concentrated to approximately 30 µl using the Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Unit with Ultracel-10 membrane (UFC501024; Amicon). Next, Opti-MEM was added to a final volume of 300 µl that was transferred onto the MCC.

### Data Protocol
Proteome data analysis MaxQuant61 (version 1.5.7.4) was used to identify the generated MS/MS spectra using default settings. Here, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N‐termini were used as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Further, trypsin was set as the used protease with two missed cleavages allowed. The peptide mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. The mass tolerance on fragment ions was set to 20 ppm. Spectra were searched against the mouse section of the Swiss-Prot database (16,859 protein entries). For label-free quantification (LFQ), MaxLFQ embedded in MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4) was performed on proteins identified with at least two razor or unique peptides. The LFQ intensity values obtained by MaxLFQ were used for data analysis in the Perseus environment (version 1.5.3.2). Here, the intensity values were log2-transformed and filtered for reverse identifications. Proteins with at least two peptides identified were withheld for further quantification. Missing values were replaced with the help of the imputation function of Perseus based on a normal distribution of LFQ intensities (width 0.3 and standard deviation of 1.8). Multiple scatter plots with Pearson correlation were used to assess for correlation between the samples within a given group and between groups. Protein, peptide and site false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 0.01. Ingenuity pathway analysis software (IPA; Ingenuity Systems Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA) was used to perform the enrichment of canonical pathways. The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) knowledgebase (version 6.8) was used for GO term enrichment analysis. Proteins identified in the CPE primary cell EV proteome (scrambled and AβO combined, only proteins detected in at least two out of three replicates were taken into account) were submitted as the “query list” and the Mus musculus proteome was used as background list.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing evidence indicates that extracellular vesicles (EVs) play an important role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). We previously reported that the blood-cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) interface, formed by the choroid plexus epithelial (CPE) cells, releases an increased amount of EVs into the CSF in response to peripheral inflammation. Here, we studied the importance of CP-mediated EV release in AD pathogenesis. We observed increased EV levels in the CSF of young transgenic APP/PS1 mice which correlated with high amyloid beta (A&#x3b2;) CSF levels at this age. The intracerebroventricular (icv) injection of A&#x3b2; oligomers (A&#x3b2;O) in wild-type mice revealed a significant increase of EVs in the CSF, signifying that the presence of CSF-A&#x3b2;O is sufficient to induce increased EV secretion. Using in vivo, in vitro and ex vivo approaches, we identified the CP as a major source of the CSF-EVs. Interestingly, A&#x3b2;O-induced, CP-derived EVs induced pro-inflammatory effects in mixed cortical cultures. Proteome analysis of these EVs revealed the presence of several pro-inflammatory proteins, including the complement protein C3. Strikingly, inhibition of EV production using GW4869 resulted in protection against acute A&#x3b2;O-induced cognitive decline. Further research into the underlying mechanisms of this EV secretion might open up novel therapeutic strategies to impact the pathogenesis and progression of AD.

### Keywords
Choroid plexus, Ev, Csf, Alzheimer, Aβo

### Affiliations
VIB Center for Inflammation Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Teresa Mendes Maia

### Lab Head
Dr Roosmarijn E. Vandenbroucke
VIB Center for Inflammation Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


