### Accession
PXD036166

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of the high light response of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

### Description
Characterization of the phosphoproteome of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii before and 24h after the transition from normal to high light.

### Sample Protocol
To disrupt cells and extract proteins, lysis buffer (100 mM Tris/HCl, pH8.5/1 mM benzamidine/1 mM PMSF/10 mM sodium fluoride/1 mM sodium orthovanadate/10 mM sodium pyrophosphate/10 mM β-glycerophosphate/ 2% (w/v) SDS) was added to the cell pellets and samples were incubated for 15 min at 65 °C in a Thermomixer at 1,000 rpm, followed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 10 min to pellet cell debris. A lysate volume corresponding to 100 µg of protein was tryptically digested following a modified FASP protocol (Filter-aided sample prepapration, [42]). Briefly, cell lysates were transferred to centrifugal ultrafiltration devices (Amicon Ultra, 0.5 mL, 30 kDa cut-off, Merck Millipore) and concentrated to 20 µL by centrifugation for 20 min at 14,000 g at room temperature. SDS removal and alkylation of cysteines was achieved by addition of 200 µL of 100 mM Tris/HCl/8M urea/10 mM TCEP/40 mM chloroacetamide, followed by centrifugation as described above. The detergent removal and alkylation step was repeated three times. Subsequently, samples were washed four times with 200 µL of 100 mM ammonium hydrogencarbonate. Then trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) was added to the filters at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 50:1. Digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were harvested by centrifugation and trifluoroacaetic acid (TFA) was added to a final concentration of 0.5%. Peptides were desalted using C18 membranes (7 mm diameter, Empore C18, Sigma) using a stencil, and inserted into MobiCol spin columns. The columns were conditioned and equilibrated using 80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and 0.1% TFA, respectively. Then, samples were loaded on the columns followed by centrifugation for 2-5 min at 1,000 g. Membranes were washed twice with 200 µL of 0.1% TFA before peptides were eluted in 100 µL of 60% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Eluates were split into two aliquots: a sample volume corresponding to 10 µg of peptides was used directly for characterization of the proteome (‘non-enriched’), whereas, the remaining 90 µg were subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment prior to LC-MS/MS analysis (‘enriched’). Phosphopeptides were enriched by metal oxide affinity chromatography (MOAC) using TiO2 (Titansphere, 5 µm particle size, GL Sciences). TiO2 (1 mg per sample) was activated with acetonitrile and equilibrated with LB (80% (v/v) acetonitrile/5% (v/v) TFA/1 M glycolic acid). The equilibration step was repeated twice. Then LB was added to obtain 10% (w/v) TiO2 slurry. Peptide samples were resuspended in 50 µL LB, then added to 10 µL of TiO2 slurry and the mixture was incubated for 1 h at room temperature at 1,200 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf). Afterwards, the slurry was transferred to in-house made C18 STAGE tips (Empore C18, Sigma [43]). The buffer was removed by centrifugation and the TiO2 beads were washed twice each with LB and 1% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) TFA (W1). Non-phosphorylated peptides that bound to the C18 plug were removed by two washes with 80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) TFA (W2).  Phosphopeptides were eluted from the TiO2 and onto the C18 material by 6 successive washes with 0.4 M NaH2PO4/1% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were washed once with W1 and subsequently eluted with 60% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) TFA (fraction 1). Strongly bound phosphopeptides were eluted with 5% ammonia (fraction 2). Peptides that remained on the C18 plug were washed once with W1, followed by elution with 60% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) TFA (fraction 3).  Samples were analysed on an LC-MS/MS system consisting of an Ultimate 3000 NanoLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled via a Nanospray Flex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were concentrated on a trap column (Acclaim Pepmap C18, 5x0.3 mm, 3 µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) for 3 min using 4% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.05% (v/v) in LC/MS grade water at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. The trap column was operated in back-flush mode, allowing the transfer of peptides on a reversed-phase column (Acclaim PepMap, 500x0.075 mm, 2 µm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for chromatographic separation. The buffers used were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid/80% (v/v) acetonitrile in ultrapure water (B). The gradient was programmed as follows:  5% B to 36% over 160 min, 36% to 99% B over 10 min and 99% B for 20 min. Flow rate was 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (‘Top12’), alternating between one MS1 full scan and up to 12 MS2 scans. Full scans were acquired with the following settings: AGC target 3e6, MS1 resolution 70,000, maximum injection time 50 ms, scan range 300 to 1,400 m/z. Settings for MS were: AGC target 5e4, resolution 17,500, MS2 maximum injection time 80 ms (200 ms for enriched samples), intensity threshold 1e4, normalized collision energy 27 (HCD)).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data obtained from non-enriched and enriched samples were searched separately with MaxQuant (v. 2.0.3.0, [44]) against a concatenated database consisting of nuclear- (v. 5.6, Phytozome 13), chloroplast- (GenBank BK000554.2) and mitochondria-encoded (GenBank NC_001638.1) proteins. False discovery rates were 1% on peptide and protein level. Default settings for identification of tryptic peptides and label-free quantification (LFQ) were applied with the following exceptions: “Fast LFQ” was deactivated. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications in addition to oxidation of methionine. Moreover, “match between runs” was enabled. Two parameter groups with identical settings were used to allow for separate normalization of LFQ data of LL and HL samples. Protein LFQ intensity and phosphorylation site intensity data were pre-processed in Perseus (v. 1.6.15.0, [45]): Intensities were log2-transformed, followed by removal of reverse hits, contaminants and proteins only identified by site. Median subtraction was performed for intensity normalization. Then the lowest intensity value was subtracted from all other values of a same sample to obtain positive values only. Proteins and phosphorylation sites with less than 75% percent valid values in at least one condition (LL or HL) were discarded. Missing values were imputed using the impSeqRob (protein intensities) and MinProb (phosphorylation site intensities) algorithms available in the online tool NAGuideR [46-48]. Differential expression analysis was carried out using PolyStest [49] with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Photosystem I (PSI) with its associated light-harvesting system is the most important generator of reducing power in photosynthesis. The PSI core complex is highly conserved, whereas peripheral subunits as well as light-harvesting proteins (LHCI) reveal a dynamic plasticity. Moreover, in green alga, PSI-LHCI complexes are found as monomers, dimers, and state transition complexes, where two LHCII trimers are associated. Herein, we show light-dependent phosphorylation of PSI subunits PsaG and PsaH as well as Lhca6. Potential consequences of the dynamic phosphorylation of PsaG and PsaH are structurally analyzed and discussed in regard to the formation of the monomeric, dimeric, and LHCII-associated PSI-LHCI complexes.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Photosystems, Photosynthesis, Chlamydomonas

### Affiliations
IBBP Muenster
IBBP, WWU Muenster

### Submitter
Martin Scholz

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
IBBP, WWU Muenster


