### Accession
PXD029815

### Title
Haliotis discus hannai cerebral ganglion LC-MS

### Description
The circadian rhythm is the most general and important rhythm in biological organisms. In this study, continuous 24 h video recordings showed that the cumulative movement distance and duration of the abalone, Haliotis discus hannai reached their maximum values between 20:00–00:00, but both were significantly lower between 08:00–12:00 than at any other time of day or night (P < 0.05). To investigate the causes of these diel differences in abalone movement behavior, their cerebral ganglia were harvested at 00:00 (group D) and 12:00 (group L) to screen for differentially expressed proteins using tandem mass tagging (TMT) quantitative proteomics. Seventy-five significantly different proteins were identified in group D vs. group L. Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) was found three times, and its expression levels differed significantly between day and night (P < 0.05). A cosine rhythm analysis found that the concentration of acetylcholine (Ach) and the expression levels of AchE tended to be low during the day and high at night, and high during the day and low at night, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were minced individually with liquid nitrogen and lysed in lysis buffer containing 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH=8), 6 M Urea and 0.2% SDS, followed by 5 min of ultrasonication on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4°C and the supernatant was transferred to a clean tube. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford protein assay. The supernatant from each sample, containing precisely 0.1 mg of protein, was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega) at 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. After 16 h of digestion at 37°C, peptides were desalted with C18 cartridge to remove the high urea, and desalted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Desalted peptides were labeled with TMT6/10-plex reagents (TMT6/10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set, Thermo Fisher), following the manufacturer’s instructions. TMT-labeled peptide mix was fractionated using a C18 column (Waters BEH C18 4.6×250 mm, 5μm) on a Rigol L3000 HPLC operating at 1 mL/min, the column oven was set as 50°C. The eluates were monitored at UV 214 nm, collected for a tube per minute and merged into 10 fractions finally. All fractions were dried under vacuum and reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) for subsequent analyses. Shotgun proteomics analyses were performed using an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with spray voltage of 2.3 kV and capillary temperature of 320°C. The 40 most abundant precursor ions from full MS scan were selected for fragmentation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a resolution of 15000 (at 200 m/z) with an AGC target value of 1×105, a maximum ion injection time of 45 ms, a normalized collision energy of 32%, an intensity threshold of 8.3×103, and the dynamic exclusion parameter of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra from each fraction were separately searched against the X101SC19060472-Z01-Hdh. changID. Fasta and Hdh. Swissprot_Annotation. xls databases using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2 search engine (PD 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The searched parameters used were: a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion scans; and a mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for the product ion scans. Regarding protein identification, proteins with at least one unique peptide were identified with a false discovery rate of less than 1.0% at the peptide and protein levels. Proteins containing similar peptides which could not be distinguished based on MS/MS analysis were categorized into separate protein groups. Reporter Quantification (TMT) was used for TMT quantification. The protein quantification results were analyzed statistically using Mann-Whitney tests, with significance ratios set at P < 0.05 and FC in the range 1.5–0.67, to screen the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Gene Ontology (GO) and InterPro (IPR) analyses were conducted using the Interproscan-5 program against non-redundant protein databases (including Pfam, PRINTS, ProDom, SMART, ProSiteProfiles, PANTHER), and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to analyze the protein families and pathways. An enrichment pipeline was used to perform the enrichment analyses of GO, IPR and KEGG.

### Publication Abstract
The circadian rhythm is one of the most general and important rhythms in biological organisms. In this study, continuous 24-h video recordings showed that the cumulative movement distance and duration of the abalone, <i>Haliotis discus hannai,</i> reached their maximum values between 20:00-00:00, but both were significantly lower between 08:00-12:00 than at any other time of day or night (<i>P</i>&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05). To investigate the causes of these diel differences in abalone movement behavior, their cerebral ganglia were harvested at 00:00 (group D) and 12:00 (group L) to screen for differentially expressed proteins using tandem mass tagging (TMT) quantitative proteomics. Seventy-five significantly different proteins were identified in group D vs. group L. The differences in acetylcholinesterase (AchE) expression levels between day- and nighttime and the key role in the cholinergic nervous system received particular attention during the investigation. A cosine rhythm analysis found that the concentration of acetylcholine (Ach) and the expression levels of AchE tended to be low during the day and high at night, and high during the day and low at night, respectively. However, the rhythmicity of the diel expression levels of acetylcholine receptor (nAchR) appeared to be insignificant (<i>P&#xa0;&gt;</i>&#xa0;0.05). Following the injection of three different concentrations of neostigmine methylsulfate, as an AchE inhibitor, the concentration of Ach in the hemolymph, and the expression levels of nAchR in the cerebral ganglia increased significantly (<i>P</i>&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05). Four hours after drug injection, the cumulative movement distance and duration of abalones were significantly higher than those in the uninjected control group, and the group injected with saline (<i>P</i>&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05). The expression levels of the core diurnal clock Bmal1 over a 24-h period also tended to be high during the day and low at night. First, a co-immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated the binding between Bmal1 and AchE or nAchR. A dual-luciferase gene test and electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that Bmal1 bound to the promoter regions of AchE and nAchR. Twenty-four hours after silencing the Bmal1 gene, the expression levels of AchE and nAchR decreased significantly compared to those of the dsEGFP and PBS control groups, further showing that Bmal1 mediates the cholinergic system to regulate the behavioral rhythm of abalone. These findings shed light on the endocrine mechanism regulating the rhythmic behavior of abalone, and provide a reference for understanding the life history adaptation strategies of nocturnal organisms and the proliferation and protection of bottom dwelling economically important organisms.

### Keywords
Haliotis discus hannai, Cholinergic system, Movement behaviour

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science, College of Ocean and Earth Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen
Xiamen University

### Submitter
Xiaolong Gao

### Lab Head
Dr Caihuan Ke
State Key Laboratory of Marine Environmental Science, College of Ocean and Earth Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen


