### Accession
PXD041264

### Title
NAIA for cysteine profiling in HepG2 cells, protein target identification of covalent ligand and studying cysteine oxidative modifications

### Description
New cysteine probes, N-acryloylindole-alkynes (NAIAs), have been developed. We have applied NAIA-5 for cysteine profiling in HepG2 cell lysates, and the results have been compared to the conventional cysteine probe iodoacetamide-alkyne (IAA). NAIA-5 allows identification of more ligandable Cys than IAA in our experiment, and more interesting, a unique pool of Cys which have not been profiled previously by any reported cysteine probe.   We have further utilized NAIA-5 for covalent ligand screening experiment. This allows us to discover hit compounds targeting the newly identified cysteines and proteins. One of the hit compounds, CL1, demonstrated good bioactivity by arresting cell cycle at G1 phase through targeting proteins associated with cell cycle and regulations.  In addition, NAIA-5 has been successfully coupled with NAI compound for studying cysteine oxidative modifications in HepG2 cells by MS experiments.

### Sample Protocol
For profiling reactive cysteines in cell lysates, HepG2 cells were lysed in PBS by sonication. After BCA assay and protein normalization, HepG2 cell lysates in PBS (2 mg/mL, 2 mL) were incubated with NAIA-5 and IAA (10 µM), respectively, at room temperature for 1 h with vortexing. Then, the samples were incubated with a master mix solution for CuAAC reaction, containing CuSO4, TBTA, DTB-PEG-azide and TECP (final concentrations are 1 mM, 100 µM, 100 µM and 1 mM respectively). After incubation at room temperature for 1 h with vortexing, pre-chilled acetone (12 mL) was added to the samples and proteins were allowed to precipitate out at -20 °C overnight. The samples were centrifuged at 5,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, and the supernatant was discarded. The protein pellets labeled by NAIA-5 and IAA were then combined, and washed with pre-chilled methanol twice. The protein pellets were then re-dispersed in 1.2% SDS in PBS (w/v), followed by heating at 80 °C for 5 min. Any insoluble solids were discarded by centrifugation at 6,500 g for 5 min, and the supernatant were transferred to PBS solution containing Pierce™ Streptavidin Agarose beads (20349; Thermo Scientific) with final concentration of SDS equal to 0.2% (w/v). The samples and beads were incubated at 4 °C with rotation overnight. The beads were then washed with PBS and water, and re-dispersed in 6M urea in PBS. The samples were reduced by TCEP (1 mM) at 65 °C for 20 min, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (18 mM) at 37 °C for 30 min in dark. The beads were then spun down by centrifugation at 1,400 g for 2 min, washed with PBS and re-suspended in 2M urea in PBS. The proteins on the beads were then digested by sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. After tryptic digestion, the beads were spun down by centrifugation at 1,400 g for 2 min and the supernatant was discarded. The beads were washed thrice with PBS and thrice with water, followed by the addition of elution buffer solution (MeCN/H2O, 1:1, v/v; with 0.1% formic acid) to the beads and incubation for 5 min at 37 °C. The probe-modified peptides were eluted out from the beads and the supernatant was collected. The beads were incubated with a new elution buffer solution, spun down and the supernatant solution was combined with the previous elution buffer solution. The combined solution containing the eluted probe-modified peptides were dried and desalted by C18 Stage tips, and the peptides (200 ng) were sent for LC-MS/MS analysis using Aurora C18 UHPLC column (75 μm i.d. × 25cm length × 1.6 μm particle size; IonOpticks, Australia) coupled to timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker).  For profiling reactive cysteines in live HepG2 cells, HepG2 cells were treated with NAIA-5 and IAA (100 µM), respectively, in serum-free medium for 30 min at 37 °C.  After that, the cells were washed with PBS and lysed in PBS by sonication. The samples were then prepared and run on timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer using the aforementioned protocol for the cell lysate experiment.  For competitive MS-based ABPP experiments, HepG2 cell lysates in PBS (2 mg/mL, 2 mL) were first treated with DMSO control or CL-Sc (500 µM)/CL1 (50 µM) at room temperature for 1 h. The samples were then incubated with NAIA-5 (10 µM) at room temperature for 1 h with vortexing, followed by incubation with a master mix solution for CuAAC reaction, containing CuSO4, TBTA, DTB-PEG-azide and TECP (final concentrations are 1 mM, 100 µM, 100 µM and 1 mM respectively). After incubation at room temperature for 1 h with vortexing, pre-chilled acetone (12 mL) was added to the samples and proteins were allowed to precipitate out at -20 °C overnight. The samples were centrifuged at 5,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, and the supernatant was discarded. The protein pellets from the control and treated group were washed separately with pre-chilled methanol twice (no combining samples in this step). The samples were then prepared and run on timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer using the aforementioned protocol for MS-based ABPP experiments.   For studying cysteine oxidative modifications, HepG2 cells were pre-treated with solvent vehicle, H2O2 (1 mM) or H2O2 (1 mM)+NAC (5 mM) in serum-free medium for 15 min at 37 oC. The cells were then incubated with NAI compound 3b (50 µM; 10 min) to label free thiols in live cells, followed by cell lysis, TCEP reduction and NAIA-5 labeling (100 µM) of the oxidized cysteines. The samples were then prepared, without any pairing of samples, and run on timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer using the aforementioned protocol.

### Data Protocol
For cysteine profiling experiment of HepG2 cell lysates using NAIA-5 and IAA, the data was searched against the Uniprot human database using MaxQuant v2.0.3.0, specified with trypsin digestion (allowed up to 3 missed cleavages) and cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) as a static modification. The search also allowed up to 5 variable modifications for methionine oxidation (+15.99491), N-terminal acetylation (+42.01056), cysteine modification by NAIA-5 (+681.38500) or cysteine modification by IAA (+494.32167). The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.  For competitive MS-based ABPP experiment to determine ligandability of the identified Cys, the data was searched against the Uniprot human database using MaxQuant v2.0.3.0, specified with trypsin digestion (allowed up to 3 missed cleavages) and cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) as a static modification. The search also allowed up to 5 variable modifications for methionine oxidation (+15.99491), N-terminal acetylation (+42.01056) or cysteine modification by NAIA-5 (+681.38500). The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. In the data analysis, peptides with non-zero LFQ intensity for all the 2 replicate runs in the control group and zero LFQ intensity for all the 2 runs in the CL-Sc-treated group were assigned as LFQ ratios of 20. The LFQ ratios for other peptides were calculated by (average LFQ intensity of control samples) / (average LFQ intensity of CL-Sc-treated samples), and those peptides with invalid values were filtered out.  For competitive MS-based ABPP experiment to determine protein targets of CL1, the data was analysed using the same method for the experiment to determine ligandability, except that peptides with non-zero LFQ intensity for all the 2 replicate runs in the control group and zero LFQ intensity for all the 2 runs in the CL1-treated group were assigned as LFQ ratios of 50.  For studying cysteine oxidative modifications, the data was analysed using the same method for the competitive MS-based ABPP experiments. For the peptides with zero LFQ intensity for all the 2 replicate runs in the control group and non-zero LFQ intensity for all the 2 runs in the treated group, they were assigned for LFQ ratio of 50. On the other hand, peptides with non-zero LFQ intensity for all the 2 replicate runs in the control group and zero LFQ intensity for all the 2 runs in the treated group were assigned as LFQ ratios of 0.01. The LFQ ratios for other peptides were calculated, and peptides with invalid values were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
Cysteine has been exploited as the binding site of covalent drugs. Its high sensitivity to oxidation is also important for regulating cellular processes. To identify new ligandable cysteines which can be hotspots for therapy and to better study cysteine oxidations, we develop cysteine-reactive probes, N-acryloylindole-alkynes (NAIAs), which have superior cysteine reactivity owing to delocalization of &#x3c0; electrons of the acrylamide warhead over the whole indole scaffold. This allows NAIAs to probe functional cysteines more effectively than conventional iodoacetamide-alkyne, and to image oxidized thiols by confocal fluorescence microscopy. In mass spectrometry experiments, NAIAs successfully capture new oxidized cysteines, as well as a new pool of ligandable cysteines and proteins. Competitive activity-based protein profiling experiments further demonstrate the ability of NAIA to discover lead compounds targeting these cysteines and proteins. We show the development of NAIAs with activated acrylamide for advancing proteome-wide profiling and imaging ligandable cysteines and oxidized thiols.

### Keywords
Profiling ligandable cysteines and studying cysteine oxidative modifications in human liver cancer cells hepg2 by naia-5 using bruker timstof ms

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Assistant Profssor, School of Biomedical Sciences and Department of Pathology, School of Clinical Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, P. R. China

### Submitter
Clive Yik-Sham CHUNG

### Lab Head
Dr Clive Yik-Sham CHUNG
Assistant Profssor, School of Biomedical Sciences and Department of Pathology, School of Clinical Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, P. R. China


