### Accession
PXD037100

### Title
Akkermansia muciniphila SEV-containing proteins smaller than 30 kDa

### Description
Histone lysine lactylation (Klac) is a new posttranslational modification (PTM) that is installed by acetyltransferase to modulate specific immune responses1 and oncogenesis2,3. Akkermansia muciniphila (A. muciniphila) is a beneficial bacterium that blunts ulcerative colitis (UC) in a mouse model by secreting extracellular vesicles (SEVs)4. Although many histone sites are known to contain lysine lactylation, whether this modification is regulated to modulate specific biological functions by exogenous acetyltransferase or intestinal microbiota is not well understood. Here, we discovered that SEV from A. muciniphila, rather than A. muciniphila per se, has anti-Th17 (T helper 17) differentiation activity. We further screened the composition of SEV and found that Amuc_2172 is the key active component. As a GCN5-related acetyltransferase of A. muciniphila, Amuc_2172 is accessible to naïve T cells and functions as a lactylation transferase on Lys4 of histone H3. Accelerated histone H3 lactylation (H3Klac) on Lys4 competitively blocks trimethylation (H3Kme3) on Il17a loci in the process of Th17-cell differentiation. Additionally, intraperitoneal application of recombinant Amuc_2172 also inhibited Th17 and dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced UC phenotypes in vivo; moreover, bioengineered Amuc_2172 showed improved colitis site delivery and higher Th17 inhibition potential compared to Amuc_2172 alone. Our study reveals not only a potential therapeutic strategy for treating colitis but also a model via which lysine lactylation is regulated by the intestinal microbiota, which may be broadly applicable to understand the crosstalk of bacteria and immunity.

### Sample Protocol
A. muciniphila (BAA-835, ATCC, Rockville, MD, USA) was cultured under anaerobic conditions until the OD (optical density) score at 600 nm reached 1.5, as previously described. The SEV was isolated as follows: the fecal samples (stored at -80 °C) or A. muciniphila culture supernatant were dissolved in 40 ml sterile PBS. After centrifugation at 10,000 g for twenty minutes, the supernatant was filtered through a 40 μm filter (Corning, NY, USA) and a 0.22 μm filter (Corning). The filtrate was then centrifuged using an ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter, Indianapolis, IN, USA) at 100,000 g at 4 °C for two hours. After washing with PBS, the filtrate was precipitated by ultracentrifugation (Beckman Coulter) at 200,000 g for two hours at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded, and the final pellets were suspended with 500μl PBS and temporarily stored at 4 °C for further usage. SEV was analyzed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), quantified by the Bradford assay, and confirmed by Coomassie blue staining on sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were searched using Protein Discoverer(version 2.4, thermo Fisher Scientific）with Mascot (version 2.7.0, Matrix Science). The data were processed with UniProt Akkermansia_muciniphila protein database (2137 entries，download in 20220823). The mass tolerances were 10 ppm for precursor and fragment Mass Tolerance 0.05 Da. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed.The search engine set protein N-acetylation and oxidation on methionine as variable modifications, the cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification.Significance threshold was p<0.05 .

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sev, Lc/msms, Akkermansia muciniphila

### Affiliations
86-13162869989
Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology; Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease; NHC Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases; State Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes; Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200001, China

### Submitter
Qian Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Mingming Zhang
Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology; Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease; NHC Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases; State Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes; Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200001, China


