### Accession
PXD022961

### Title
Lineage‐Mismatched Mitochondrial Replacement in an Inducible Mitochondrial Depletion Model Effectively Restores the Original Proteomic Landscape of Recipient Cells

### Description
The therapeutic potential of mitochondrial transfer has been recently demonstrated in a number of preclinical and clinical studies. However, the molecular mechanisms underpinning the success of mitochondrial transfer, including how exogenous mitochondria may influence the cellular proteomic landscape, are largely unknown. Using a mitochondrial depletion model designed to eliminate endogenous cellular mitochondria, we evaluated proteomic profiles in cells following exogenous mitochondrial transplantation. Our data demonstrate that exogenous mitochondrial transfer does not significantly alter the proteomic profile in non-depleted host cells, and largely rescues the aberrant proteome of mitochondrial-depleted cells following internalization. Our data add to a growing body of supportive evidence suggesting that transfer of exogenous mitochondria does not disrupt or perturb the intracellular landscape, and further demonstrate that mitochondrial transfer is capable of restoring cellular phenotype in an induced-depletion model.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing was conducted similarly to Li, et al MCP 2015 (mcp.M114.045724), with the following exceptions.  Briefly, sample preparation using approximately 10E+04 cells: the cell pellets were rinsed three times with 1 mL volumes of PBS, spun down at 200 g for 10 min, and the cell pellet was resuspended in 4 µL of lysis buffer (10 M urea, 2.5 M thiourea, 10 mM DTT (dithiothreitol) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), pH 8.4) and loaded onto SPE tips (100 µL pipette tips fitted with 2 punches of Empore Octadecyl C18, 47 mm extraction disk, taken with a flat needle and previously wetted with 2 x 50 µL of methanol and washed with 2x 50 µL water). Extracted proteins were reduced by the addition of 10 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature (~ 27 ˚C) and alkylated by the addition of 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark (both with 1 min spins at 3000 x g). Prior to digestion, the membrane-bound lysates were washed with 2 x 10 µL 25 mM ABC, pH 8. Protein digestion was performed with trypsin (Promega) at an E:S ratio of 1:10 with overnight digestion in a shaker at 45 ˚C (trypsin was added to the tips and then washed with 15 µL 15 mM ABC . After digestion, the tips were spun at 5,000 x g for 15 s to remove the remaining ABC and peptides were eluted by 2 x 10 µL of 65% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and spinning at 5,000 x g for 3 minutes each time. The eluate was evaporated to dryness in a SpeedVac set to 35˚C and samples were reconstituted in 10 µL of 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed via Proteome Discoverer v 2.3, with the data searched against the human proteome database (including common contaminants) from UniProt (reviewed sequences, release ver. 2020_01) after recalibration. Precursor search tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment mass was set to 0.06 Da respectively. Methionine oxidation, N/Q deamidation, Phosphorylation on S/T/Y, protein N-Term acetylation were searched as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. The FDR for both peptides and proteins were set as 1%. Label-free quantitation was accomplished by comparison of the peptide m/z and z state values and retention time across biological replicates. Protein quantitation was performed by Label Free Quantification ( LFQ ) method using Proteome Discoverer v. 2.3. Only unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Precursor abundance was calculated based on intensity of the peptides and intensity normalization was done by the total peptide amount across samples. Protein abundance was estimated from peptides using a summed abundance approach and no imputation was used for interpolating missing intensities.

### Publication Abstract
In addition to critical roles in bioenergetics, mitochondria are key contributors to the regulation of many other functions in cells, ranging from steroidogenesis to apoptosis. Numerous studies further demonstrate that cell type-specific differences exist in mitochondria, with cells of a given lineage tailoring their endogenous mitochondrial population to suit specific functional needs. These findings, coupled with studies of the therapeutic potential of mitochondrial transplantation, provide a strong impetus to better understand how mitochondria can influence cell function or fate. Here an inducible mitochondrial depletion modelis used to study how cells lacking endogenous mitochondria respond, on a global protein expression level, to transplantation with lineage-mismatched (LM) mitochondria. It is shown that LM mitochondrial transplantation does not alter the proteomic profile in nonmitochondria-depleted recipient cells; however, enforced depletion of endogenous mitochondria results in dramatic changes in the proteomic landscape, which returns to the predepletion state following internalization of LM mitochondria. These data, derived from a cell system that can be rendered free of influence by endogenous mitochondria, indicate that transplantation of mitochondria-even from a source that differs significantly from the recipient cell population, effectively restores a normal proteomic landscape to cells lacking their own mitochondria.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial depletion; mitochondrial transfer; quantitative proteomics.

### Affiliations
Northeastern University Biology Department
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Fausto Capelluto

### Lab Head
Dr Dori C. Woods
Northeastern University Biology Department


