### Accession
PXD011349

### Title
Human myocardial biopsy LC-MS/MS

### Description
In order to explore the association of the protein abundances in endomyocardial biopsies from the left and the right ventricle with echocardiographic parameters in DCM patients we did a global proteome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
From each patient three EMBs from the LV and RV respectively, were pooled, grinded to powder and protein extracted with Qiazol. Protein precipitated with isopropanol was reconstituted in 100 µl of 8M urea/ 2M thiourea. Protein was reduced and alkylated before subsequent digestion with lysC (1:100) for 3 h and trypsin (1:10) at 37°C for 16-18 hours. The resulting peptides were cleaned using reversed-phase material (µ-C18 ZipTips) and separated on a nano-Acquity UPLC column in a 90 min non-linear gradient ranging from 2 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. The detection was carried out in DDA mode on a LTQ Orbitrab Velos instrument selecting TOP 20 precursor ions for CID fragmentation per cycle at an exclusion time of 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching a forward-reverse UniProt/SwissProt database with a restriction to human entries using the SorcererTM software platform with the Sequest algorithm implemented in Rosetta Elucidator software suite (Ceiba Solutions, Boston, MA, USA). A statistical evaluation of the results was performed by analysis in peptide/protein prophet and the annotation of peptides was carried out at a false-positive rate of <1%. Only proteins with a peptide count ≥2 were used for statistical analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Human, Lc-ms/ms, Ventricle, Myocardial biopsy

### Affiliations
University Medicine Greifswald Department for Functional Genomics
Dept. of Functional Genomics

### Submitter
Elke Hammer

### Lab Head
Dr Elke Hammer
University Medicine Greifswald Department for Functional Genomics


