### Accession
PXD018338

### Title
SWATH-based quantitative proteomics data derived from whole grain of Malaysian local pigmented and non-pigmented rice varieties

### Description
Information about protein expression in rice grain across both pigmented and non-pigmented rice varieties is still relatively scarce. The data provided here represent proteomic data obtained from selected 6 Malaysian local rice varieties with varying pigmentations (black, red and white). The selected pigmented rice varieties such as black (BALI and Pulut hitam 9) and red rice (MRQ100 and MRM16) have shown high antioxidant activities and non-pigmented rice (MRQ76 and MR297) contain amino acid and micronutrient contents. This project aimed to obtain global protein expression profile as well as differential protein expression between the selected pigmented and non-pigmented rice varieties particularly proteins with their functions responsible for nutritional (i.e. antioxidant, folate and low glycaemic index) and quality (i.e. aromatic) traits. Integration of this proteomics dataset with other available in-house omics data could facilitate the identification of significant functional markers related to nutritional and quality traits. Total proteins were prepared from dehusked matured seeds harvested from three different rice plants of each variety (3 protein samples per variety). The proteins were trypsin digested before subjected to SWATH-MS proteomics analysis. Proteins were identified by matching tandem mass (MS/MS) spectra from both 1D and 2D IDA to Oryza sativa japonica and indica rice databases available at UniProt by using ProteinPilot software (v4.2) (AB Sciex). Quantification of proteins was carried out by determining protein peak areas extracted from SWATH analysis data sets using PeakView (v2.1) (AB Sciex) software. Differentially expressed protein between varieties were identified using T-test analysis with a set threshold for fold change ± 1.5 and p‐value < 0.05.

### Sample Protocol
Total Protein Extraction  Six Malaysian local rice varieties with varying grain pigmentations were selected for rice proteomics study including black rice (BALI and Pulut Hitam 9), red rice (MRM16 and MRQ100) and white rice (MR297 and MRQ76). The matured seeds of those selected varieties were harvested (three plants of each variety) from MARDI rice field plots at Seberang Perai, Penang, Malaysia. The rice seeds were first dehusked and ground into powder in the presence of liquid nitrogen. The protein was extracted from each rice variety (3 biological replicates each variety) using modified phenol extraction method as described in Faurobert et al. (2007). Air-dried protein pellets were sent to The Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF), Macquarie University, Sydney NSW, Australia for protein analysis. Sample preparation  The acetone precipitated protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris‐HCl (pH 8.8), vortexed and water‐sonicated for 15 min. The protein concentrations were then determined by BCA assay. Approximately 50 µg of each sample (all 18 samples) was taken and diluted with 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Samples were subsequently reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) before subjected to a 16-hour trypsin digestion at 37 °C. The digested samples were purified, dried and resuspended in 50 µL of loading buffer (2 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid).  Peptide samples were subjected to peptide separation using Eksigent NanoLC® Ultra systems (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) equipped with analytical column nano cHiPLC column (15 cm x 200 µm, 120Å, 3 μm) coupled to TripleTOF™ 6600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, USA). For SWATH analysis, 4 µL for each sample was diluted with 6 µL of loading buffer and SWATH were acquired in random order with one blank run after each sample. For pH RP‐HPLC, ion library was generated through high pH (HpH) fractionation with 12.5 µL of each sample (total 18 samples) were pooled and fractionated by High pH RP‐HPLC. The pooled sample was then purified, dried and resuspended in mobile phase buffer A (5 mM ammonium hydroxide solution, pH 10.5). After sample loading and washing with 3% buffer B (5 mM ammonia solution with 90% acetonitrile, pH 10.5) for 10 min at a flow rate of 300 μL/min, the buffer B concentration was increased from 3% to 30% over 55 min and then to 70% between 55 to 65 min and to 90% between 65‐70 min. The eluent was collected every 2 min at the beginning of the gradient and at one minute intervals for the rest of the gradient. Upon HpH‐RP‐HPLC separation, 17 fractions were concatenated (0 – 85 min), dried and resuspended in 11 µL of loading buffer. Subsequently, 10 µL per fraction was taken for 2D-IDA analysis. Data acquisition For analysis in 2D-IDA, 10 µL of sample was first injected onto a reverse‐phase C18 self‐packed peptide trap for pre‐concentration and desalted with loading buffer, at 5 µL/min for 3 min. before switching to the analytical column. Peptides were eluted from the column using a linear solvent gradient from mobile phase A: mobile phase B (95:5) to mobile phase A: mobile phase B (65:35) at 600 nL/min over a period of 120 min. After peptide elution, the column was cleaned with 95% buffer B for 6 min and then equilibrated with 95% buffer A for 10 min before the injection of next sample. The reverse phase nanoLC eluent was subjected to positive ion nanoflow electrospray analysis in an information dependant acquisition mode (IDA). In the IDA mode, a TOF‐MS survey scan was acquired (350‐1500 m/z, 0.25 sec) with the 20 most intense multiply charged ions (2+ ‐ 5+; exceeding 200 counts per sec) in the survey scan sequentially subjected to MS/MS analysis. MS/MS spectra were accumulated for 100 msec in the mass range of 100–1800 m/z with rolling collision energy. For DIA using SWATH method, 10 µL sample was injected onto a reverse‐phase C18 self‐packed peptide trap for pre‐concentration and desalted with loading buffer, at 5 µL/min for 3 min. The peptide trap was then switched into line with the analytical column. Peptides were eluted from the column using a linear solvent gradient from mobile phase A: mobile phase B (95:5) to mobile phase A: mobile phase B (65:35) at 600 nL/min over a 120 min period. After peptide elution, the column was cleaned with 95% buffer B for 6 min and then equilibrated with 95% buffer A for 10 min before next sample injection. The reverse phase nanoLC eluent was subjected to positive ion nanoflow electrospray analysis in a data independent acquisition (SWATH). In SWATH mode, first a TOFMS survey scan was acquired (350‐1500 m/z, 50 msec) then the 100 predefined m/z ranges were sequentially subjected to MS/MS analysis. MS/MS spectra were accumulated for 30 milliseconds in the mass range of 350‐1500 m/z with rolling collision energy optimised for lowed m/z in m/z window +10%.

### Data Protocol
The data files generated by 2D‐IDA‐MS analysis were searched with ProteinPilot version 5.0 (AB SCIEX Foster City, CA, USA) using the ParagonTM algorithm in thorough mode. Carbamidomethylation of Cys residues was selected as a fixed modification. An Unused Score cut‐off was set to 1.3 (95% confidence for identification), and global protein FDR of 1%). Two rice databases which are available in UniProt\Proteomes were combined and used for protein annotation, 1. Oryza sativa subsp. japonica (Strain: cv. Nipponbare, Proteome ID: UP000059680) and 2. Oryza sativa subsp. indica (Strain: cv. 93-11, Proteome ID: UP000007015). The ion library was constructed from 2D‐IDAs. Ion library and SWATH data files were imported into PeakView version 2.2 (AB SCIEX Foster City, CA, USA. Protein peak area information in SWATH data were extracted using PeakView software with the following parameters: Top 6 most intense fragments of each peptide were extracted from the SWATH data sets (75 ppm mass tolerance, 5 min retention time window). Shared and modified peptides were excluded. After data processing, peptides (max 100 peptides per protein) with confidence ≥ 99% and FDR ≤ 1% (based on chromatographic feature after fragment extraction) were used for quantitation.  Statistical Analysis The protein peak areas were normalised to the total peak area of the respective sample and subjected to two sample T‐Test to compare relative protein peak areas between the sample groups. Protein T‐Test with p‐value < 0.05 and fold change ± 1.5 were highlighted as differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oryza sativa indica; pigmented rice; non-pigmented rice; nutritional traits; swath-ms.

### Affiliations
Institute of Systems Biology (INBIOSIS), Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
Principal Research Officer Malaysian Agricultural Research & Development Institute (MARDI), 43300 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia

### Submitter
Wan Aizat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Norliza Abu Bakar
Principal Research Officer Malaysian Agricultural Research & Development Institute (MARDI), 43300 Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia


