### Accession
PXD019123

### Title
Proteome profilling of chromophobe renal cell carcinomas

### Description
LC-MS/MS based proteomics study of chromophobe renal cell carcinomas versus the adjacent healthy kidney tissues, nine patients included. The chromophobe renal cell carcinoma cells (UOK276) under different conditions were also analyzed.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were homogenized and the sample processing was done with the iST kit according to the instruction from PreOmics. Proteomic profiling of the UOK276 cells was performed as reported previously (PMCID:PMC5739687) in biological triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software with the Andromeda search engine. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins, peptides and spectra was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (chRCC) and renal oncocytoma are closely related, rare kidney tumors. Mutations in complex I (CI)-encoding genes play an important role in dysfunction of the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system in renal oncocytoma, but are less frequently observed in chRCC. As such, the relevance of OXPHOS status and role of CI mutations in chRCC remain unknown. To address this issue, we performed proteome and metabolome profiling as well as mitochondrial whole-exome sequencing to detect mitochondrial alterations in chRCC tissue specimens. Multiomic analysis revealed downregulation of electron transport chain (ETC) components in chRCC that differed from the expression profile in renal oncocytoma. A decrease in mitochondrial (mt)DNA content, rather than CI mutations, was the main cause for reduced OXPHOS in chRCC. There was a negative correlation between protein and transcript levels of nuclear DNA- but not mtDNA-encoded ETC complex subunits in chRCC. In addition, the reactive oxygen species scavenger glutathione (GSH) was upregulated in chRCC due to decreased expression of proteins involved in GSH degradation. These results demonstrate that distinct mechanisms of OXPHOS exist in chRCC and renal oncocytoma and that expression levels of ETC complex subunits can serve as a diagnostic marker for this rare malignancy. SIGNIFICANCE: These findings establish potential diagnostic markers to distinguish malignant chRCC from its highly similar but benign counterpart, renal oncocytoma.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Kidney cancer, Chromophobe renal cell carcinomas, Proteome

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics

### Submitter
Yi Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr David Meierhofer
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics


