### Accession
PXD010212

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis of PKCe KO

### Description
Activation of protein kinase C epsilon (PKCε) in the liver has been widely associated with hepatic insulin resistance. PKCε is proposed to inhibit insulin signalling through phosphorylation of the insulin receptor. We have tested this directly by breeding PKCε floxed mice with mice expressing Cre recombinase under the control of the cytomegalovirus, albumin or adiponectin promoters to generate global, liver- and adipose tissue-specific PKCε knockout (KO) mice. Global deletion of PKCε recapitulated the benefits for diet-induced glucose intolerance that we previously described using conventional PKCε KO mice. However, we did not detect PKCε-dependent alterations in hepatic insulin receptor phosphorylation. Furthermore, liver-specific KO mice were not protected against diet-induced glucose intolerance or insulin resistance determined by euglycemic clamp. In contrast, adipose tissue-specific KO mice exhibited improved glucose tolerance and mildly increased hepatic triglyceride storage, but no change in liver insulin sensitivity. Phosphoproteomic analysis of insulin signalling in PKCε KO adipocytes revealed no defect in the canonical INSR/AKT/mTOR pathways. However, PKCε KO resulted in changes in phosphorylation of several proteins associated with the endosome and cell junctions suggesting regulation in secretory pathways and a potential role of PKCε in endocrine function. Indeed, RNA-seq analysis revealed adipose-tissue PKCε-dependent changes in the hepatic expression of several genes linked to glucose homeostasis and hepatic lipid metabolism. The primary effect of PKCε on glucose homeostasis is therefore not exerted directly in the liver as currently assumed. However, PKCε in adipose tissue modulates glucose tolerance and is involved in crosstalk with the liver that affects gene expression and lipid accumulation.

### Sample Protocol
Primary adipocyte isolation, incubation and protein preparation for proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses Adipocytes were isolated and incubated as described by Rodbell (Rodbell, 1964), with modifications as suggested by Honnor et al. (Honnor et al., 1985). Perigonadal fat pads were harvested from 10 female chow-fed AdEpsKO mice (12.3 ± 1.0 weeks old) and 10  PKCεfl/Δ littermate control mice (12.4 ± 1.2 weeks old). Pads from 2 mice were combined, minced with scissors and shaken for 40 min at 37 °C (200 cycles/s) in 8 ml KRP buffer (pH 7.4) with the addition of 25 mM Hepes, 3.5% BSA, 5 mM glucose, 1 U/ml Collagenase D and 1 U/ml Dispase II, when most tissue had disintegrated. Cells were filtered through a 250 µm nylon net and washed 3 times with 5 ml KRP buffer with the addition of 25 mM Hepes, 3.5% BSA, 5 mM glucose and 200 nM adenosine, retaining only floating adipocytes while stromal vascular cells were discarded. Adipocytes were preincubated in 5 ml KRP buffer with the addition of 25 mM Hepes, 3.5% BSA, 5 mM glucose, 100 nM (-)-N6-(R-phenylisopropyl)-adenosine (PIA) and 0.5 U/ml adenosine deaminase for 30 min at 37°C with gentle shaking (120 cycles/s). Cells were then divided into 2 incubations with a total volume of 10 ml of the same buffer and either no further additions or 100 nM insulin/25 mM glucose. After incubation for 10 min at 37°C with gentle shaking, buffers were rapidly exchanged for similar buffers containing no BSA and cells further incubated, for a total of 15 min. All buffer was then removed, cells frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -70°C. Cells were subsequently lysed in 100 µl of 6 M guanidine, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM chloroacetamide and 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5, and lysates heated at 95°C for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 30 min, 4°C. Supernatants were precipitated by the addition of 4 volumes of ice-cold methanol, 1 volume of ice-cold chloroform and 3 volumes of ice-cold MilliQ water. Suspensions were centrifuged at 9,000 g for 1 min, 4°C and the upper phase discarded. After addition of 3 volumes of ice-cold methanol, proteins were again centrifuged, at 12,000 g for 2 min, 4°C. Protein pellets were washed with 5 volumes of ice-cold methanol and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 2 min, 4°C. Finally, protein were resuspended in 200 µl of 10% trifluoroethanol, 100 mM Hepes, pH 7.5 using a BioRuptor.  Phosphopeptide enrichment Phosphoproteomic analysis was performed essentially as described previously [PMID: 26280412]. Briefly, protein was digested with Lys-C/trypsin at 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio overnight at 37°C. The digests were adjusted with final concentrations of 300 mM KCl, 5 mM KH2PO4, 50% acetonitrile and 6% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and phosphopeptides bound to titanium dioxide beads at 10:1 beads:peptide ratio (GL Sciences, Japan) at 40°C for 5 min in a ThermoMixer at 2,000 rpm. Non-phosphorylated peptides were removed by washing the beads with 80% acetonitrile containing 6% TFA and eluted with 40% acetonitrile containing 3.75% NH4OH. Phosphopeptides were purified by SDB-RPS stage tips and dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1 formic acid and loaded onto a 40 cm x 75 μm inner diameter column packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18AQ particles (Dr Maisch GmbH HPLC) using an Easy nLC-1200 UHPLC operated in single-column mode with intelligent flow control loading at 950 bar. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 5 – 30% Buffer B over 60 min (for immunoprecipitated insulin receptor and phosphproteomic analysis) or 180 min (for total proteomic analysis) at 300 nl/min (Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B = 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid). The column was maintained at 60°C using a PRSO-V1 ion-source (Sonation) coupled directly to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (for immunoprecipitated insulin receptor) or a Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (for proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis). A full-scan MS1 was measured at 60,000 resolution (300 – 1600 m/z; 60 ms injection time; 3e6 AGC target) followed by isolation of up to 7 (HF) or 10 (HFX) most abundant precursor ions for MS/MS (1.2 m/z isolation; 27 normalized collision energy; 15,000 resolution; 60 ms injection time; 1e5 AGC target).   Analysis of mass spectrometry data All data were processed using MaxQuant/Andromeda (v1.6.1.0) and searched against the Mouse UniProt database (March, 2018) (Cox and Mann, 2008). The data were searched with the following variable modifications; methionine oxidation; serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. All search parameters were default and false discovery rate at both the peptide spectral match and protein level set to 1%. Only phosphorylation sites localized by >75% were included in further analysis. Quantification of phosphopeptides immunoprecipitated from the insulin receptor was performed manually with MS1 filtering in Skyline (Schilling et al., 2012). Analysis of proteomic and phosphoproteomics data were performed in Perseus (v1.6.1.3) [PMID: 27348712]. Differential analysis was performed with t-tests and corrected for multiple hypothesis testing with Benjamin Hochberg FDR at q-value <0.1. Enrichment term analysis by cellular compartment was performed using ToppCluster and only enrichment terms with FDR < 0.05 were considered. The resulting network was manually arranged using Cytoscape.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adipocyte, Pkcepsilon

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Sydney


