### Accession
PXD005220

### Title
Proteomic profiles of  synovial fluids derived from autologous chondrocyte implantation surgery

### Description
The pathology of failure in currently used biological treatments (cell therapies and microfracture) for cartilage repair or early osteoarthritis (OA) is poorly understood. We aimed to identify a reliable panel of biological predictors, present in synovial fluid, which can be used in the preoperative setting to optimise patient selection and therapy efficacy. The-long term aim is to reduce the number of patients who progress to end-stage OA and require knee replacement by making earlier, less invasive treatments more effective. In this first stage, we have taken synovial fluid aspirates from patients undergoing autologous chondrocyte implantation (ACI) at our centre in Oswestry, UK. Synovial fluids (SFs) were obtained from 14 ACI responders (mean Lysholm improvement of 33 (17-54)) and 13 non-responders (mean Lysholm decrease of 14 (4-46)) at the two stages of surgery (cartilage harvest and chondrocyte implantation). Dynamic range compression of synovial fluids coupled with label-free quantification mass spectrometry (MS), was used in an unbiased approach to identify predictive markers of ACI success or failure and to investigate the biological pathways involved in the clinical response to ACI.

### Sample Protocol
Following local research ethical committee approval and with informed consent, SF was collected from patients’ knee joints at Stages I (harvest) and II (implantation of cells) of ACI, by injecting 20mL of saline and then extending and flexing the leg at least 20 times prior to intra-articular aspiration of as much SF as possible.  SF was centrifuged at 500g for 15 minutes to remove cellular debris and the supernatant was aliquoted and stored in liquid nitrogen.  Samples were processed batch-wise and had undergone no previous freeze-thaw cycles. Synovial fluids were thawed and centrifuged at 36,000 g for 10 mins. 1030 µl of SF supernatant was treated with 200 units of hyaluronidase and 1000 µl of the supernatant was centrifuged through a 0.22 mm cellulose acetate membrane (Costar Spin-X, Corning, Tokyo, Japan) tube filter (5,000 g/15 min) to remove insoluble material.  The protein concentration of each sample was then assessed using a PierceTM 660nm protein assay (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). Efficient SF digestion by hylauronidase was confirmed using Coomassie stained 1D-SDS PAGE gels before 5 mg of total protein was bound to ProteoMinerTM Small Capacity beads (BioRad, Hemel Hempstead, UK) to enable peptide-based dynamic range compression.  Bound proteins were treated with 0.05% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters, Manchester, UK) in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) for 10 mins at 80°C. Samples were reduced in 3mM dithiothreitol at 60˚C for 10 mins and alkylated in the dark for 30 mins with 9mM Iodoacetamide (Sigma). In-situ protein digestion on the ProteoMiner™ beads was undertaken by incubating samples under continuous rotation at 37˚C in 2µg of sequencing grade trypsin for 2 hours. A trypsin top-up was added after 2 hours and the samples were incubated for a further 18 hours. Peptides were eluted into LoBind protein tubes (Eppendorf, Stevenage, UK) and then acidified using 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Samples then underwent two rounds of centrifugation to remove any precipitates and were transferred to new LoBind tubes. Tryptic peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS, analysed using a 2h gradient on a NanoAcquityTM ultraperformance LC (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled online to a Q-Exactive Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Thermo-Fisher Scientific Hemel Hempstead, UK).

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were converted to mascot-generated files (mgf) (Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo, Hemel Hempstead, UK)). The mgf files were searched against the Homo sapiens database Unihuman Reviewed. Search parameters used were: peptide mass tolerances, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.01 Da; 2+ and 3+ ions; missed cleavages, 1; enzyme, trypsin; instrument type, ESI-FTICR. Modifications included were: fixed carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable; oxidation of methionine, lysine, proline.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label-free; synovial fluid; proteominer; osteoarthritis; cell therapy

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
University of Chester

### Submitter
Emma Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Mandy Peffers
University of Liverpool


