### Accession
PXD029242

### Title
Definition and characterization of the mitochondrial proteome of human cells (MitoCoP): Relation between MS analysis time, sample fractionation, proteases, replicates and number of proteins identified/quantified

### Description
Aim of the overall project was the definition and characterization of the mitochondrial proteome of human cells, referred to as MitoCoP. To this end, we combined the complementary strengths of subtractive proteomics, ImportOmics and subcellular protein profiling in a global multidimensional classification approach.  In this part of the project, we analyzed the correlation between MS analysis time, sample fractionation, use of multiple proteases and replicates on the number of proteins identified and quantified in mitochondrial fractions applying the subtractive proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
LC/MS sample preparation: Crude and gradient-purified mitochondrial fractions (referred to as cM and pM) were prepared from differentially SILAC-labeled HEK cells and mixed in equal amounts. To analyze the effect of MS analysis time, sample fractionation, use of multiple proteases and number of replicates on the number of proteins identified and quantified, we performed/analyzed five different experiments: In E1 - E3 (performed in single replicates), proteins of cM/pM samples were digested with trypsin. E1 - E3 differed in MS analysis time and sample fractionation (see below). In E4 and E5, proteins were digested using multiple proteases (LysC/trypsin, chymotrypsin, AspN or GluC). E4 and E5 differed in the number of replicates analyzed (E4, one replicate; E5, four replicates). Peptide mixtures of E3 - E5 were further fractionated into 32 fractions per replicate by high pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography (hpH-RPLC). Prior to proteolytic in-solution digestion, proteins of cM/pM samples were acetone-precipitated and resuspended in 8 M urea/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). To reduce and alkylate cysteine residues, proteins were incubated in 5 mM TCEP (30 min at 37°C) followed by incubation in 55 mM iodoacetamide (45 min at RT in the dark). Subsequently, samples were diluted by adding 50 mM ABC to a final concentration of 4 M urea for digestion with LysC and 1 M urea for digestion with trypsin, chymotrypsin, AspN or GluC. Digestion was performed over night at 37°C, except for LysC (4 h, 37°C).  LC/MS analysis: Nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed at an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system, which was either equipped with nanoEase™ M/Z Symmetry C18 precolumns (length, 20 mm; inner diameter, 0.18 mm; flow rate, 10 µL/min; Waters) and a nanoEase™ M/Z HSS C18 T3 column (length, 250 mm; inner diameter, 75 µm; particle size, 1.8 µm; packing density, 100 Å; flowrate, 300 nl/min) for the analysis of E1 and E2 or with PepMap C18 precolumns (5 mm x 0.3 mm; flow rate of 30 µl/min) and an Acclaim PepMap C18 reversed-phase nano LC column (500 mm x 75 µm; particle size, 2 µm; packing density, 100 Å; flowrate of 250 nl/min) for the analysis of E3 - E5. Peptides of E1 and E2 were separated using a binary solvent system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (FA; solvent A) and 30% acetonitrile (ACN)/50% methanol/0.1% FA (solvent B). Following loading and concentration of peptides at 7% B for 5 min, the following gradients were applied for elution: 7% - 70% B in 50 min, 70% - 95% B in 5 min, 3 min at 95%, followed by re-equilibration of the column for 17 min, resulting in a total LC-MS analysis time of 80 min for E1 or 7% - 60% B in 195 min, 60% - 95% B in 15 min, 5 min at 95%, followed by re-equilibration of the column for 20 min, resulting in a total LC-MS analysis time of 4 h for E2. The solvent system for the analysis of E3 - E5 consisted of 4% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)/0.1% FA (solvent A') and 30% ACN/48% methanol/4% DMSO/0.1% FA (solvent B'). Peptides were loaded for 5 min at 1% B' and eluted with 1% - 65% solvent B' in 50 min, 65% - 95% B' in 5 min, 5 min at 95% B, followed by re-equilibration of the column for 15 min, which resulted in a total LC-MS analysis time of 80 min for each hpH-RPLC fraction of E3 - E5. Mass spectrometric data were acquired in data-dependent mode with a mass range of m/z 370 to 1,700, a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400, a target value of 1 x 10E06, and a maximum injection time of 200 ms for MS survey scans. The most intense precursor ions with a charge ≥ +2 (up to 25 for E1 and E2; up to 20 for E3 - E5) were selected for low energy collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap with the following parameters: normalized collision energy, 35%; activation q, 0.25; activation time, 10 ms; target value, 5,000; maximum injection time, 150 ms; dynamic exclusion time, 45 s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis: Mass spectrometric raw data of all experiments were processed using MaxQuant v.1.6.0.1 (Cox und Mann, 2008). For peptide identification, mass spectra were correlated with the Uniprot human proteome set including isoforms (retrieved 08/2018; 95,106 entries) and a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant using Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). Database searches were performed with a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For all analyses, Arg10 and Lys8 were selected as heavy labels, multiplicity was set to 2, a maximum of 3 missed cleavages was allowed, and the option 'requantify' was enabled. The following protease-specific parameters were selected: Trypsin/P with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages; chymotrypsin+/4 missed cleavages; AspN/2 missed cleavages; or GluC_DE (cleavage after D and E)/4 missed cleavages. Proteins were identified based on ≥ 1 unique peptide with a length of ≥ 6 amino acids. The options 'match between runs' and 'iBAQ' were enabled. A peptide spectrum match false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied using the decoy mode 'Revert'. An FDR of 1% was further applied to the list of proteins identified. SILAC-based protein quantification was based on unique and razor peptides and a minimum ratio count of 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Silac, Subtractive proteomics

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry – Functional Proteomics, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany CIBSS Centre for Integrative Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany Department of Microbiology, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Institute of Biology II, Biochemistry – Functional Proteomics, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany CIBSS Centre for Integrative Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany Department of Microbiology, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany


