### Accession
PXD006512

### Title
Proteome Landscape of Early Stage Hepatocellular Carcinoma Identifies Proteomic Subtypes and New Therapeutic Targets

### Description
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) accounts for approximately 90% of primary liver cancers, the second leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. Although HCC surgical treatment may be curative in the early stages, its five-year overall survival is only 50-70%. Advances in proteomic technologies have expanded the breadth and depth of cancer proteome characterization. Here, we present the largest characterization effort on proteomic profiling of 222 tumor and paired non-tumor tissues in clinically early HCC (Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) stage 0 and A). Quantitative proteomic data identified three more-refined subtypes in the early- stage cohort of HCC (termed S-I, S-II and S-III) with different clinical outcomes. S-I retained hepatic detoxification and metabolic functions with the best prognosis, S-II increased molecular expression related to proliferation, and S-III showed distinct enrichment of tumor metastasis and immune response pathways and the poorest prognosis. The subtype specific signatures targeted by known FDA approved drugs or inhibitors under clinical investigations for HCC provide a novel resource for HCC therapeutic targets. A new mechanism of disrupted cholesterol homeostasis with aberrant accumulation of cholesteryl esters was also highlighted in S-III. Thus, this study represents the first proteomic stratification of early-stage HCC, providing insights into tumor biology and personalized targeted therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Liver tissues (approximately 0.1 g each) were minced and lysed in T-PER buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by 1 min sonication (3s on and 3s off, amplitude 25%). The lysate was centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected as whole-tissue extract. The protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. Protein digestion by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) The protein digestion was processed by FASP with slight adaptations1 starting from 500μg of liver proteins. The protein solution was diluted to 500μl with UA solution (8M urea in 0.1M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). The sample solution was centrifuged on a 30kDa filter for 20min. Then, 200μl of UA solution with 10mM DTT was added and the reduction reaction was kept for 4h at 37°C. The solution was removed by centrifugation, and a UA solution with 50mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added. The sample was incubated in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. The ultra-fraction tube was washed with 200μl UA three times and 200μl ABC (50mM ammonium bicarbonate) three times by centrifuging at 14,000 g for 15min at room temperature. Then, 100μl ABC containing 0.1μg/μl trypsin was added to each ultra-fraction tube. The tubes were incubated at 37°C for 12 h. Peptides were collected by centrifuging at 14,000 g for 15min. Tubes were washed twice with 100μl of ABC for 15 min while being centrifuged at 14,000 g. The flow fractions were collected together, and the concentration was measured using a NanoDrop 2000C at 280nm absorbance. The peptide mixtures were acidized with 10μl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and freeze dried and then stored at -80°C. High-pH reversed-phase pre-fractionation of the peptides The peptides were separated into 6 fractions using high-pH reversed-phase chromatography. Briefly, the pipet tip was blocked using a layer of Empore 3M C8 disk and then filled with five mg of C18 reverse-phase media (3μm, Durashell, Agela Technologies, Tianjin, China). The tip was washed twice with 90μl methanol and then with 90μl of ammonia water (pH 10). A total of 50μg peptide was re-dissolved in 160μl of ammonia water and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min. The peptide solution was loaded onto the tip and centrifuged at 1,200 g for five min to remove the liquid. Then, 90μl of ammonia water was loaded onto the tip and centrifuged at 1,200 g for 5 min to remove the liquid. Peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile in ammonia water (6%, 9%, 12%, 15%, 18%, 21%, 25%, 30%, 35%, and 50%). The fractions were collected, and the last four fractions were mixed with the first four fractions sequentially. The final six fractions were freeze dried and stored at -80°C. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analysis of peptide mixture The LC-MS/MS detection system consisted of a nano-flow HPLC chromatographic instrument (Easy nLC1000 System, Thermo Fisher, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Briefly, 0.5μg of peptide mixture was loaded onto a 2 cm self-packed trap column (100 µm id, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3μm; Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany) using flow phase A (99.9% water and 0.1% FA) and separated on a 75μm inner diameter 12cm length column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3μm; Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany) using a 78 min linear gradient of 6-32% flow phase B (99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. The Orbitrap Fusion was set to the OT-IT mode. For a full MS survey scan, the target value was 5e5 and the scan range was from 300 to 1400 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 and a maximum injection time of 50ms. For the MS2 scan, a duty cycle of 3s was set with the top-speed mode. Only spectra with a charge state 2-6 were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 32%. The MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap in rapid mode with an AGC target of 7000 and a maximum injection time of 35ms.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human UniProt database (version 20140922, 20,193 sequences) using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, and two missed cleavages sites were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as the fixed modification. Oxidation of M and acetylation of the protein N-terminal were set as the variable modifications. The first search mass tolerance was 20ppm, and the main search peptide tolerance was 4.5ppm. False discovery rates (FDRs) of PSMs and proteins were set to be less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma is the third leading cause of deaths from cancer worldwide. Infection with the hepatitis B virus is one of the leading risk factors for developing hepatocellular carcinoma, particularly in East Asia<sup>1</sup>. Although surgical treatment may be effective in the early stages, the five-year overall rate of survival after developing this cancer is only 50-70%<sup>2</sup>. Here, using proteomic and phospho-proteomic profiling, we characterize 110 paired tumour and non-tumour tissues of clinical early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma related to hepatitis B virus infection. Our quantitative proteomic data highlight heterogeneity in early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma: we used this to stratify the cohort into the subtypes S-I, S-II and S-III, each of which has a different clinical outcome. S-III, which is characterized by disrupted cholesterol homeostasis, is associated with the lowest overall rate of survival and the greatest risk of a poor prognosis after first-line surgery. The knockdown of sterol O-acyltransferase 1 (SOAT1)-high expression of which is a signature specific to the S-III subtype-alters the distribution of cellular cholesterol, and effectively suppresses the proliferation and migration of hepatocellular carcinoma. Finally, on the basis of a patient-derived tumour xenograft mouse model of hepatocellular carcinoma, we found that treatment with avasimibe, an inhibitor of SOAT1, markedly reduced the size of tumours that had high levels of SOAT1 expression. The proteomic stratification of early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma presented in this study provides insight into the tumour biology of this cancer, and suggests opportunities for personalized therapies that target it.

### Keywords
Human, Liver cancer, Proteomics

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, 38 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206, P.R. China.

### Submitter
Yang Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Fuchu He
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, National Center for Protein Sciences Beijing, 38 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206, P.R. China.


