### Accession
PXD009250

### Title
Cue-induced modulation of eIF2α-eIF2Bε underlies axonal translation up-regulation in neural wiring

### Description
Local protein synthesis is rapidly regulated by extrinsic signals during neural wiring but the translational control mechanisms remain elusive. Here, we show that the guidance cue Sema3A, but not Slit1, elicits precise spatiotemporal control of the phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor, eIF2α, in axonal growth cones via the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) kinase PERK. Strikingly, in contrast to the canonical UPR signaling, we find that the Sema3A-induced eIF2α phosphorylation bypasses the conventional global translational repression and underlies a burst in axonal protein synthesis, mediated by differential eIF2B activity. Ultrasensitive proteomics on somaless axons reveals a subset of 75 proteins translationally regulated via Sema3A-p-eIF2α, including several proteostasis- and actin cytoskeleton-related nascent proteins. Finally, in vivo experiments provide evidence that eIF2α phosphorylation drives the formation of the retinotectal axon projection. Thus, specific extracellular cues can trigger non-canonical PERK-eIF2α-eIF2B signaling leading to subcellular dynamic remodeling of the nascent proteome required for neural wiring.

### Sample Protocol
Axons were harvest by addition of lysis buffer (1% SDC, 0.1% SDS, 100mM TrisHCl ph 8.5, 10mM DTT, 1x protease inhibitor EDTA free). Samples were supplemented with 25 units Benzonase nuclease (Merck), and lysed in a Bioruptor (Diagenode) for 5 minutes (cycle 30/30, 4°C). Alkylation was performed by addition of 30 mM Chloroacetamide followed by incubation in the dark for 30 min. Protein clean-up, digestion and peptide clean-up were performed using a modified version of the recently developed ultrasensitive sample preparation protocol SP3 (Hughes et al., 2014). In brief, 5 μL of beads (1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic SeraMag Carboxylate-Modified beads, GE Life Sciences) were added to each sample. Acidified acetonitrile was added to achieve a final fraction of organic solvent of 50%. Beads were incubated for 10 min to allow complete binding of proteins to the beads. Protein clean-up was performed by subsequent wash with 70% Ethanol and once with Acetonitrile. For digestion, 0.1 μg sequencing grade Trypsin/LysC (Promega) was added and digestion was performed at 37°C for 16 h. Peptides were eluted with 9 μL 5% DMSO. 1 µL 10% formic acids was added and samples were stored at -20°C prior MS analysis.Samples were analyzed on a Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using default settings. The mass spectrometer was coupled to a UPLC systems (Waters nanoAcquity UPLC). Peptides were loaded onto trap columns (Waters nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and separated over a 25 cm analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 2 μm) using 240 minute linear gradients from 3-40% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in Acetonitrile). Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer using a Pico-Tip Emitter (360 μm outer diameter × 20 μm inner diameter, 10 μm tip, New Objective). MS2 Fragmentation was set to CID, and MSMS scans were acquired in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.4.1.2) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using default settings. MSMS spectra were searched against the Xenopus laevis Uniprot database (v20140925) concatenated to a database containing protein sequences of common contaminants. Raw data from PXD005469 was used as library to increase depth of identifications using the match-between-runs option, which was enabled in Maxquant. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were used as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids. The mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm for the first search, and 4.5 ppm for the main search. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. The re-quantify option was enabled. For protein quantification a minimum ratio count of 2 was set. The iBAQ was calculated to determine relative abundance levels of the pre-existing light-labelled proteins. Protein ratios were log2-transformed using the Perseus computational framework (Tyanova et al., 2016), and H/M ratios of NSPs were normalized to the median to center the distribution of ratios at 0 on the log2 scale, i.e. comparable numbers of proteins are up-regulated and down-regulated, respectively. To test, whether the log2 ratio of each protein was significantly different from zero, p-values were computed by a moderated t-test implemented in the R/Bioconductor package limma (Ritchie et al., 2015). p-values were corrected for multiple testing by controlling the false discovery rate with the method of Benjamini-Hochberg. Enrichment of categorical annotations (Gene Ontology) was determined using DAVID (Huang et al., 2009). Disease analyses were carried out using KEGG.

### Publication Abstract
Local translation is rapidly regulated by extrinsic signals during neural wiring, but its control mechanisms remain elusive. Here we show that the extracellular cue Sema3A induces an initial burst in local translation that precisely controls phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor eIF2&#x3b1; via the unfolded protein response (UPR) kinase PERK. Strikingly, in contrast to canonical UPR signaling, Sema3A-induced eIF2&#x3b1; phosphorylation bypasses global translational repression and underlies an increase in local translation through differential activity of eIF2B mediated by protein phosphatase 1. Ultrasensitive proteomics analysis of axons reveals 75 proteins translationally controlled via the Sema3A-p-eIF2&#x3b1; pathway. These include proteostasis- and actin cytoskeleton-related proteins but not canonical stress markers. Finally, we show that PERK signaling is needed for directional axon migration and visual pathway development in&#xa0;vivo. Thus, our findings reveal a noncanonical eIF2 signaling pathway that controls selective changes in axon translation and is required for neural wiring.

### Keywords
Psilac, Neuroproteomics, Axon

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
Division Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer (B230), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Krijgsveld
Division Proteomics of Stem Cells and Cancer (B230), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 581, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


