### Accession
PXD018047

### Title
Tissue-specific protein complex analysis with natively processed bait proteins

### Description
Protein-protein interaction analysis is an important tool to elucidate the function of proteins and protein complexes as well as their dynamic behavior. Despite the large toolset available to date the analysis of tissue specific complexes is still relying on the availability of specific antibodies suited for immunoprecipitation. Due to the lack of specific, high affinity antibodies, we aimed at establishing a novel approach that is generally applicable to identify protein interactions and complexes in tissue. Therefore, we established an approach for which a tagged bait protein is expressed in a mammalian cell line which is, after a specific cleaning procedure, used to pulldown prey proteins and complexes from tissue samples. We demonstrate here that this protocol allows the identification of tissue specific interaction by applying it to the ciliary protein lebercilin and its specific interactors were identified in retina or the retinal pigment epithelium. Further, the heart specific interactome of two isoforms of the cyclic guanosine-3’,5’-monophosphate (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase type 1α and 1β (cGKI/ aka PRKG1/), which differ only in their unique amino-terminal region comprising about 100 AS, shows the suitability of the approach to identify isoform-specific interactions. With this affinity purification-based protocol, we provide a fast and reliable method for tissue-specific protein complex analysis independent of antibody availability.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purified eluates were precipitated with chloroform and methanol followed by trypsin digestion as described before [7]. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on Ultimate3000 RSLCnano systems (Thermo Scientific) coupled to either a Q Exactive Plus or an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific) by a nano spray ion source. Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected automatically and loaded at a flow rate of 10 μl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC-grade water onto a nano trap column (Q Exactive Plus: 300 μm ID × 5 mm Precolumn, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific; Orbitrap Fusion: 2 mm x 10 mm, µPACTM Trapping column, 300 nm, 100-200 Å, PharmaFluidics). After 3 min, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (Q Exactive: 75 μm ID. × 25 cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific; Orbitrap Fusion: 315 µm x 50cm, µPACTM nano-LC columns – 50cm µPACTM C18, 300 nm, 100-200 Å, PharmaFluidics) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC - grade water) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 82 min. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B in 5 min. From the high resolution MS pre-scan with a mass range of 335 to 1500, the ten most intense peptide ions were selected for fragment analysis in the Q Exactive depending on intensity (at least 200 counts) and if they were at least doubly charged. The Orbitrap Fusion was run in top speed mode with a cycle time of 3 sec. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to a value of 26 (Q Exactive) or 30 (Orbitrap Fusion) and the resulting fragments were detected with a resolution of 17,500 (Q Exactive) or in the ion trap (Orbitrap Fusion). The lock mass option was activated; the background signal with a mass of 445.12003 was used as lock mass [25]. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 20 or 60 sec by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0, [26,27]). As a digesting enzyme, Trypsin/P was selected with maximal 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set for fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The data were analyzed by label-free quantification (no fast LFQ) with the minimum ratio count of 2. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20, the main search peptide tolerance to 4.5 ppm and the re-quantify option was selected. For peptide and protein identification, the following subset of the SwissProt database was used: human, release 2019_11, #20,367 entries and mouse release 2019_08, #17,027 entries (PRKG1 alpha and beta–specific N-terminal sequences were added). For pig the sus scrofa proteome database released 2019_11, #49,571 entries was used and contaminants were detected using the MaxQuant contaminant search. A minimum peptide number of 1 and a minimum length of 7 amino acids were tolerated. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. The match between run options was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. The statistical analysis was done using the Perseus software (version 1.6.5.0, [28]). A minimum of six biological replicates were used for statistics, which represent individual tissue-specific immunoprecipitation samples processed in minimum two independent experiments (replicate number stated in each table legend). All data were filtered for potential contaminants, peptides only identified by side or reverse sequence. In the groups, minimum half of the samples should have valid values. Based on the mean value, significance A (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR) was calculated. The stability of protein enrichment within groups was determined using the student’s t-test. Only proteins with a significance A < 0.05 and a student’s t-test p < 0.05 were taken as being significantly enriched (summarized in supplementary tables). For comparison of different SDS concentrations (Figure 1 and supplementary table 1), normalization was skipped in the LFQ setting due to variation in protein content/background between samples. For statistical analysis done for Figure1 and supplementary table 1, unique peptide and LFQ data were filtered for minimum half of the samples in one group with valid values and the median was calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein interaction analysis is an important tool to elucidate the function of proteins and protein complexes as well as their dynamic behavior. To date, the analysis of tissue- or even cell- or compartment-specific protein interactions is still relying on the availability of specific antibodies suited for immunoprecipitation. Here, we aimed at establishing a method that allows identification of protein interactions and complexes from intact tissues independent of specific, high affinity antibodies used for protein pull-down and isolation. Tagged bait proteins were expressed in human HEK293T cells and residual interactors removed by SDS. The resulting tag-fusion protein was then used as bait to pull proteins from tissue samples. Tissue-specific interactions were reproducibly identified from porcine retina as well as from retinal pigment epithelium using the ciliary protein lebercilin as bait. Further, murine heart-specific interactors of two gene products of the 3',5'-cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase type 1 (cGK1) were investigated. Here, specific interactions were associated with the cGK1&#x3b1; and &#x3b2; gene products, that differ only in their unique amino-terminal region comprising about 100 aa. As such, the new protocol provides a fast and reliable method for tissue-specific protein complex analysis which is independent of the availability or suitability of antibodies for immunoprecipitation. SIGNIFICANCE: Protein-protein interaction in the functional relevant tissue is still difficult due to the dependence on specific antibodies or bait production in bacteria or insect cells. Here, the tagged protein of interest is produced in a human cell line and bound proteins are gently removed using SDS. Because applying the suitable SDS concentration is a critical step, different SDS solutions were tested to demonstrate their influence on interactions and the clean-up process. The established protocol enabled a tissue-specific analysis of the ciliary proteins lebercilin and TMEM107 using pig eyes. In addition, two gene products of the 3',5'-cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-dependent protein kinase type 1 showed distinct protein interactions in mouse heart tissue. With the easy, fast and cheap protocol presented here, deep insights in tissue-specific and functional relevant protein complex formation is possible.

### Keywords
Isoform-specific, Tissue-specific protein complex analysis

### Affiliations
Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University Clinics Tuebingen
University Clinics Tuebingen

### Submitter
Tina Beyer

### Lab Head
Dr Marius Ueffing
Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University Clinics Tuebingen


