### Accession
PXD041169

### Title
p97/VCP promotes the recycling of endocytic cargo

### Description
The endocytic pathway is of central importance for eukaryotic cells, as it enables uptake of extracellular materials, membrane protein quality control and recycling, as well as modulation of receptor signaling. While the ATPase p97 (VCP, Cdc48) has been found to be involved in the fusion of early endosomes and endolysosomal degradation, its role in endocytic trafficking is still incompletely characterized. Here, we identify myoferlin (MYOF), a ferlin family member with functions in membrane trafficking and repair, as a hitherto unknown p97 interactor. The interaction of MYOF with p97 depends on the cofactor PLAA previously linked to endosomal sorting. Besides PLAA, shared interactors of p97 and MYOF comprise several proteins involved in endosomal recycling pathways, including Rab11, Rab14 and the transferrin receptor CD71. Accordingly, a fraction of p97 and PLAA localizes to MYOF-, Rab11-, and Rab14-positive endosomal compartments. Pharmacological inhibition of p97 delays transferrin recycling, indicating that p97 promotes not only the lysosomal degradation, but also the recycling of endocytic cargo.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown to 80-90% confluence on 15 cm dishes, washed two times with PBS, and incubated with DSP (0.8 mM final conc. in PBS) for 30 min at room temperature. Then, the crosslinker was quenched with 25 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6 for 10 min at room temperature and the supernatant was removed. The cells were collected in PBS, harvested by centrifugation, and the cell pellet was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. For immunoprecipitation of p97 or MYOF, the frozen pellets of crosslinked cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 1 % Nonidet P40, 10 % glycerol) containing protease inhibitors (1 mM PMSF, 1x Roche complete protease inhibitor mix) and incubated for 10 min on ice. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation, and the protein concentration of the supernatants was determined with the 660 nm Protein Assay Kit (Pierce) and adjusted to same input levels as appropriate. Supernatants were pre-cleared by incubation with 20 uL of protein G sepharose beads (1 h, 4 °C) on a rotating wheel. The pre-cleared supernatants were incubated with specific antibodies as indicated (p97, HA: 6 µg; MYOF: 10 µg) or with the appropriate unspecific control IgGs (IgG, rabbit; IgG2a, mouse) for 1 h at 4 °C on a rotating wheel, before 25 uL of protein G sepharose beads were added for 2 h at 4°C. The beads were washed twice with lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors, once with lysis buffer without inhibitors, and once with TBS. The immunoprecipitates were heat-denatured on the beads in sample buffer, separated by SDS-PAGE and further analyzed by mass spectrometry or immunoblotting. Proteins in NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies) were reduced with 50 mM DTT at 70 °C for 10 min, alkylated with 120 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 min, and separated on NuPAGE Novex 4-12 % Bis-Tris gels (Life Technologies) in MOPS buffer according to manufacturer’s instructions. Gels were washed three times for 5 min with water and stained for 45 min with Simply Blue™ Safe Stain (Life Technologies). After washing with water for 2 h, each gel lane was cut into 15 slices. For in-gel digestion, the excised gel slices were destained with 30% acetonitrile, shrunk with 100% acetonitrile, and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Trypsin digest was performed overnight at 37 °C in 0.05M NH4HCO3 (pH 8), using 0.1 µg of protease per slice. Peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5% formic acid.  NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm x 150 µm ID, New Objective) packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch), and separated with a 30 min linear gradient from 3% to 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS scans and 15,000 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy was applied. A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 s was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 120 s; singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with a target value of 5e5 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
For raw data file processing, database searches and quantification, MaxQuant version 1.5.7.4 was used (Cox & Mann, 2008). The search was performed against the H. sapiens reference proteome database (Uniprot, UP000005640, 78,120 entries, download date 2021-09-09) and, additionally, a database containing common cell culture contaminants. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with three allowed miscleavages. Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (<1% FDR on protein and peptide level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was performed allowing the following variable modifications: Protein N-terminal acetylation, Gln to pyro-Glu formation (N-term. Gln), and oxidation (Met). For protein quantitation, the LFQ intensities were used (Cox et al, 2014). Proteins with less than two identified razor/unique peptides were dismissed.  Further data analysis was performed using R scripts developed in-house. For discrimination of unspecifically immunoprecipitated proteins, LFQ intensities of IP control samples were quantile normalized, and median intensities were calculated. Missing LFQ intensities in the control samples were imputed with values close to the baseline. Data imputation was performed with values from a standard normal distribution with a mean of the 5% quantile of the combined log10-transformed LFQ intensities and a standard deviation of 0.1. For the identification of significantly co-immunoprecipitated proteins, boxplot outliers were identified in intensity bins of at least 300 proteins. Log2 transformed protein ratios of IP versus control with values outside a 1.5x (potential) or 3x (extreme) interquartile range, respectively, were considered as co-precipitated with significance levels 1 and 2, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The endocytic pathway is of central importance for eukaryotic cells, as it enables uptake of extracellular materials, membrane protein quality control and recycling, as well as modulation of receptor signaling. While the ATPase p97 (VCP, Cdc48) has been found to be involved in the fusion of early endosomes and endolysosomal degradation, its role in endocytic trafficking is still incompletely characterized. Here, we identify myoferlin (MYOF), a ferlin family member with functions in membrane trafficking and repair, as a hitherto unknown p97 interactor. The interaction of MYOF with p97 depends on the cofactor PLAA previously linked to endosomal sorting. Besides PLAA, shared interactors of p97 and MYOF comprise several proteins involved in endosomal recycling pathways, including Rab11, Rab14, and the transferrin receptor CD71. Accordingly, a fraction of p97 and PLAA localizes to MYOF-, Rab11-, and Rab14-positive endosomal compartments. Pharmacological inhibition of p97 delays transferrin recycling, indicating that p97 promotes not only the lysosomal degradation, but also the recycling of endocytic cargo.

### Keywords
Vcp, Rab11, Myof, Cdc48, Myoferlin, P97

### Affiliations
Chair of Biochemistry I, Biocenter, University of Wuerzburg

### Submitter
Alexander Buchberger

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Buchberger
Chair of Biochemistry I, Biocenter, University of Wuerzburg


