### Accession
PXD014315

### Title
Active thrombin is produced by intestinal epithelium to control mucosal biofilm

### Description
Healthy human and mouse colon epithelium is a major source of active thrombin, released in lumen. Using germ-free animals, we demonstrated that mucosal thrombin was directly regulated by the presence of commensal microbiota. Specific inhibition of lumenal thrombin activity caused macro-, microscopic damage and transcriptomic alterations of genes involved in host-microbiota interactions. Further, lumenal thrombin inhibition impaired the spatial segregation of microbiota biofilms, allowing bacteria to invade the mucus layer and to translocate across the epithelium. Thrombin proteolyzed the biofilm matrix of reconstituted mucosa-associated human microbiota. We demonstrated a previously unknown physiological role for epithelial thrombin that constrains biofilms at mucosal surfaces. We report that lung, bladder and skin epithelia also expressed thrombin, suggesting that this role may be applicable to other host-microbiome surfaces. Our discovery points route to new therapies targeting biofilms, important for a broad range of disorders, in the gut, and beyond.

### Sample Protocol
Human stool samples (N = 3) were treated with recombinant human thrombin or control subjected to an N-terminomics TAILS and shotgun proteomics analysis. Stool protein lysates were diluted in a final concentration of 4 M guanidine HCL (pH 8.0), 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) and 10 mM DTT and incubated at 37 °C for 60 min. Once cooled to room temperature, alkylation of the sample was achieved by incubation with a final concentration of 15 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark at room temperature. The pH was next adjusted to 6.5 with HCL.  Next, to label peptide α- and ε-amines, samples were incubated for 18 h at 37 °C with isotopically heavy [40 mM 13CD2O +20 mM NaBH3CN (sodium cyanoborohydride)] or light labels [40 mM light formaldehyde (CH2O) + 20 mM NaBH3CN], all final concentrations. Next, sample mixtures were cleaned in acetone/methanol, followed by protein precipitation and trypsinization.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were matched to peptide sequences in the human UniProt protein database of twelve common bacterial species using the Andromeda algorithm as implemented in the MaxQuant software package v.1.6.0.1, at a peptide-spectrum match FDR of  < 0.05. Search parameters included a mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m. for the parent ion, 0.5 Da for the fragment ion, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464 Da), variable N-terminal modification by acetylation (+42.010565 Da), and variable methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da). N-terminal and lysine heavy (+34.063116 Da) and light (+28.031300 Da) dimethylation were defined as labels for relative quantification. The cleavage site specificity was set to semi-ArgC (free N-terminus), with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Significant outlier cutoff values were determined after log(2) transformation by boxplot-and-whiskers analysis using the BoxPlotR tool

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gut physiology, Thrombin, Microbiota spatial organization, Microbial biofilm, Epithelia

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology 
University of Calgary

### Submitter
Antoine Dufour

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
University of Calgary


