### Accession
PXD002033

### Title
Comparative phosphoproteomics reveals the role of AmpC β-lactamase phosphorylation in the clinical imipenem-resistant strain Acinetobacter baumannii SK17 (MaxQuant 1.3 and 1.4)

### Description
Nosocomial outbreaks of infections caused by multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii have emerged as a serious threat to human health. The phosphoproteomics of pathogenic bacteria have been investigated for their role in virulence regulation networks. In this study, we analyzed the phosphoproteomics of two clinical isolates of A. baumannii: imipenem-sensitive strain SK17-S and -resistant strain SK17-R.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphopeptides were enriched using hydroxy-acid-modified metal-oxide chromatography (HAMMOC). An online nanoLC-MS/MS LTQ-Orbitrap Velos equipped with a PicoView nanospray interface and coupled with a nanoAcquity system were used for sample analysis throughout this study.

### Data Protocol
The combined database used in this study was generated from the DNA sequencing results of strains SK17-S and SK17-R. Detailed information on DNA sequencing and database generation are provided in supporting information. MaxQuant versions 1.4.1.2 and 1.3.0.5 (http://www.maxquant.org/) were used to analyze the MS data sets.

### Publication Abstract
Nosocomial infectious outbreaks caused by multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii have emerged as a serious threat to human health. Phosphoproteomics of pathogenic bacteria has been used to identify the mechanisms of bacterial virulence and antimicrobial resistance. In this study, we used a shotgun strategy combined with high-accuracy mass spectrometry to analyze the phosphoproteomics of the imipenem-susceptible strain SK17-S and -resistant strain SK17-R. We identified 410 phosphosites on 248 unique phosphoproteins in SK17-S and 285 phosphosites on 211 unique phosphoproteins in SK17-R. The distributions of the Ser/Thr/Tyr/Asp/His phosphosites in SK17-S and SK17-R were 47.0%/27.6%/12.4%/8.0%/4.9% versus 41.4%/29.5%/17.5%/6.7%/4.9%, respectively. The Ser-90 phosphosite, located on the catalytic motif S(88)VS(90)K of the AmpC &#x3b2;-lactamase, was first identified in SK17-S. Based on site-directed mutagenesis, the nonphosphorylatable mutant S90A was found to be more resistant to imipenem, whereas the phosphorylation-simulated mutant S90D was sensitive to imipenem. Additionally, the S90A mutant protein exhibited higher &#x3b2;-lactamase activity and conferred greater bacterial protection against imipenem in SK17-S compared with the wild-type. In sum, our results revealed that in A. baumannii, Ser-90 phosphorylation of AmpC negatively regulates both &#x3b2;-lactamase activity and the ability to counteract the antibiotic effects of imipenem. These findings highlight the impact of phosphorylation-mediated regulation in antibiotic-resistant bacteria on future drug design and new therapies.

### Keywords
Ampc phosphorylation, Acinetobacter baumannii

### Affiliations
robbin3194@hotmail.com
Academia Sinica Institute of Biological Chemistry(IBC),  Dr. Shih-Hsiung Wu's lab, Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.)

### Submitter
Juo-hsin Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Juohsin Lai
Academia Sinica Institute of Biological Chemistry(IBC),  Dr. Shih-Hsiung Wu's lab, Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.)


