### Accession
PXD007188

### Title
Mevalonate pathway activity is a key determinant of radiation sensitivity in head and neck cancer

### Description
Radioresistance is a major hurdle in the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Here we report a novel role for statin-based treatment of HNSCCs as an actionable and safe adjuvant to radiotherapy. Proteomic profiling and comparison of radiosensitive and radioresistant HNSCCs revealed differential regulation of the mevalonate biosynthetic pathway. Consistent with this finding, inhibition of the mevalonate pathway by pitavastatin (and other related statins) sensitized SQ20B cells to ionizing radiation (IR) and reduced their clonogenic potential. In an effort to uncover the mechanism behind this statin-mediated sensitization, we analyzed prenylation of several important cellular targets upon combined IR-statin treatment. Overall, this study reinforces the view that the mevalonate pathway is a promsing novel therapeutic target in radioresistant HSNCCs.

### Sample Protocol
2.2.1 Sample preparation for proteomics SCC61, JSQ3 and SQ20B were seeded at 106 cells in 100 mm Petri dishes and were grown under standard conditions for 48 hours. Proteins were isolated with M-PER (Thermo Scientific) in the presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Thermo Scientific). Thirty micrograms were separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis on a 12% MOPS buffered 1D Gel (Thermo Scientific) run for 10 min at 200V resulting in a ~2 cm “gel plug”. After staining with 25 mL Imperial Protein stain (Thermo Scientific) at room temperature, peptides were digested for LC-MS/MS analysis.  2.2.2 Peptide digestion  The gel plugs for analysis were excised by sterile razor blade, divided into 1 section and chopped into ~1 mm3 pieces. Each section was washed in dH2O and destained using 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 in 50% acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μl 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 and 10 μl of 200 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine HCl at 37°C for 30 min. The proteins were alkylated by addition of 100 μl of 50 mM iodoacetamide prepared fresh in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 buffer, and allowed to react in the dark at 20°C for 30 min. Gel sections were washed in water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C with 1:50-1:100 enzyme–protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5, and 20 mM CaCl2. Peptides were extracted first with 5% formic acid, then with 75% ACN: 5% formic acid, combined and vacuum dried.  2.2.3 HPLC for mass spectrometry All samples were re-suspended in Burdick & Jackson HPLC-grade water containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% TFA (Pierce), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3–16 (Calbiochem), a sulfobetaine detergent that contributes the following distinct peaks at the end of chromatograms: MH+ at 392, and in-source dimer [2 M + H+] at 783, and some minor impurities of Zwittergent 3–12 seen as MH+ at 336. The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μl C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic (Optimize Technologies) C8, washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm by 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a 2-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nL/min, a 90 min, 2-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50%–95% B over the next 10 min, 10 min at 95% B, then back to the starting conditions and re-equilibrated.  2.2.4 LC-MS/MS analysis  The samples were analyzed via electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) on a Thermo Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 360–2000 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 20 MS/MS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60s.

### Data Protocol
2.2.5 LC–MS/MS data analysis, statistical analysis  Label-free quantification (LFQ) sample sets were analyzed as described previously (Truman et al., 2012). All LC-MS/MS *.raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8, searching against the SPROT Human database (Downloaded: 1/07/2016 with isoforms) using the following criteria: LFQ was selected for quantitation with a min of 1 high confidence peptide to assign LFQ intensities. Trypsin was selected as the protease with max miss cleavage set to 2. Carbamiodomethyl (C) was selected as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to Oxidization (M), Formylation (n-term), Acetyl (Protein n-term), Deamidation (NQ), GlyGly (K), HNE (Budach et al.), and Phosphorylation (STY). Orbitrap mass spectrometer was selected using an MS error of 20 ppm and a MS/MS error of 0.5 Da. 1% FDR cutoff was selected for peptide, protein, and site identifications. Ratios were reported based on the LFQ intensities of protein peak areas determined by MaxQuant and reported in the proteinGroups.txt. Proteins were removed from this results file if they were flagged by MaxQuant as “Contaminants”, “Reverse” or “Only identified by site”. Three complete biological replicates were performed. LFQ peak intensities were analyzed in each run to determine protein hits that fell into the category of single condition only hits and retained if they maintained this state across all runs. Proteins with two out of three observations were retained and quantitated based on LFQ intensity. Log2 transformation of ratios was performed and a significance cutoff of 1.5 fold change was implemented (+/- 0.58 Log2 ratio).

### Publication Abstract
Radioresistance is a major hurdle in the treatment of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Here, we report that concomitant treatment of HNSCCs with radiotherapy and mevalonate pathway inhibitors (statins) may overcome resistance. Proteomic profiling and comparison of radioresistant to radiosensitive HNSCCs revealed differential regulation of the mevalonate biosynthetic pathway. Consistent with this finding, inhibition of the mevalonate pathway by pitavastatin sensitized radioresistant SQ20B cells to ionizing radiation and reduced their clonogenic potential. Overall, this study reinforces the view that the mevalonate pathway is a promising therapeutic target in radioresistant HNSCCs.

### Keywords
Pitavastatin, Senescence, Q-exactive, Ddr, Hnscc, Mevalonate pathway, Lfq quantification.

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Stephen J Kron
Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.


