### Accession
PXD021998

### Title
Proteomic dissection of the impact of environmental exposures on mouse seminal vesicle function

### Description
The seminal vesicles are an integral part of the male accessory gland system, and are responsible for producing a complex array of bioactive moieties that support gamete function and promote reproductive success. However, despite their physiological significance, the biology of the seminal vesicles remains poorly defined. Here, we exploit an established reproductive toxicant model, where mice were administered acrylamide (25 mg/kg bw/day) or control each morning for 5 consecutive days prior to collecting seminal vesicle tissue 72 h following the final injection, to complete the first proteomic assessment of mouse seminal vesicles. A total of 5,013 proteins were identified in the core seminal vesicle proteome with bioinformatics analysis of identifying cell proliferation, transcript/protein production and cellular death and survival pathways as prominent biological processes. Comparison of our acrylamide to control seminal vesicle proteome revealed 311 differentially regulated (-1.5 ≤ FC ≥ 1.5, p ≤ 0.05, 205 up-regulated, 106 down-regulated) proteins with immunoblotting analysis confirming proteomic data. Pathways that initiate protein synthesis to promote cellular survival were prominent amongst the dysregulated cellular pathways and RICTOR (Z-score = -3.64, p = 6.69E-07) was a top-ranked upstream driver. Oxidative stress was implicated as a contributor to protein changes with acrylamide leading to a significant increase in 8-OHdG in epithelial cells (5-fold increase, p = 0.016). Direct effects of acrylamide on seminal vesicle function were observed through a reduction in seminal vesicle secretion weight and overall protein content. Together these finding support the emerging concept that in addition to sperm, paternal exposures exert significant influence on the seminal vesicles, and identify new pathways to develop targeted interventions with which to manipulate fertility and reproductive outcomes.

### Sample Protocol
Seminal vesicle tissues were cut into small segments with a scalpel and homogenized in ice-cold 0.1 M Na2CO3 containing protease and complete EDTA free phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Holding AG, Basel, Switzerland) using a FastPrep-24TM 5G homogenizer (MP Biomedicals, Irvine, CA, USA) with a Cool Prep Adaptor (2 × 1 min, 4.0 m/s, at 4oC). Homogenized samples were then sonicated (3 × 10 s cycles, 100% output power). Protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and diluted to a final concentration of 1.4 mg in a solution of 6 M urea and 2 M thiourea. Samples underwent reduction and alkylation with 10 mM dithiothreitol (30 min at room temperature)  and 20 mM iodoacetamide (30 min protected from light at room temperature) respectively, followed by digestion overnight with 1:30 Lys-C/Trypsin Mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Lipids were precipitated from peptide suspensions with formic acid (2% v/v final concentration) and the resultant supernatant purified using Oasis 1 cc desalting columns (Waters Corp, Milford, MA, USA). Following quantification using a Qubit protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), peptides were subjected to offline hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC), and then analyzed using high-resolution nano liquid chromatography tandem MS (nLC-MS/MS). Reverse phase nLC-MS/MS was performed on control and acrylamide treated HILIC enriched (12 fractions) seminal vesicle protein fractions using a Q-Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap MS coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nanoflow high-performance LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 75 μm × 20 mm trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for pre-concentration and online de-salting. Separation was then achieved using an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 75 μm × 250 mm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), employing a linear gradient of acetonitrile (2 - 40%, 300 nl/min, 120 min). A Q-Exactive Plus MS system was operated in full MS/data dependent acquisition MS/MS mode (data-dependent acquisition). The Orbitrap mass analyzer was used at a resolution of 35,000, to acquire full MS with an m/z range of 380 – 2000, incorporating a target automatic gain control value of 1 × 106 and maximum fill times of 50 ms.  The 20 most intense multiple charged precursors were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation with a stepped collisional energies of 25, 28 and 30. MS/MS fragments were measured at an Orbitrap resolution of 17,500 using an automatic gain control target of 5 × 105 and maximum fill times of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of all raw files was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). SEQUEST HT was used to search against the UniProt Mus musculus database (25,260 sequences, downloaded 12th November 2019). Database searching parameters included up to two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, and trypsin designated as the digestion enzyme. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while dynamic modifications included acetylation (N-terminus), oxidation (M), and phosphorylation (S/T and Y). Interrogation of the corresponding reversed database was also performed to evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identification using Percolator based on q-values, which were estimated from the target-decoy search approach. To filter out target peptide spectrum matches over the decoy-peptide spectrum matches, a fixed FDR of 1% was set at the peptide level. Fold changes and significance between control and acrylamide treated groups were calculated by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using a non-nested pairwise ratio approach, whereby the program calculates the peptide group ratios as the geometric median of all combinations of ratios from all the replicates for each group. Protein ratios were subsequently calculated as the geometric median of the peptide group ratios. The protein list was exported as an Excel file and further refined to include only those with a quantitative value in all three replicates within at least one group (i.e. control and/or acrylamide treated), and a minimum of two unique peptides. Using Perseus, version 1.6.10.43, scatter plots of normalized abundances were generated.

### Publication Abstract
Seminal vesicles are an integral part of the male reproductive accessory gland system. They produce a complex array of secretions containing bioactive constituents that support gamete function and promote reproductive success, with emerging evidence suggesting these secretions are influenced by our environment. Despite their significance, the biology of seminal vesicles remains poorly defined. Here, we complete the first proteomic assessment of mouse seminal vesicles and assess the impact of the reproductive toxicant acrylamide. Mice were administered acrylamide (25&#xa0;mg/kg bw/day) or control daily for five consecutive days prior to collecting seminal vesicle tissue. A total of 5013 proteins were identified in the seminal vesicle proteome with bioinformatic analyses identifying cell proliferation, protein synthesis, cellular death, and survival pathways as prominent biological processes. Secreted proteins were among the most abundant, and several proteins are linked with seminal vesicle phenotypes. Analysis of the effect of acrylamide on the seminal vesicle proteome revealed 311 differentially regulated (FC &#xb1; 1.5, p &#x2264; 0.05, 205 up-regulated, 106 downregulated) proteins, orthogonally validated via immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry. Pathways that initiate protein synthesis to promote cellular survival were prominent among the dysregulated pathways, and rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR (RICTOR, p&#xa0;= 6.69E-07) was a top-ranked upstream driver. Oxidative stress was implicated as contributing to protein changes, with acrylamide causing an increase in 8-OHdG in seminal vesicle epithelial cells (fivefold increase, p&#xa0;= 0.016) and the&#xa0;surrounding smooth muscle layer (twofold increase, p&#xa0;= 0.043). Additionally, acrylamide treatment caused a reduction in seminal vesicle secretion weight (36% reduction, p&#xa0;= 0.009) and total protein content (25% reduction, p&#xa0;= 0.017). Together these findings support the interpretation that toxicant exposure influences male accessory gland physiology and highlights the need to consider the response of all male reproductive tract tissues when interpreting the impact of environmental stressors on male reproductive function.

### Keywords
Acrylamide, Seminal vesicle, Proteomics

### Affiliations
The University of Newcastle
Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science, School of Environmental and Life Sciences, Discipline of Biological Sciences, The University of Newcastle, University Drive, Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia; Hunter Medical Research Institute, Pregnancy and Reproduction Program, New Lambton Heights, NSW 2305, Australia

### Submitter
David Skerrett-Byrne

### Lab Head
Dr John Schjenken
Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science, School of Environmental and Life Sciences, Discipline of Biological Sciences, The University of Newcastle, University Drive, Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia; Hunter Medical Research Institute, Pregnancy and Reproduction Program, New Lambton Heights, NSW 2305, Australia


