### Accession
PXD019472

### Title
Induction of active hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes in mice exposed to benzo[a]pyrene or environmental mixtures of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons

### Description
Cytochrome P450 enzymes play an important role in bioactivating or detoxifying polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). We exposed mice to doses of benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) or a mixture of PAHs to characterize dose- and time-response relationships of specific cytochrome P450s. Mice exposed to the highest PAH exposures exhibited 1.7-5-fold higher intrinsic clearance rates for BaP, compared to controls, and higher Vmax values, indicating higher amounts of enzymes capable of metabolizing BaP. This study demonstrates that PAHs induce enzymes in dose- and time-dependent patterns in animal models at exposure levels researchers use to characterize hazards and at relevant human exposure levels to PAH mixtures found at Superfund sites. Accounting for these potential changes in enzyme profiles, relative rates of PAH bioactivation and detoxification, and resulting risk will help reduce uncertainty and improve risk assessments for PAHs at contaminated sites.

### Sample Protocol
We exposed B6129SF1/J mice to single or repeated doses (2-180 µmol/kg/d) of benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) or Supermix-10, a mixture of the top 10 most abundant PAHs found at the Portland Harbor Superfund Site, and we used chemoproteomics and global proteomics to evaluate P450 function and induction.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MS-GF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
Cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYPs) play an important role in bioactivating or detoxifying polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), common environmental contaminants. While it is widely accepted that exposure to PAHs induces CYPs, effectively increasing rates of xenobiotic metabolism, dose- and time-response patterns of CYP induction are not well-known. In order to better understand dose- and time-response relationships of individual CYPs following induction, we exposed B6129SF1/J mice to single or repeated doses (2-180 &#x3bc;mol/kg/d) of benzo[<i>a</i>]pyrene (BaP) or Supermix-10, a mixture of the top 10 most abundant PAHs found at the Portland Harbor Superfund Site. In hepatic microsomes from exposed mice, we measured amounts of active CYPs using activity-based protein profiling and total CYP expression using global proteomics. We observed rapid Cyp1a1 induction after 6 h at the lowest PAH exposures and broad induction of many CYPs after 3 daily PAH doses at 72 h following the first dose. Using samples displaying Cyp1a1 induction, we observed significantly higher metabolic affinity for BaP metabolism (<i>K</i><sub>m</sub> reduced 3-fold), 3-fold higher intrinsic clearance, but no changes to the <i>V</i><sub>max</sub>. Mice dosed with the highest PAH exposures exhibited 1.7-5-fold higher intrinsic clearance rates for BaP compared to controls and higher <i>V</i><sub>max</sub> values indicating greater amounts of enzymes capable of metabolizing BaP. This study demonstrates exposure to PAHs found at superfund sites induces enzymes in dose- and time-dependent patterns in mice. Accounting for specific changes in enzyme profiles, relative rates of PAH bioactivation and detoxification, and resulting risk will help translate internal dosimetry of animal models to humans and improve risk assessments of PAHs at superfund sites.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, Cytochrome p450, Enyzme induction

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron T Wright
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, USA


