### Accession
PXD006734

### Title
Thylakoid membranes from Arabidopsis LC-MSMS

### Description
The small heat shock protein (sHsp) chaperones are crucial for cell survival and can prevent aggregation of client proteins that partially unfold under destabilizing conditions.  Most investigations on the chaperone activity sHsps are based on a limited set of thermosensitive model substrate client proteins since the endogenous targets are often not known. There is a high diversity among sHsps, with a single conserved -sandwich fold domain defining the family, the α-crystallin domain, whereas the N-terminal and C-terminal regions are highly variable in length and sequence among various sHsps and conserved only within orthologues. The endogenous targets are probably also varying among various sHsps, cellular compartments, cell type and organism. Here we have investigated Hsp21, a non-metazoan sHsp expressed in the chloroplasts in green plants, which experience huge environmental fluctuations not least in temperature. We describe how Hsp21 can also interact with the chloroplast thylakoid membranes, both when isolated thylakoid membranes are incubated with Hsp21 protein and when plants are heat-stressed. The amount of Hsp21 associated with the thylakoid membranes was precisely determined by quantitative mass spectrometry after metabolic 15N-isotope labelling, of either recombinantly expressed and purified Hsp21 protein or intact Arabidopsis thaliana plants. We found that Hsp21 is among few proteins that become associated with the thylakoid membranes in heat-stressed plants, and that approximately two thirds of the pool of chloroplast Hsp21 is affected. We conclude that for a complete picture of the role of sHsps in plant stress resistance also their association with the membranes should be considered

### Sample Protocol
In vivo experiments: Plants of Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia (Col-0) were grown hydroponically,  either without or with stable isotope labelling (14N-plants and 15N-plants, respectively). Heat-treatment was performed in a VB0714 Hereaus-Vötsch climate-chamber (Hereaus, Mölndal, Sweden) with humidity kept at 70% to prevent transpiration. To induce expression of Hsp21 all plants were subjected to a heat pre-treatment on day 46 (45°C for 30 min,  and the next day 45°C for 90 min). After another three days, the 15N-plants were subjected to heat-treatment (45°C for 60 min) whereas the 14N plants were kept as control plants in the growth chamber. All plants were then immediately transferred to the cold room and chloroplast isolation was performed at 4 °C with all materials and buffers precooled. Separation of the soluble stroma and the thylakoid membrane fraction was performed. The protein concentrations were determined and fractions stored in aliquots at -80ºC. To quantify the amount of Hsp21 in heat-stressed versus control membranes, and heat-stressed versus control stroma, fractions from heat-stressed 15N-plants and control 14N-plants were thawed, and mixed 1:1 and loaded for SDS-PAGE. In vitro experiments: Recombinantly expressed Hsp21 from Arabidopsis thaliana (sequence as in UniProtKB P31170 with a start methionine replacing the first 44 amino acids, which are the transit sequence not part of the mature protein within the chloroplast), and non-dodecameric mutational variant Hsp21V81A, were expressed and purified as. Hsp21 protein labelled with 15N was obtained. Thylakoid membranes, that had been isolated from Arabidopsis thaliana plants,  concentration-determined and stored in aliquots at -80ºC, were thawed immediately before use. Stock solutions of Hsp21 and thylakoid membranes were diluted 10 or 100 times with buffer (20 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 8, 150 mM NaCl) to prepare samples with various amounts of Hsp21 (2, 0.4, 0.2, and 0.1 µg) and thylakoid membranes corresponding to 75 µg protein in a total volume of 24 µl. After incubation at 20 or 45ºC for 15 min the thylakoid membranes were isolated and washed in the following way: after centrifugation (Eppendorf centrifuge, 5 min 4000 rpm), 12 µl (half of each sample) was withdrawn from the top of the supernatant and spiked with an amount of 15N-labelled Hsp21 corresponding to half of the originally added amount of unlabelled Hsp21. The rest of the supernatant was discarded and the pellet with the thylakoid membranes was washed with 24 µl fresh buffer. After centrifugation (Eppendorf centrifuge, 5 min 4000 rpm), the washed pellet was dissolved in 12 µl fresh buffer and spiked with an amount of 15N-labelled Hsp21 corresponding to the amount of unlabelled Hsp21 originally added. Loading buffer with LDS and DTT were added and samples heated for 10 min at 95°C before loading for SDS-PAGE. Band corresponding to Hsp21 subunit in size was cut out of the gel and analysed with LC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
With an in-house licensed version of the software Mascot Server software (version 2.5, Matrix Science Inc, Boston, USA, http://www.matrixscience.com) raw files, typically containing 20 000 scans each, were converted to mgf-format by Mascot Distiller (version 2.6) and identification of proteins were performed with the Mascot Daemon software (version 2.4). For the conversion of the raw-files from the Thermo Xcalibur software the default settings were optimized, in MS and MSMS processing: Peak half width 0.02, 600 data points per Da, in Time domain Max intermediate time 0, in MSMS and MS peak picking same settings with Min S/N =2, Peak profile Min peak width 0.002, Expected 0.02, Max 0.2. For protein identification the following parameter settings were used: UniProt database, subsection SwissProt restricted to Arabidopsis thaliana, Enzyme: trypsin, missed cleavage sites: 1 or 2, variable modification: methionine oxidation, peptide mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance: 0.05 Da, Quantitation: 15N Metabolic. The Mascot Distiller Quantitation Toolbox was used to assess the L/H ratio between light (14N) and heavy (15N) isotope. The protocol requires information from the raw data file that is not present in the peak list, and Mascot Distiller has access to both the Mascot search results and the raw data.

### Publication Abstract
The small heat shock protein (sHsp) chaperones are crucial for cell survival and can prevent aggregation of client proteins that partially unfold under destabilizing conditions. Most investigations on the chaperone activity of sHsps are based on a limited set of thermosensitive model substrate client proteins since the endogenous targets are often not known. There is a high diversity among sHsps with a single conserved &#x3b2;-sandwich fold domain defining the family, the &#x3b1;-crystallin domain, whereas the N-terminal and C-terminal regions are highly variable in length and sequence among various sHsps and conserved only within orthologues. The endogenous targets are probably also varying among various sHsps, cellular compartments, cell type and organism. Here we have investigated Hsp21, a non-metazoan sHsp expressed in the chloroplasts in green plants which experience huge environmental fluctuations not least in temperature. We describe how Hsp21 can also interact with the chloroplast thylakoid membranes, both when isolated thylakoid membranes are incubated with Hsp21 protein and when plants are heat-stressed. The amount of Hsp21 associated with the thylakoid membranes was precisely determined by quantitative mass spectrometry after metabolic <sup>15</sup> N-isotope labeling of either recombinantly expressed and purified Hsp21 protein or intact Arabidopsis thaliana plants. We found that Hsp21 is among few proteins that become associated with the thylakoid membranes in heat-stressed plants, and that approximately two thirds of the pool of chloroplast Hsp21 is affected. We conclude that for a complete picture of the role of sHsps in plant stress resistance also their association with the membranes should be considered.

### Keywords
Membranes, Arabidopsis, Chaperone, Heat shock protein, Hsp21, Thermomemory, Quantitative mass spectrometry, Photosynthesis, Thylakoid, Stress response, Stable isotope labelling

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Structural Biology
Kemicentrum
Box 118, 221 00 LUND
Sweden
Deparment of Boichemistry and Structural Biology  Center for Molecular Protein Science  Lund University PO Box 124 22100 Lund Sweden

### Submitter
Gudrun Rutsdottir

### Lab Head
Dr Cecilia Emanuelsson
Deparment of Boichemistry and Structural Biology  Center for Molecular Protein Science  Lund University PO Box 124 22100 Lund Sweden


