### Accession
PXD009241

### Title
Identification of potential biomarkers of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma using iTRAQ based quantitative proteomic approach

### Description
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is one of the most common cancers in India. Despite improvements in treatment strategy, the survival rates of HNSCC patients remains poor. Thus, it is necessary to identify biomarkers that can be used for early detection of disease. In this study, we employed iTRAQ-based quantitative mass spectrometry analysis to identify dysregulated proteins from a panel of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines. We identified 2,468 proteins, of which 496 proteins were found to be dysregulated in at least two HNSCC cell lines compared to immortalized normal oral keratinocytes. We detected increased expression of replication protein A1 (RPA1) and heat shock protein family H (Hsp110) member 1 (HSPH1), in HNSCC cell lines compared to control. The differentially expressed proteins were further validated using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) and western blot analysis in HNSCC cell lines. Immunohistochemistry-based validation using HNSCC tissue microarrays revealed overexpression of RPA1 and HSPH1 in 15.7% and 32.2% of the tested cases, respectively. Our study illustrates quantitative proteomics as a robust approach for identification of potential HNSCC biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
1. Cell culture FaDu and JHU-O28 were cultured in RPMI-1640 culture media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin solution. CAL 27 and OKF6/TERT1 were cultured in keratinocyte serum-free media (KSFM) (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) supplemented with bovine pituitary extract (25 mg/ml), calcium chloride (0.4 mM), epidermal growth factor (0.2 ng/ml) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin solution. All the cell lines were grown and maintained at 37ºC in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2 incubator.   2. Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis Each cell line was grown to 70% confluency. The cells were then maintained in serum-free growth media for 12 h prior to harvesting cells for protein extraction. Cells were lysed using lysis buffer (2% SDS, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM β -glycerophosphate and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC)). Protein concentration was determined using bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA). Filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) was used to reduce SDS concentration in the sample as described earlier. Briefly, Equal amounts of protein from each cell line was reduced using tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 60°C for 1 h and alkylated using methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 20 min at room temperature. The samples were then digested using trypsin (Promega, San Luis Obispo, CA) overnight at 37ºC.   3. iTRAQ labeling and basic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography Peptides from each cell line were labelled using iTRAQ 8-plex kit (AB SCIEX, Washington, D.C.) in two technical replicates as per manufacturer’s instructions. OKF6/TERT1 was labelled using iTRAQ label 113 and 114, CAL 27 with 115 and 116, FaDu with 117 and 118, and JHU-O28 with 119 and 121. The iTRAQ-labeled samples were pooled, dried and subjected to bRPLC, as described earlier. Briefly, the samples were reconstituted in 25% acetonitrile and, adjusted to pH 2.8 using orthophosphoric acid. Sample fractionation was carried out on polysufoethyl A column (200 × 4.6 mm, 5 μm, 200 Å, PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD) on Agilent 1260 HPLC platform. Peptide fractionation was carried out using a linear gradient of 0% - 60% of solvent B (10 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCl, 25% acetonitrile) over a period of 50 min at a constant flow rate of 350 μl/min. The samples were concatenated and pooled into 25 fractions, reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and desalted using C18 Stage Tips (3M Empore, St. Paul, MN).  4. LC-MS/MS and data analysis iTRAQ based LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Easy-nLC II system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded on a trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, Magic C18Aq, 5 μm, 100Å) and washed using Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 3 μl/min. Samples were then resolved on an analytical column (75 μm × 12 cm, Magic C18 Aq, 3 μm, 100Å) at 350 nl/min flow rate using a linear gradient of 7% – 30% of Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 75 minutes. MS and MS/MS scans were at a mass resolution of 60,000 at 400m/z and 15,000 at 400 m/z, respectively. Full MS scans were acquired in m/z range of 350–1800 m/z. For each cycle, twenty most abundant precursor ions with charge state ≥2 were sequentially isolated. Higher energy collision dissociation was used as the activation method with 40% normalized collision energy. Isolation width used was 2 m/z. Precursor ions with single charge or unassigned charges were rejected.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4) software suite (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for protein identification and quantification. Mass spectrometry data was queried against NCBI Human RefSeq protein database (Version 81) using Sequest and Mascot (version 2.4) search algorithms. Oxidation of methionine was set to dynamic modification in the search parameters while static modifications included - carbamidomethylation at cysteine and iTRAQ 8-plex modification at N-terminus of the peptide and lysine. Trypsin was specified as protease with one missed cleavage allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.1 Da. Decoy database searches were carried out to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR). 1% FDR cut-off at PSM, peptide and protein level was considered for protein identification. The protein abundance ratios in HNSCC cell lines was obtained as follows: CAL 27 (115+116)/OKF6/TERT1 (113+114), FaDu (117+118)/OKF6/TERT1 (113+114) and JHU-O28 (119+121)/OKF6/TERT1 (113+114).

### Publication Abstract
Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is one of the most common cancers in India. Despite improvements in treatment strategy, the survival rates of HNSCC patients remain poor. Thus, it is necessary to identify biomarkers that can be used for early detection of disease. In this study, we employed iTRAQ-based quantitative mass spectrometry analysis to identify dysregulated proteins from a panel of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines. We identified 2468 proteins, of which 496 proteins were found to be dysregulated in at least two out of three HNSCC cell lines compared to immortalized normal oral keratinocytes. We detected increased expression of replication protein A1 (RPA1) and heat shock protein family H (Hsp110) member 1 (HSPH1), in HNSCC cell lines compared to control. The differentially expressed proteins were further validated using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) and western blot analysis in HNSCC cell lines. Immunohistochemistry-based validation using HNSCC tissue microarrays revealed overexpression of RPA1 and HSPH1 in 15.7% and 32.2% of the tested cases, respectively. Our study illustrates quantitative proteomics as a robust approach for identification of potential HNSCC biomarkers. The proteomic data has been submitted to ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://www.proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE public data repository accessible using the data identifier - PXD009241.

### Keywords
Hnscc, Parallel reaction monitoring, Itraq, Mass spectrometry, Okf6/tert

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Institute of Bioinformatics 7th floor, Discoverer building, International Tech Park, Bangalore 560 066

### Submitter
Aditi Chatterjee

### Lab Head
Dr Aditi Chatterjee
Institute of Bioinformatics 7th floor, Discoverer building, International Tech Park, Bangalore 560 066


