### Accession
PXD019139

### Title
Quantitative proteome, phosphoproteome and acetylome analysis of Arabidopsis thaliana root responses to persistent osmotic and salinity stress.

### Description
Environmental conditions contributing to abiotic stresses such as drought and salinity result in large annual economic losses around the world. As sessile organisms, plants cannot escape the environmental stresses they encounter, but instead must adapt to survive. Previous studies investigating osmotic and/or salt responses have largely focused on understanding short-term responses (0-1h) at the transcriptomic, proteomic and phosphoproteomic level; however, our understanding of intermediate to longer-term adaptation (24h - days) is relatively limited. In addition to protein abundance and phosphorylation changes, recent evidence suggests reversible protein acetylation may be important for abiotic stress responses. Therefore, to characterize the effects of osmotic and salt stress, we undertook a label-free proteomic and PTMomic analysis of Arabidopsis roots exposed to 300mM Mannitol and 150mM NaCl for 24 h. We quantitatively assessed protein abundance, phosphorylation and acetylation.

### Sample Protocol
Plant Growth and Harvesting Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 seeds were imbibed 2d at 4oC in the dark prior to growth in Magenta boxes containing 0.5x MS media containing 0.5% (w/v) sucrose. Plants were grown at 22oC under a 12h light : 12h dark photoperiod for 21 days prior to the application of 0.5x MS media containing 300mM Mannitol (Osmotic) or 150mM NaCl (Salt). Seedlings were grown in either experimental or control media for an additional 24 h. Roots were manually separated from shoots and immediately frozen in liquid N2. Roots were then ground in a mortar and pestle under liquid N2 and stored at -80oC until further use. Sample Preparation and PTM Affinity Enrichments Root tissue was extracted using 1:1.5 w/v extraction buffer (4% SDS, 50mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0, 50mM DTT). Samples were then processed and digested with trypsin (Promega) as previously described (Uhrig et al., 2019). Subsequent enrichment of phosphorylated or acetylated peptides was performed using titanium dioxide (NP‐Ti02; Sachtopore; SNX 030S 005 #9205/1639) and anti‐acetylated lysine IgG‐coupled agarose (ICP0388; ImmuneChem, https://www.immunechem.com) as previously described (Uhrig et al., 2019), prior to analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.4.1.2, http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox and Mann, 2008) and searched against The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR10) protein database concatenated with a decoy database supplemented with contaminants using the Andromeda search engine. Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, while methionine oxidation (all searches), lysine acetylation (acetylated peptide enrichments) and phosphorylated serine / threonine and tyrosine (phosphopeptide enrichments) were set as variable modifications, respectively. One missed cleavage for phosphoproteomic and proteomic measurements and two missed cleavages for lysine-acetylated peptides were permitted. Protein and PSM false discovery rates (FDR) threshold of 1%, while match between runs and re-quantify options were enabled. Further downstream analysis was performed using Perseus version 1.5.5.3 (Tyanova et al, 2016). For all data reverse hits and contaminants were removed, followed by assembly into treatment groups, filtering based on the presence of measure data in at least 2 replicates per group and log2-transformation with missing values replaced using the normal distribution function set to default parameters. All PTM analyses utilized a PTM site localization score threshold ≥ 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Abiotic stresses such as drought result in large annual economic losses around the world. As sessile organisms, plants cannot escape the environmental stresses they encounter but instead must adapt to survive. Studies investigating plant responses to osmotic and/or salt stress have largely focused on short-term systemic responses, leaving our understanding of intermediate to longer-term adaptation (24&#x2009;h to d) lacking. In addition to protein abundance and phosphorylation changes, evidence suggests reversible lysine acetylation may also be important for abiotic stress responses. Therefore, to characterize the protein-level effects of osmotic and salt stress, we undertook a label-free proteomic analysis of Arabidopsis thaliana roots exposed to 300&#x2009;mM mannitol and 150&#x2009;mM NaCl for 24&#x2009;h. We assessed protein phosphorylation, lysine acetylation and changes in protein abundance, detecting significant changes in 245, 35 and 107 total proteins, respectively. Comparison with available transcriptome data indicates that transcriptome- and proteome-level changes occur in parallel, while post-translational modifications (PTMs) do not. Further, we find significant changes in PTMs, and protein abundance involve different proteins from the same networks, indicating a multifaceted regulatory approach to prolonged osmotic and salt stress. In particular, we find extensive protein-level changes involving sulfur metabolism under both osmotic and salt conditions as well as changes in protein kinases and transcription factors that may represent new targets for drought stress signaling. Collectively, we find that protein-level changes continue to occur in plant roots 24&#x2009;h from the onset of osmotic and salt stress and that these changes differ across multiple proteome levels.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Global proteome, Quantitative proteomics, Acetylome, Roots, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
University of Alberta
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta

### Submitter
Richard Uhrig

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Uhrig
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta


