### Accession
PXD006446

### Title
Proteomic analysis of skeletal muscle reveals estrogen as a key regulator of muscle signaling in women

### Description
Women’s aging is characterized by menopausal loss of ovarian function, which has been suggested as a contributing factor to aging-related muscle deterioration and predisposes to the metabolic dysfunctions. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms have remained unknown. To identify mechanisms, we utilized muscle samples from 24 pre- and postmenopausal women, established proteome-wide profiles and identified upstream regulators and downstream cellular pathways associated with the differences in age, menopausal status and use of hormone replacement therapy (HRT). None of the premenopausal women used hormonal medication while the postmenopausal women were monozygotic twin-sister pairs who were either current HRT users or had never used HRT. The proteomic analyses resulted in the quantification of 762 muscle proteins of which 158 were for the first time associated with female muscle aging. The Ingenuity Pathway Analysis pinpointed 17β-estradiol as a potential upstream regulator of the observed differences in the major downstream pathways including dysregulated cell death and glycolysis pathways. The results increase knowledge on the factors related to skeletal muscle signaling and aging. This is of importance, since the role of female sex hormones in the regulation of muscle cell signaling has been under appreciated and scarcely studied as compared to vast amount of data on male sex hormones and skeletal muscle. Our results clearly demonstrate the also female sex hormones and HRT should be considered as potential active players and an intervention targets to promote women’s muscular health.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and proteolytic digestion of proteins from muscle samples. Frozen muscle samples were thawed on ice, detached from cutting block and submersed in milliQ water to wash excess amounts of OCT. Subsequently, they were dipped in 4% SDS/0.1 M Tris pH 8/0.05 M DTT and grounded at room temperature using tissue homogenizer. The homogenate was heated for10 min at 100 °C and cleared by centrifugation at 30 000 g for 15 min. The protein concentration was determined using the nanodrop technique. 10 µg of total protein amounts was taken to be digested, using modified FASP protocol (Scifo et al., J Proteomics 2015). In brief, the lysate buffer was exchanged by washing it several times with 8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris, pH (urea buffer, UB). The proteins were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in UB, after washing out the DTT - containing solution. 1:50 w/w of lysine-C endopeptidase (Wako) was added in about 4 M urea/0.1 M Tris pH 8 and incubated at room temperature overnight. The peptide digests were collected by centrifugation and trypsin solution was added in a ratio of 1:50 w/w in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. As before, the digests were collected and combined. The peptide samples were cleaned using C18 - reverse phase ZipTipTM (Millipore), resuspended in 1% TFA and sonicated in water bath for 1 minute.  Liquid chromatography high-deﬁnition tandem mass spectrometry (HDMSE). The samples were analyzed in randomized order. 300 ng of digested proteins/replicate (3 technical replicates per sample) was used in nano-LC-HD-MSE analysis. The nano-LC-HD-MSE analyses were performed as described (Mäkelä et al., Eur J Neurosci 2016; Tikka et al., NeuroMol Med 2016). Briefly, the peptides were separated by nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) equipped with a trapping column (5 μm Symmetry C18 180 μm × 20 mm C18 reverse phase, Waters), and followed by an analytical C18 reversed-phase column (Waters) in a single pump trapping mode. After trapping, the peptides were separated with a linear gradient of 3 to 35% of solution B (0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile), for 90 min at a flow rate 0.3 µl/min and stable column temperature of 35°C. Each sample run was followed by two empty runs to wash out any remaining peptides from previous runs. The samples were run in ion mobility-assisted data-independent analysis mode (HD-MSE), in a Synapt G2-S mass spectrometer (Waters), by alternating between low collision energy (6V) and high collision energy ramp in the transfer compartment (20 to 45 V) and using 1s cycle time. The separated peptides were detected online with mass spectrometer, operated in positive, resolution mode in the range of m/z 50-2000 amu. 150 fmol/µl of human [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (Sigma) in 50% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid solution at a flow rate of 0.3µl/min was used for a lock mass correction, applied every 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
Relative quantification between samples using precursor ion intensities was performed with Progenesis QI ™ Informatics for Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics/Waters) and ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS V3.0). HD-MSE parameters were set as follows: low energy threshold of 135 counts, elevated energy threshold of 30 counts, and intensity threshold of precursor/fragment ion cluster 750 counts. Chromatograms were automatically aligned by the Progenesis QI software, and those with alignment score > 70% to the reference run were selected for further analysis. To compare the controlsto other subjects we utilized the between-subject design scheme of Progenesis QI software. Database searches were carried out against UniProt-SwissProt reviewed human database (release 2014_1, 47214 entries) with Ion Accounting algorithm and using the following parameters: peptide and fragment tolerance: automatic, maximum protein mass: 500 kDa, min fragment ions matches per protein - 7, min fragment ions matches per peptide - 3, min peptide matches per protein - 1, primary digest reagent: trypsin, missed cleavages allowed - 2, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation C, variable modifications - deamidation of N/Q residues, oxidation of Methionine (M) and false discovery rate (FDR) < 4%. Protein quantitation was performed entirely on non-conflicting Homo sapiens identifications, using precursor ion intensity data and standardized expression profiles. Protein was considered to be identified when it was present in all three replicates of the nano-LC-HD-MSE runs and within a study group when identification failed in less than in 33% of the participants (i.e. protein called present at least 4 out of 6 participants within premenopausal group and at least 7 out of 9 participants within postmenopausal group). DEPs (p ≤ 0.05 by ANOVA for all comparisons), which were quantified with ≥2 unique peptides served as inputs into IPA (Ingenuity systems, Redwood City, CA; www.ingenuity.com). Prior to network and other functional analyses, the list of proteins was filtered to include only proteins with fold changes, FC greater than |1.5|. The IPA right-tailed Fisher’s exact test with B-H multiple testing corrections was used to determine a p-value of significance in all functional analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Female middle age is characterized by a decline in skeletal muscle mass and performance, predisposing women to sarcopenia, functional limitations, and metabolic dysfunction as they age. Menopausal loss of ovarian function leading to low circulating level of 17&#x3b2;-estradiol has been suggested as a contributing factor to aging-related muscle deterioration. However, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain largely unknown and thus far androgens have been considered as a major anabolic hormone for skeletal muscle. We utilized muscle samples from 24 pre- and postmenopausal women to establish proteome-wide profiles, associated with the difference in age (30-34&#xa0;years old vs. 54-62&#xa0;years old), menopausal status (premenopausal vs. postmenopausal), and use of hormone replacement therapy (HRT; user vs. nonuser). None of the premenopausal women used hormonal medication while the postmenopausal women were monozygotic (MZ) cotwin pairs of whom the other sister was current HRT user or the other had never used HRT. Label-free proteomic analyses resulted in the quantification of 797 muscle proteins of which 145 proteins were for the first time associated with female aging using proteomics. Furthermore, we identified 17&#x3b2;-estradiol as a potential upstream regulator of the observed differences in muscle energy pathways. These findings pinpoint the underlying molecular mechanisms of the metabolic dysfunction accruing upon menopause, thus having implications for understanding the complex functional interactions between female reproductive hormones and health.

### Keywords
Human, Hdmse, Estrogen, Aging, Muscle, Hormon replacement therapy

### Affiliations
University of Helsinki, Medicum, HiLIFE, Meilahti Clinical Proteomics Core Facility
Medicum,Faculty of Medicine Biochemistry/Developmental Biology Meilahti Clinical Proteomics Core Facility PO Box 63 (Haartmaninkatu 8) FI-00014 University of Helsinki Finland

### Submitter
Maciej Lalowski

### Lab Head
Dr Marc H. Baumann
Medicum,Faculty of Medicine Biochemistry/Developmental Biology Meilahti Clinical Proteomics Core Facility PO Box 63 (Haartmaninkatu 8) FI-00014 University of Helsinki Finland


