### Accession
PXD001455

### Title
Global quantitative proteomics reveals novel factors in the ecdysone signaling pathway in Drosophila melanogaster.

### Description
Global quantitative proteomics reveals novel factors in the ecdysone signaling pathway in Drosophila melanogaster.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lyates S2 cell line, SILAC K6R10, Forward and Reverse (label swap) as duplicate experiments, HILIC fractionation (6-8 fractions), LC-MS/MS on Q Exactive

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant standard instrument settings for Q Exactive, SILAC mutiplicity=2; follow-up analysis with Perseus, DAVID GO

### Publication Abstract
The ecdysone signaling pathway plays a major role in various developmental transitions in insects. Recent advances in the understanding of ecdysone action have relied to a large extent on the application of molecular genetic tools in Drosophila. Here, we used a comprehensive quantitative SILAC MS-based approach to study the global, dynamic proteome of a Drosophila cell line to investigate how hormonal signals are transduced into specific cellular responses. Global proteome data after ecdysone treatment after various time points were then integrated with transcriptome data. We observed a substantial overlap in terms of affected targets between the dynamic proteome and transcriptome, although there were some clear differences in timing effects. Also, downregulation of several specific mRNAs did not always correlate with downregulation of their corresponding protein counterparts, and in some cases there was no correlation between transcriptome and proteome dynamics whatsoever. In addition, we performed a comprehensive interactome analysis of EcR, the major target of ecdysone. Proteins copurified with EcR include factors involved in transcription, chromatin remodeling, ecdysone signaling, ecdysone biosynthesis, and other signaling pathways. Novel ecdysone-responsive proteins identified in this study might link previously unknown proteins to the ecdysone signaling pathway and might be novel targets for developmental studies. To our knowledge, this is the first time that ecdysone signaling is studied by global quantitative proteomics. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001455 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001455).

### Keywords
Q exactive, Silac, Ecdysone signaling, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Proteomics center | Erasmus University Medical Center | Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen AA Demmers
Proteomics center | Erasmus University Medical Center | Rotterdam, The Netherlands


