### Accession
PXD035397

### Title
Irisin acts through its integrin receptor in a novel two-step process

### Description
Exercise benefits the human body in many ways. Irisin is secreted by muscle, increased with exercise, and conveys many physiological benefits, including improved cognition and resistance to neurodegeneration. Irisin acts via αV integrins; however, a mechanistic understanding of how small polypeptides like irisin can signal through integrins is poorly understood. Using mass spectrometry and cryo-EM, we demonstrate that extracellular heat-shock protein 90α (eHsp90α) is secreted by muscle with exercise and acts as a required cofactor that “opens” the integrin αVβ5 structure to allows for high affinity irisin binding and signaling through an eHsp90α/αV/β5 complex. By including hydrogen/deuterium exchange data, we generate and experimentally validate a 2.98 Å RMSD irisin/αVβ5 complex docking model. Irisin binds very tightly to an alternative interface on αVβ5 distinct from that involved in its interaction with known ligands. These data together elucidate a non-canonical mechanism by which a small polypeptide hormone like irisin can function through integrins.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling:  Stock concentrations of purified αVβ5 ectodomain and the irisin/αVβ5 ectodomain complex (as purified above) were 20 μM and 20 μM/4 μM, respectively, in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MnCl2, H2O. Deuterium labeling was initiated with an 18-fold dilution into D2O buffer (18 μL, 10 mM HEPES pD 7.43, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MnCl2, 99.9% D2O).  After each labeling time (10 seconds, 10 minutes, and 4 hours) at 23 °C, the labeling reaction was quenched with the addition of 19 μL of ice-cold quenching buffer (200 mM potassium phosphate, pH 2.44, 4 M guanidinium chloride, 0.72 M TCEP, H2O) and held on ice for 1 minute prior to LC/MS analysis.  LC/MS:  Deuterated and control samples were digested online at 15 °C using an in-house-packed pepsin column. The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min.  Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 μm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The back pressure averaged ~12,950 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water, 0.1% formic acid.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the pepsin column during each analytical run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z.  The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 2.5 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C. The error of determining the deuterium levels was ± 0.25 Da in this experimental setup. Deuterium levels were not corrected for back exchange and thus reported as relative [Wales & Engen (2006). Mass Spectrom Rev. 25(1), 158-170].

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from replicate HDMSE analyses (as detailed in the Supplemental Datafile) of undeuterated control samples using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters Corporation). Peptide masses were identified from searches using non-specific cleavage of a custom database containing the sequence of human irisin (encoded by FNDC5, Uniprot Q8NAU1), human αV ectodomain residues 32-991 (from Uniprot P06756), and β5 ectodomain residues 24-717 (from Uniprot P18084).  Searches used the following parameters: no missed cleavages, no PTMs, a low energy threshold of 135, an elevated energy threshold of 35, and an intensity threshold of 500. No false discovery rate (FDR) control was performed.  The peptides identified in PLGS (excluding all neutral loss and in-source fragmentation identifications) were then filtered in DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation) implementing a minimum products per amino acid cut-off of 0.25, at least 2 consecutive product ions.  Peptides meeting the filtering criteria to this point were further processed by DynamX 3.0 (Waters Corporation), including manual inspection of each mass spectrum. The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined with the software by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuterated form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were used to generate all uptake graphs and difference maps.

### Publication Abstract
Exercise benefits the human body in many ways. Irisin is secreted by muscle, increased with exercise, and conveys physiological benefits, including improved cognition and resistance to neurodegeneration. Irisin acts via &#x3b1;V integrins; however, a mechanistic understanding of how small polypeptides like irisin can signal through integrins is poorly understood. Using mass spectrometry and cryo-EM, we demonstrate that the extracellular heat shock protein 90&#x3b1; (eHsp90&#x3b1;) is secreted by muscle with exercise and activates integrin &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;5. This allows for high-affinity irisin binding and signaling through an Hsp90&#x3b1;/&#x3b1;V/&#x3b2;5 complex. By including hydrogen/deuterium exchange data, we generate and experimentally validate a 2.98&#xa0;&#xc5; RMSD irisin/&#x3b1;V&#x3b2;5 complex docking model. Irisin binds very tightly to an alternative interface on &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;5 distinct from that used by known ligands. These data elucidate a non-canonical mechanism by which a small polypeptide hormone like irisin can function through an integrin receptor.

### Keywords
Irisin; integrin; hdx-ms; hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry; polypeptide hormone; αvβ5

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Chemical biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry and Chemical biology, Northeastern University


