### Accession
PXD041089

### Title
LiP-MS on Purified CAMKK1 treated with Staurosporine

### Description
Limited proteolysis coupled to mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) is a structural proteomics technique that can be used to identify the targets of small molecules. This is achieved by incubating protein with the drug of interest, which induces structural changes such as occupation of the binding site or changes and protein-protein interactions. This is followed by a limited proteolysis step in which the unspecific protease proteinase K is added to the treated protein sample. The protease preferentially cleaves accessible and flexible regions of the protein, thus generating peptides that reflect the changes in surface accessibility caused by the treatment with the small molecule. Here we treated affinity-purified CAMKK1 kinase inhibitor Staurosporine. The data were generated as part of the IMI EUbOPEN project.

### Sample Protocol
A HEK293 cells that overexpressed twin-strep tagged CAMKK1 were harvested and lysed in native conditions. The lysate was incubated with Streptavidin beads for 1 h. The beads were washed with lysis buffer and LiP buffer. Finally, CAMKK1 was eluted using 0.5 mM biotin in LiP buffer. In total, 1 µg of protein in 50 µl buffer was used for each sample. In triplicates, a final concentration of 10 µM of staurosporine or DMSO was added to the sample for 5 minutes. This was followed by a 5 minute limited proteolysis step in which proteinase K was added. The samples were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin in denaturing conditions. The peptides were desalted using a C18 resin and measured using SWATH-MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with an Waters Aquity M-Class UPLC System. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 3% to 35% acetonitrile in water over the course of 120 minutes. The MS1 spectra were acquired in a scan range of 350-1400 m/z with an Orbitrap resolution of 120000. The normalized AGC target is set to 50% with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The RF lens was set to 30%. The targeted MS2 spectra are acquired for the desired masses with variable isolation windows listed below and fragmented with a HCD of 28%. The spectra are measured with an Orbitrap resolution of 30000 with variable scan ranges. The AGC target is set to 200% with a maximum injection time of 54 ms. The RF lens was set to 30%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was uploaded to the commercial software Spectronaut v. 17. The data was seached against the library VR_Ex24_DDA_LIB.kit. Factory settings were used, except that the Minor grouping in the Quantification Settings was set to Precursor, and in the Post analysis Settings the Differential abundance grouping was set to Minor group. The data were further analyzed using the R package protti to identify structural changes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Target engagement, Lip-ms

### Affiliations
IMSB, ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Viviane Reber

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Matthias Gstaiger
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich


