### Accession
PXD028660

### Title
A global screening identifies chromatin-enriched RNA-binding proteins and the transcriptional regulatory activity of QKI5 during monocytic differentiation [RBP screening 293T cells]

### Description
We process mass spectrome datasets of RNA binding proteins(RBPs) in soluble nuclear extract (SNE) and chromatin-pellet extract (CPE) from 293T cells.

### Sample Protocol
The soluble nuclear extract (SNE) and chromatin-pellet extract (CPE) fractions were prepared from 293T cells. The lysates from each fraction were subjected to SDS/PAGE (10% separation gel) and dyed with 0.25% coomassie brilliant blue (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The stained protein bands were cut off from the gel and sent to Protein Research and Technology Center (Tsinghua University, Beijing,China) for mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Briefly, proteins were subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion followed by peptide desalting and concentration before mass spectrometry detection.

### Data Protocol
The MS / MS spectrometer data was analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supported by the Protein Research and Technology Center (Tsinghua University, Beijing,China). The protein score was used to estimate the reliability of protein identification which was evaluated by PSMs (peptide spectrum matches - the number of identified peptides spectra matched for the proteins in second-order MS), matching rate, and peptide FDR confidence level. The area value represented the relative quantity of protein defined by the peak area of peptides on chromatography.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nuclear rbp;  293t cells;

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China.

### Submitter
Yue Huo

### Lab Head
Dr Jia Yu
State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China


