### Accession
PXD002055

### Title
Dynamic interaction- and phosphoproteomics of CD147

### Description
Using affinity purification, mass spectrometry, and phospho-enrichment of isotope-labeled peptides, we examined the CD147 microenvironment and CD147-dependent signaling cascades in the Jurkat acute T cell leukemic cell line and its dynamics upon treatment with T cell stimulating agents.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lysed and the lysates were incubated with agarose coated with anti-HA mAb. The proteins were eluted with urea buffer and subsequently subjected to standard in-solution digestion protocol using trypsin. For phosphoproteomics experiments, the lysates were prepared using the FASP protocol and the peptides were enriched by sequential incubation with titanium dioxide beads.

### Data Protocol
All data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform version 1.3.0.5 using the in-built Andromeda search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Numerous publications have addressed CD147 as a tumor marker and regulator of cytoskeleton, cell growth, stress response, or immune cell function; however, the molecular functionality of CD147 remains incompletely understood. Using affinity purification, mass spectrometry, and phosphopeptide enrichment of isotope-labeled peptides, we examined the dynamic of the CD147 microenvironment and the CD147-dependent phosphoproteome in the Jurkat T cell line upon treatment with T cell stimulating agents. We identified novel dynamic interaction partners of CD147 such as CD45, CD47, GNAI2, Lck, RAP1B, and VAT1 and, furthermore, found 76 CD147-dependent phosphorylation sites on 57 proteins. Using the STRING protein network database, a network between the CD147 microenvironment and the CD147-dependent phosphoproteins was generated and led to the identification of key signaling hubs around the G proteins RAP1B and GNB1, the kinases PKC&#x3b2;, PAK2, Lck, and CDK1, and the chaperone HSPA5. Gene ontology biological process term analysis revealed that wound healing-, cytoskeleton-, immune system-, stress response-, phosphorylation- and protein modification-, defense response to virus-, and TNF production-associated terms are enriched within the microenvironment and the phosphoproteins of CD147. With the generated signaling network and gene ontology biological process term grouping, we identify potential signaling routes of CD147 affecting T cell growth and function.

### Keywords
Human, Cd147

### Affiliations
MaxPlanck Institute for Biochemistry, Core facility 
Molecular Immunology Unit, Institute for Hygiene and Applied Immunology, Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, Lazarettgasse 19, A-1090 Vienna ( lab head )

### Submitter
Nagarjuna  Nagaraj

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes Stockinger
Molecular Immunology Unit, Institute for Hygiene and Applied Immunology, Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of Vienna, Lazarettgasse 19, A-1090 Vienna ( lab head )


