### Accession
PXD002273

### Title
A proteomic map of human choroid tissue

### Description
The choroid is the vascular layer situated between the outer sclera and the inner retina. Together with the ciliary body and the iris it forms the uvea. Because of its rich blood supply it is also called the nutritive layer and it supplies oxygen and nutrition to the retinal pigment epithelium and the outer retina. Due to its vascular nature it acts as a heat sink and helps in thermoregulation within the eye. It also contains a pigment “melanin”, which absorbs excess light within the eye and prevents scattering. . The human choroid is thickest posteriorly where it measures 0.2 mm, whereas anteriorly it measures 0.1 mm.. The aim of this study was to characterize the choroid proteome to generate a resource for future studies on the  choroid . The method used in this study combined bRPLC and LC-MS/MS analysis of the proteins isolated from the three cadaver samples of healthy donors. Subsequently, we classified the proteins based on gene ontology and pathway analysis. A total of 5,249 non redundant proteins were identified in the human choroid. Gene ontology classification pinpointed proteins involved in protein metabolism, regulation of nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolism, transport, cell growth and/or maintenance and immune response. Several proteins identified in normal choroid have previously been identified in human choroid where these proteins are related to glaucoma, ocular inflammation, toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis, diabetic retinopathy, open-angle glaucoma and Grave’s disease. The top canonical pathway in which the choroid proteins participated are EIF2 signaling, integrin signalling, mitochondrial dysfunction, regulation of eIF4 and p70S6K signaling and clathrin-mediated endocytosis signalling. Around 800 choroid proteins were related to infectious diseases. The results of this study illustrate the largest number of proteins identified in human choroid and may serve as a valuable resource for future investigations of choroid biology and disease. Proteomic analysis of choroid proteins could provide versatile information to understand choroidal functions and the underlying pathogenesis of choroidal pathologies.

### Sample Protocol
The choroid tissues were dissected from histologically normal human eyes harvested from three adult donor cadavers. The choroid tissues were lysed using buffer containing 4% SDS, 100mM DTT and 100 mMTris pH7.5. The tissue lysates were then homogenized and sonicated followed by heating for 10-15 min at 75oC. The lysates were cooled, centrifuged at 2,000 rpm for 10 minutes and the protein concentration of the cleared lysate was estimated using BCA assay. For further analysis, an equal amount of proteins from each of the donor was pooled.  Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al., 2009) was carried out. Briefly, 450 µg proteins from the pooled samples were buffer exchanged with 8 M urea in a 30 kDa MWCO spin filters (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA) to reduce the SDS concentration. This was followed by alkylation of cysteine residues with 10 mM iodoacetamide.The proteins were digested using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI. Cat#: V5111) overnight at 37ºC. The peptide digest desalted using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) and lyophilized. Prior to high pH reverse phase chromatography fractionation, the lyophilized samples were reconstituted in bRPLC solvent A (10mM TEABC, pH 8.5) and loaded on XBridge C18, 5 µm 250 x 4.6 mm column (Waters, Milford, MA) connected to Agilent 1100 series HPLC system. Using a gradient of 0 to 100% solvent B (10mM TEABC in Acetonitrile, pH 8.5), the peptide digest was resolved in 50 minutes. 96 fractions were collected which were pooled to 24 fractions, vacuum dried and stored at -80 until further LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry derived data obtained from all LC-MS analysis were searched against Human RefSeq 50 database (containing 33,947 entries along with common contaminants) using Sequest and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The parameters used for data analysis included trypsin as protease with maximum two missed cleavage allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were included as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was specified to be 6 amino acids. The mass error of parent ions was set to 10 ppm, whereas for fragment ions it was set to 0.05 Da. The data were searched against decoy database and the false discovery rate was set to 1% at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Ophthalmology and visual health research have received relatively limited attention from the personalized medicine community, but this trend is rapidly changing. Postgenomics technologies such as proteomics are being utilized to establish a baseline biological variation map of the human eye and related tissues. In this context, the choroid is the vascular layer situated between the outer sclera and the inner retina. The choroidal circulation serves the photoreceptors and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). The RPE is a layer of cuboidal epithelial cells adjacent to the neurosensory retina and maintains the outer limit of the blood-retina barrier. Abnormal changes in choroid-RPE layers have been associated with age-related macular degeneration. We report here the proteome of the healthy human choroid-RPE complex, using reverse phase liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry-based proteomics. A total of 5309 nonredundant proteins were identified. Functional analysis of the identified proteins further pointed to molecular targets related to protein metabolism, regulation of nucleic acid metabolism, transport, cell growth, and/or maintenance and immune response. The top canonical pathways in which the choroid proteins participated were integrin signaling, mitochondrial dysfunction, regulation of eIF4 and p70S6K signaling, and clathrin-mediated endocytosis signaling. This study illustrates the largest number of proteins identified in human choroid-RPE complex to date and might serve as a valuable resource for future investigations and biomarker discovery in support of postgenomics ophthalmology and precision medicine.

### Keywords
Human, Brplc, Eye, Lc-ms/ms, Choroid

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


