### Accession
PXD018897

### Title
Identification of sex steroid hormones binding proteins in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

### Description
The project aims to elucidate mechanisms driving P. aeruginosa response to sex steroids hormones. An experiment involving Co-immunoprecipitation combined with Mass spectroscopy was performed to identify P. aeruginosa proteins binding to estradiol and /testosterone.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa PAO1 was cultured in tryptic soy broth supplemented with ethanol (vehicle control), estradiol (25 nM) or testosterone (2.5uM) for three days. Cultures (1 liter) were centrifuged at 6,000rpm for 20 minutes. A lysis buffer containing 20mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6), 150mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.5 mg/mL lysozyme, Protease inhibitor cocktail (1X) and 10% Glycerol were added to each bacterial pellet and mixed for 1 hour at 4°C on a rocker. Samples were then sonicated three times for 30 seconds each at 90% duty using a Sonics vibra cell sonicator and centrifuged at 10,000rpm for 20 minutes before isolating total protein extract. After pre-clearing the samples with protein-G control beads (Cat.No: 11243233001, Roche) for 1 hour, 5mg of total protein was then added to 100µL of estradiol beads (Cat.No: 24861-1, Polysciences, Inc.) or protein-G control beads (Cat.No: 11243233001, Roche). Proteins were allowed to bind to the beads overnight at 4°C on a roller after which beads were washed at 4°C four times for 5 minutes each using lysis buffer to remove non-specific interactions. For the isolation of testosterone binding proteins, an anti-testosterone antibody (14P1F9 Abcam) was used to overcome the absence of commercially available bead system. After pre-clearing with protein-G beads, 5mg of total protein was bound to the antibodies overnight at 4°C and total protein extract unexposed to antibodies serving as a control for the co-immunoprecipitation. Samples were next added to protein-G beads and allowed to bind for 1 hour at 4°C to capture antibody-protein complexes. Bound proteins were then eluted with 2X laemmli sample buffer with 5% mercaptoethanol. The eluted proteins were run on a 10% SDS-PAGE and the gel lanes excised and sent to the Taplin biological mass spectrometry facility at Harvard University for protein identification using LC-MS/MS. Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces. Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (1). Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min. followed by removal of acetonitrile. Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac. Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC. After 45 min., the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces. Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight. Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr). The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis.

### Data Protocol
On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was  created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (2). After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide. Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) (3). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.  References:  1. Shevchenko, et al., Anal Chem. 68:850-858, 1996  2. Peng, J and Gygi S.P. Proteomics: The move to mixtures, J. Mass Spec. Oct:36(10):1083-91  3. Eng. et al., J. Am. Soc. Mass. Spectrom. 5:976-989, 1994

### Publication Abstract
Estrogen, a major female sex steroid hormone, has been shown to promote the selection of mucoid <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> in the airways of patients with chronic respiratory diseases, including cystic fibrosis. This results in long-term persistence, poorer clinical outcomes, and limited therapeutic options. In this study, we demonstrate that at physiological concentrations, sex steroids, including testosterone and estriol, induce membrane stress responses in <i>P. aeruginosa</i> This is characterized by increased virulence and consequent inflammation and release of proinflammatory outer membrane vesicles promoting <i>in vivo</i> persistence of the bacteria. The steroid-induced <i>P. aeruginosa</i> response correlates with the molecular polarity of the hormones and membrane fluidic properties of the bacteria. This novel mechanism of interaction between sex steroids and <i>P. aeruginosa</i> explicates the reported increased disease severity observed in females with cystic fibrosis and provides evidence for the therapeutic potential of the modulation of sex steroids to achieve better clinical outcomes in patients with hormone-responsive strains.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Molecular mechanisms by which sex steroids interact with <i>P. aeruginosa</i> to modulate its virulence have yet to be reported. Our work provides the first characterization of a steroid-induced membrane stress mechanism promoting <i>P. aeruginosa</i> virulence, which includes the release of proinflammatory outer membrane vesicles, resulting in inflammation, host tissue damage, and reduced bacterial clearance. We further demonstrate that at nanomolar (physiological) concentrations, male and female sex steroids promote virulence in clinical strains of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> based on their dynamic membrane fluidic properties. This work provides, for the first-time, mechanistic insight to better understand and predict the <i>P. aeruginosa</i> related response to sex steroids and explain the interindividual patient variability observed in respiratory diseases such as cystic fibrosis that are complicated by gender differences and chronic <i>P. aeruginosa</i> infection.

### Keywords
Virulence, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Sex steroid

### Affiliations
Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Lee kong Chian School of Medicine (LKCSoM)

### Submitter
Valerie Yong

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjay Haresh Chotirmall
Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore


