### Accession
PXD008901

### Title
Change of Ranibizumab-induced Human Vitreous Protein Profile in Patients with Proliferative Diabetic Retinopathy Based on Proteomics Analysis

### Description
Background: Preoperative treatment of anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) agents is extensively used in proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR), but the molecular mechanism is not fully understood. The objective of this research is to observe change of protein profile induced by Ranibizumab (an anti-VEGF agent) in vitreous humor from PDR patients and reveal the effects of anti-VEGF treatment on PDR. Methods: A proteomic method was used to identify differentially expressed proteins in vitreous humor. Untreated PDR patients were defined as PDR group, while those who treated with intravitreal injection of ranibizumab (IVR) were defined as IVR. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and REACTOME pathways were obtained from DAVID Bioinformatics Resources. Intravitreal level of apolipoprotein C-I (APOC1), serpin peptidase inhibitor clade A member 5 (SERPINA5), tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP2), and keratin 1 (KRT1) were determined by enzyme-linked immuno sorbent assay (ELISA). Results: 339 differentially expressed proteins were identified in response to IVR. The most notable GO annotation describes the altered proteins was “innate immune response”. The most notable REACTOME pathway was “platelet degranulation”. ELISA result showed increased level of APOC1, SERPINA5, KRT1 and a decreased level of TIMP2 in PDR group compared with IVR. Conclusions: In addition to decreasing VEGF level, Ranibizumab is associated with change of human vitreous protein profile in patients with PDR, in which the differential proteins are involved in immune response, platelet degranulation, complement activation etc., suggesting that the effects of VEGF are involved in these signaling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
A C18 column (100 μm ID, 15 cm length) packed with Aqua C18 reverse phase material (Phenomenex) was placed inline with a PROXEON EASY-nLC1000 liquid chromatography system (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Mobile phases A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. After loading, the digested peptides were separated using the following gradient: 0–5 min, 0–3% B; 5–150 min, 3–30% B; 150–166 min, 30–100% B; 166–180 min, 100% B. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. Peptides eluted from the LC column were directly electrosprayed into an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) with the application of a distal 1.8 kV spray voltage. A cycle of 1 full-scan MS spectrum (m/z 300–1800) was acquired followed by 20 data-dependent MS scans, sequentially generated for the 20 most intense ions in the full MS spectrum at a 30% normalized collision energy. The number of microscans for both MS and MS/MS scans was one and the maximum ion injection times were 200 and 50 ms, respectively. The dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s. MS scan functions and HPLC solvent gradients were controlled by the Xcalibur data system (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
Protein analysis was performed using the Integrated Proteomics Pipeline, IP2 (Integrated Proteomics Applications, Inc., San Diego, CA). MS/MS spectra were extracted from raw files using RawXtract 1.9.9.1 (http://fields.scripps.edu/downloads.php), and were searched with the ProLuCID algorithm against the Uniprot human database (http://www.uniprot.org/) within IP2 (MS1: 7ppm, MS2: 0.05 Da). To accurately estimate peptide probabilities and false discovery rates, we used a decoy database containing the reverse sequences of all proteins appended to the target database. The search space included all fully tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates that fell within the mass tolerance window. Carbamidomethylation (+57.02146 Da) of cysteine was considered a static modification. The database search results were assembled and filtered using the DTASelect program. Normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) was used to evaluate the relative protein contents base on the spectrum counts.  The protein detected in less than 50% of the sample was defined to undetected protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics; proliferative diabetic retinopathy; ranibizumab

### Affiliations
Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Ocular Fundus Disease; Shanghai Engineering Center for Visual Science and Photomedicine, No. 100 Haining Road, Shanghai 200080, China.

### Submitter
Chen Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi Zheng
Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Ocular Fundus Disease; Shanghai Engineering Center for Visual Science and Photomedicine, No. 100 Haining Road, Shanghai 200080, China.


