### Accession
PXD038309

### Title
3-Mercaptopyruvate sulfur transferase is a protein persulfidase

### Description
Protein S-persulfidation (P-SSH) is recognized as a common post-translational modification across all domains of life. It occurs under basal conditions and is often observed to be elevated under stress conditions. However, the mechanism(s) by which proteins are persulfidated inside cells have remained unclear. Here we report that 3-mercaptopyruvate sulfur transferase (MPST) engages in direct protein-to-protein transpersulfidation reactions beyond its previously known protein substrates thioredoxin and MOCS3/Uba4, associated with H2S generation and tRNA thiolation, respectively. We observe that depletion of MPST in human cells lowers overall intracellular protein persulfidation levels and identify a subset of proteins whose persulfidation depends on MPST. The predicted involvement of these proteins in the adaptation to stress responses supports the notion that MPST-dependent protein persulfidation promotes cytoprotective functions. The observation of MPST-independent protein persulfidation suggests that other protein persulfidases remain to be identified.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity enrichment of persulfidated proteins from mammalian cells was based on the dimedone switch method1, with slight modifications. HEK293 MSR cells (MPST or mock depleted) were grown to 80%-90% confluency in a 10 cm dish. Cells were lysed using cold HEN lysis buffer containing 5 mM NBF-Cl and the lysate was incubated for 30 min at 37°C. Following methanol/chloroform precipitation, the protein pellet was dissolved in 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.4) supplemented with 0.1% SDS. Preclearing of the protein solution (to remove endogenous biotinylated proteins) was performed by incubation with SA beads for 1 h. Following methanol/chloroform precipitation, the resulting protein pellet was redissolved in 50 mM HEPES buffer containing 2% SDS. The protein solution was then incubated with or without 50 μM DCP-Bio1 at 37°C for 1 h, followed by methanol/chloroform precipitation. The protein pellet was redissolved in 50 mM HEPES buffer containing 0.1% SDS and the solution was incubated with SA beads at 4°C overnight with agitation. The beads were washed three times with 50 mM HEPES buffer containing 0.001% Tween-20 and three times with plain 50 mM HEPES buffer. After washing, persulfidated proteins were eluted by incubation with 4 mM biotin for 30 min. The eluates were run on a SDS-PAGE gel and stained with coomassie. Samples were then subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis (see below). Following SDS-PAGE, four gel pieces per lane were manually excised. The gel pieces were washed once with 60 µL of 1:1 (v/v) 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) and acetonitrile (ACN), pH 8.5 for 10 min and shrunk three times for 10 min each in 60 µL ACN and washed in 60 µL 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. Following reduction of proteins with 10 mM DTT in 100 mM TEAB at 57°C for 30 min and dehydration of gel pieces, proteins were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 100 mM TEAB at 25°C for 20 min in the dark. Prior to protein digestion, gel pieces were washed with 60 µl 100 mM TEAB and shrunk twice for 10 min in 60 µl ACN. A total of 30 µL of 8 ng/µL in 50 mM TEAB trypsin solution (sequencing grade, Thermo-Fisher, USA) was added to the dry gel pieces and incubated 4 h at 37°C. The reaction was quenched by addition of 20 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The resulting peptides were extracted once for 30 min with 30 µl 1:1 (v/v) 0.1% TFA and ACN, followed by gel dehydration with 20 µl ACN for 20 min, and washed with 30 µl of 100 mM TEAB for another 20 min. Finally, the gel was shrunk twice with 20 µl of ACN for 20 min. The supernatant from each extraction step was collected, concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 15 µl 0.1% TFA. Nanoflow LC-MS2 analysis was performed with an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap QE HF (Thermo Fisher). An in-house packed analytical column (75 µm x 200 mm, 1.9 µm ReprosilPur-AQ 120 C18 material; Dr. Maisch, Germany) was used. Mobile phase solutions were prepared as follows, solvent A: 0.1% formic acid / 1% acetonitrile, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid, 89.9% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated in a 25 min linear gradient from 3% to 23% B over 21 min and then to 38% B over 4 min, followed by washout with 95% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. MS spectra (m/z 400–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 (m/z 400) resolution and MS2 spectra were generated for up to 15 precursors with normalized collision energy of 27 and isolation width of 1.4 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot H. sapiens protein database modified June 2020 and containing 20531 sequences (UP000005640), and a customized contaminant database using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 with Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.2 Da and a parent ion mass tolerance to 10 ppm. Trypsin was specified as the enzyme. Following modifications of peptides were allowed: carbamidomethylation (cysteine), oxidation (methionine), deamidation (asparagine and glutamine), acetylation (protein N-terminus), methionine loss (protein N-terminus), NBF (163.0012, lysine and cysteine), DCP-Bio1 (394.1557, cysteine) and hydrolyzed DCP-Bio1 (168.0786, cysteine). Peptide quantification was done using a precursor ion quantifier node with summed abundances method set for protein abundance calculation. Common contaminants, proteins identified with less than two peptides, proteins not being a master protein within a protein group, and proteins not containing cysteine residues were filtered out. This procedure generated a list of 322 quantified proteins. We only considered proteins which were at least two-fold more abundant in the DCP-Bio1 treated sample compared to the non-treated control or were quantified in the DCP-Bio1 treated sample but did not reach the quantification threshold in the non-treated control. For the obtained 300 proteins, the ratio of protein abundance between MPST-depleted and WT samples was calculated and log2 transformed. Proteins depleted more than two-fold in MPST-depleted cells were considered candidate MPST target proteins. The 64 most depleted candidate target proteins were queried against the STRING database50 considering only protein interactions for which there is experimental evidence with at least medium confidence. The network was edited in Cytoscape51. Protein subcellular localization was downloaded from ProteinAtlas60 .

### Publication Abstract
Protein S-persulfidation (P-SSH) is recognized as a common posttranslational modification. It occurs under basal conditions and is often observed to be elevated under stress conditions. However, the mechanism(s) by which proteins are persulfidated inside cells have remained unclear. Here we report that 3-mercaptopyruvate sulfur transferase (MPST) engages in direct protein-to-protein transpersulfidation reactions beyond its previously known protein substrates thioredoxin and MOCS3/Uba4, associated with H<sub>2</sub>S generation and transfer RNA thiolation, respectively. We observe that depletion of MPST in human cells lowers overall intracellular protein persulfidation levels and identify a subset of proteins whose persulfidation depends on MPST. The predicted involvement of these proteins in the adaptation to stress responses supports the notion that MPST-dependent protein persulfidation promotes cytoprotective functions. The observation of MPST-independent protein persulfidation suggests that other protein persulfidases remain to be identified.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Mpst, Protein persulfidation, S-persulfidation, Cytoprotection

### Affiliations
University of Heidelberg
Division of Redox Regulation, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany Faculty of Biosciences, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Marcin Luzarowski

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias P. Dick
Division of Redox Regulation, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany Faculty of Biosciences, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany


