### Accession
PXD032997

### Title
Stool metaproteomics of children with islet autoimmunity

### Description
The gastrointestinal ecosystem is a highly complex environment with a profound influence on human health. Inflammation in the gut, linked to an altered gut microbiome has been associated with the development of multiple human conditions including type 1 diabetes (T1D). Viruses infecting the gastrointestinal tract, especially enteroviruses, are also thought to play an important role in T1D pathogenesis possibly via overlapping mechanisms. Here, we apply an integrative approach to combine comprehensive faecal virome, microbiome and metaproteome data sampled before and at the onset of islet autoimmunity in 40 children. We show strong age and antibody related effects across the datasets. Mastadenovirus infection was associated with profound functional changes in the faecal metaproteome. Multiomic factor analysis modelling revealed proteins associated with carbohydrate transport from the genus Faecalibacterium were associated with islet autoimmunity. These findings demonstrate functional remodelling of the gut microbiota accompanies both islet autoimmunity and viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
The slurry remaining after preparation of viral DNA was thawed on ice and resuspended by gentle vortexing for 30 seconds in an equal volume of ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Each sample was then split into two new tubes using a wide-bore 1 mL tip to ensure solids were evenly distributed. Peptides were then prepared according to the human enrichment protocol as described (59) with minor modifications, most notably the exclusion of PNGase F digestion. The aliquot for proteomics was centrifuged at 8,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C to pellet debris and intact bacterial cells. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and centrifuged under the same conditions. Twenty µg of total protein, as estimated by the direct detect spectrometer, were then solubilized, reduced, and alkylated at 95°C for 5 minutes in a solution containing 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM (tris[2-carboxyethyl]phosphine) and 40mM 2-Chloroacetaldehyde in 100mM Tris pH 8.  This solution was diluted 1:10 in water and proteins were digested overnight at 37°C by addition of modified pig trypsin (Promega Madison, WI) at a protein:trypsin ratio of 50:1 (w/w). Detergents were precipitated by addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid, the supernatant was transferred to a fresh plate, and salts were removed using C18 tips (Glygen, Columbia, MD) on a Bravo liquid handler. The eluent was evaporated with centrifugation under vacuum and tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid for mass spectrometry. Assays were performed blinded to clinical information and results of virome sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectrum matching, protein inference, grouping, and quantification were performed using the MetaPro-IQ (61) strategy implemented in MetaLab version 1.1 (62) and MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4.  The integrated reference catalog of the gut microbiome from Li et al (63)⁠ was used for the initial search. Human proteins were retrieved from Uniprot. Spectral clustering was disabled during database generation. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were included as fixed and variable modifications, respectively, during MaxQuant searches. Spectra from replicate runs were merged during the MaxQuant pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T1d metaproteome

### Affiliations
Univeristy of Queensland
university of queensland

### Submitter
patrick gavin

### Lab Head
Dr Emma Hamilton Williams
Univeristy of Queensland


