### Accession
PXD038129

### Title
Immune surveillance of brain metastatic cancer cells is mediated by IFITM1 (Proteins identified in the >100 kDa fraction of conditioned media from all four cell lines)

### Description
The protein(s) larger than 100 kDa in conditioned medium from lung cancer cell lines activated microglia. The >100 kDa fraction of conditioned medium from H460, H1299, H2030, or H292 cells was collected. Proteins present in the conditioned medium were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain fractions of conditioned medium containing molecules of different molecular weights, spin filtration was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Millipore). Conditioned medium was applied to the 100K filter (UFC510096, Millipore) and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 5 min. The >100 kDa fraction was collected by reverse filtration into a new vial. The >100 kDa fraction of conditioned medium from H460, H1299, H2030, or H292 cells (1×106 cells for each cell line), were separated on a NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris Gel (NP0341BOX, Invitrogen) and visualized using EZBlueTM Gel Staining Reagent (G1041-500ML, Sigma). The entire gel lanes were excised and subjected to ESI-LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.3.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, March 2016 download). Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide mass tolerances were set at 15 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm. Fixed modifications allowed were Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications allowed were Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), and Oxidation (M). Data were filtered using at Data were filtered using at peptide score >43, or extensive homology (p<0.05) and requiring minimum of one specific peptide per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Brain metastasis, most commonly originating from lung cancer, increases cancer morbidity and mortality. Although metastatic colonization is the rate-limiting and most complex step of the metastatic cascade, the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Here, in vivo genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screening revealed that loss of interferon-induced transmembrane protein 1 (IFITM1) promotes brain colonization of human lung cancer cells. Incipient brain metastatic cancer cells with high expression of IFITM1 secrete microglia-activating complement component 3 and enhance the cytolytic activity of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells by increasing the expression and membrane localization of major histocompatibility complex class I. After activation, microglia (of the innate immune system) and cytotoxic CD8<sup>+</sup> T lymphocytes (of the adaptive immune system) were found to jointly eliminate cancer cells by releasing interferon-gamma and inducing phagocytosis and T-cell-mediated killing. In human cancer clinical trials, immune checkpoint blockade therapy response was significantly correlated with IFITM1 expression, and IFITM1 enhanced the brain metastasis suppression efficacy of PD-1 blockade in mice. Our results exemplify a novel mechanism through which metastatic cancer cells overcome the innate and adaptive immune responses to colonize the brain, and suggest that a combination therapy increasing IFITM1 expression in metastatic cells with PD-1 blockade may be a promising strategy to reduce metastasis.

### Keywords
Brain metastatic colonization, In vivo pooled genome-wide loss-of-function genetic screen, Non-small cell lung cancer, Interferon-induced transmembrane protein 1 (ifitm1)

### Affiliations
Tongji University
Cancer Center and Research Institute of Intestinal Diseases, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji University

### Submitter
Shijun Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Hua Gao
Cancer Center and Research Institute of Intestinal Diseases, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji University


