### Accession
PXD015959

### Title
Secretome of Acinetobacter baumannii KAB strains

### Description
We analyzed the extracellular proteome of colistin-resistant Korean Acinetobacter baumannii (KAB) strains to identify proteome profiles that can be used to characterize extensively drug-resistant KAB strains.

### Sample Protocol
A. baumannii KAB strains and A. baumannii ATCC 19606 were cultured under three culture conditions: LB broth, with meropenem, and with complex of meropenem, amikacin and colistin. The cultured media were then filtered through a 0.45 mm membrane filter and precipitated in 90% ammonium sulfate solution.

### Data Protocol
Silver-stained gels were destained in a solution of 30 mM potassium ferricyanide and 100 mM sodium thiosulfate. The gels were then washed with two or three volumes of distilled water by vortex-mixing, and completely dried using a speed vacuum concentrator. Tryptic digestion was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37 C for 12–16 h. For optimal digestion, the final trypsin concentration was adjusted to 10 ng/ml. Tryptic peptides were obtained by two extraction steps in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% acetonitrile containing 5% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were eluted by a gradient of 0–65% acetonitrile for 80 min. All MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode using an LTQ-Velos ESI ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). After each full MS scan (m/z range, 400–2000), three MS/MS scans of the most abundant precursor ions in the MS spectra were performed. The MS/MS data were analyzed by using MASCOT 2.4, with a cut-off value corresponding to a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
We analyzed the extracellular proteome of colistin-resistant Korean <i>Acinetobacter baumannii</i> (KAB) strains to identify proteome profiles that can be used to characterize extensively drug-resistant KAB strains. Four colistin-resistant KAB strains with colistin resistance associated with point mutations in <i>pmrB</i> and <i>pmrC</i> genes were analyzed. Analysis of the extracellular proteome of these strains revealed the presence of 506 induced common proteins, which were hence considered as the core extracellular proteome. Class C ADC-30 and class D OXA-23 &#x3b2;-lactamases were abundantly induced in these strains. Porins (CarO and CarO-like porin), outer membrane proteins (OmpH and BamABDE), transport protein (AdeK), receptor (TonB), and several proteins of unknown function were among the specifically induced proteins. Based on the sequence homology analysis of proteins from the core proteome and those of other <i>A. baumannii</i> strains and pathogenic bacterial species as well as further in silico screening, we propose that CarO-like porin is an <i>A. baumannii</i>-specific protein and that two tryptic peptides that originate from CarO-like porin detected by tandem mass spectrometry are peptide makers of this protein.

### Keywords
Mrab, Acinetobacter baumannii, Secretome

### Affiliations
Senior Researcher, Korea Basic Science Institute, KOREA
Korea Basic Science Institute

### Submitter
Sang-Yeop Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Sang-Yeop Lee
Senior Researcher, Korea Basic Science Institute, KOREA


