### Accession
PXD014081

### Title
Identification of Cavin3-interacting proteins

### Description
Caveolae are specialized domains of the plasma membrane. Formation of these invaginations is dependent on the expression of Caveolin-1 or -3 and proteins of the cavin family. In response to stress, caveolae disassemble and cavins are released from caveolae, allowing cavins to potentially interact with intracellular targets. Here, we describe the intracellular (non-plasma membrane) cavin interactome using biotin affinity proteomics and mass spectrometry. We validate 47 potential cavin-interactor proteins using a cell-free expression system and protein-protein binding assays. These data, together with pathway analyses, revealed novel roles for cavin proteins in metabolism and stress signaling. We validated the interaction between one candidate interactor protein, protein phosphatase 1 alpha (PP1α), and Cavin-1 and -3 and show that UV treatment causes release of Cavin3 from caveolae allowing interaction with, and inhibition of, PP1α. This interaction increases H2AX phosphorylation to stimulate apoptosis, identifying a pro-apoptotic signaling pathway from surface caveolae to the nucleus.

### Sample Protocol
Biotin ligase transfection and purification MCF-7 cells at 80% confluency were transfected with BirA-IRES-GFP (control) or BirA-IRES-Cavin3 using Lipofectamine 3000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After 3 h, the cell culture medium was replaced with 2 ml of fresh medium containing 10 % FBS serum and 50 μM biotin. Cells were further incubated for 18 h at 37 °C. Cells were washed 3 times with ice-cold PBS and were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100 and 5 mM EDTA) containing phosphatase and protease inhibitors (Roche). Cell extracts were lysed with a 25-gauge needle and syringe, 10-20 times and were incubated on ice for 20 min. Samples were spun at 14,000x g for 10 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was removed. High affinity strepavidin agarose beads (ThermoScientific) with washed three times with RIPA buffer and was added to 2 mg of total cell extract that was left to rotate at 4 °C overnight. The agarose beads were pelleted at 2500 x g and washed x 3 in RIPA buffer. 80 μl of 2 x SDS PAGE sample buffer containing DTT was added to the beads and boiled 5 min at 95 °C. All samples were pelleted at 2500 x g for 5 min at RT before loading on an SDS PAGE gel. Western blot membranes were blocked with 5% BSA in TBST for at least 1 h and were extensively wash (4 times) with TBST 10 min prior to detection with Clarity Western ECL substrates (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, California, USA).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry Pulldowns were eluted in SDS-PAGE sample buffer and separated on 10% SDS-PAGE gels to 2 mm only. Protein visualization, excision of bands and in-gel trypsin digest were performed using a semi-automated method. Peptides were analyzed using either Agilent nano-LC QTOF with Spectrum Mill for database searching, or using the following method. Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer coupled with Easy-nLC 1000 and EASY-spray ion source was used to analyze the digested peptides. Samples were loaded onto an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 2 µm column (25 cm x 75 µm ID), with a nanoviper acclaim C18 guard (75um x 2cm). A 62 min method was run using a combination of Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid: Acetonitrile). A two-step gradient was run comprising a 10min gradient from 3% to 10% Buffer B and a 30 min gradient from 10 % to 32 % Buffer B. Flow rate was at 3uL/min. The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire a full MS resolution of 70,000 with an ACG target of 3e6 with a maximum injection time of 100ms. The MS scan range was from 350 to 1400m/z. MS/MS was set to acquire a resolution of 35,000 with an ACG target of 5e5 and maximum injection time of 110ms. The loop count was set to 20 with a dynamic exclusion after 10sec. Raw data was processed with Proteome Discoverer (Thermo, 2.0.0.802). Selected modifications included fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable oxidized methionine. Results were searched against the Human SwissProt database (v2015-09-16) using the Sequest HT node. Trypsin was selected for enzyme digest, with 3 maxima missed cleavages allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set at +/- 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.08 Da. False discovery rate was set to 0.05 using the percolator node.    Network representation of selected biological processes and pathways was performed using Ingenuity Pathway analysis (QIAGEN Bioinformatics) content version 18841524.

### Publication Abstract
Caveolae are specialized domains of the plasma membrane. Formation of these invaginations is dependent on the expression of Caveolin-1 or -3 and proteins of the cavin family. In response to stress, caveolae disassemble and cavins are released from caveolae, allowing cavins to potentially interact with intracellular targets. Here, we describe the intracellular (non-plasma membrane) cavin interactome using biotin affinity proteomics and mass spectrometry. We validate 47 potential cavin-interactor proteins using a cell-free expression system and protein-protein binding assays. These data, together with pathway analyses, reveal unknown roles for cavin proteins in metabolism and stress signaling. We validated the interaction between one candidate interactor protein, protein phosphatase 1 alpha (PP1&#x3b1;), and Cavin-1 and -3 and show that UV treatment causes release of Cavin3 from caveolae allowing interaction with, and inhibition of, PP1&#x3b1;. This interaction increases H2AX phosphorylation to stimulate apoptosis, identifying a pro-apoptotic signaling pathway from surface caveolae to the nucleus.

### Keywords
Caveolae. cavinteractome

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, 4072, Brisbane, Australia; The University of Queensland, Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, 4072, Brisbane, Australia
University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience

### Submitter
Kerrie-Ann McMahon

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Parton
The University of Queensland, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, 4072, Brisbane, Australia; The University of Queensland, Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, 4072, Brisbane, Australia


