### Accession
PXD006252

### Title
RWPE-PC3 secretome -  Proteomics approach to identify novel metastatic bone markers from the secretome of PC-3 prostate cancer cells

### Description
Prostate cancer is the leading type of cancer diagnosed and the third leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide each year in men. The limitations of the current prostate cancer screening test demands new biomarkers for early diagnosis of prostate cancer metastasis to bone. In this study, we performed a deep proteomic analysis of secreted proteins from the prostate cancer bone metastasis cell line, PC-3, and normal prostate cell line, RWPE-1. Here, we quantified 917 proteins and found 68 highly secreted in PC-3 versus RWPE-1 cells using LC-MS/MS. To characterize the highly secreted proteins in the PC-3 cell line to identify biomarker proteins, the quantifiable proteins were divided into four quantitative categories (Q1-Q4). The KEGG pathways of lysine degradation and osteoclast differentiation were enriched in Q4, the highly secreted group. Transforming growth factor (TGF) beta family proteins related to osteoclast differentiation were identified as key regulators in PC-3 cells. Among the 68 highly secreted proteins, pentraxin, follistatin, and TGF-beta family members were confirmed by immunoblots. In particular, serpin B3, modulated by TGF-beta, was detected and its selective expression and secretion in PC-3 cells was confirmed. In the present study, we suggest that serpin B3 is a novel biomarker candidate for diagnosis of prostate cancer metastasis to the bone.

### Sample Protocol
* Cell culture The normal prostate epithelial cell line RWPE-1 was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). The human prostate cancer cell line PC-3 was obtained from the Korean Cell Line Bank (Seoul, Korea). RWPE-1 cells were cultured in keratinocyte serum-free media (Gibco, Rockville, MD) supplemented with bovine pituitary extract (Pierce HyClone, Fremont, CA), recombinant epidermal growth factor, and 1 % penicillin and streptomycin. PC-3 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 media (Pierce HyClone, Fremont, CA) supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum (GE Healthcare HyClone, Logan, UT) and 1 % penicillin and streptomycin. All cells were maintained at 37 °C with 5 % CO2 in a humidified incubator.  * Isolation of secretome RWPE-1 and PC3 cells were grown to approximately 70 % confluence (approximately 3.5×〖10〗^6 cells) in 150 mm culture dishs. The cells were washed carefully with serum-free medium (SFM) three times to avoid serum contamination and incubated in SFM for 24 h at 37 °C. Protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Boston, MA) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Millipore, Billerica, MA) were added to the collected conditioned media, which was centrifuged at 9,000 x g for 15 min to remove cellular debris. The supernatant was concentrated using a concentrator filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The protein concentrations of RWPE-1 and PC-3 conditioned media samples were determined by the BCA protein assay. In addition, whole cellular proteins were isolated. The cells were washed twice with cold PBS and lysed in RIPA buffer with protease inhibitor cocktail and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. The cell lysates were collected, sonicated on ice, and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. The protein concentration was measured using the BCA assay. All proteins sample were stored at -80 °C until use.  * Tryptic digestion and TMT-labeling The proteins were digested by sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, Wl) at 37 °C for 16 h after reduction and alkylation. Twenty five g of proteins from each group were labeled with the six-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the protocol supplied by the manufacturer. The peptide was fractionated according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eighteen fractions were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore, Billerica, MA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instruction followed by liquid chromatography/high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS) analysis.   * Nano LC-MS/MS Analysis  Enriched peptide separation was performed using a handmade C18 reversed-phase analytical column (Reprosil C18 3 m beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) with a linear gradient of 5–23 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid and 10 % water in acetonitrile) for 42 min and 23–90 % solvent B for 5 min at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Eksigent Technologies LLC, Dublin, CA). The peptides were ionized using a nanospray ionization source followed by tandem MS/MS in a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo, USA) coupled online to the UPLC. The detail method has been described in Supplemental Information.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 with Uniprot Human databased concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme and up to 2 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions nad 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as a fixed modification whereas oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-termini were specified as variable modification. For quantification of peptides by TMT labeling, the reporter ions were calculated by TMT-6plex at peptide N-termini and lysine. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer is the leading type of cancer diagnosed, and the most frequent cause of worldwide male cancer-related deaths annually. The limitations of current prostate cancer screening tests demand the identification of novel biomarkers for the early diagnosis of prostate cancer bone metastasis. In the present study, we performed a proteomic analysis of secreted proteins from the prostate cancer bone metastasis cell line, PC-3, and the normal prostate cell line, RWPE-1. We thus quantified 917 proteins, of which 68 were found to be secreted at higher levels by PC-3 than by RWPE-1 cells via LC-MS/MS. To characterize the highly secreted proteins in the PC-3 cell line and thereby identify biomarker proteins, we divided the quantifiable proteins into four quantitative categories (Q1-Q4). The KEGG lysine degradation and osteoclast differentiation pathways were demonstrated to be enriched in the highly secreted Q4 protein group. Transforming growth factor (TGF) beta family proteins related to osteoclast differentiation were identified as key regulators of PC-3 cell proliferation. Immunoblotting was used to confirm the observed high level of pentraxin, follistatin, TGF-beta family members, and serpin B3 secretion by PC-3 cells. From the collective results of the present study, we suggest that serpin B3 is a promising novel biomarker candidate for the diagnosis of prostate cancer bone metastasis.

### Keywords
Tmt labeling, Secretome, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
BK21 Plus KNU Multi-Omics-based Creative Drug Research Team, College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Republic of Korea
Kyungpook National University

### Submitter
Oh Kwang Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
BK21 Plus KNU Multi-Omics-based Creative Drug Research Team, College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Republic of Korea


