### Accession
PXD005035

### Title
Mouse muscle LC-MSMS upon weightlessness

### Description
Upon weightlessness and microgravity, deleterious effects on the neurosensory and neurovestibular systems, haematological changes, and deconditioning of musculoskeletal, cardiovascular and cardiopulmonary functions have been reported. In particular, loss of muscle mass and strength are triggered by weightlessness in humans during space flights, what is similarly observed as a result of physical inactivity conditions and ageing on Earth. However, skeletal muscle tissue is of paramount importance for health maintenance (e.g. being essential to locomotion, heat production, and metabolism). To better prevent or eventually treat microgravity-induced muscle atrophy, its underlying mechanisms have first to be characterized in details. Using cutting-edge quantitative proteomics, the aim of the present study was therefore to get an in depth view of the molecular regulations triggered by space conditions in skeletal muscles of mice during the 30-day flight of the BION-M1 biosatellite. As muscles differing in their fiber type composition appear to respond differently to microgravity (see above), we characterized here the differential response of the soleus, extensor digitorum longus and vastus lateralis muscles.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue samples were weighted and grinded using a ball mill (3x 30 seconds @ 25Hz; MM400, Retsch) under liquid nitrogen and proteins were extracted using 7.5 volumes (i.e. 7.5µl/mg of tissue) of extraction buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea , 2 % CHAPS, 2 % DTT, 30 mM Tris pH 8, protease inhibitors). After solubilisation for 30 minutes @ 37°C, samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 15000 x g, 4 °C to remove cell/tissue debris. Protein concentration in the supernatants was determined by a Bradford assay using BSA as standard (both from Bio-Rad). For quality assessment of the LC-MS/MS analyses, a sample pool was generated comprising equal amounts of all protein extracts for each muscle. 50 µg of each sample were mixed with 4x SDS sample buffer (1x: 50 mM Tris pH 6.8, 1 mM EDTA, 5 % β-ME, 2.5 % SDS and 10 % glycerol), incubated at 37 °C for 10 minutes and run for 15 minutes at 35 V into a 4 % polyacrylamide stacking gel in order to let proteins enter approximately 4 mm into the gel. Electrophoresis was stopped at this point and gels were stained by Colloidal Coomassie Blue. Both the “stacked” protein-band and the part of the gel above this band were excised with each of them being again divided into 4 pieces before in-gel digestion using an automatic pipetting device (MassPrep, Waters, Milford, MA). Following de-staining, reduction (DTT) and alkylation (iodoacetamide), proteins were digested with trypsin (300 ng/band) overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were consecutively extracted in 40 % and 60 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid in water for one hour each and in 100 % acetonitrile (ACN) for 15 minutes at 450 rpm on an orbital shaker. At this stage peptide extracts were spiked with iRT reference peptides (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) and kept at -80°C until LC-MS analysis.  Just before LC-MS/MS analysis, volume of peptide extracts was reduced in a speed-vac and sample volumes were adjusted to 25 µl with 1% ACN, 0.1 % formic acid. Samples were analysed on a nanoUPLC-system (nanoAcquity, Waters) coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive plus, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). Two µl of each sample was concentrated/desalted on a trap column (C18, 180 μm x 20 mm, 5 µm; Waters) using 99 % solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water)/1 % solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in ACN) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min for 3 minutes. Afterwards, peptides were transferred and eluted from the separation column (BEH130 C18, 250 mm x 75 µm, 1.7 µm; Waters) maintained at 60 °C using a 85 minutes (VL) or 150 minutes (EDL and SOL) gradient from 3-40 % B. The Q-Exactive Plus was operated in positive ion mode with source temperature set to 250°C and spray voltage to 1.8 kV. Full scan MS spectra (300-1800 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 140,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges with the lock-mass option being enabled (445.12002  m/z). Up to 10 most intense precursors per full scan were isolated using a 2 m/z window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalised collision energy of 27) and dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursors was set to 60 s. MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Peak lists were searched using Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant against a protein database created using the MSDA software suite. The database contained mice protein sequences (Swissprot; Taxonomy ID: 10090; 16688 entries), which were downloaded in November 2014. Sequences of common contaminants like keratins and trypsin (247 entries) were finally added to the database (contaminants.fasta included in MaxQuant). A maximum number of one missed cleavage and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (minimum length of seven amino acids) and proteins was accepted during identification. Regarding quantification, data normalisation and protein abundance estimation was performed using the MaxLFQ (label free quantification) option implemented in MaxQuant using a “minimal ratio count” of one. “Match between runs” was enabled using a one minute time window after retention time alignment. Both unmodified and modified (acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine residues) peptides were considered for quantification while shared peptides were excluded. All other MaxQuant parameters were set as default. Only proteins with at least four of five valid values per group as well as the ones “absent” (i.e. 0 valid values) in samples from a given group were kept for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The safety of space flight is challenged by a severe loss of skeletal muscle mass, strength, and endurance that may compromise the health and performance of astronauts. The molecular mechanisms underpinning muscle atrophy and decreased performance have been studied mostly after short duration flights and are still not fully elucidated. By deciphering the muscle proteome changes elicited in mice after a full month aboard the BION-M1 biosatellite, we observed that the antigravity soleus incurred the greatest changes compared with locomotor muscles. Proteomics data notably suggested mitochondrial dysfunction, metabolic and fiber type switching toward glycolytic type II fibers, structural alterations, and calcium signaling-related defects to be the main causes for decreased muscle performance in flown mice. Alterations of the protein balance, mTOR pathway, myogenesis, and apoptosis were expected to contribute to muscle atrophy. Moreover, several signs reflecting alteration of telomere maintenance, oxidative stress, and insulin resistance were found as possible additional deleterious effects. Finally, 8 days of recovery post flight were not sufficient to restore completely flight-induced changes. Thus in-depth proteomics analysis unraveled the complex and multifactorial remodeling of skeletal muscle structure and function during long-term space flight, which should help define combined sets of countermeasures before, during, and after the flight.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Spaceflight, Muscles, Mice

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


