### Accession
PXD006832

### Title
PROCAL: A set of 40 peptide standards for retention time indexing, column performance monitoring and collision energy calibration

### Description
We describe PROCAL (ProteomeTools Standard), a set of 40 synthetic peptides that span the entire hydrophobicity range of tryptic digests, enabling not only accurate determination of retention time indices but also monitoring of chromatographic separation performance over time. The fragmentation characteristics of the peptides can also be used to calibrate and compare collision energies between mass spectrometers. The sequences of all selected peptides do not occur in any natural protein, thus eliminating the need for stable isotope labeling and allowing straightforward integration into standard peptide identification strategies employing database searching or spectral library matching.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were were individually synthesized by SPOT Fmoc-based solid phase synthesis strategy.  Peptides were HPCL purified and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using different gradient lenghts and steepness.

### Data Protocol
Parts of the acquired MS data were searched against UniprotKB (human, 88,380 entries, version 07/13) supplemented with the sequences of the ProPep peptides) using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 and default settings. Extraction of retention times and ion chromatograms was performed using Skyline 3.6.0. Further data analysis and visualization was performed using Microsoft Excel, custom R scripts and GraphPad Prism 5.

### Publication Abstract
Beyond specific applications, such as the relative or absolute quantification of peptides in targeted proteomic experiments, synthetic spike-in peptides are not yet systematically used as internal standards in bottom-up proteomics. A number of retention time standards have been reported that enable chromatographic aligning of multiple LC-MS/MS experiments. However, only few peptides are typically included in such sets limiting the analytical parameters that can be monitored. Here, we describe PROCAL (ProteomeTools Calibration Standard), a set of 40 synthetic peptides that span the entire hydrophobicity range of tryptic digests, enabling not only accurate determination of retention time indices but also monitoring of chromatographic separation performance over time. The fragmentation characteristics of the peptides can also be used to calibrate and compare collision energies between mass spectrometers. The sequences of all selected peptides do not occur in any natural protein, thus eliminating the need for stable isotope labeling. We anticipate that this set of peptides will be useful for multiple purposes in individual laboratories but also aiding the transfer of data acquisition and analysis methods between laboratories, notably the use of spectral libraries.

### Keywords
Retention time kit, Peptide standard, Proteometools, Synthetic peptide, Retention time calibration

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Daniel Zolg

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich


