### Accession
PXD023965

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Laodelphax striatellus in response to rice stripe virus infection

### Description
Persistent plant viruses multiply and circulate inside insect vectors following the route of midgut-hemolymph-salivary gland. Currently, how viruses interact with insect vectors after they are released into hemolymph is not entirely clear. In this study, we found that the hemolymph and fat body (HF) contained the highest RSV levels. Proteomic analysis on RSV-free and RSV-infected HF identified 156 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), with the majority of them participating in metabolism, transportation, and detoxification.

### Sample Protocol
The HF were isolated from RSV-free and RSV-infected L. striatellus (5th instar nymphs, 48 h after ecdysis) using Microloader (CAT: 5242956003, Eppendorf, Germany). Approximately 300 nymphs were used in each sample, and three biological replicates were performed.

### Data Protocol
iQuant method, including algorithms of Mascot and Percolator, was used for protein quantification [29]. For peptide-to-spectrum match, peptides at the 95% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis greater than “identity” were counted as identified, all peptide identification was required to have a “false discovery rate” (PSM-level FDR) estimation of no higher than 1%. The confident peptides were matched with the selected protein database, and calculated by “the parsimony principle.” According to this principle, only the simplest group of proteins which are sufficient to explain all the observed peptides are reported to be inferred. The matched proteins were filtered at 1% false discovery rate at the protein level and protein matches with at least one unique peptide were accepted as confident protein identification. The protein fold changes were reported as the median ratios of tag intensities of all significantly matched peptides. To investigate the differential expression of proteins between two treatments, the protein-relative abundance (ratio) was calculated, and only ratio with a P-value< 0.05 was accepted. Ratios with fold changes > 1.20 or < 0.83 were considered as cases of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
Persistent plant viruses multiply and circulate inside insect vectors following the route of midgut-hemolymph-salivary gland. Currently, how viruses interact with insect vectors after they are released into hemolymph is not entirely clear. In this study, we found that the hemolymph and fat body (HF) contained the highest Rice stripe virus (RSV) levels. Proteomic analysis on RSV-free and RSV-infected HF identified 156 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), with the majority of them participating in metabolism, transportation, and detoxification. The RNA binding protein esf2 was the most downregulated protein. Knocking down the expression of esf2 did not influence the RSV burden, but caused the lethal effect to L. striatellus. In contrast, the mRNA decay protein ZFP36L1 was 69% more abundant upon RSV infection, and suppression of ZFP36L1 significantly increased the RSV burden. Our results reveal the potential role of ZFP36L1 in restricting the viral proliferation, and provide valuable clues for unravelling the interaction between RSV and L. striatellus in HF. SIGNIFICANCE: More than 76% of plant viruses are transmitted by insect vectors. For persistent propagative transmission, plant viruses multiply and circulate inside insects following the route of midgut-hemolymph-salivary gland. However, how viruses interact with vector insects after they are released into hemolymph is not entirely clear. Our study investigated the influence of rice stripe virus (RSV) on insect hemolymph and fat body by iTRAQ labeling method. Among the 156 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) identified, two proteins associated with mRNA metabolism were selected for function analysis. We found that the mRNA decay activator protein ZFP36L1 influenced the RSV proliferation, and RNA binding protein esf2 caused the lethal effect to L. striatellus. Our results provide valuable clues for unveiling the interaction between RSV and L. striatellus, and might be useful in pest management.

### Keywords
Laodelphax striatellus; itraq

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality and Safety of Agro-Products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, China
Nanjing Argriculture university

### Submitter
Haijian Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Jun-Min Li
State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality and Safety of Agro-Products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, China


