### Accession
PXD038402

### Title
The Respiratory Syncytial Virus M2-2 protein is targeted for proteasome degradation and inhibits translation and stress granules assembly

### Description
The M2-2 protein from the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a 10 kDa protein expressed by the second ORF of the viral gene M2. During infection, M2-2 has been described as the polymerase cofactor responsible for promoting genome replication. This function was first inferred by infection with a mutant virus lacking the M2-2 ORF, in which viral genome presented delayed accumulation in comparison to wild-type virus. In accordance with this phenotype, it has been recently shown that M2-2 promotes changes in interactions between the polymerase and other viral proteins at early stages of infection. Despite its well explored role in the regulation of the polymerase activity, little has been made to investigate the relationship of M2-2 with cellular proteins. In fact, previous reports showed poor recruitment of M2-2 to viral structures, with the protein being mainly localized to the nucleus and cytoplasmic granules. To unravel which other functions M2-2 exerts during infection, we expressed the protein in HEK293T cells and performed proteomic analysis of co-immunoprecipitated partners, identifying enrichment of proteins involved with regulation of translation, protein folding and mRNA splicing. In approaches based on these data, we found that M2-2 expression downregulates eiF2α phosphorylation and inhibits stress granules assembly under arsenite induction. In addition, we also verified that M2-2 inhibits translation initiation, and is targeted for proteasome degradation, being localized to granules composed by defective ribosomal products at the cytoplasm. These results suggest that besides its functions in the regulation of genome replication, M2-2 may exert additional functions to contribute to successful RSV infection.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted proteins from co-IPs were submitted to digestion. In brief, proteins were reduced with DTT (final concentration 10 mM) for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark (final concentration 40 mM). Remaining IAA was reduced with DTT (final concentration 5 mM), and then Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) was added at the proportion 1:50 (µg trypsin: µg eluted protein) for overnight digestion at 37°C. All steps were performed in solutions containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. For desalt, digested proteins were precipitated with trifluoroacetic acid (final concentration 1% v/v) and purified with C18 resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by elution with acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated at a flow of 200 nl/min on an nanoAcquity UPLC® 1.8µm HSS T3 (75 µm x 200 mm) by reversed-phase chromatography, which was operated on an NanoAcquity Waters (Waters). The mobile phase was water/0.1% Formic Acid (A) and ACN/0.1% Formic Acid (B). The gradient was 2-30% phase B for 210 minutes, 30-85% B for 15 minutes, and 85-2%B for 15 minutes. The NanoAcquity Waters was coupled into an MAXIS 3G mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) operating in positive mode ion. The mass spectrometer acquired a full MS scan at 60,000 full width half maximum (FWHM) resolution with a 350-1500 Da mass range. The samples were analyzed by Central Analítica of the Chemistry Institute of the University of São Paulo. Co-IP peptides were analyzed by Nano-HPLC-ESI-QUAD-TOF using a maXis 3G Bruker Daltonics (Central Analítica – IQ – USP). Bruker Q-TOF files were imported to MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 for protein identification and quantification. For protein identification in MaxQuant, the database search engine Andromeda was used against Uniprot Homo sapiens (20,370 entries release). The following parameters were used: carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021464 Da) as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine (15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation protein (42.010565 Da) were selected as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to full trypsin with maximum of two missed cleavages. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. For label-free quantification, it was used “match between runs” feature in MaxQuant, which is able to identify the transfer between the samples based on the retention time and accurate mass, with a 0.7-minute match time window and 20 minutes’ alignment time window. Normalized MS/MS count was used as main parameter to further analyses. After identification of peptides by MS/MS counting, proteins were selected as potential M2-2 binding partners by the following steps: (1) selection of enriched peptides (Fold Change > 1.5) or unique proteins for each independent experiment, excluding proteins present in negative controls, (2) selection of proteins identified in at least two out of three independent experiments. From this filtering, 72 proteins were selected as potential M2-2 interactors. These proteins were analyzed on STRING, for generation of functional protein-protein association network. Linking between network nodes was set for confidence, with minimum interaction score of 0.900. Analysis of enriched GO terms for Biological Process was performed on BiNGO (Cytoscape 3.9.1.), looking for overrepresented terms. Hypergeometric test was used for statistical analysis, with Benjamini and Hochberg False Discovery Rate correction, and significance set as 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The M2-2 protein from the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a 10 kDa protein expressed by the second ORF of the viral gene M2. During infection, M2-2 has been described as the polymerase cofactor responsible for promoting genome replication, which occurs by the induction of changes in interactions between the polymerase and other viral proteins at early stages of infection. Despite its well-explored role in the regulation of the polymerase activity, little has been made to investigate the relationship of M2-2 with cellular proteins. A previous report showed poor recruitment of M2-2 to viral structures, with the protein being mainly localized to the nucleus and cytoplasmic granules. To unravel which other functions M2-2 exerts during infection, we performed proteomic analysis of co-immunoprecipitated cellular partners, identifying enrichment of proteins involved with regulation of translation, protein folding and mRNA splicing. In approaches based on these data, we found that M2-2 expression downregulates eiF2&#x3b1; phosphorylation and inhibits both translation and stress granules assembly. Finally, we also verified that M2-2 is targeted for proteasome degradation, being localized to granules composed of defective ribosomal products at the cytoplasm. These results suggest that besides its functions in the replicative complex, M2-2 may exert additional functions to contribute to successful RSV infection.

### Keywords
Rsv; syncytial virus; m2-2; translation; stress granules; eif2α; proteasome; drips; puromycin.

### Affiliations
University of Southampton
Laboratory of RNA Virus Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil

### Submitter
Veronica Santiago

### Lab Head
Dr Armando Morais Ventura
Laboratory of RNA Virus Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil


