### Accession
PXD008365

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Identify a Novel DNA Repair-Dependent Role for Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4α

### Description
Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) is a transcription factor that acts as a master regulator of genes in several endodermal-derived tissues, including the intestine in which it plays a central role during development and tumorigenesis. To better delineate the mechanisms by which HNF4 can interfere during these processes, we combined stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics with immunoprecipitation of green fluorescent protein (GFP) as well as with proximity-dependent purification by the biotin ligase BirA, both fused to HNF4. Surprisingly, these analyses identified a significant enrichment of proteins falling into the DNA repair gene ontology term, a so far unidentified biological feature of this transcription factor. Several of these proteins including PARP1, RAD50 and DNA-PKcs were confirmed to interact with HNF4in colorectal cancer cell lines. During DNA damage response, HNF4 localized to double strand DNA breaks in these cells. HNF4was able to interfere functionally during non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ). Overall, these observations identify an unsuspected role for this transcription factor during the DNA damage response.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-TRAP assay and In-gel digestion.  In order to perform quantitative mass spectrometry, the proteome of P2-HNF4α-eGFP and eGFP control cells were labelled using the SILAC technique by successive amplification in heavy and light media, respectively. Cells were recovered using trypsin and washed twice carefully with D-PBS 1X. Nuclear protein extracts were prepared as previously described (Boisvert, Lam, Lamont, & Lamond, 2010). Briefly, cells were resuspended in a hypotonic buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM DTT) and dounce-homogenized 25 times with a tight pestle to isolate nuclei. Nuclei were recovered by centrifugation and further purified on a sucrose gradient. Clean nuclei pellets were resuspended in RIPA 1X buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate) and sonicated 5 times for 10 seconds at 25% on a Fisher FB-120 Sonic Dismembrator with a 1/8-inch probe (Fisher Scientific, Watlham, USA). Nuclear extracts were further diluted in RIPA 1X buffer and incubated 1 hour at 4oC with 40 µl of GFP-TRAP beads (Chromotek, Hauppauge, USA) to immunoprecipitate the P2-HNF4α-eGFP protein and interacting partners. Beads were washed three times with RIPA 1X and two times with PBS 1X buffer. After the last wash, beads from the different conditions were pooled together before recovering the proteins by heating the beads at 95oC for 10 min in NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer 1X (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA). At all steps, a protease cocktail inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, Canada) was added to avoid protein degradation. The recovered proteins were then analyzed by mass spectrometry after being reduced to peptides by In-gel digestion as previously described (Drissi, Dubois, Douziech, & Boisvert, 2015).     BioID assay. HEK293T and HCT116 cells were infected with lentiviruses expressing the P2-HNF4α-BirA construct or a control empty vector. Cells were selected and amplified in SILAC media as described above. To induce in vivo biotinylation of potential protein partners, cells were incubated 24 hours in media containing 50 µM of biotin (Sigma-Aldrich, Oakville, Canada) before being collected by dissociation with trypsin and washed twice in D-PBS 1X. Nuclear extracts were prepared as described above and diluted in RIPA 1X buffer. To immunoprecipitate the biotinylated proteins, 50 µl of streptavidin coupled beads (GE Healthcare, Mississauga, Canada) was added to the nuclear extract and incubated 2 hours at 4oC. Beads were then washed three times with RIPA 1X and five times with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate to remove unspecific interactions. After the last wash, the beads from the different conditions were combined and proteins directly converted to peptides using the On-Beads digestion technique described previously (Dubois et al., 2016).     Mass spectrometry and quantification. Trypsin digested peptides were loaded and separated onto a nanoHPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000). 10 µl of the sample (2 µg) was first loaded with a constant flow of 4 µl/min onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column, 0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were then eluted off towards an analytical column heated to 40 oC (PepMap C18 nano column (75 µm x 50 cm)). Peptides were then analysed by an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific Inc.) using an EasySpray source at a voltage of 2.0 kV. Peptides selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation were based on the ten highest intensities for the peptide ions from the MS survey scan. All unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species for the precursor ions were rejected, and a dynamic exclusion list was set to 500 entries with a retention time of 40 seconds (10 ppm mass window). Data acquisition was done using Xcalibur version 2.2 SP1.48. Identification and quantification of proteins identified by mass spectrometry was done using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Biological replicates were done twice and combined together for the MaxQuant analysis. Quantification was done with light (Lys 0 and Arg 0) and heavy (Lys 8 and Arg 10) labels and considering a trypsin digestion of the peptides with no cleavages on lysine or arginine before a proline. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed with methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications of proteins and carbamidimethylation as fixed modification. Mass tolerance was set to a maximum of 7 ppm for the precursor ions and 20 ppm for the fragment ions. The minimum length of peptides to be considered for quantification was set to 7 amino acids and the false discovery rate threshold set to 5%. The minimum number of peptides to be used for the identification of proteins was set to one but only proteins identified with two or more peptides were considered in further analysis. Protein quantification was calculated using both unique and razor peptides.

### Data Protocol
To remove common background contaminants from the protein partners identified with the BioID assay, the proteins identified by MaxQuant software were analyzed by the Crapome database version 1.1 (Mellacheruvu et al., 2013) to score interactions. Briefly, the spectral counts of the proteins identified in both duplicate of the BirA assay for P2-HNF4α-BirA condition were compared to the empty control condition as well as twelve (CC532, CC533, CC534, CC535, CC536, CC537, CC538, CC553, CC554, CC555, CC556 and CC557 controls) HEK293 BirA-Flag negative control pulldowns available from the CRAPome database for the HEK293T BioID assay or sixteen (CC539, CC540, CC541, CC542, CC543, CC544, CC545, CC546, CC547, CC548, CC549, CC550, CC551, CC552, CC558 and CC559) HeLa BirA-Flag negative control pulldowns for the HCT116 BioID assay. The scoring interaction for each protein was determined based on the fold change results (FC_B; default setting used) computed by averaging the three highest normalized spectral counts across all controls (our empty control and the CRAPome database selected controls). Interactions with a fold change of 2.0 or higher were considered as real targets from the BioID assays and were the only ones considered for further analysis. Biological functions associated with the identified HNF4α proteins partners in the GFP-TRAP or BioID assay were determined using the Functional Annotation Chart tool of DAVID database version 6.8 (Huang, Sherman, & Lempicki, 2009a, 2009b). Analyses were done based on the whole human genome background file of DAVID’s database. Functional protein interaction networks were analyzed using STRING v10.5 (Szklarczyk et al., 2015) based on a minimum required interaction score of 0.400.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4&#x3b1; (HNF4&#x3b1;) is a transcription factor that acts as a master regulator of genes for several endoderm-derived tissues, including the intestine, in which it plays a central role during development and tumorigenesis. To better define the mechanisms by which HNF4&#x3b1; can influence these processes, we identified proteins interacting with HNF4&#x3b1; using stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics with either immunoprecipitation of green fluorescent protein (GFP) or with proximity-dependent purification by the biotin ligase BirA (BioID), both fused to HNF4&#x3b1;. Surprisingly, these analyses identified a significant enrichment of proteins characterized with a role in DNA repair, a so far unidentified biological feature of this transcription factor. Several of these proteins including PARP1, RAD50, and DNA-PKcs were confirmed to interact with HNF4&#x3b1; in colorectal cancer cell lines. Following DNA damage, HNF4&#x3b1; was able to increase cell viability in colorectal cancer cells. Overall, these observations identify a potential role for this transcription factor during the DNA damage response.

### Keywords
Human, Bioid, Quantitative proteomics, Gfp-trap, Colorectal cancer, Dna repair, Silac, Hnf4alpha

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology Faculty of Medicine and Health Science Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Samuel Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr François Boudreau
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology Faculty of Medicine and Health Science Université de Sherbrooke


