### Accession
PXD034560

### Title
Mechanistic insight into the role of enzyme mevalonate kinase by a natural fatty acid -mediated killing of Leishmania donovani

### Description
We evaluated the anti-leishmanial efficacy of different saturated medium-chain fatty acids (FAs, C8-C18) where FA containing C8 chain, caprylic acid (CA), was found to be most potent against Leishmania donovani, the causative agent for visceral leishmaniasis (VL). Different analogs of CA with C8 chain, but not higher, along with a carboxyl/ester group showed a similar anti-leishmanial effect. Ergosterol depletion, measured by HPLC, was the major cause of CA-mediated cell death. Molecular docking and Molecular dynamic simulation studies indicated the enzyme mevalonate kinase (MevK) of the ergosterol biosynthesis pathway as a possible target of CA. Enzyme assays with purified recombinant MevK and CA/ CA analogs confirmed the target with a competitive inhibition pattern. The inhibition constant of CA was ⁓53µM. Using Isothermal calorimetry and circular dichroism studies; strong binding interaction between MevK and CA/CA analogs was established. Point mutation with Y167F residue at MevK active site reduces the binding affinity of CA on MevK. Also, homologous over-expression of MevK in parasites resisted CA-mediated killing. Further, proteomics studies using LC-HRMS showed dose-dependent down-regulation of MevK in CA-treated cells. We established the mechanism of the antileishmanial effect of CA, a natural product, against VL where toxicity and drug resistance with currents chemotherapeutics demand an alternative. This is the first report on the identification of an enzymatic target with kinetic parameters & mechanistic insights against any organism for a natural medium-chain FA. CA and, even, its derivatives/analogs may be developed as an anti-parasitic formulation with higher efficacy and reduced toxicity.

### Sample Protocol
Promastigotes were grown at a density of 2 x106cells/mL for 48 h then and treated with CA (173 and 346 µM) for 6 h. Treated and untreated parasites (1x108)were harvested, washed thrice with PBS finally, and then finally lysed in 300 μL of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl,100 mMNaCl, 0.1% Nonidet P40, and 0.15% SDS, pH 7.2)in the presence protease inhibitorcocktail of 1 mg/mL.The mixture was incubated for 30 min at 37℃ with shaking. Protein lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min. The supernatant wascollectedand precipitated with 4-fold ice-chilled acetone overnight. The pellet was air-dried in 100 µL of PBS.  Approximately 100 µg protein (~25-30 µL) from untreated, 173 and 346 µM CA-treatedsamples were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37°C followed by alkylation with 25 mM ofIodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Excess IAA was quenched by adding 10mM-DTT and incubated at room temperature for 20 min. Sample digestion was performedovernight at 37°C by addition of 50 mMof120 µL ammonium bicarbonate with 2 µg trypsin. After digestion, 5μl of 0.25% formic acid was added to the mixture to hydrolyze the trypsin and the entire digestion mixture is dried ina vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid before mass spectrometry analysis. Reconstituted samples were subjected to mass spectrometric analysis using OrbitrapExploris 240 mass spectrometer (LTQ-XL, ThermoFisher Scientific) after chromatographic separation and peptide fractionation through a C18 easy spray nano column (3µm, 100 Å) by nano-LC (Easy-nLC1000).The injection volume was 2 µl for each sample with a spray rate of 300 nl/min.Peptides were eluted using a 150-min dual gradient of solvent A and B (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water; solvent B: 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrilein water). The gradient profile was set withSolvent B as follows -5-20% for 60 min, 20-60% for 40 min, 60-95% for 20 min, 95% for 10 min, and 5% for 20 min. The scan range for Orbitrap was from 350 to 2,000 (m/z) with a minimum of three peaks and a resolution of 60,000. Ionic fragmentation was done by the collision-induced dissociation (CID) method.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0. MS/MS spectra were matched against MASCOT withthe assistance ofa Percolator. Static Modification was set for N-terminal acetylation and Carbamido methylation of Cysteine. The dynamic modification was set for Methionine (oxidation) and the minimum missed cleavage number was set at two. Swissprot was used as a reference software for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
We evaluated the anti-leishmanial efficacy of different saturated medium-chain fatty acids (FAs, C8-C18) where FA containing C8 chain, caprylic acid (CA), was found to be most potent against Leishmania donovani, the causative agent for visceral leishmaniasis (VL). Different analogs of CA with C8 linear chain, but not higher, along with a carboxyl/ester group showed a similar anti-leishmanial effect. Ergosterol depletion was the major cause of CA-mediated cell death. Molecular docking and molecular dynamic simulation studies indicated the enzyme mevalonate kinase (MevK) of the ergosterol biosynthesis pathway as a possible target of CA. Enzyme assays with purified recombinant MevK and CA/CA analogs confirmed the target with a competitive inhibition pattern. Using biochemical and biophysical studies; strong binding interaction between MevK and CA/CA analogs was established. Further, using parasites with overexpressed MevK and proteomics studies of CA-treated parasites the direct role of MevK as the target was validated. We established the mechanism of the antileishmanial effect of CA, a natural product, against VL where toxicity and drug resistance with current chemotherapeutics demand an alternative. This is the first report on the identification of an enzymatic target with kinetic parameters and mechanistic insights against any organism for a natural medium-chain FA.

### Keywords
Mevalonate kinase, Caprylic acid, Visceral leishmaniasis, Proteomics, Competitive inhibition, Ergosterol depletion

### Affiliations
niper hajipur
Associate professor Department of Biotechnology National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Hajipur, Bihar-844102

### Submitter
nikhil pallaprolu

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Debabrataman Mandal
Associate professor Department of Biotechnology National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Hajipur, Bihar-844102


