### Accession
PXD008719

### Title
Curcumin exerts its potential antitumor effects in a context dependent fashion

### Description
Background Clinical practice demonstrates that anticancer drug effects may strongly vary between different patients. Individual responses to drug action are potentially responsible for adverse effects such as establishment of resistance. Consequently, the understanding of response mechanisms to drug actions is of great relevance. Proteome profiling is a powerful tool for the investigation of cellular responses to drugs.  Methods Here, we have investigated the effects of curcumin, a natural remedy with known anti-cancer activities, on breast cancer cells MCF-7, ZR-75-1 and normal mammary fibroblasts as well as co-cultures thereof using proteome profiling. The mammary fibroblasts had been treated before with TGF-beta in order to induce a wound-healing signature known to be representative for the in vivo situation in breast tumors.  Results While co-culture alone induced several proteins like ANXA1, S100A4 and SPARC similarly in both breast cancer cells, the majority of proteins regulated upon co-culture differed between MCF-7 and ZR-75-1. Curcumin significantly induced HMOX1 in all single cell models and co-cultures. However, otherwise the curcumin effects differed. In the MCF-7 co-culture, curcumin significantly downregulated RC3H1, a repressor of inflammatory signaling. In the ZR-75-1 co-culture, curcumin significantly downregulated PEG10, an anti-apoptotic protein, and induced RRAGA, a pro-apoptotic protein involved in TNF-alpha signaling. In this model, curcumin also induced AKR1C2, an important enzyme for progesterone metabolism. None of these specific curcumin effects were observed in single cell cultures.  Conclusions The present data demonstrate that curcumin induces proteome alterations potentially accounting for its known antitumor effects in a strongly context-dependent fashion.

### Sample Protocol
MCF-7 and ZR-75-1 were kindly provided by Dr. Walter Jaeger (Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Diagnostics, University of Vienna). Cells were cultured in phenol red free DMEM and RPMI (LifeTech, Austria), respectively, containing 10% FCS (ATCC, USA) and 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin (ATCC, USA). Human mammary fibroblasts (HMF, ScienCell Research Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA) were cultured in FBM (Lonza, Switzerland) supplemented with the FGM Bullet Kit, including 10% FCS, and 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin. The cells were stimulated with TGF-β (2ng/mL; Sigma-Aldrich, Austria) for seven days in order to obtain cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and used up to passage 5. For co-culture models representing the in vivo situation the cancer cells – 1x10^6 and 3x10^5 cells per well of ZR-75-1 and MCF-7, respectively – were incubated with 10% of CAFs for 72 hours with a 1:1 mixture of the respective media. After 24 hours of incubation, co-cultures as well as MCF 7, ZR 75 1 and CAF alone were treated with 30µM curcumin (Sigma-Aldrich, Austria) for 24 hours. . Medium was changed in control cells. Experiments were conducted at 37°C and 5% CO¬¬2 in 6 well-plates in triplicates. After 24 hours treatment, cells were washed with cold PBS and 200µl sample buffer (7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM DDT) were added. Cells were scraped off and lysed by means of an ultrasonic stick before a spatula tip of urea was added to keep proteins in solution.  In solution digestions were performed with 20µg of protein. The samples were pre-concentrated on 10kDa filters (Pall Austria Filter GmbH), reduced with DTT (56°C, 30 min) and carbamidomethylated with iodoacetamide (45 min in the dark). To receive peptides, samples were digested with a trypsin/lys-c mixture (Promega, Germany) for 18h at 37°C. Furthermore, peptide samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (1% final concentration) and transferred on prewashed and equilibrated C-18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Scientific). The column bound peptides were washed (5% CAN, 0.5% TFA) and finally eluted (50% ACN, 0.1% TFA).Eluates were dried and stored at -20°C until analysis. For analysis a nanoLC-system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Austria) was coupled to a high resolution QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Austria). Samples were resolved in 5µL 30% formic acid (FA) containing 10 fmol each of four synthetic peptides as internal standard for LC-MS quality control. After dilution with 40µL mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA), 5µL of the sample were injected. At a flow rate of 10 µL/min of mobile phase A the samples were loaded on a 2 cm x 75 µM C-18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Scientific, Austria). Peptides were separated over a 75 µm x 50 cm C-18 separation column (Thermo Scientific, Austria) with a 90 min gradient from 8-40% solvent B (80%ACN, 20%H2O, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS parameters were set to 70’000 and 17’500 resolution and 50 ms and 75 ms maximum injection time for MS1 and MS2, respectively. The m/z range was set to 400-1400 in this 115 min long top 8 method. Only peptides with charges of +2, +3 and +4 were considered. Samples were measured in replicates.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version 11/2015 with 20 193 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cancer-associated fibroblast, Proteome profiling, Breast cancer, Curcumin, Anti-cancer drug, Co-culture

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


