### Accession
PXD020251

### Title
High density lipoproteins – a therapeutic target  for age-related macular degeneration

### Description
We analyzed Apolipoprotein A-1 (ApoA-1) containing lipoproteins isolated from Bruch’s membrane (BrM) of elderly human donor eyes and found a unique proteome, quite different from HDL isolated from donor plasma of the same individuals. The most striking difference is higher concentrations of ApoB and ApoE, which bind to glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). We hypothesize that this interaction promotes lipoprotein deposition onto BrM GAGs, initiating downstream effects that contribute to RPE dysfunction/death. We tested this hypothesis using two therapeutic strategies to alter the lipoprotein/protein profile of these extracellular deposits. First, we used short, heparan sulfate oligosaccharides to remove lipoproteins already deposited in both the extracellular matrix of RPE cells and in aged, donor BrM tissue. Second, we used an ApoA-1 mimetic, 5A peptide, which modulates the relative amounts of cholesterol and ApoA-1, ApoB, and ApoE secreted both apically and basolaterally from primary porcine RPE cells. Significantly, the 5A peptide altered the proteomic profile of circulating HDL and ameliorated some of the potentially harmful changes in protein composition seen with a high fat, high cholesterol diet in a mouse model of AMD. Together, these results indicate that HDL interactions with BrM represent a viable target to slow AMD progression in humans

### Sample Protocol
The protein concentration was measured (Pierce BCA protein assay kit) and 25µg of protein from both the plasma and the tissue HDL was used for proteomics. A paramagnetic bead protocol for protein sample cleavage for MS analysis described by Hughes (79) was used to prepare the samples for analysis. This uses both hydrophilic and hydrophobic SeraMag SpeedBead carboxylate-modified magnetic particles (Part #45152105050250 and Part #65152105050250, GE Healthcare). Briefly, proteins solubilized in 2% SDS, 100mM Tris·HCl (pH 8.0) were reduced with 10mM DTT (D0632; Sigma-Aldrich), alkylated with 25mM Iodoacetamide (I1149; Sigma-Aldrich) and subjected to tryptic hydrolysis using the HILIC beads SP3 protocol

### Data Protocol
The peptides were analyzed with a nanoAcquity UPLC system coupled to a Synapt G2 HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters Inc.) employing the LC-MS/MS protocol in a data-independent acquisition mode complemented with ion mobility separation (HDMSE). The peptides were separated on a 75μm × 150mm 1.7μm C18 BEH column (Waters) using a 90min gradient of 5% to 30% of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min at 45°C. Eluting peptides were sprayed into the ion source of the Synapt G2 using the 10μm PicoTip emitter (Waters) at the voltage of 2.75kV. PLGS 2.5.1 software was used to assign peptides to the features and generate searchable files which were submitted to the IdentityE search engine incorporated into Progenesis QI Proteomics software 3.1 (Waters). For peptide identification we searched against either UniProt mouse, human or pig databases (2016 release) using carbamidomethyl at Cys as a fixed modification and Met oxidation as a variable modification. Only proteins identified by at least two peptides and with confidence scores of >95% were included in Tables 1 & 3 and Supporting Tables 3A-B. Only 1 missed and/or non-specific cleavage was permitted, there was a 20ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions and a 0.1 mass tolerance for fragment ions. The threshold score for accepting individual spectra was 6 and there was a >95% confidence level. Calculated protein decoy FDR was 0.1% and peptide decoy FDR was 0.1%. All calculations were made from an average of technical duplicates. For protein quantification we used a sum of the intensity of the top 3 peptides for each protein, to compare their amounts in each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Strong evidence suggests that dysregulated lipid metabolism involving dysfunction of the retinal pigmented epithelium (RPE) underlies the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), the leading cause of irreversible blindness in the elderly. A hallmark of AMD is the overproduction of lipid- and protein-rich extracellular deposits that accumulate in the extracellular matrix (Bruch's membrane (BrM)) adjacent to the RPE. We analyzed apolipoprotein A-1 (ApoA-1)-containing lipoproteins isolated from BrM of elderly human donor eyes and found a unique proteome, distinct from high-density lipoprotein (HDL) isolated from donor plasma of the same individuals. The most striking difference is higher concentrations of ApoB and ApoE, which bind to glycosaminoglycans. We hypothesize that this interaction promotes lipoprotein deposition onto BrM glycosaminoglycans, initiating downstream effects that contribute to RPE dysfunction/death. We tested this hypothesis using two potential therapeutic strategies to alter the lipoprotein/protein profile of these extracellular deposits. First, we used short heparan sulfate oligosaccharides to remove lipoproteins already deposited in both the extracellular matrix of RPE cells and aged donor BrM tissue. Second, an ApoA-1 mimetic, 5A peptide, was demonstrated to modulate the composition and concentration of apolipoproteins secreted from primary porcine RPE cells. Significantly, in a mouse model of AMD, this 5A peptide altered the proteomic profile of circulating HDL and ameliorated some of the potentially harmful changes to the protein composition resulting from the high-fat, high-cholesterol diet in this model. Together, these results suggest that targeting HDL interactions with BrM represents a new strategy to slow AMD progression in humans.

### Keywords
Human, Lipoproteins, Complement factor h, Mouse, Amd, Pre cells

### Affiliations
Duke University
Duke University, Albert Eye Research Institute

### Submitter
Nikolai Skiba

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine Bowes Richman
Duke University, Albert Eye Research Institute


