### Accession
PXD035850

### Title
Protein mass spectrometry data of Klebsiella sp.

### Description
To mine enzymatic activities and metabolic pathways related to PVC degradation, biodegradation of PVC film by the strain was conducted with and without an additional supply of 1% (w/v) glucose.

### Sample Protocol
both intracellular and extracellular proteins were separately extracted from the cells harvested after 30 days based on the acetone precipitation method.The collected EMBL-1 cells in two groups were lysed by using Branson SFX550 Ultrasonicator, and then the solution was centrifuged to obtain supernatant for further operation. The collected culture solution in two groups were concentrated 10 times for next step. Acetone precipitation method was used to extract intracellular (IN) and extracellular (OUT) proteins. Specific steps are as follows: a mixture of extraction solution and pre-cooled acetone (v:v=1:1) was stirring for 1 h at 0℃, and then placed on 4℃ overnight. The mixture in each group was concentrated (10000rpm, 4℃) to harvest the proteins from four groups: IN (intracellular protein in group 1)), OUT (extracellular protein in group 1)), INglu (intracellular protein in group 2)), and OUTglu (extracellular protein in group 2)),respectively.Moreover, proteins were resolved with a Thermo Ultimate 3000 integrated nano-HPLC system that directly interfaced with a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) to explore some related PVC degradation proteins. The SDS-PAGE was used to separate the protein extracts and stained with Coomassie Blue G-250. The gel bands of target were cut into pieces. Sample was digested by trypsin with prior reduction and alkylation in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37ºC overnight. The digested products were extracted twice with 1% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile aqueous solution and dried to reduce volume by speed Vacuum Concentrator. The peptides were separated by a 65 min gradient elution at a flow rate 0.300 µL/min with the Thermo Ultimate 3000 integrated nano-HPLC system which is directly interfaced with the Thermo orbitrap fusion lumos mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a home-made fused silica capillary column (75 µm ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA) packed with C-18 resin (300 A, 3 µm, Varian, Lexington, MA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using the Xcalibur 4.1 software and there is a single full-scan mass spectrum in the Orbitrap (300-1800 m/z, 60,000 resolution) followed by 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans at 30% normalized collision energy. Each mass spectrum was analyzed using the Peak studio for the database searching. The reference strain is Klebsiella variicola (strain 118).

### Data Protocol
Based on the PVC-degradation activity of four proteins (OUT > OUTglu > IN > INglu), statistical analysis was focused on the proteins shared by the OUT group and the IN group which showed degrading activities of PVC film. In total, 39 proteins were firstly selected within the yellow dotted line. Further, the relative abundance of these proteins in their respective groups was calculated and visualized in a heat map. Moreover, the differential profiles in protein expression between the two groups were calculated based on the relative abundance to further narrow the list of potential PVC-degrading proteins (Log2(OUT/IN) ≥3).

### Publication Abstract
Evidence for microbial degradation of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) has previously been reported, but little is known about the degrading strains and enzymes. Here, we isolate a PVC-degrading bacterium from the gut of insect larvae and shed light on the PVC degradation pathway using a multi-omic approach. We show that the larvae of an insect pest, Spodoptera frugiperda, can survive by feeding on PVC film, and this is associated with enrichment of Enterococcus, Klebsiella and other bacteria in the larva's gut microbiota. A bacterial strain isolated from the larval intestine (Klebsiella sp. EMBL-1) is able to depolymerize and utilize PVC as sole energy source. We use genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic analyses to identify genes and proteins potentially involved in PVC degradation (e.g., catalase-peroxidase, dehalogenases, enolase, aldehyde dehydrogenase and oxygenase), and propose a PVC biodegradation pathway. Furthermore, enzymatic assays using the purified catalase-peroxidase support a role in PVC depolymerization.

### Keywords
Bacteria protein, Lc-ms/ms, Intracellular, Extracellular

### Affiliations
Westlake University
Research Center for Industries of the Future (RCIF), School of Engineering, Westlake University, 18 Shilongshan Road, Hangzhou 310024, Zhejiang Province, China

### Submitter
zhe zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Feng Ju
Research Center for Industries of the Future (RCIF), School of Engineering, Westlake University, 18 Shilongshan Road, Hangzhou 310024, Zhejiang Province, China


