### Accession
PXD010739

### Title
Proteomic Analysis Reveals Early Salinity Stress-Responsive Proteins in Dunaliella salina

### Description
Dunaliella salina has been recognized as a model organism for stress response research due to its high capacity to tolerate extreme salt stress. An iTRAQ-based proteomic approach was used to analyze the proteome of D. salina during early response to salt stress, and identify the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). A total of 141 DEPs were identified in salt-treated samples, including 75 up-regulated and 66 up-regulated proteins after 3 and 24 h salt stress (p<0.05). The patterns of protein accumulation exhibited changes, including dynamics of tricarboxylic acid cycle, photosynthesis and oxidative phosphorylation pathways.

### Sample Protocol
cells were cultured in f/2 medium for several weeks in 0.5 M NaCl as previously described 32, with temperature and pH maintained at 25 ± 1 °C and 7.5 ± 0.2 respectively. Cells were seeded at the density of ~5×105 cells/ml, corresponding to the optical density at 630 nm (OD630) of 0.06-0.08. When the cells reached the logarithmic growth phase (~ 2-3×106 cells/ml), they were transferred to fresh medium containing 1 M (control) or 3 M (salinity shock) NaCl. After 3 or 24 h treatment, algae cells were harvested, and either used fresh or stored at −80°C for later analyses.The samples were reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin at 20:1 (w/w) at 37°C for 16 h, and then labeled using the iTRAQ Reagents 8-plex kit according to the manufacturer's instructions (AB Sciex Inc., USA).The labeled peptide mixtures were dissolved in strong cation exchange (SCX) solvent A (25% (v/v) acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium formate, and 0.1% formic acid, pH 2.8), and then fractionated on an Agilent HPLC system 1260 with a polysulfethyl A column (2.1 × 100 mm, 5μm, 300 Å) (Phenomenex, USA). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 200 μl/min with a linear gradient of 0−20% solvent B (25% v/v acetonitrile, 500 mM ammonium formate, pH 6.8) over 50 min, followed by ramping up to 100% solvent B in 5 min and holding for 10 min using Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex, USA) and vacuum-dried. The absorbance at 280 nm was monitored and a total of 12 fractions were collected.LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously. Peptides of each fraction (5μl injections) were resolved in solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was separated using a Shimadzu LC-20AD Nano-HPLC system (Kyoto, Japan) with a flow rate of 0.7 ml/min. The peptides were eluted using a linear gradient starting from 5% solvent B (95% acetonitrile v/v, 0.1% formic acid) to 35% solvent B over 35 min, followed by ramping up to 60% solvent B over 5 min, up to 80% in 2 min and maintained for 5min. The chromatographic conditions (5%) were restored in 1 min and equilibrated in solvent A for 10 min. The obtained peptides were subjected to nanoelectrospray ionization followed by tandem mass spectrometry in a Q Exactive MS (Thermo Fisher, NY, USA) coupled online to the HPLC.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using the Mascot 2.3.02 search engine (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) against the UniProt Plant database (http://www.uniprot.org) containing 87,406 sequences. The protein mass were predicted using http://www.expasy.ch/tools/ on the basis of the protein sequences. The peptide mass tolerance was set as±20 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.1 Da. The results were filtered based on a false discovery rate (FDR) of no more than 0.01. To demonstrate the reproducibility of the replicates, protein abundances between various biological replicates were compared, and ratios for each protein comparison were normalized to 1. Only proteins with at least one unique peptide and unused value of> 1.3 were considered for further analysis. When differences in protein expression between salt-treated and control groups were >1.2-fold or <0.83-fold, with a p-value < 0.05, the protein was considered to be differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Salt stress is one of the most serious abiotic factors that inhibit plant growth. <i>Dunaliella salina</i> has been recognized as a model organism for stress response research due to its high capacity to tolerate extreme salt stress. A proteomic approach based on isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) was used to analyze the proteome of <i>D. salina</i> during early response to salt stress and identify the differentially abundant proteins (DAPs). A total of 141 DAPs were identified in salt-treated samples, including 75 upregulated and 66 downregulated DAPs after 3 and 24 h of salt stress. DAPs were annotated and classified into gene ontology functional groups. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway analysis linked DAPs to tricarboxylic acid cycle, photosynthesis and oxidative phosphorylation. Using search tool for the retrieval of interacting genes (STRING) software, regulatory protein&#x207b;protein interaction (PPI) networks of the DAPs containing 33 and 52 nodes were built at each time point, which showed that photosynthesis and ATP synthesis were crucial for the modulation of early salinity-responsive pathways. The corresponding transcript levels of five DAPs were quantified by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). These results presented an overview of the systematic molecular response to salt stress. This study revealed a complex regulatory mechanism of early salt tolerance in <i>D. salina</i> and potentially contributes to developing strategies to improve stress resilience.

### Keywords
Ltq orbitrap velos, Dunaliella salina, Whole body

### Affiliations
Dalian Ocean University, China. 116023
Dalian Ocean University

### Submitter
Yuan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaojie Chai
Dalian Ocean University, China. 116023


