### Accession
PXD019332

### Title
Dipeptide Tyr-Asp inhibits glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase activity, affecting redox metabolism and boosting plant stress resistance.

### Description
Proteogenic dipeptides are not only intermediates of proteolysis but also an emerging class of small molecule regulators, with diverse and specific functions. We have recently reported a novel in vitro interaction between the dipeptide Tyr-Asp and the Arabidopsis glycolytic enzyme glyceraldehyde 3- phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH). To understand the functional significance of Tyr-Asp/GAPDH binding, we examined the effect produced on the enzymatic activity. Results demonstrate that low to mid micro-molar concentrations of Tyr-Asp, but none of the other tested dipeptides, inhibit GAPDH activity both in vitro and in planta. Inhibition of the GAPDH activity was associated with a shift of the flux from glycolysis towards the pentose phosphate pathway and an increase in the NADPH/NADP+ ratio, a known response to cope with oxidative stress. In addition to GAPDH, the Tyr-Asp protein interactome comprised further stress-related proteins, including multiple chaperones. In line with the molecular data, Tyr-Asp supplementation improved growth performance of both Arabidopsis and tobacco seedlings subjected to oxidative stress conditions. By contrast, no such improvement was measured, neither for the free amino acids nor the other tested dipeptides, demonstrating that the action of Tyr-Asp is specific and independent of the degradation of Tyr-Asp to the constituent amino acids. Finally, inhibition of Arabidopsis phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase activity reveals a multisite regulation of glycolytic/gluconeogenic flux by dipeptides. In summary, our data suggest proteogenic dipeptides as a novel class of small-molecule regulators operating at the nexus of stress, protein degradation and metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
The same protocol was used for both the feeding and the TPP experiments. Peptides were resuspended in buffer containing 3 % v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Measurements were executed on a Q Exactive HF coupled to nanoACQUITY UPLC System (Waters). Total of 1 µg of peptides was loaded onto an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Peptide CSH column (75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm length, 1.7 µm bead size (Waters) at a flow rate of 0.4 μl min-1. The column was previously equilibrated with buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water). Peptide elution was performed by increasing the buffer B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) gradient from 0 % to 30 % [v/v] over 65 min, from 30 % to 60 % for the next 20 min from 60 % to 80 % for the last 15 min at a flow rate of 0.25 μl/min. The column was then washed with 80 % [v/v] acetonitrile for 5 min and for the last 5 min column was equilibrated with buffer A. Peptide ions were detected in a full scan from mass-to-charge ratio 300 to 1600 at resolution of 120000 (AGC target of 3e6. MS/MS scans were performed for the 10 peptides with the highest MS signal (ddMS2 resolution of 15000, AGC target 1e5, isolation width mass-to-charge ratio 1.2 m/z, relative collision energy 27). Dynamic exclusion of 30 s was used and apex trigger (- to 9 s) was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software for protein identification and quantification. Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR10 protein sequences (35386 entries) were used by the search engine Andromeda for identification of peptides. The settings used for a search were the same as in. The “label-free quantification” and “match between runs” options were selected. A minimum peptide length of six amino acids was used. The quantification was performed for proteins with minimum of one unique and one razor peptide. Known contaminants, such as keratins, were removed from further analysis. Quantification of tobacco proteins was performed using Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics) as previously described in Moreno et al.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Pepck, Arabidopsis, Dipeptides, Glycolysis, Gapdh, Tyr-asp

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Plant Physiology | Celon Pharma
Dr. Aleksandra Skirycz  Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie  Potsdam Science Park Am Mühlenberg  1  14476 Potsdam

### Submitter
Michal Gorka

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Skirzcy
Dr. Aleksandra Skirycz  Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie  Potsdam Science Park Am Mühlenberg  1  14476 Potsdam


