### Accession
PXD024481

### Title
Tripartite separation of glomerular proteomes from reporter-free mice

### Description
Renal blood filtration occurs in a functional unit called the glomerulus. The resident cell types comprise the filtration barrier, namely podocytes, mesangial cells and glomerular endothelial cells. Here we introduce a glomerular cell isolation protocol, which enables the separation of these three cell types in sufficient amounts and purity to allow detailed protein-biochemical investigations. We demonstrate that the expression of fluorescent transgenes in glomerular cells can result in proteome artifacts. We show that different mouse strains have different glomerular cell type proteomes. Further, we demonstrate the power of the technique to identify new glomerular cell type-enriched proteins and demonstrate the potential of this globally applicable technique in the dissection of cell-specific disease responses and intra-glomerular cell-type crosstalk.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were snap-frozen and stored at -80 degrees. For comparison of different strains, approximately 50000 cells were analyzed. Cells were resuspended in 4% SDS and 10mM Tris and heated at 95 degrees for 10 min. Then, solubilized proteins were reduced and alkylated using 5mM DTT and 10mM Iodoacetate, respectively. Proteins were digested and prepared using the SP3 protocol with modifications previously described (Hohne et al., 2018; Rinschen, 2019). For deeper protein analysis, pellets of 1 million cells were obtained from mT/mG mice. These pellets were resuspended in 8M urea and 5mM Tris in LCMS grade water, sonicated for 1 min using an ultrasonication pulse (0.1 sec cycle, 10% strength), and spun down with 16000g at 4°C. Protein concentration (for 1e6 cells) was determined using a commercial BCA assay (Thermo). Then proteins were reduced and alkylated as described above. Proteins were digested using a protease in-solution digestion protocol with a modified SP3 protocol (Hohne et al., 2018; Hughes et al., 2019) (50000 cells), or in solution digestion (Rinschen et al., 2018a). For all digestion steps, trypsin was used. Tryptic peptides were analyzed using a nLC-MS/MS hardware setup consisting of a nanoflow LC (flow: 200 nl/min) coupled to an Orbitrap QExactive Plus tandem mass spectrometer. The peptides were separated using a gradient used for reverse phase separation consisted of buffer A and buffer B, with ascending concentrations of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over buffer A (0.1% formic acid). The peptides from 50000 cells were separated using a 1h gradient. The peptides from 1*e6 cells were separated using a 2.5h gradient.

### Data Protocol
Protein raw files were searched using MaxQuant and the LFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014; Cox and Mann, 2008) with search against a uniport mouse proteome reference database released in Jan 2018. Search criterions were alkylation on cysteins as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation as well as methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Default criterions were used, meaning that PSM, peptide and protein FDRs were set at 0.01. LFQ algorithm was enabled, match between run was enabled. The data were analyzed using Perseus v 1.5.5.3 using filtering for the embedded annotations as contaminant, reverse or proteins identified by site only. Only proteins in at least 60% of samples were kept and missing values were imputed using default imputation parameters (downshift SD=2, width 0.3). GO-term and uniport keyword annotation and enrichment was performed using the embedded terms (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse kidney glomerulus endotheliall mesangial

### Affiliations
Aarhus University
Department of Biomedicine
Markus Rinschen Lab
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine 8000 Aarhus C Denmark

### Submitter
Fatih Demir

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Matthias Rinschen
Aarhus University Department of Biomedicine 8000 Aarhus C Denmark


