### Accession
PXD021450

### Title
Rice aleurone cytosolic CFMS analysis

### Description
Rice aleurone cytosolic proteome was fractionized by SEC and analyzed by LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
Kitaake (Oryza sativa L. ssp. japonica) cultivar was grown in a Conviron® E15 growth chamber (Conviron) with a day/night setting of 26/22 °C and 12/12 h. One hundred developing seeds at 10-12 days after flowering (DAF) were peeled to isolate sub- and aleurone layers as described before (Yang et al., 2018). The peeled layers were homogenized and differentially centrifuged to obtain crude cytosolic proteins as mentioned above, except for the filtration step though cheesecloth, and sample concentration by the 10 kDa cutoff column. The depletion of RuBisCO was not conducted.  (Aryal et al., 2017; Aryal et al., 2014; McBride et al., 2019; McBride et al., 2017). Briefly, fresh tissues were ground using a Polytron homogenizer (Brinkman Instruments) under ice-cold Microsome Isolation Buffer (MIB) solution [50 mM HEPES/KOH pH 7.5, 250 mM sorbitol, 50 mM KOAc, 2 mM Mg(OAc)2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, 2 mM PMSF and 1% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail (160 mg/mL benzamidine-HCl, 100 mg/mL leupeptin, 12 mg/mL phenanthroline, 0.1 mg/mL aprotinin, and 0.1 mg/mL pepstatin A)]. The homogenate was filtered with four-layers of cheesecloth to remove debris, and enriched by centrifugation at 1 k x g on Beckman Avanti 30 (Beckman Coulter Life Sciences) for 10 minutes at 4°C. The cytosolic fraction was obtained by ultracentrifugation at 200 k x g for 20 minutes at 4°C using Beckman Optima Ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter Life Sciences).  Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) Fractionation  The cytosolic protein samples were fractionized by ÄKTA FPLC system (Amersham Biosciences) as described previously (Aryal et al., 2017; Aryal et al., 2014; McBride et al., 2019). Approximately one milligram of total proteins in Arabidopsis, cotton, and rice plants was loaded onto Superdex® 200 10/300 GL column (GE Healthcare). The SEC elution was carried out with the mobile phase (50 mM HEPES/KOH, pH 7.8, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2 and 5% glycerol) at a flow rate of 0.65 mL/min. Protein elution was monitored by absorption at 280 nm. The columns were calibrated using Gel Filtration Markers Kit MWGF1000 (Sigma-Aldrich) determining a mass range from 669 to 29 kDa and the void volume. SEC fractions of 500 μL were collected for LC-MS/MS Analysis. For soybean SEC separation, about four milligrams of cytosolic proteins were fractionized by HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 200pg (GE Healthcare) column at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Both columns were calibrated using Gel Filtration Markers Kit MWGF1000 (Sigma-Aldrich) determining a mass range from 669 to 29 kDa and the void volume. SEC fractions of 500 mL were collected for LC-MS/MS Analysis.

### Data Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis Fractionized samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis as described previously (McBride et al., 2019; McBride et al., 2017). The mobile phase was removed and proteins in each fraction were precipitated by acetone precipitation. Dried pellets were denatured in 8 M urea for 1 hour at room temperature, reduced in 10 mM DTT for 45 minutes at 60 °C, and then alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 minutes at room temperature under dark. The urea concentration of the peptide solution was brought down to below 1.5 M by additional ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion. The digested peptides were purified using Pierce® C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Peptide concentrations for each SEC fraction were measured by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay following the manufacturer’s protocol. All the result samples were adjusted to the equal volume. The most concentrated sample had a peptide concentration of 0.2 µg/µL. 5 µL of each sample was injected onto LC-MS/MS. Duplicates were analyzed.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously (McBride et al., 2017). In brief, Q-Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer in conjunction with reverse-phase HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using the Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) was used for the analysis of A. thaliana, G. hirsutum, and O. sativa peptide samples. Peptides were resolved over a 125-minute gradient with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. An MS survey scan was acquired from 350 to 1600 m/z range. MS/MS spectra were acquired by selecting the 20 most abundant precursor ions for sequencing with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) normalized collision energy of 27%. A fifteen-second dynamic exclusion window was applied for reducing the number of times the same ion was sequenced. For G. max, samples were analyzed as described previously (Aryal et al., 2017). Briefly, peptides were resolved over a 90 minute by reverse-phase HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using an Eksigent ekspert™ Nano-LC 425 HPLC system (Dublin, CA, USA). MS/MS acquisition was conducted on AB SCIEX quadrupole time-of-flight (Q-TOF) TripleTOF 5600 plus mass spectrometer (AB Sciex Pte. Ltd.) operated in a data-dependent mode.  Peptide Identification and Quantification Acquired MS/MS files were submitted simultaneously to MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.5) for protein identification and relative quantification using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2014). The search was conducted with all the fractions obtained from the biological duplicates in one species at a single search as described previously (McBride et al., 2017). Each MS/MS spectrum in each species was searched against TAIR Athaliana_167_TAIR10.protein_primaryTranscriptOnly.fa, the cotton FASTA file provided from Dr. Jonathan Wendel, JGI Gmax_275_Wm82.a2.v1.protein_primaryTranscriptOnly.fa and JGI Osativa_323_v7.0.protein_primaryTranscriptOnly.fa for Arabidopsis, cotton, soybean, and rice, respectively. The search parameters were set as follows; Cysteine carbamidomethylation was a fixed modification; oxidation on methionine and acetyl (protein N-term) were chosen as variable modifications; Trypsin was selected as enzyme specificity, and up to two missed cleavages were accepted; The precursor mass tolerance and the fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 40 ppm, respectively; One percent of the protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was chosen; A reverse decoy database was enabled; For identification proteins should have at least one peptide that had a minimum of 7 amino acid length; Peptide abundance was calculated from the extracted ion current for both razor and unique peptides, and protein level signals were aggregated from peptide intensities; and “match between runs” function was set with maximum matching time window of 0.7 min as default. After MaxQuant searching, proteins identified by a single unique peptide were taken, and all the protein groups were filtered out when they had zero intensity value and zero ms/ms count.

### Publication Abstract
Whole-genome duplications are common during evolution, creating genetic redundancy that can enable cellular innovations. Novel protein-protein interactions provide a route to diversified gene functions, but, at present, there is limited proteome-scale knowledge on the extent to which variability in protein complex formation drives neofunctionalization. Here, we used protein correlation profiling to test for variability in apparent mass among thousands of orthologous proteins isolated from diverse species and cell types. Variants in protein complex size were unexpectedly common, in some cases appearing after relatively recent whole-genome duplications or an allopolyploidy event. In other instances, variants such as those in the carbonic anhydrase orthologous group reflected the neofunctionalization of ancient paralogs that have been preserved in extant species. Our results demonstrate that homo- and heteromer formation have the potential to drive neofunctionalization in diverse classes of enzymes, signaling, and structural proteins.

### Keywords
Rice aleurone cytosolic cfms analysis

### Affiliations
Purdue University
1Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. 2Center for Plant Biology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. 3Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.

### Submitter
Youngwoo Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel B. Szymanski
1Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. 2Center for Plant Biology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. 3Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.


