### Accession
PXD040268

### Title
Immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectropmetry of Plasmodium falciparum Cullin2

### Description
This study is aim to characterize Plasmodium Cullin2 to find its interacting partners

### Sample Protocol
The parasite lysates were used for IP with A/G bead conjugated HA antibodies. Briefly, the parasite pellets were resuspended in 5x pellet volume of the lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, 0.5 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 7.5; supplemented with Roche EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail), subjected to freeze-thaw, the suspension was passed through a 26.5 G needle, and the sample was incubated on ice for 30 min. The lysate was centrifuged at 25000x g for 30 min at 4°C, the supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube, the pellet was re-extracted with 3× pellet volume of the lysis buffer and this supernatant was combined with the first supernatant. The protein amount in the supernatant was estimated using the BCA method, and incubated with A/G bead conjugated HA antibodies (15 µl slurry/2 mg protein; ChromoTek, and 5ug HA antibodies) for 2 hours at 4°C with gentle shaking. The flow through was discarded, the beads were washed with wash buffer 1 (10 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, pH 7.5 supplemented with Roche EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail), followed by with wash buffer 2 (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, pH 7.5, supplemented with Roche EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail). The beads were boiled in 100 µl of 2xSDS PAGE sample buffer for 15 min to elute the bound proteins. A 20 µl aliquot were checked for the presence of bait by western blotting. For LC-MS/MS, 80 µl of the IP eluates were stacked on a gradient SDS-PAGE gel until the protein marker ladder started resolving. The eluate band was excised, cut into small pieces, washed, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin, peptides were extracted, vacuum dried, and resuspended in 11 µl of 2% formic acid. 10 µl of the peptide sample was run on the Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fischer Scientific) to perform HCD mode fragmentation and LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were acquired on the proteome discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Fischer Scientific), analyzed, and the predicted peptide sequences were searched against the Uniprot databases of P. falciparum 3D7 using the Sequest HT algorithm. The analysis criteria used were trypsin specificity, maximum two missed cleavages and some variable modifications (oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and deamidation of asparagine/glutamine).Other criteria were precursor tolerance of 5 ppm, fragmentation tolerance of 0.05 Da and 1% peptide FDR threshold. Proteins exclusively present in the test samples were considered genuine if reproducibly present in at least 2 of the 3 biological replicates with a minimum 1 unique peptide.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Ip-ms, Cullin2

### Affiliations
CSIR-Centre for cellular and molecular biology (CCMB)
CSIR-CCMB, Hyderabad, India

### Submitter
Zeba Rizvi

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Puran Singh Sijwali
CSIR-CCMB, Hyderabad, India


