### Accession
PXD020912

### Title
Citrus sinensis challenged with LotP

### Description
Infiltrating purified LotP protein in healthy citrus leaf induces chlorosis and provoke plant stress. Further proteomic analysis of the affected tissue using TMT11MS/MS revealed a significant abundance of plant proteins associated with stabilizing and processing mRNA transcripts and miRNAs. Interestingly, a subset of transcription factors directly connected to pathways coordinating the innate plant defense were also more abundant in the damage tissue two days post infiltration. Inhibiting the formation of LotP multimers via direct mutation of critical residues of the N terminal domain significantly decreases the chlorotic response in infiltrated leaf as well as the intensity of the associated proteome reaction.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were dissolved in protein buffer (8M Urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 0.1% SDS (w/v), 1% Triton-100 (w/v), 1 mM PMSF, 10 μg/ml leupeptin, 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2 and 3 (v/v)). For each sample, a total of 200 μg of protein were reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide, trypsin-digested (w/w for enzyme : sample = 1 : 100), and labeled according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Control samples with three different day points of Day 1, 2, and 3 were labeled with TMT tags 126, 127N and 127C, and the LotP samples were labeled with TMT tags 128N, 128C and 129N. The corresponding FLAG samples were labeled with 129C, 130N, and 130C. To increase the signal, mixed samples of LotP and FLAG were labeled with 131N and mixed samples of controls were labeled with 131C, which works as an internal standard. Therefore, all experiments were performed with at least biological duplicates in time-point per group. Labeled peptides were desalted with C18-solid phase extraction and dissolved in strong cation exchange (SCX) solvent A (25% (v/v) acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium formate, and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, pH 2.8). The peptides were fractionated using an Agilent HPLC 1260 with a polysulfoethyl A column (2.1 × 100 mm, 5 µm, 300 Å; PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 0–20% solvent B (25% (v/v) acetonitrile and 500 mM ammonium formate, pH 6.8) over 50 min followed by ramping up to 100% solvent B in 5 min. The absorbance at 280 nm was monitored and a total of 19 fractions were collected. The fractions were lyophilized, desalted, and resuspended in LC solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 99.9% water (v/v)). A hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap (Q Exactive Plus) MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used with high energy collision dissociation (HCD) in each MS and MS/MS cycle. The MS system was interfaced with an automated Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Each sample fraction was loaded onto an Acclaim Pepmap 100 pre-column (20 mm × 75 μm; 3 μm-C18) and separated on a PepMap RSLC analytical column (250 mm × 75 μm; 2 μm-C18) at a flow rate at 350 nl/min during a linear gradient from solvent A (0.1% formic acid (v/v)) to 30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid (v/v) and 99.9% acetonitrile (v/v)) for 95 min, to 98% solvent B for 15 min, and hold 98% solvent B for additional 30 min. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 400–2000 range with resolution 70,000 at 200 m/z. The top ten most intense peaks with charge state ≥ 2 were fragmented in the collision cell with a normalized collision energy of 28. The quadrupole isolation window was 0.7 m/z. The maximum ion injection time for both the survey scan and the MS/MS scan was 250 ms, respectively and the ion target values were set to 3e6 and 1e6, respectively. Selected sequenced ions were dynamically excluded for 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data files were processed by a thorough database searching approach considering biological modification and amino acid substitution against Uniprot Citrus database (downloaded on June 6th 2019; 196,268 entries) using the Proteome Discoverer v2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with the SEQUEST algorithm (Eng et al., 1994). The following parameters were used for all the searching: peptide tolerance at 10 ppm, tandem MS tolerance at ± 0.02 Da, peptide charges of 2+ to 5+, trypsin as the enzyme, allowing one missed cleavage, TMT label and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications, acetylation (n-terminus), 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (K), loss of methionine (n-terminus), oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modifications. For peptide confidence, we adopted the following cutoff values of Xcorr that are commonly used for the SEQUEST algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003): 2.31 for 2+, 2.41 for 3+, and 2.6 for 4+ and 5+ peptides. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer workflow based on the search results against a decoy database and was set at 1% FDR. For protein quantification, only MS/MS spectra that were unique to a particular protein and where the sum of the signal-to-noise ratios for all the peak pairs > 9 were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
'<i>Candidatus</i> Liberibacter asiaticus' is known as the most pathogenic organism associated with citrus greening disease. Since its publicized emergence in Florida in 2005, '<i>Ca</i>. L. asiaticus' remains unculturable. Currently, a limited number of potential disease effectors have been identified through <i>in silico</i> analysis. Therefore, these potential effectors remain poorly characterized and do not fully explain the complexity of symptoms observed in citrus trees infected with '<i>Ca</i>. L. asiaticus.' LotP has been identified as a potential effector and have been partially characterized. This protein retains structural homology to the substrate binding domain of the Lon protease. LotP interacts with chaperones like GroEL, Hsp40, DnaJ, and ClpX and may exercise its biological role through interactions with different proteins involved in proteostasis networks. Here, we evaluate the interactome of LotP-revealing a new protein-protein interaction target (Lon-serine protease) and its effect on citrus plant tissue integrity. We found that via protein-protein interactions, LotP can enhance Lon protease activity, increasing the degradation rate of its specific targets. Infiltration of purified LotP strained citrus plant tissue causing photoinhibition and chlorosis after several days. Proteomics analysis of LotP tissues recovering after the infiltration revealed a large abundance of plant proteins associated with the stabilization and processing of mRNA transcripts, a subset of important transcription factors; and pathways associated with innate plant defense were highly expressed. Furthermore, interactions and substrate binding module of LotP suggest potential interactions with plant proteins, most likely proteases.

### Keywords
Citrus, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Microbiology and Cell Science Department, Genetics Institute, Institute of Food and Agricultural Science, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States
University of Florida

### Submitter
Kaylie Padgett-Pagliai

### Lab Head
Dr Claudio Fabricio Gonzalez
Microbiology and Cell Science Department, Genetics Institute, Institute of Food and Agricultural Science, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States


