### Accession
PXD006134

### Title
Phagolysosomal proteomics identifies DHN-melanin-regulated processes in activated macrophage in response to Aspergillus fumigatus conidia

### Description
Infection by the human pathogenic fungus Aspergillus fumigatus is initialized by the outgrowth of asexual spores (conidia) into the lung tissue of the immunocompromised host following an inhalation of the airborne conidia. The resident phagocytes, the alveolar macrophages are the first immune cells to encounter invading conidia. However, A. fumigatus conidia employ versatile mechanisms to evade the host immune defense and establish a severe invasive infection. Previously, we showed that depending on the presence of conidial 1,8-dihydroxynaphthalene (DHN) melanin, A. fumigatus circumvents intracellular killing by manipulating the phagolysosomal maturation process. Here, by comparative dual proteomics we analyzed proteins of phagolysosomes containing melanized wild-type or non-melanized pksP mutant conidia. Bioinformatics compiled a regulatory module of differentially abundant proteins that mirrors processes targeted by the fungus for immune evasion. Those are i.e. vATPAse-driven phagolysosomal acidification, endocytic trafficking, signal transduction, energy metabolism and immune response. In detail, we found alterations of vATPase complex assembly and impaired abundances of mTOR and MAPK signaling molecules, Rab5 and Vamp8 mediators of endosomal trafficking as well as Lamp1 and cathepsin Z lysosomal markers.

### Sample Protocol
RAW 264.7 macrophage cells were cultivated overnight in 4-well plates and infected at an MOI = 5 with magnetically labeled A. fumigatus conidia. Co-incubation was stopped after 2 h, the cells were washed with PBS, scratched off and collected in homogenization buffer (3 mM imidazole, 250 mM sucrose, pH 7.4 and proteinase inhibitors (cOmplete, Roche) and benzonase nuclease (Merck Millipore)). Cell lysis was achieved by pressing the cell suspension 60 times through a needle (27G) with a syringe and monitored with light microscopy. To purify the phagolysosomal fraction the lysate was loaded onto the QuadroMACS separator (Miltenyi, Germany). Phagolysosomes with magnetically labeled conidia were retained on the stand by magnetic force and proteins were eluted directly from the column with 98 °C heated elution buffer (2 % SDS, 100 mM TEAB, 10 % glycerol, 1 mM TCEP). The eluted proteins were reduced to 100 µL volume and precipitated with methanol and chloroform. Each 100 µg of the precipitated proteins were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB buffer, reduced with 200 mM TCEP, alkylated with 375 mM iodoacetamide and digested with 4 µg trypsin (SERVA) over night at 37°C. Reaction was stopped with formic acid and the sample was resuspended in acetonitrile, TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were enriched on a  nano trap column (Acclaim Pep Map 100, 2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. Trapped peptides were separated after a valve switch  on Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano columns with 50 cm (M#2) length  (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase consisted of eluent A) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O and eluent B) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 ACN/H2O. We applied 360 min gradient elution using the following gradients: 0-4 min at 4% B, 90 min at 9% B, 130 min at 12.5% B, 180 min at 17% B, 200 min at 20% B, 220 min at 24% B, 250 min at 35% B, 260 min at 44% B, 265 min at 50% B, 270 min at 55% B, 275 min at 70% B, 280-290 min at 96% B, 291-360 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated with a stainless steel emitter at 2.2 kV spray voltage using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The  MS instrument was operated in Full MS / dd MS2 (TopN) mode. Precursor ions were measured in full scan mode within a mass range of m/z 300-1500 at a resolution of 140k FWHM using a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC (automatic gain control) target of 1e6. Up to 10 most abundant precursor ions per scan cycle with an assigned charge state of z = 2-6 were selected for data-dependent acquisition  using an isolation width of m/z 2.0. HCD Fragmentation was conducted  at a normalized collision energy of 30 V using N2. Dynamic exclusion of precursor ions was 40 s. Fragment ions were monitored at a resolution of 17.5k (FWHM) using a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC target of 2e5. The fixed first mass was set to m/z 120. The LC-MS/MS instrument was operated by Thermo/Dionex Chromeleon Xpress 6.8 and Thermo QExactive Plus Tune/ Xcalibur 3.0.63.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were processed by the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo). Tandem mass spectra were searched against monthly updated databases of Mus musculus (UniProt) and A. fumigatus (Aspergillus Genome Database, AspGD) using the algorithms of Mascot v2.4.1 (Matrix Science, UK), Sequest HT and MS Amanda. Two missed cleavages were allowed for tryptic peptides. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Dynamic modification was oxidation of Met. Static modification was Cys carbamidomethylation. Percolator node and a reverse decoy database was used for qvalue validation of the peptide spectral matches (PSMs) using a a strict target false discovery (FDR) rate of < 1%. At least 2 peptides per protein were required for positive protein hits. Label-free quantification was performed by two different methods: 1.) The Precursor Ions Area - Top3 method compares the 3 most abundant peptides of each protein by using the peak area of the respective precursor ion [27]. The mass tolerance was set to 2 ppm and the signal-to-noise ratio should be >3. For the 2.) OpenMS method a max. retention time difference of 0.33 min, a max. m/z difference of 10 ppm, a q-value threshold of 0.01 and a protein level false discovery rate of <0.05 was used. The abundance values were normalized based on the total peptide amount. Only unique peptides were considered for quantification. The significance threshold for differential protein regulation was set to factor ≥2.0 (up- or down-regulation).

### Publication Abstract
Invasive infections by the human pathogenic fungus <i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> start with the outgrowth of asexual, airborne spores (conidia) into the lung tissue of immunocompromised patients. The resident alveolar macrophages phagocytose conidia, which end up in phagolysosomes. However, <i>A. fumigatus</i> conidia resist phagocytic degradation to a certain degree. This is mainly attributable to the pigment 1,8-dihydroxynaphthalene (DHN) melanin located in the cell wall of conidia, which manipulates the phagolysosomal maturation and prevents their intracellular killing. To get insight in the underlying molecular mechanisms, we comparatively analyzed proteins of mouse macrophage phagolysosomes containing melanized wild-type (wt) or nonmelanized <i>pksP</i> mutant conidia. For this purpose, a protocol to isolate conidia-containing phagolysosomes was established and a reference protein map of phagolysosomes was generated. We identified 637 host and 22 <i>A. fumigatus</i> proteins that were differentially abundant in the phagolysosome. 472 of the host proteins were overrepresented in the <i>pksP</i> mutant and 165 in the wt conidia-containing phagolysosome. Eight of the fungal proteins were produced only in <i>pksP</i> mutant and 14 proteins in wt conidia-containing phagolysosomes. Bioinformatical analysis compiled a regulatory module, which indicates host processes affected by the fungus. These processes include vATPase-driven phagolysosomal acidification, Rab5 and Vamp8-dependent endocytic trafficking, signaling pathways, as well as recruitment of the Lamp1 phagolysosomal maturation marker and the lysosomal cysteine protease cathepsin Z. Western blotting and immunofluorescence analyses confirmed the proteome data and moreover showed differential abundance of the major metabolic regulator mTOR. Taken together, with the help of a protocol optimized to isolate <i>A. fumigatus</i> conidia-containing phagolysosomes and a potent bioinformatics algorithm, we were able to confirm <i>A. fumigatus</i> conidia-dependent modification of phagolysosomal processes that have been described before and beyond that, identify pathways that have not been implicated in <i>A. fumigatus</i> evasion strategy, yet.Mass spectrometry proteomics data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD005724 and PXD006134.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Dhn-melanin, Phagolysosome, Mycology, Proteomics, Aspergillus fumigatus, Host-pathogen interactions, Macrophage

### Affiliations
1) Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology – Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany 2) Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
1) Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology – Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany 2) Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany


