### Accession
PXD026858

### Title
Proteome analysis of the murine primary placenta

### Description
The placenta regulates maternal-fetal communication, and its defect leads to significant pregnancy complications. The maternal and embryonic circulations are primitively connected in early placentation, but the function of the placenta during this developmentally essential period is relatively unknown. We thus performed a comparative proteomic analysis of the placenta before and after primary placentation and found that the metabolism and transport of lipids were characteristically activated in this period. The placental fatty acid (FA) carriers in specific placental compartments were upregulated according to gestational age, and metabolomic analysis also showed that the placental transport of FAs increased in a time-dependent manner. Further analysis of two mutant mice models with embryonic lethality revealed that lipid-related signatures could reflect the functional state of the placenta. Our findings highlight the importance of the nutrient transport function of the primary placenta in the early gestational period and the role of lipids in embryonic development.

### Sample Protocol
Placenta tissues were washed with chilled phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysed in 100 L of lysis buffer consisting of 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.55, ThermoFisher Scientific) by sonication on ice. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. The protein concentration of the collected supernatants was determined by bicinchoninic acid protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Equal amounts of proteins (300 g) were processed with Strap-based tryptic digestion using according to previously published methods. Trypsin/LysC mixture (Promega) was used as digestive enzyme.  Peptide separation was performed using Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with reversed phase C18 columns (precolumn: Acclaim PepMap, 100 μm X 20 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å, separation column: Acclaim PepMap, 75 μm X 500 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) over 200 min (250 nl/min) using a 5 to 40% buffer (80% acetonitrile containing 5% dimethyl sulfoxide and 0.1% formic acid) at 50 °C. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer with a nano-ESI source. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan (m/z 350-1800) with 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. The ion target value for MS/MS was set to 100,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 400 with normalized collision energy (28%). Dynamic exclusion of repeated peptides was applied for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched using the SequestHT on Proteome discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the SwissProt database (Feb 2019). Briefly, precursor mass tolerance was set to ± 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.02 Da. The search parameters were set as default including cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal/lysine acetylation, N-terminal methionine loss and acetylation, methionine oxidation, phospho- serine, -threonine and -tyrosine as variable modifications with 2 miscleavages. False discovery rates (FDRs) were set for 1% for each analysis using “Percolator”. From the Sequest search output, Peptide filters which peptide confidence, peptide rank, score versus charge state and search engine rank were default value of proteome discoverer. And label free quantitation was performed using peak intensity for unique and razor peptide of each protein. Normalization was done using total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Placenta, Murine

### Affiliations
1 Department of Convergence Medicine, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea 2 Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea 3 Clinical Proteomics Core Laboratory, Convergence Medicine Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea 4 Bio-Medical Institute of Technology, Asan Medical Center, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea
prometabio co., ltd.

### Submitter
Jeonghun Yeom

### Lab Head
Dr Kyunggon Kim
1 Department of Convergence Medicine, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea 2 Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea 3 Clinical Proteomics Core Laboratory, Convergence Medicine Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea 4 Bio-Medical Institute of Technology, Asan Medical Center, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea


