### Accession
PXD027673

### Title
Global and mitochondrial proteomics under GSH depletion

### Description
Glutathione (GSH) is a tripeptide thiol abundantly present in all eukaryotes1. As the major site of oxidative metabolism, mitochondria must maintain sufficient levels of GSH in order to perform key protective and biosynthetic functions. GSH is exclusively synthesized in the cytosol, yet how it enters mitochondria and the molecular machinery involved in mitochondrial GSH import remain elusive. Here, using mass-spectrometry approaches, we identify SLC25A39, a mitochondrial membrane carrier of unknown function, to mediate GSH transport into mitochondria. SLC25A39 loss reduces mitochondrial GSH import and abundance, without impacting whole cell GSH levels.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were denatured in  urea with TEAB. Reduction and alkylation was carried out using DTT and IAA. Proteins were precipitated by Wessel/Flügge extractionand pellets were dissolved in TEAB with LysC  and incubated for 2-3 hours. Trypsin was added, and digestion proceeded overnight. Peptides were labeled with TMTpro and mixed according to a label-check. The pooled sample was fractionated using high pH reverse phase spin columns. Fractions were separated using an Easy-nLC 1200 HPLC equipped with a 250mm*75µm Easyspray column connected to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer operating in SPS-MS3 mode. Peptides from the mitochondrial-IP were separated across a 90-minute linear gradient and peptides from the whole-cell lysate were separated across a 120-minute linear gradient going from 7 to 33% B solvent at 300nL/minute.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched through Proteome Discoverer v.2.3 and spectra were queried against the human proteome (database downloaded from uniprot.org on 02/12/2019, containing 73662 sequences) using Sequest HT with a 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) applied. Oxidation of M was applied as a variable modification and carbamylation of C was applied as a static modification. A maximum isolation interference of 50% was allowed and 80% matching SPS ions were required. Subsequent statistical analysis was performed within the Perseus framework. All values were log2 transformed and normalized to the median intensity within each sample. An FDR-corrected t-test (q=0.05) was used to test for significance between sample groups

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Lc-ms/ms, Gsh, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Metabolic Regulation and Genetics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA
Research Support Specialist

### Submitter
Soren Heissel

### Lab Head
Dr Kivanc Birsoy
Laboratory of Metabolic Regulation and Genetics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA


