### Accession
PXD012553

### Title
Overexpression of the mycobacterial PknB Ser/Thr kinase uncovers its global regulatory role in mycolic acids biosynthesis and trafficking

### Description
Comparison of the global phospho-proteomes of Mycobacterium smegmatis wild type, and over-expressing the protein kinase PknB from Mycobacterium tuberculosis or its enzymatically inactive K40M isoform.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for label-free proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis. Flash-frozen cell pellets were resuspended in Urea lysis buffer (Urea 8M, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, Sodium Orthonovanadate 1 mM, supplemented with Complete Ultra tablets and PhosStop Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail tablets) and lysed with a cell disruptor (One Shot Model - Constant System Ltd., France) at 2.6 kbar. Non-lysed bacteria and cell debris were eliminated by centrifugation at 9000 x g. Protein concentrations of clarified lysates were quantified with Biorad DC Assay kit (Biorad). Equal amounts of lysate (3.1 mg) from each condition were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM Dithiothreitol DTT and 20 mM Iodoacetamide, respectively. Urea concentration was reduced to 1 mM by a 8-fold dilution with Ammonium Bicarbonate 50 mM. The samples were then incubated overnight at 37°C with Trypsin at a ratio 1:100 (w:w, trypsin:protein). After digestion, peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak columns (Waters; tC18 6cc 500 mg) following the provider instructions. Peptides were then dried down under vaccum and kept at -20°C. Phosphopeptide enrichment. Titansphere TiO2 beads (5 µm; GL Sciences 5020 75000) were pre-washed in TiO2 loading buffer: 80% acetonitrile, 5% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 1 M glycolic acid. Peptide pellets (500 µg per sample) were resuspended in TiO2 loading buffer (1 µg/µL), and incubated with conditioned TiO2 beads (6 mg of beads per mg of peptides) for 20 min under agitation at room temperature. Beads were then washed with washing buffer (60% acetonitrile 1% TFA) and loaded onto a home-made column (200 µL tip with an EMPORE C18 filter). Packed TiO2 beads were washed once with washing buffer and phospho-peptides were eluted twice with 1% NH4OH. Pooled eluates were acidified with TFA before being dried down under vacuum.  NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis. Peptides and phospho-peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a Q-ExactivePlus mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA spiked with iRT (Biognosis 1X). 25% of each sample were loaded onto a C18 precolumn (300 µm inner diameter x 5 mm, Dionex) at 20 µl/min in 5% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA. After 5 min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with the analytical C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 50 cm; in-house packed with Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid). The peptides were eluted using a 4% to 40% gradient of solvent B at 300 nl/min flow rate for 240 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software. Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 400-1600 m/z range with a resolution of 70,000. The 10 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation and resulting fragments were analyzed at a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification. Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1. Data were searched with the Andromeda search engine against M. smegmatis entries of the Swissprot protein database (strain ATCC 700084 / mc(2)155 Uniprot IDs UP000000757 and UP000006158 with 6,602 and 6,585 entries, respectively). The search included methionine oxidation, serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Validation was performed with a false discovery rate set to 1% at protein and peptide spectral match (PSM) level determined by target-decoy search in MaxQuant. Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after lysine or arginine, and up to 3 missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search. The mass tolerance in MS/MS mode was set to 20 ppm. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the “match between runs” option of MaxQuant was enabled to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs.  Statistical analysis. The quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis was performed using the statistical package R (R Development Core Team, 2012; http://www.R-project.org/) and R scripts related to the analysis can be found online (https://github.com/mlocardpaulet/PhosphoSmegPKNB). Phosphorylation site relative quantification was performed with the intensities from the mono-phosphorylated peptides of the “Phospho (STY)” tables of MaxQuant with a localisation score ≥ 75%. Intensities were first normalized for instrument variation using spiked-in standards. Protein entries identified as potential contaminants by MaxQuant were eliminated from the analysis, as well as PSMs with a PEP value ≤ 0.01. Log2-transformed values of technical repeats were averaged. Each phosphorylation site relative quantities across the conditions were normalized to its cognate protein relative quantities determined by its LFQ values in the proteome (peptides analysis before phospho-enrichment). Then, missing values of the phosphorylation sites with ≤ 1 data point across the 3 experiments were replaced for each condition (empty vector, PknB-K40M, PknB-WT) with the 1% quantile of the entire data set. In order to identify the PknB-dependent phosphorylation sites, we systematically performed two-sided unpaired Welch t-tests followed by Benjamini-Hochberg corrections of the p-value between the conditions. Phosphorylation sites were considered statistically significant when they presented a corrected p-value ≤ 0.05 and a minimum absolute log2-transformed fold change ≥ 1 (corresponds to a two-fold change) (see Table S1 for the results of the statistical analysis).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> is the causative agent of tuberculosis and remains one of the most widespread and deadliest bacterial pathogens in the world. A distinguishing feature of mycobacteria that sets them apart from other bacteria is the unique architecture of their cell wall, characterized by various species-specific lipids, most notably mycolic acids (MAs). Therefore, targeted inhibition of enzymes involved in MA biosynthesis, transport, and assembly has been extensively explored in drug discovery. Additionally, more recent evidence suggests that many enzymes in the MA biosynthesis pathway are regulated by kinase-mediated phosphorylation, thus opening additional drug-development opportunities. However, how phosphorylation regulates MA production remains unclear. Here, we used genetic strategies combined with lipidomics and phosphoproteomics approaches to investigate the role of protein phosphorylation in <i>Mycobacterium</i> The results of this analysis revealed that the Ser/Thr protein kinase PknB regulates the export of MAs and promotes the remodeling of the mycobacterial cell envelope. In particular, we identified the essential MmpL3 as a substrate negatively regulated by PknB. Taken together, our findings add to the understanding of how PknB activity affects the mycobacterial MA biosynthesis pathway and reveal the essential role of protein phosphorylation/dephosphorylation in governing lipid metabolism, paving the way for novel antimycobacterial strategies.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium smegmatis phosphoproteomics nanohlpc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
CNRS

### Submitter
Alexandre STELLA

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
CNRS


