### Accession
PXD029418

### Title
Inactivity of peptidase ClpP causes primary accumulation  of mitochondrial disaggregase ClpX with its interactors  at the nucleoid and RNA granule

### Description
Mitochondrial matrix peptidase ClpP inactivating mutations in human cause an autosomal recessive Perrault syndrome variant (PRLTS3), characterized by ovarian failure with early sensorineural deafness, often followed by general neurodegeneration. Mouse models showed that accumulations of (i) its main protein interactor, the substrate-selecting AAA+ ATPase ClpX, (ii) mitoribosomes, and (iii) mtDNA nucleoids are main cellular consequences of ClpP mutations. However, the sequence of these events and their validity in human remain unclear. Here, we studied global proteome profiles to define ClpP substrates among mitochondrial ClpX interactors, which accumulated consistently in ClpP-null mouse embryonal fibroblasts and brain. Validation work included novel ClpP-mutant patient fibroblast proteomics. ClpX co-accumulated in mitochondria with POLDIP2 as nucleoid component, LRPPRC as mitochondrial poly(A) mRNA granule element, GFM1 (in mouse also GRSF1) as tRNA processing factors. Only in mouse, accumulated ClpX, GFM1 and GRSF1 appeared in nuclear fractions. Mitoribosomal accumulation was minor. Consistent accumulations in murine and human fibroblasts also affected multimerizing factors not known as ClpX interactors, namely OAT, ASS1, ACADVL, STOM, PRDX3, PC, MUT, ALDH2, PMPCB, UQCRC2 and ACADSB, but the impact on downstream metabolites was marginal. Our data demonstrate the primary impact of ClpXP on the assembly of proteins with nucleic acids, and show nucleoid enlargement in human as key consequence.

### Sample Protocol
7 control subject cell lines and the two PRLTS3 patient cell lines (in triplicates) were cultured in T75 flasks, washed with PBS (Gibco), and lysed with trypsin (Gibco). The lysates were centrifuged and resuspended in 150 µl lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7,5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP40, 0,1 % Sodiumdeoxycholat, 1mM EDTA, and protease inhibitor). Protein content was determined using BCA assay (Life Technologies). 300 µg of each sample was precipitated according to the method of Wessel and Flügge (D. Wessel, Flügge U.I., Anal. Biochem., 1984) and the proteins resuspended in 8M urea, 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH8.5 for denaturation. Samples were loaded on molecular cut-off spin columns (Microcon 30 kDa, Merck Millipore) and subsequently reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin on the filters following the FASP protocol described by Wiśniewski et al. (Wiśniewski JR et al, Nat Methods. 2009) The obtained peptide mixtures were lyophilized, desalted on 50 mg SepPac C18 columns (Waters) and afterwards fractionated on self-made SCX stage tips (3 disks of cation extraction material, Empore, in 200 µl pipette tips). Peptides bound to the SCX material were stepwise eluted with five different concentrations of AcONH4 (20 mM, 50 mM, 100 mM, 250 mM and 500 mM), 0.1 % TFA, 15 % acetonitrile. Overall 65 samples (5 fractions for each of the 13 fibroblast culture samples) were further lyophilized, desalted on self-made C18 stage tips (2 layers of C18 disks, Empore) and after final lyophilization resuspended in 25 µl 0.1% formic acid (FA) and filtered through equlibrated 0.2 μm Millipore filters before MS measurement. Nanoflow liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (MS)/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 Nano HPLC system (Thermo Fischer). Peptides were first loaded on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap column (75 µm ID × 2 cm) and then separated on an Aurora UHPLC analytical column, 75 µm ID × 25 cm, 120 Å pore size, (Ionopticks). Columns were constantly heated at 40 °C. Subsequent separation was performed using a first gradient ranging from 5 to 22% acetonitrile in 0.1 % FA for 105 min followed by a second gradient ranging from 22 to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA for 10 min at an overall flow rate of 400 nl/min. Peptides were ionized via electrospray ionization. Measurements on the Orbitrap Fusion were carried out in a top speed data dependent mode using a cycle time of 3 s. Full scan (MS1) acquisition (scan range of 300 – 1500 m/z) was performed in the orbitrap at a defined resolution of 120,000 as well as with an automatic gain control (AGC) ion target value of 2e5 whereby dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. For fragmentation, precursors with a charge state of 2-7 and a minimum intensity of 5e3 were selected and isolated in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z. Subsequent fragment generation was achieved using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, collision energy: 30%). The MS2 AGC was adjusted to 1e4 and 35 ms were selected as the maximum injection time for the ion trap (with inject ions for all available parallelized time enabled).  Scanning of fragments was performed by applying the rapid scan rate.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 2.0.3.0). The search was based on the Uniprot human reference protein database downloaded in October 2021, containing 20371 entries.). Most default settings of MaxQuant were applied: PSM and protein FDR 1%; enzyme specificity trypsin/P; minimal peptide length: 7; variable modifications: methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation. For protein identification the minimal number of unique peptides was set to 2. The match between runs option was enabled. For label-free protein quantification, the MaxLFQ algorithm was used as part of the MaxQuant environment: (LFQ) minimum ratio count: 2; peptides for quantification: unique. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0). Proteins identified only by site, reverse hits or potential contaminants were removed. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Samples were grouped into two categories: control (7 samples) and PRLTS3 (3 samples patient 0006 plus 3 samples patient 58955) and then filtered for at least four valid values in each group. The replicate groups were compared via a two- sided, two-sample Student’s t test (S0 = 0, permutation-based FDR method with FDR = 0.05 and 250 randomizations).

### Publication Abstract
Biallelic pathogenic variants in <i>CLPP</i>, encoding mitochondrial matrix peptidase ClpP, cause a rare autosomal recessive condition, Perrault syndrome type 3 (PRLTS3). It is characterized by primary ovarian insufficiency and early sensorineural hearing loss, often associated with progressive neurological deficits. Mouse models showed that accumulations of (i) its main protein interactor, the substrate-selecting AAA+ ATPase ClpX, (ii) mitoribosomes, and (iii) mtDNA nucleoids are the main cellular consequences of ClpP absence. However, the sequence of these events and their validity in human remain unclear. Here, we studied global proteome profiles to define ClpP substrates among mitochondrial ClpX interactors, which accumulated consistently in ClpP-null mouse embryonal fibroblasts and brains. Validation work included novel ClpP-mutant patient fibroblast proteomics. ClpX co-accumulated in mitochondria with the nucleoid component POLDIP2, the mitochondrial poly(A) mRNA granule element LRPPRC, and tRNA processing factor GFM1 (in mouse, also GRSF1). Only in mouse did accumulated ClpX, GFM1, and GRSF1 appear in nuclear fractions. Mitoribosomal accumulation was minor. Consistent accumulations in murine and human fibroblasts also affected multimerizing factors not known as ClpX interactors, namely, OAT, ASS1, ACADVL, STOM, PRDX3, PC, MUT, ALDH2, PMPCB, UQCRC2, and ACADSB, but the impact on downstream metabolites was marginal. Our data demonstrate the primary impact of ClpXP on the assembly of proteins with nucleic acids and show nucleoid enlargement in human as a key consequence.

### Keywords
Lars2; twnk; eral1; clpb, Leukodystrophy; ataxia; parkinson’s disease; hars2

### Affiliations
TU Munich, Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Center for Protein Assemblies, Ernst-Otto-Fischer-Str. 8 85748 Garching
TU München

### Submitter
Nina Bach

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
TU Munich, Chair of Organic Chemistry II, Center for Protein Assemblies, Ernst-Otto-Fischer-Str. 8 85748 Garching


