### Accession
PXD010002

### Title
Structural dynamics of the E6AP/UBE3A-E6-p53 enzyme-substrate complex

### Description
Deregulation of the ubiquitin ligase E6AP is causally linked to the development of human disease, including cervical cancer. In complex with the E6 oncoprotein of human papillomaviruses, E6AP targets the tumor suppressor p53 for degradation, thereby contributing to carcinogenesis. Moreover, E6 acts as a potent activator of E6AP by a yet unknown mechanism. However, structural information explaining how the E6AP-E6-p53 enzyme-substrate complex is assembled, and how E6 stimulates E6AP, is largely missing. We therefore developed and applied different approaches in structural mass spectrometry to show that binding of E6 induces conformational rearrangements in E6AP, which result in the positioning of E6 and p53 in the immediate vicinity of the catalytic centre of E6AP. Our data provides structural and functional insights into the dynamics of the full-length E6AP-E6-p53 enzyme-substrate complex and reveals how E6 can both stimulate the ubiquitin ligase activity of E6AP and facilitate the transfer of ubiquitin from E6AP onto p53.

### Sample Protocol
Complexes were crosslinked and measured essentially as described in Leitner A. et al., 2014. In short, approximately 100 μg of E6AP were crosslinked by addition of H12/D12 DSS (Creative Molecules) at a ratio of 1.5 nmol / 1 µg protein for 30 min at 37°C shaking at 650 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf). In order to crosslink E6AP in complex, wild-type E6 or the E6_L50E mutant (and p53) were added in a molar ratio of 1:1(:1) and incubated on ice for 30 min prior to crosslinking under the same conditions. Proteins were crosslinked directly after purification without freezing. After quenching by addition of ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 50 mM, samples were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin. Digested peptides were separated from the solution and retained by a solid phase extraction system (SepPak, Waters), and then separated by size exclusion chromatography prior to liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to centroid mzXML files. Data were searched using xQuest in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink ions were applied. Error estimation was done via xProphet.  For xTract analysis data were converted to profile mzXML files. The chromatographic peaks of identified crosslinks between E6AP in the absence and presence of E6 or E6_L50E (n=3, each sample analyzed additionally as technical duplicate) were integrated and summed up over different peak groups (taking different charge states and different unique crosslinked peptides for one unique crosslinking site into account) for quantification by xTract. xTract standard settings were used.

### Publication Abstract
Deregulation of the ubiquitin ligase E6AP is causally linked to the development of human disease, including cervical cancer. In complex with the E6 oncoprotein of human papillomaviruses, E6AP targets the tumor suppressor p53 for degradation, thereby contributing to carcinogenesis. Moreover, E6 acts as a potent activator of E6AP by a yet unknown mechanism. However, structural information explaining how the E6AP-E6-p53 enzyme-substrate complex is assembled, and how E6 stimulates E6AP, is largely missing. Here, we develop and apply different crosslinking mass spectrometry-based approaches to study the E6AP-E6-p53 interplay. We show that binding of E6 induces conformational rearrangements in E6AP, thereby positioning E6 and p53 in the immediate vicinity of the catalytic center of E6AP. Our data provide structural and functional insights into the dynamics of the full-length E6AP-E6-p53 enzyme-substrate complex, demonstrating how E6 can stimulate the ubiquitin ligase activity of E6AP while facilitating ubiquitin transfer from E6AP onto p53.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Papillomavirus, Xl-ms, E6 oncoprotein, E6ap/ube3a, P53

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Universität Konstanz


