### Accession
PXD006360

### Title
A Fossil Protein Chimera; Difficulties in Discriminating Dinosaur Peptide Sequences From Modern Cross-Contamination

### Description
Proteome analyses of ostrich bone using Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Bone powder drilled, demineralised with 0.6 M hydrochloric acid and the acid-insoluble protein extracted with 6 M guanidine hydrochloride, reduced and alkylated (with dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide), and digested with trypsin. The tryptic digests were cleaned using C18 ziptips, dried down and resuspended with 10 µL 5% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Digested samples were analysed by LC–MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer (120 k resolution, Full Scan, Positive mode, normal mass range 350–1500). Peptides in the sample were separated on a 75 mm × 250 μm i.d. 1.7 μM Ethylene Bridged Hybrid (BEH) C18 analytical column (Waters, UK) using a gradient from 92% A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 8% B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 33% B in 44 min at a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. Peptides were automatically selected for fragmentation by data-dependent analysis; six MS/MS scans (Velos ion trap, product ion scans, rapid scan rate, Centroid data; scan event: 500 count minimum signal threshold, top six) were acquired per cycle, dynamic exclusion was employed, and one repeat scan (two MS/MS scans total) was acquired in a 30 s repeat duration with that precursor being excluded for the subsequent 30 s (activation: CID, 2+ default charge state, 2 m/z isolation width, 35 eV normalised collision energy, 0.25 Activation Q, 10.0 ms Activation time).

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectra obtained via LC–MS/MS were searched against the SwissProt database for matches to primary protein sequences using the Mascot search engine (v. 2.2.0.6; Matrix Science, London, UK). Each search included the fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine (+57.02 Da) and the variable modifications for asparagine and glutamine deamidation (+0.98 Da), serine and threonine phosphorylation (+79.99 Da), and oxidation of lysine, proline and methionine residues (all +15.99 Da) to account for PTMs and diagenetic alterations (the oxidation of lysine and proline being equivalent to hydroxylation commonly observed in collagen, the dominant protein in bone). Enzyme specificity was limited to trypsin (trypsin/P) with up to two missed cleavages allowed, mass tolerances were set at 5 ppm for the precursor ions and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions; all spectra were considered as having either 2+ or 3+ precursors and the peptide ion score cut off was set at 30 for more confident matches. Repeat searches were also carried out using Error Tolerant search parameters with only one missed cleavage and the carbamidomethyl fixed modifications, and oxidations of both lysine and arginine selected to ensure that collagen would be adequately matched.

### Publication Abstract
A decade ago, reports that organic-rich soft tissue survived from dinosaur fossils were apparently supported by proteomics-derived sequence information of exceptionally well-preserved bone. This initial claim to the sequencing of endogenous collagen peptides from an approximately 68 Myr <i>Tyrannosaurus rex</i> fossil was highly controversial, largely on the grounds of potential contamination from either bacterial biofilms or from laboratory practice. In a subsequent study, collagen peptide sequences from an approximately 78 Myr <i>Brachylophosaurus canadensis</i> fossil were reported that have remained largely unchallenged. However, the endogeneity of these sequences relies heavily on a single peptide sequence, apparently unique to both dinosaurs. Given the potential for cross-contamination from modern bone analysed by the same team, here we extract collagen from bone samples of three individuals of ostrich, <i>Struthio camelus</i> The resulting LC-MS/MS data were found to match all of the proposed sequences for both the original <i>Tyrannosaurus</i> and <i>Brachylophosaurus</i> studies. Regardless of the true nature of the dinosaur peptides, our finding highlights the difficulty of differentiating such sequences with confidence. Our results not only imply that cross-contamination cannot be ruled out, but that appropriate measures to test for endogeneity should be further evaluated.

### Keywords
Bone, Ostrich, Struthio

### Affiliations
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology
University of Mancheter

### Submitter
Michael Buckley

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Buckley
Manchester Institute of Biotechnology


