### Accession
PXD023458

### Title
TMT-based proteomics analysis of proteome changes in RNF114-/- mouse oocytes

### Description
The proteome changes were quantified in RNF114-/- mouse oocyte using TMT 6-plex by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Oocytes were harvested from the control and RNF114-/- mice. The proteins were reduced, and trypsin was digested, and labeled by TMT 6-plex labeling reagents.  The TMT 6-Plex labeled peptide mixtures were subjected to fractionation by high-pH reverse phase column using an XBridgeTM BEH130 C18 column (300μm×150mm, 1.7μm, Waters) with an M-class HPLC system (Waters), 30 fractions were collected and then dried with a SpeedVac concentrator.  All fractions were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using an LTQ Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated with a trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column, 3 μm, 100 Å; DIONEX) and an analytical column (75 μm × 25 cm, Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å; DIONEX). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode. A full survey scan was obtained for the m/z range of 350–1500, and the resolution of HCD MS/MS was 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the mouse protein sequences obtained from the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) database using MaxQuant software (1.6.2.10). FDR cut-offs were set to 0.01 for proteins, peptides and sites. Enzyme specificity was considered full cleavage by trypsin, and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was permitted. Carbamidomethyl (C) on cysteine fixed modifications, with TMT reagent adducts on lysine and peptide amino termini as fixed modifications for TMT data. Variable modifications included oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Proteomics, Tmt, Oocyte

### Affiliations
18351998967
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine. Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China

### Submitter
yao ping

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine. Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China


