### Accession
PXD012459

### Title
Carbo-loading in fungal lung pathogens: a quantitative analysis of CAZyme abundance and resulting glycan populations

### Description
Herein we i) identify Coccidioides spp.-specific CAZymes by bioinformatically comparing the CAZyme repertoire (CAZome) of Coccidioides spp. to other common fungal lung pathogens and a non-pathogenic close fungal relative,  ii) experimentally evaluate Coccidioides spp. CAZyme abundance in vivo and in vitro, and iii) identify Coccidioides genus-specific N-glycans by experimentally determining the N-glycan population (N-glycome) of Coccidioides-infected lung tissues using tandem mass spectrometry. As far as we are aware, this is the first use of mass spectrometry to compare the N-glycomes and CAZomes of different fungal genera during infection in human hosts.

### Sample Protocol
Methods were performed in accordance with the protocol published by Jensen, et. al. 2012,29 with little deviation. In brief, glycoproteins from processed LCM FFPE tissues were spotted onto ethanol-wetted Immun-Blot® PVDF membrane (BioRad Laboratories; Hercules CA) and stained with Direct Blue 71 (MilliporeMilliporeSigma; Burlington MA) to visualize proteins. After washing in 40% ethanol, 10% acetic acid, followed by water to remove acid, membranes were blocked in 1% (w/v) polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP40; MilliporeMilliporeSigma) in 50% (v/v)methanol.  Protein spots were excised with a clean disposable scalpel and put into individual wells of a flat-bottom polypropylene 96-well plate (Corning; Corning NY). N-glycans were released from the protein spots by adding 5ul of PNGase F (New England BioLabs, Ipswich MA), 10µl of water and incubating in a humidity chamber at 37°C overnight. The next day, the plate was sonicated in a water bath sonicator for 5 minutes prior to sample collection into microcentrifuge tubes. PVDF spots were washed twice with 20µl of water and washes were collected into the respective sample tube. Glycosylamines from the reducing terminus of PNGase F-released glycans were removed by the addition of 10µl of 100mM ammonium acetate (pH 5, MilliporeSigma) and incubation at RT for 1h. After drying samples in a SpeedVac concentrator at room temperature, free N-glycans were not reduced, but were desalted by using porous graphitic carbon (PGC) solid phase extraction (SPE) spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA), using a modification to the Jansen et. al. protocol. Prior to sample loading, PGC SPE were washed in one column volume of 1M NaOH (MilliporeSigma), HPLC-grade water (Honeywell, Morris Plains, NJ), 30% acetic acid (MilliporeSigma), HPLC-grade water, and then equilibrated in 50% acetonitrile (ACN, Honeywell) with 0.1% triflouroacetic acid (TFA, MilliporeSigma) and then 5% ACN with 0.1% TFA. Samples were loaded onto the PGC SPE, spun out and then reloaded onto the column twice, prior to washing with one column volume of HPLC-grade water and one volume of 5% ACN with 0.1% TFA. Glycans were eluted by adding 1 column volume of 50% ACN with 0.1% TFA. Eluted glycans were dried in a SpeedVac concentrator at 37°C and frozen at -80°C until mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Glycan LC-MS/MS. Dried glycan extracts from dot-blotted and deglycosylated LCM tissues were solubilized in 10mM NH4HCO3 and analyzed by capillary-flow liquid chromatography electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (capLC-ESI-MS/MS) using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Q-Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a Thermo Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system configured with the capillary flow module. The glycan mixture is loaded onto a Hypercarb Porous Graphite Carbon column (Thermo) and chromatography is performed using 10mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer in both the A solvent (98%water/2%acetonitrile) and B solvent (80% acetonitrile/20% water),starting at 10%B and jumping to 20%B in 5 minutes then a 20%B to 55%B gradient over 60 minutes at 4.8 ul /min.  The Q-Exactive mass spectrometer experiment was a positive mode data dependent set up with an MS1 survey scan from 380-2000 m/z at resolution 70,000 (at 200m/z), AGC target of 1e6, and maximum injection time (MaxIT) of 75ms, followed by HCD MS/MS scans at resolution 17,500 on the top 13 ions having a charge state of +2, +3, or +4, with an AGC target of 2e5, and max IT of 300ms . This is followed by a second positive mode data dependent series of an MS1 survey scan from 600 -1600 m/z at 70,000 resolution, triggering HCD MS/MS scans on the top 5 ions having a charge state of +1 or +2. The ions selected for MS/MS are placed on an exclusion list for 20 seconds.    Glycan identification. Glycan MS/MS spectra were analyzed using SimGlycan v.5.60 (Premier Biosoft; Palo Alto, CA). Search parameters were underivatized, free glycans in positive ion mode with H+ and Na+ adducts. A 1 Da ± 0.5 Da error tolerance was allowed. All glycosidic and cross-ring options were set to “yes”. Only precursor mass to charge ratios (m/z) which also had MS2 spectra were kept for analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Coccidioides spp. are important pneumonia-causing pathogens of the American southwest, but little is known about their glycobiology and how their glycosylations differ from other pneumonia-causing fungi. There is mounting preliminary evidence to suggest genus or even species-specific glycosylations in the fungal kingdom due to the presence of unique carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) in fungal genomes (Deshpande et al. 2008, Glycobiology, 18(8), 626-637; Karkowska-Kuleta and Kozik 2015, Acta Biochim Pol., 62(3), 339-351). If Coccidioides spp.-specific glycans can be identified, it may be possible to exploit these differences to develop more specific diagnostic approaches and more effective therapeutics. Herein, we i) mined Coccidioides spp. and other pathogenic fungal genomes to identify CAZymes specific for Coccidioides spp., ii) proteomically determined the Coccidioides spp. "CAZome" produced in vivo and in vitro, and iii) utilized glycomics to differentiate Coccidioides genus-specific N-glycans from other pathogenic fungi. As far as we are aware, this is the first proteomic and glycomic comparison of the N-glycomes and CAZomes of different fungal genera during infection in human hosts.

### Keywords
Valley fever, Glycomics, Proteomics, Cazymes, Glycans, Coccidioides

### Affiliations
ASU
PI/ PROFESSOR

### Submitter
Natalie Mitchell

### Lab Head
Dr DOUGLAS LAKE
PI/ PROFESSOR


