### Accession
PXD001618

### Title
Phosphatase POPX2 secretome SILAC

### Description
Cancer metastasis is a complex mechanism involving multiple processes. In an earlier study, we reported that the levels of serine/threonine phosphatase POPX2 were positively correlated with cancer cell motility through modulating MAPK signaling. Surprisingly, here we found that POPX2 knockdown cells induced more numerous and larger tumor nodules in lungs in longer term animal studies, suggesting that lower levels of POPX2 may favor tumor progression in later stages of metastasis. We hypothesize that POPX2 may do so by modulation of angiogenesis. Secretome analysis of POPX2-knockdown MDA-MB-231 cells using SILAC-mass spectrometry and cytokine array showed that silencing of POPX2 leads to increased secretion of exosomes, which may in turn induce multiple pro-angiogenic cytokines. This study, combined with our earlier findings, suggests that a single ubiquitously expressed phosphatase POPX2 influences cancer metastasis via modulating multiple biological processes including MAPK signaling and exosome-cytokine secretion.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture) and cell culture A custom RPMI1640 medium lacking arginine, lysine and methionine was purchased from Biowest (Maimi, FL, USA). 13C6-arginine (heavy) and 13C6-lysine (heavy) were purchased from Cambridge Isotopes Laboratories, Inc. (Andover, MA, USA). 12C6-arginine (light), 12C6- lysine (light) and 12C6-methionine (light) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Dialyzed fetal bovine serum was purchased from Invitrogen. The control and POPX2 knockdown (X2-shRNA1/2) MDA-MB-231 stable cells were described previously17. The control cells were cultured in RPMI1640 medium containing heavy arginine, heavy lysine and light methionine, along with 10 % (v/v) dialyzed fetal bovine serum and 100 U penicillin, 100 µg streptomycin per ml (Invitrogen, CA, USA). The X2-shRNA1 cells were maintained in RPMI1640 medium containing light arginine, light lysine and light methionine, along with 10 % (v/v) dialyzed fetal bovine serum and 100U penicillin, 100 µg streptomycin per ml (Invitrogen, CA, USA). All cells were grown in 37 oC humidified incubator supplemented with 5 % CO2. The cells used in the experiments were grown up to seven passages to ensure full incorporation of heavy and light amino acids.  Conditioned media collection and concentration When the cells were grown to 70 % confluence, all cells were washed with 1×PBS for four times and serum free RPMI 1640 medium once, and then exposed to serum free medium for 6 hrs to remove serum proteins. Cells are exposed to fresh serum free medium for another 24 hrs for collecting secretome. 24 hrs later, the conditioned media were collected (400 ml each), protease inhibitor was added to minimize protein degradation. Conditioned media were centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 10 min at 4 oC and filtered (0.22 µm pore size) to remove cell debris. The conditioned media were then concentrated to 200-300µl using 10 KDa 15 ml ultra filter (Millipore) with 4000 rpm at 4 oC. The concentrated conditioned media were collected into a sterile 1.5 ml tube and stored at -80 oC until use.  SDS-PAGE  Conditioned media were dissolved in 10 % SDS, along with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and phosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and dithiothreitol (Sigma). Protein concentration was determined by Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) protein assay. Equal amounts of protein (50 µg each) from heavy and light samples were mixed at a 1:1 ratio and stored at -80 oC for the following experiments. A total of 50 µg protein were run on 4-12 % NuPAGE gradient gel (Invitrogen). After SDS-PAGE, silver staining was adopted to visualize protein bands.  In-gel digestion The whole lane was cut into 10 fractions for in-gel digestion. The gel pieces were washed with the destaining solution several times until the color totally disappear, followed by dehydration with 100 % acetonitrile and vacuum dried. Subsequently, proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56 oC for 1 hr, followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min. Gel pieces were dehydrated again with 100 % acetonitrile and vacuum dried. In-gel digestion was carried out by trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 1:100 (m/m), and at 37 oC overnight. The supernatant was then transferred to a new 1.5 ml tube and the peptides were extracted with extraction buffer (50 % acetonitrile + 5 % acetic acid). Gel pieces were vortexed for 10 sec and sonicated for 30 min. The supernatant was collected into the same tube. The extraction steps were repeated several times for complete peptides extraction. Peptides were vacuum dried and stored at -80 oC until use.  Mass spectrometric analysis  Peptide samples were analyzed in an LTQ-FT Ultra mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) coupled to a Prominence HPLC unit (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) as described previously 18. Briefly, peptides were separated using a home-made capillary column (200 µm i.d. x 10 cm) packed with C18 AQ (5 µm particle size, 100Å pore size, Michrom BioResources, Auburn, CA), and ionized in an ADVANCE CaptiveSpray Source (Michrom BioResources) with an electrospray potential of 1.5 kV. Every MS1 scan was followed by MS2 scans of the 10 most intense precursors in a data-dependent manner.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data analysis The MS raw files were converted into mzXML format and mgf format using trans-proteome pipeline. Protein identification was performed using Mascot (version 2.2.07, Matrix Science, Boston, MA) against a concatenated target and reverse decoy version of non-redundant Uniprot protein database containing totally 40516 sequences (downloaded on 8 October 2010). Mascot search was limited to a maximum of two missed trypsin cleavages; #13C of 2; mass tolerance of 20 ppm for peptide precursors; and 0.8 Da mass tolerance for fragment ions. Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl at Cys residues, while variable modifications included oxidation at methionine residues, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine, heavy lysine and arginine. False discovery rate was controlled below 1 %. The extracted ion chromatograph (XIC) of the identified peptides was computed using a tolerance of 0.05 Th for peptide quantification. The ratio for SILAC pairs was calculated based on the area of XIC of each peptide. Ratios calculated from both replicate experiments were averaged in log scale, and error factors were calculated in log scale as well.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Popx2 silac secretome

### Affiliations
Westlake University
Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Tiannan Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Newman Sze
Nanyang Technological University


