### Accession
PXD046856

### Title
Identification of sulfhydryl-containing proteins and further evaluation of the selenium-tagged redox homeostasis-regulating proteins:Identification of sulfhydryl-containing proteins and further evaluation of the selenium-tagged redox homeostasis-regulating proteins:Identification of sulfhydryl-containing proteins and further evaluation of the selenium-tagged redox homeostasis-regulating proteins:Mass Spectrometry (MS)-based quantitative profiling of Se-probes-reactive proteins

### Description
We performed MS-based quantitative profiling of Se-probes-reactive proteins by ABPP using stable isotope reductive dimethylation method.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates (1mL, 2 mg/mL) were labeled with Se-probes (100 μM) or DMSO (control) and allowed to incubate at 25 °C for 1 hour. The proteomes were precipitated with 2.5 mL methanol/chloroform (v:v=4:1), washed two times with 1 mL of ice-cold MeOH and resuspended in 0.4% SDS/PBS. The resuspended samples were added with 200 μM Biotin-PEG3-azide, 1 mM CuSO4, 100 μM TBTA ligand, and 1 mM TCEP to react for 1 h. The proteomes were precipitated again with methanol/chloroform, resuspended in 1.2% SDS/PBS, diluted to 0.2% SDS/PBS and subjected to streptavidin enrichment for 3h with rotation. The beads were then washed with 1×5 mL of 0.2% SDS/PBS, 3×5 mL of PBS and 3×5 mL of water, and were denatured in 6 M urea/TEAB (100 mM), reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 30min and alkylated with 20 mM IAA at 35 °C for 30 min in dark. The redundant IAA in mixtures was quenched with isometric DTT at 37 °C for 30 min. To this bead-mixture was added certain amount of TEAB (100 mM) to dilute solution to 2M urea/TEAB and 4 μL of trypsin (Promega, 20 μg reconstituted in 40 μL of the TEAB buffer) and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. Then 4% of light or heavy formaldehyde was added to Se-probe or control proteomes, with simultaneous addition of 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride. The reaction was lasted for 1 h at room temperature and sequentially quenched by 1% ammonia and 5% formic acid. Finally, heavy and light labeled peptides were combined,concentrated by speed vacuum, and resuspended into 100μL of water. Then the samples were centrifuged (100,000g,10min, 4°C) and fractionated with a fast sequence workflow by dual reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC)39. The samples were dried under vacuum, combined into 10 fractions and reconstituted in 10 μL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water. Finally, all fractions were performed on LC-M/MS.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an EASY nLC 1200 system. The peptides were separated using an increasing gradient of aqueous acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase A was 0.1% FA in H2O, and mobile phase B was 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. The flow rate was 3 μL/min for loading and 0.3 μL/min for eluting. Labeled peptide samples were loaded onto an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, ES900) packed with 15 cm × 3 μm C18 resin. Under the positive-ion mode, full-scan mass spectra were acquired over the m/z range from 350 to 2000 using the Orbitrap mass analyzer with mass resolution of 70 000. MS/ MS fragmentation is performed in a data-dependent mode, in which the 20 most intense ions were selected from each full-scan mass spectrum for fragmentation by high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 using the Orbitrap analyzer. Other important parameters: isolation window, 1.6 m/z units; default charge, 2+; normalized collision energy, 28%; maximum IT, 50 ms; dynamic exclusion, 20.0 s.

### Publication Abstract
Chemoproteomic profiling of sulfhydryl-containing proteins has consistently been an attractive research hotspot. However, there remains a dearth of probes that are specifically designed for sulfhydryl-containing proteins, possessing sufficient reactivity, specificity, distinctive isotopic signature, as well as efficient labeling and evaluation capabilities for proteins implicated in the regulation of redox homeostasis. Here, the specific selenium-containing probes (Se-probes) in this work displayed high specificity and reactivity toward cysteine thiols on small molecules, peptides and purified proteins and showed very good competitive effect of proteins labeling in gel-ABPP. We identified more than 6000 candidate proteins. In TOP-ABPP, we investigated the peptide labeled by Se-probes, which revealed a distinct isotopic envelope pattern of selenium in both the primary and secondary mass spectra. This unique pattern can provide compelling evidence for identifying redox regulatory proteins and other target peptides. Furthermore, our examiation of post-translational modification (PTMs) of the cysteine site residues showed that oxidation PTMs was predominantly observed. We anticipate that Se-probes will enable broader and deeper proteome-wide profiling of sulfhydryl-containing proteins, provide an ideal tool for focusing on proteins that regulate redox homeostasis and advance the development of innovative selenium-based pharmaceuticals.

### Keywords
Abpp; npspyne; npssyne; dpdsyne

### Affiliations
Shandong Normal University

### Submitter
Zhongyao Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenzhen Chen
Shandong Normal University


