### Accession
PXD016059

### Title
A Redox Switch Regulates the Structure and Function of Anti-Apoptotic BFL-1

### Description
BCL-2 family proteins control cell fate by regulating the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Anti-apoptotic members suppress cell death by capturing pro-apoptotic α-helices in a surface groove, a mechanism hijacked by cancer cells to enforce cellular immortality. We previously identified and harnessed a unique cysteine (C55) in the canonical groove of anti-apoptotic BFL-1 to selectively neutralize its oncogenic activity using a covalent stapled-peptide inhibitor. Here, we find that disulfide bonding between a native cysteine pair at the interface between the groove (C55) and C-terminal α9 helix (C175) operates as a redox switch to control the accessibility and functionality of the anti-apoptotic pocket. Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry was used to characterize a construct of BFL-1 deleting the C-terminus and thus C175 (BFL-1ΔC C55), as well as full length BFL-1 (BFL-1 C55/C175) in both oxidation states.  Reducing the C55-C175 disulfide bond triggers a cascade of structure-function changes that includes release of α9 for membrane translocation, exposure of the groove for α-helical interaction, and resultant blockade of mitochondrial membrane permeabilization by pro-apoptotic BAX. Thus, we identify a unique mechanism of conformational control over anti-apoptotic activity by a redox switch in BFL-1.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling:  Prior to labeling, BFL-1ΔC C55 or BFL-1 C55/C175 (30 pmol; 2 μL) in the absence or presence of β-mercaptoethanol (BME, 100,000 pmol), was incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes.  Deuterium labeling was initiated with an 18-fold dilution (36 μL) into D2O buffer (10 mM HEPES, 200 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, pD 7.0) After 10 seconds or 10 minutes of labeling at room temperature, the labeling reaction was quenched with the addition of an equal volume (38 μL) of ice-cold quenching buffer [4 M guanidinium chloride, 200 mM potassium phosphate, 0.72 M TCEP, H2O, pH 2.34].  LC/MS:  Deuterated and control samples were digested online at 15 °C using an in-house packed pepsin column. The cooling chamber of the UPLC system, which housed all the chromatographic elements was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements. Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap (2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm (Waters, 186002346)) for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min.  Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 6 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 µm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column.  The back pressure averaged ~12,950 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water.  The error of determining the deuterium levels was ± 0.20 Da in this experimental setup.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution of [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the pepsin column during each analytical run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/ μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned 0.4 scans/second over the range 50 to 2000 m/z with ion mobility engaged.  The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.  All comparison experiments were done under identical experimental conditions such that deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange and are therefore reported as relative.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, RRID: SCR_016664, 720001408EN) using 5 replicates of undeuterated control samples.  Raw MS data were imported into DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered as follows: minimum consecutive products of 2; minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.5. Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all processing.  The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuteratered form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were used to generate uptake graphs and difference maps.

### Publication Abstract
Apoptosis is regulated by BCL-2 family proteins. Anti-apoptotic members suppress cell death by deploying a surface groove to capture the critical BH3 &#x3b1;-helix of pro-apoptotic members. Cancer cells hijack this mechanism by overexpressing anti-apoptotic BCL-2 family proteins to enforce cellular immortality. We previously identified and harnessed a unique cysteine (C55) in the groove of anti-apoptotic BFL-1 to selectively neutralize its oncogenic activity using a covalent stapled-peptide inhibitor. Here, we find that disulfide bonding between a native cysteine pair at the groove (C55) and C-terminal &#x3b1;9 helix (C175) of BFL-1 operates as a redox switch to control the accessibility of the anti-apoptotic pocket. Reducing the C55-C175 disulfide triggers &#x3b1;9 release, which promotes mitochondrial translocation, groove exposure for BH3 interaction and inhibition of mitochondrial permeabilization by pro-apoptotic BAX. C55-C175 disulfide formation in an oxidative cellular environment abrogates the ability of BFL-1 to bind BH3 domains. Thus, we identify a mechanism of conformational control of BFL-1 by an intramolecular redox switch.

### Keywords
Hdxms, Hydrogen deuterium exchange, Conformational change, Bcl-2 family, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


