### Accession
PXD029895

### Title
An ERAP2 inhibitor induces cell-surface presentation of many new and potentially antigenic peptides by cancer cells

### Description
Recent studies have linked the activity of ER aminopeptidase 2 (ERAP2) to increased efficacy of immune-checkpoint inhibitor cancer immunotherapy, suggesting that pharmacological inhibition of ERAP2 could have important therapeutic implications. To explore the effects of ERAP2 inhibition on the immunopeptidome of cancer cells we treated MOLT4 T lymphoblast leukaemia cells with a recently developed selective ERAP2 inhibitor, isolated Major Histocompatibility class I molecules (MHCI) and sequenced bound peptides by tandem liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Inhibitor treatment induced significant shifts on the immunopeptidome so as more than 20% of detected peptides were either novel or significantly upregulated. Most of the inhibitor-induced peptides were 9mers and had sequence motifs and predicted affinity consistent with being optimal ligands for at least one of the MHCI alleles carried by MOLT4 cells. Such inhibitor-induced peptides could serve as triggers for novel cytotoxic responses against cancer cells and synergize with the therapeutic effect of immune-checkpoint inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
For the isolation of the immunopeptidome, 5 × 108 cells per sample were used. Cells were lysed with 20 ml lysis buffer (Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA pH 8.0, 1 × complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablets) for 1 h at 4 °C. The cell lysate was cleared with ultracentrifugation at 100000 g for 1 h at 4 °C and then loaded onto a cyanogen bromide-activated Sepharose pre-column, blocked as described above. The flow through from the pre-column was passed through W6/32-coupled beads three times and then washed with 20 bed volumes 20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 20 bed volumes 20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 400 mM NaCl, 20 bed volumes 20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and finally with 40 bed volumes 20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0. The MHC-I–peptide complexes were eluted from the immunoaffinity column with 1% TFA. The peptides were separated from the MHC-I molecules using reversed-phase C18 disposable spin columns (Thermo Scientific). The fraction containing peptides was dried prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. C-MS/MS Analysis The purified peptidic samples were concentrated on a pepmap LC trapping column (Thermo, 0.3X5mm) at a rate of 5uL of Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in water) for 5min. Then the samples were injected onto a 50 cm long pepmap column (Thermo) placed in a oven set to 55C- using a gradient of 100% Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in water) to 27.5% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in acetonitrile) in 35 min followed by an increase to 40% buffer B in 2.5 min and a second increase to 99% Buffer B in 0.5min and then kept constant for 1min. Finally the column was equilibrated for 15 min prior to the subsequent injection. A full MS was acquired using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadropole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, in the scan range of 350-1500m/z using 60K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and max IT of 45ms, followed by MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions, using 15K resolving power with an AGC of 1x 105 and max IT of 22ms and an NCE of 28.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched and the identified peptides were quantified in MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0), using “unspecific” search against the human uniprot protein database (downloaded 19/9/2019). Search parameters included a molecular weight ranging from 350 to 5,000 Da, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, an MS/MS fragment tolerance of 0.5 Da and methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed cysteine modification. The protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. The match-between-run function was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies have linked the activity of ER aminopeptidase 2 (ERAP2) to increased efficacy of immune-checkpoint inhibitor cancer immunotherapy, suggesting that pharmacological inhibition of ERAP2 could have important therapeutic implications. To explore the effects of ERAP2 inhibition on the immunopeptidome of cancer cells, we treated MOLT-4 T lymphoblast leukemia cells with a recently developed selective ERAP2 inhibitor, isolated Major Histocompatibility class I molecules (MHCI), and sequenced bound peptides by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Inhibitor treatment induced significant shifts on the immunopeptidome so that more than 20% of detected peptides were either novel or significantly upregulated. Most of the inhibitor-induced peptides were 9mers and had sequence motifs and predicted affinity consistent with being optimal ligands for at least one of the MHCI alleles carried by MOLT-4 cells. Such inhibitor-induced peptides could serve as triggers for novel cytotoxic responses against cancer cells and synergize with the therapeutic effect of immune-checkpoint inhibitors.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Mhci, Erap2, Inhibitor, Molt4, Er aminopeptidase 2, Dg011a

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
1 National Centre for Scientific Research “Demokritos”, Agia Paraskevi, Attica, Greece 2 Department of Chemistry, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Stratos Stratikos
1 National Centre for Scientific Research “Demokritos”, Agia Paraskevi, Attica, Greece 2 Department of Chemistry, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece


