### Accession
PXD019134

### Title
Revealing the venomous secrets of the spider’s web

### Description
Orb-weaving spiders use a highly strong, sticky and elastic web to catch their prey. These web properties alone would be enough for the entrapment of prey; however, these spiders may be hiding venomous secrets in the web, which current research is revealing. Here, we provide strong proteotranscriptomic evidence for the presence of toxin/neurotoxin-like proteins, defensins and proteolytic enzymes on the web silk from Nephila clavipes spider. The results from quantitative-based transcriptomics and proteomic approaches showed that silk-producing glands produce an extensive repertoire of toxin/neurotoxin-like proteins, similar to those already reported in spider venoms. Meanwhile, the insect toxicity results demonstrated that these toxic components can be lethal and/or paralytic chemical weapons used for prey capture on the web; and the presence of fatty acids in the web may be responsible mechanism for open the way to the web-toxins for accessing the interior of prey's body, as showed here. Comparative phylogenomic-level evolutionary analyses revealed orthologous genes among two spider groups - Araneomorphae and Mygalomorphae; and the findings showed protein sequences similar to toxins found in the taxa Scorpiones and Hymenoptera in addition to Araneae. Overall, these data represent a valuable resource to further investigate other spider web toxin systems; these data also suggest that N. clavipes web is not a passive mechanical trap for prey capture, but it exerts an active role in prey paralysis/killing using a series of neurotoxins.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome preparation the biological replicates samples came from 5 female individuals. The silk glands were obtained by dissection and stored individually in separate vials in the presence of 10 mM ammonium acetate buffer pH 6.8. All samples were prepared in the presence of a 0.2% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma Fast™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets, EDTA-Free); and in the case of web silk, approximately 10 mg (dry weight) of fibers were incubated with 30% ACN at 25 °C for 2 hours under shaking. For this purpose it was used two different approaches, (i) shotgun proteomic approach using the Microcon YM-30 MW cut off membrane-filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method., and (ii) shotgun proteomic approach with in-solution digestion of the total sample without using cut off membrane-filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. The peptides generated from trypsin digestion were solubilized in 50% ACN/0.5% TFA solution and submitted to LCMS analyses. Peptides were analyzed using a single-shot LCMS approach with a 4-hr gradient using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany)and a Nano-Advance UHPLC system coupled to an Amazon ETD mass spectrometer (nanoLC-ESI-CID/ETD-MS/MS) equipped with a CaptiveSpray source (Bruker, Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
A protein database was generated from the cDNA sequences obtained from the transcriptomic analyses using RevTrans 2.061. All MS-MS2 spectra were matched to the generated protein database (34,826 sequences) appended with common contaminants using the Mascot 1.5.3.30 software via the Proteome Discoverer 2.3 platform (Thermo Scientific, USA). Search parameters were set as follows: two tryptic missed cleavage sites, and mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. The data were also matched to a decoy reverse database. Peptides and proteins identified with a 1% FDR were reported by implementing the Percolator algorithm. Proteins identified from a minimum of two peptides sequences were reported. In addition, MASCOT searches using MASCOT 2.2.06 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against publicly available spider protein sequences deposited in the NCBInr protein database (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi on 15/02/2017) were performed. For this purpose, we selected all 404,857 entries contained in the taxa Arachnida. For the proteins that were not identified within this database, searches were performed against proteins from the taxa Arthropoda, which contains 6,448,695 entries, and against proteins from the NCBInr database (that comprises all organisms), which contains 363,947,122 entries; moreover, searches were performed also against proteins from the taxa Squamata, which contains 771,552 entries. Search parameters were set as follows: taxonomy, enzyme selected as trypsin, 2 maximum missing cleavage sites allowed, peptide mass tolerance was 0.5 Da for the MS and 0.8 Da for the MS/MS spectra, carbamidomethyl (C) was specified as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation was specified in MASCOT as variable modifications. Afterwards, the identified proteins were subjected to additional filtering by Scaffold 4.3.2 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) to validate peptide identification. A false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was calculated by requiring significant matches to at least two different sequences. Considering the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm, the peptide probability identification was set to a minimum of 99%, while the protein probability identification was set at 95%.

### Publication Abstract
Orb-weaving spiders use a highly strong, sticky and elastic web to catch their prey. These web properties alone would be enough for the entrapment of prey; however, these spiders may be hiding venomous secrets in the web, which current research is revealing. Here, we provide strong proteotranscriptomic evidence for the presence of toxin/neurotoxin-like proteins, defensins, and proteolytic enzymes on the web silk from <i>Nephila clavipes</i> spider. The results from quantitative-based transcriptomic and proteomic approaches showed that silk-producing glands produce an extensive repertoire of toxin/neurotoxin-like proteins, similar to those already reported in spider venoms. Meanwhile, the insect toxicity results demonstrated that these toxic components can be lethal and/or paralytic chemical weapons used for prey capture on the web, and the presence of fatty acids in the web may be a responsible mechanism opening the way to the web toxins for accessing the interior of prey's body, as shown here. Comparative phylogenomic-level evolutionary analyses revealed orthologous genes among two spider groups, Araneomorphae and Mygalomorphae, and the findings showed protein sequences similar to toxins found in the taxa Scorpiones and Hymenoptera in addition to Araneae. Overall, these data represent a valuable resource to further investigate other spider web toxin systems and also suggest that <i>N. clavipes</i> web is not a passive mechanical trap for prey capture, but it exerts an active role in prey paralysis/killing using a series of neurotoxins.

### Keywords
Neurotoxins, Spider silk-producing glands, Web silk toxins, De novo transcriptome assembly, Lcms-based proteomics

### Affiliations
São Paulo State University - UNESP
Center of the Study of Social Insects, Department of General and Applied Biology, Institute of Biosciences of Rio Claro, University of São Paulo State (UNESP), Rio Claro, SP, 13500 Brazil.

### Submitter
José Roberto Aparecido dos Santos-Pinto

### Lab Head
Dr José Roberto Aparecido dos Santos-Pinto
Center of the Study of Social Insects, Department of General and Applied Biology, Institute of Biosciences of Rio Claro, University of São Paulo State (UNESP), Rio Claro, SP, 13500 Brazil.


