### Accession
PXD036161

### Title
High-throughput proteomics of the 26 medically most important elapids and vipers from sub-Saharan Africa

### Description
Venomous snakes are important parts of the ecosystem, and their behavior and evolution have been shaped by their surrounding environments over the eons. This is reflected in their venoms, which are typically highly adapted for their biological niche, including their diet and defense mechanisms for deterring predators. Sub-Saharan Africa is rich in venomous snake species, of which many are dangerous to humans due to the high toxicity of their venoms and their ability to effectively deliver large amounts of venom into their victims via their bite. In this study, the venoms of 26 of sub-Saharan Africa’s medically most relevant elapid and viper species were subjected to parallelized toxicovenomics analysis. The analysis included venom proteomics and enables a robust comparison of venom profiles between species. Moreover, two new venom proteomes (N. anchietae and E. leucogaster) are presented here for the first time.

### Sample Protocol
For each of the 26 snake venoms, lyophilized whole venom was dissolved in 1×PBS, then 5 µg was vacuum dried and resuspended in 20 µL of 6 M guanidinium hydrochloride containing 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM 2-Chloroacetamide, and 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5. After adding 40 µL of digestion buffer (10% acetonitrile, 50 mM HEPES pH8.5), samples were digested with LysC endopeptidase (1:50; w:w) for 3 h 30 min at 37 °C. Samples were further diluted with 140 µL of digestion buffer and mixed with trypsin (1:100; w:w). Trypsinized samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C, then diluted with 200 µL of 2% TFA to quench trypsin activity. Peptides were desalted on StageTip containing Empore C18 disks, eluted in 60 µL 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid (FA), dried in a vacuum centrifuge, and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 1% TFA and iRT peptides (Biognosys, Switzerland).  Mass spectrometry data was collected using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) coupled to a Thermo EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) system (ThermoFisher Scientific). 100 ng of peptides were loaded into a 2 cm C18 trap column (ThermoFisher, 164705) connected to a 15 cm reverse-phase analytical column (ThermoFisher Scientific, ES900). Peptides were separated for 70 min with a gradient going from 10% to 60% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) over 60 min, until spiking to 95% buffer B for the last 10 min to wash the column. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 70,000, with an AGC target of 3 × 106 or maximum injection time of 20 ms and a scan range of 300–1,750 m/z. The MS2 spectra were obtained at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target value of 1 × 106 or maximum injection time of 60 ms, a normalized collision energy of 25 and an intensity threshold of 1.7 × 104. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s, and ions with a charge state < 2 or unassigned were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Using proteome Discoverer 2.4, peptide fragmentation spectra (MS/MS) were searched against a database consisting of all Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL protein sequences from the serpentes suborder available in Uniprot (331,759 entries). The search was performed using the built-in Sequest HT algorithm which was configured to derive fully-tryptic peptides using default settings. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification and oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q) and acetyl on protein N-termini were set as dynamic modifications. Label-free quantitation was enabled in both processing and consensus steps, with quantitation being done using Minora Feature Detector. All results were filtered at 1% FDR and relative protein abundances were estimated by calculating the ratio of the of individual protein abundances to the sum of abundances of all proteins detected within a sample.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Snake venom, Venomics, Snakebite envenoming

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark

### Submitter
Carol O'Brien

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas H. Laustsen
Technical University of Denmark


