### Accession
PXD004941

### Title
Integrative analysis of proteome and ubiquitylome reveals unique features of protein ubiquitylation and mitochondria in gefitinib resistant non-small cell lung cancer cells

### Description
Even though gefitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, widely used in treating non-small cell lung cancer   (NSCLC) patients carrying EGFR activating mutations, most patients will develop gefitinib   resistance. Protein ubiquitylation is one of major posttranslational modifications affecting the   stability or function of the protein. However, the role of protein ubiquitylation in gefitinib resistance   is poorly understood. To systematically identify the global change in protein ubiquitylation during   gefitinib resistance, we carried out quantitative global proteome and ubiquitylome study by using   cells with stable isotopic labeling with amino acid in cell culture (SILAC) followed by affinity   enrichment of ubiquitylated peptides and subsequent liquid chromatography–tandem mass   spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Our study quantified  are differentially regulated in ubiquitylation between gefitinib resistant and sensitive cells. Among   them, 799 lysine sites were up-regulated in ubiquitylation in resistant cells, which are enriched in   pathways, such as SNARE interaction in vesicle transport, endocytosis, phagosome, and lysosome,   etc. In addition, we also found  cells. The proteins carry these sites are involved in pathways including metabolic pathways, gap   junction, and biosynthesis of amino acids, etc, This data indicate that gefitinib resistance   dramatically alters the landscape of ubiquitylation in the cells. Furthermore, by integrating the   genome-wide transcriptome data, we discovered that complexes I and IV in the electron transport   chain of the mitochondria are up-regulated, while complexes II and III are down-regulated in   resistant cells. Overall, these results reveal the unique features of ubiquitylation and mitochondria   during gefitinib resistance, which will help to a better understanding of the role(s) of ubiquitylation,   and to identify new therapeutic targets in overcoming gefitinib resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Human NSCLC cells, PC9/GR (gefitinib resistant) and PC9 (gefitinib sensitive), were grown to   80% confluence in high glucose (4.5 g/liter) Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (with glutamine   and sodium pyruvate) containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin at  with 95% air and 5% CO2. PC9/GR cells were labeled with “light isotopic lysine” (12C-Lysine), and   PC9 cells were labeled with “heavy isotopic lysine” (1 quantitation kit (Pierce, Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells were grown   in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (The “light” labeled PC9/GR cells were treated with  gefitinib ) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and either the “heavy” form of [U-1 L-lysine or “light” [U-12C6]- L-lysine for more than six generations before being harvested, to   achieve more than 97% labeling efficiency. After that, the cells were further expanded in SILAC   media to desired cell number (~5×10 8 ) in fifteen 150 cm 2 flasks. The cells were then harvested and   washed twice with ice-cold PBS. After snap freezing in liquid nitrogen, cell pellets were stored in   -80 °C freezer for future use.   Protein extraction   The harvested “heavy” and “light” labeled cells were sonicated three times on ice using a high   intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 5 mM DTT , 2 mM EDTA, 1.0 %   cocktail III). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min.   After concentration measurement, equal amounts of crude proteins in supernatant labeled “heavy” or   “light” were mixed and the crude proteins were precipitated by adding TCA with 15% final   concentration (v/v) (soluble fraction). After washing twice with -20 °C acetone, the proteins pellets   were dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO Trypsin digestion   Trypsin (Promega) was added into protein solution with ratio of trypsin to protein at 1:50 (w/w)   for digestion at  by incubation at 50 °C for  concentration of 15 mM followed by incubation at the room temperature in dark for  alkylation reaction was quenched by  another  digestion at  High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) fractionation   The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent    separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80   min into 80 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 8 fractions and dried by vacuum   centrifuging.   Affinity Enrichment   To enrich Kub (lysine (K) ubiquitylated) peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer   (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with   pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were   washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from   the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting   peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions,   followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Analysis   Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim   PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase   analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an   increase from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 26 min, 22% to  climbing to 80% in  nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive TM  Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).   The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by MS/MS in Q Exactive TM  Plus (Thermo)   coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000.   Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as  Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan   followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count   of 1.0E4 in the MS survey scan with  2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were   accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was  Database search   The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search   engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Swissprot_human (20,274 sequences)   database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme   allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to   10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was   specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, ubiquitylation on Lys and acetylation on   protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds   for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7.   All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability   was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients carrying EGFR activating mutations treated with gefitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, will develop drug resistance. Ubiquitylation is one of major posttranslational modifications of proteins affecting the stability or function of proteins. However, the role of protein ubiquitylation in gefitinib resistance is poorly understood. To systematically identify the global change in protein expression and ubiquitylation during gefitinib resistance, a quantitative global proteome and ubiquitylome study in a pair of gefitinib-resistant and sensitive NSCLC cells is carried out. Altogether, changes in expression of 3773 proteins are quantified, and changes in ubiquitylation of 2893 lysine sites in 1415 proteins are measured in both cells. Interestingly, lysosomal and endocytic pathways, which are involved in autophagy regulation, are enriched with upregulated proteins or ubiquitylated proteins in gefitinib-resistant cells. In addition, HMGA2 overexpression or ALOX5 knockdown suppresses gefitinib resistance in NSCLC cells by inhibiting autophagy. Overall, these results reveal the previously unknown global ubiquitylome and proteomic features associated with gefitinib resistance, uncover the opposing roles of HMGA2 or ALOX5 in regulating gefitinib resistance and autophagy, and will help to identify new therapeutic targets in overcoming gefitinib resistance.

### Keywords
Human, Lc_msms, Lung, Non-small cell lung cancer cells

### Affiliations
Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of 6 Medicine, 507 Zhengmin Road, Shanghai 200433, China
PTM biolab (Hangzhou)

### Submitter
zhu taotao

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang Fan
Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of 6 Medicine, 507 Zhengmin Road, Shanghai 200433, China


