### Accession
PXD021741

### Title
Consequences of fibroblast ablation in adult murine hearts

### Description
Fibroblasts produce the majority of collagen in the heart and are thought to regulate extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover. However, the in vivo role of fibroblasts in structuring the basal ECM network is poorly understood. To examine the effects of fibroblast loss on the microenvironment in the adult murine heart, we generated mice with reduced fibroblast numbers and evaluated the tissue microenvironment during homeostasis and after injury. We determined that a 60-80% reduction in fibroblasts numbers did not overtly change the fibrillar collagen network but did alter the distribution and abundance of type VI collagen, a microfibrillar collagen that forms an open network with the basement membrane. In fibroblast ablated mice, myocardial infarction did not result in ventricular wall rupture, and heart function was more effectively preserved during angiotensin II/phenylephrine (AngII/PE) induced fibrosis. Analysis of cardiomyocyte contractility demonstrated weaker contractions and slower calcium release and reuptake in uninjured and AngII/PE infused fibroblast ablated animals. Moreover, fibroblast ablated hearts have a similar gene expression prolife to hearts with exercise-induced and physiological hypertrophy after AngII/PE infusion. These results suggest that hearts are resilient to a significant degree of fibroblast loss and that fibroblasts can directly impact cardiomyocyte function. Furthermore, a reduction in fibroblasts may have cardioprotective effects heart after injury suggesting that manipulation of the number of fibroblasts may have therapeutic value.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates from decellularized heart tissue were cleaned using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA), and then reduced, alkylated, and trypsin-digested into peptides. The peptides were cleaned again using another Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and analyzed label-free by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). A 15 cm Å~ 75 μm C18 column (5 μm particles with 100 Å pore size) was used and the nano-UPLC ran at 300 nL/min with a 150 min linear acetonitrile gradient (from 5 to 35% B over 150 min; A = 0.2% formic acid in water; B = 0.2% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile). Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was set with an exclusion of 25 s, and the samples were run with high-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 30 and an isolation width of 2 m/z. The resolution setting was 70,000 for target values of the MS at 1e6 ions and in MS2 at resolution setting of 17,500 for 1x105 ions.

### Data Protocol
The identified peptides were quantified using spectral counting and total spectral counts of each sample were used for normalization, and a sample report was generated in Scaffold version 4.8.7 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR). Data (quantitative values of normalized total spectra) were analyzed by t-test. Mass spectrometry analyses were performed at the University of Mississippi Medical Center.

### Publication Abstract
Fibroblasts produce the majority of collagen in the heart and are thought to regulate extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover. Although fibrosis accompanies many cardiac pathologies and is generally deleterious, the role of fibroblasts in maintaining the basal ECM network and in fibrosis in vivo is poorly understood. We genetically ablated fibroblasts in mice to evaluate the impact on homeostasis of adult ECM and cardiac function after injury. Fibroblast-ablated mice demonstrated a substantive reduction in cardiac fibroblasts, but fibrillar collagen and the ECM proteome were not overtly altered when evaluated by quantitative mass spectrometry and N-terminomics. However, the distribution and quantity of collagen VI, microfibrillar collagen that forms an open network with the basement membrane, was reduced. In fibroblast-ablated mice, cardiac function was better preserved following angiotensin II/phenylephrine (AngII/PE)-induced fibrosis and myocardial infarction (MI). Analysis of cardiomyocyte function demonstrated altered sarcomere shortening and slowed calcium decline in both uninjured and AngII/PE-infused fibroblast-ablated mice. After MI, the residual resident fibroblasts responded to injury, albeit with reduced proliferation and numbers immediately after injury. These results indicate that the adult mouse heart tolerates a significant degree of fibroblast loss with a potentially beneficial impact on cardiac function after injury. The cardioprotective effect of controlled fibroblast reduction may have therapeutic value in heart disease.

### Keywords
Shotgun, Labelfree analysis, Fibroblast ablated, Murine

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic 
Suneel Apte lab,  Biomedical engineering department,  Learner research institute Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Sumit Bhutada

### Lab Head
Dr Suneel Apte
Suneel Apte lab,  Biomedical engineering department,  Learner research institute Cleveland Clinic


