### Accession
PXD013621

### Title
Global proteomic profile of antibiotic induced persistent Mycobacterial sapmles

### Description
Global protein alteration in Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37 RV ( Mtb-H37RV) of day 2 (control) and day 16 (persistent) samples (in duplicates) treated with antibiotics 8µg/ml of ciprofloxacin and 0.1 µg/ml of Isoniazid (to mimic persister stage) were accessed using 4 plex iTRAQ label.

### Sample Protocol
. Control i.e. Day 2 and persistent i.e. day 16 samples were lysed using bead beater and 50 µg of whole cell extract (WCE) samples were trypsin digested and labelled with 114(Set 1 Control) ,115(Set 1 persistent),116 (Set 2 Control)  and 117 (Set 2 persistent). Labelled peptides were pooled and fractionated on strong cation exchange cartridge by increasing the concentration of Ammonium Formate from 20mM to 500mM manually. Peptides were fractionated using 20 mM, 40 mM, 60 mM , 80 mM, 100 mM, 120 mM and 500 mM of Ammonium formate and 25% Acetonitrile. All the fractions were dried using speed Vac and reconstituted in 0.1% Formic acid Water. Flow-through of SCX was also dried and desalted using C18 cartridge. All the desalted samples were dried and reconstituted in 20 µl of 0.1% Formic acid water and 5 µl of samples were injected into Acclaim PepMap ( Thermo nano viper ) 75 µm X 250mm ,C18, 3 µm, 100 Å column. Fractions were resolved with water and Acetonitrile gradient and spectra was acquired on 5600 TF ( Sciex) in high resolution mode.

### Data Protocol
All the fraction data were pooled together and searched using Paragon algorithm with deamindated N& Q , Cabidomethyl C , oxided M and iTRAQ 4 plex against the Mtb Uniprot FASTA file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycobacterium, Persistance

### Affiliations
Professor
Translational health Science and Technology Institute, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, Haryana, India

### Submitter
Nisheeth Agarwal

### Lab Head
Dr Nisheeth Agarwal
Translational health Science and Technology Institute, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, Haryana, India


