### Accession
PXD020180

### Title
Ral GTPases promote metastasis by controlling biogenesis and organotropism of exosomes

### Description
Cancer extracellular vesicles (EVs) mainly exert pro-tumoral functions by changing the phenotypes of stromal cells to the benefit of tumor growth and metastasis. In particular, they shuttle to distant organs and seed pre-metastatic niches facilitating subsequent colonization by circulating tumor cells. The levels of tumor secreted EVs have been correlated to tumor aggressiveness, however, the link between EV secretion mechanisms, their capacity to form pre-metastatic niches and the actual formation of metastasis remains obscure. Here, we show that two GTPases RalA and RalB control, through the phospholipase PLD1, the homeostasis of multi-vesicular bodies and thereby tune the biogenesis and secretion of a subtype of (pro-metastatic) EVs. Mice experiments revealed that RalA and RalB promote lung metastasis of mammary carcinoma cells without affecting their invasive behaviors. Importantly, we show in vivo that EVs from RalA or RalB depleted cells have limited organotropic capacities and, as a consequence, are less efficient in priming lung metastasis. Furthermore, we show that such EVs lack the adhesion molecule MCAM/CD146, which is responsible for EVs organotropism. Finally, we show that RalA and RalB have increased expression in human breast cancer patients with lung metastasis. Altogether, our study identifies Ral GTPases as central molecules linking the mechanisms of EVs secretion, cargo loading to their capacity to disseminate and induce pre-metastatic niches.

### Sample Protocol
Stacking gel, trypsin digestion, NanoLC-MS/MS analyses of the tryptic peptides were performed on a nanoACQUITY Ultra-Performance_LC-system (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source

### Data Protocol
Maxquant Database: Homo Sapiens Treatement with Prostar (filters, imputation, Differential data analysis (Limma test)

### Publication Abstract
Cancer extracellular vesicles (EVs) shuttle at distance and fertilize pre-metastatic niches facilitating subsequent seeding by tumor cells. However, the link between EV secretion mechanisms and their capacity to form pre-metastatic niches remains obscure. Using mouse models, we show that GTPases of the Ral family control, through the phospholipase D1, multi-vesicular bodies homeostasis and tune the biogenesis and secretion of pro-metastatic EVs. Importantly, EVs from RalA or RalB depleted cells have limited organotropic capacities <i>in vivo</i>and are less efficient in promoting metastasis. RalA and RalB reduce the EV levels of the adhesion molecule MCAM/CD146, which favors EV-mediated metastasis by allowing EVs targeting to the lungs. Finally, RalA, RalB, and MCAM/CD146, are factors of poor prognosis in breast cancer patients. Altogether, our study identifies RalGTPases as central molecules linking the mechanisms of EVs secretion and cargo loading to their capacity to disseminate and induce pre-metastatic niches in a CD146-dependent manner.

### Keywords
Human, Nanolcmsms prostar maxquant, Extracellular vesicles, Ral

### Affiliations
CNRS
BioOrganic Mass Spectrometry laboratory (LSMBO) Institut Plurisciplinaire Hubert Curien University of Strasbourg. France

### Submitter
Francois Delalande

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah CIANFERANI
BioOrganic Mass Spectrometry laboratory (LSMBO) Institut Plurisciplinaire Hubert Curien University of Strasbourg. France


