### Accession
PXD005505

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis reveals potential virulence factors of Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae

### Description
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae is a small, facultatively aerobic, gram-positive bacterium that causes erysipelas in swine and a wide spectrum of diseases in other animals, as well as the skin disease erysipeloid in humans. Swine erysipelas caused by E. rhusiopathiae is the most prevalent and economically important of these diseases. In China, swine erysipelas has emerged at an alarming rate, developing from scattered occurrences on a small number of farms to systemic outbreaks since 2012 in many provinces, thereby inflicting large financial losses. Some virulence factors of E. rhusiopathiae have been identified. The capsule is considered essential for resistance to phagocytosis and bacterial virulence. Neuraminidase plays a crucial role in initiating adhesion to endothelial cells. Two surface-adhesion proteins (RspA and RspB) participate in the initiation of biofilm formation by binding to abiotic and biotic surfaces. SpaA is involved in the adhesion of E. rhusiopathiae to porcine endothelial cells. Nevertheless, very little is known about the pathogenesis of E. rhusiopathiae. This knowledge gap has become one of the most important obstacles to controlling infection. Thus, the identification of novel virulence factors is necessary to improve understanding of the pathogenesis of E. rhusiopathiae.Surface proteins of gram-positive bacteria play a critical role in virulence by modifying the environment surrounding the cell. Furthermore, for many bacteria, surface proteins are candidate antigens for subunit vaccines. The examination of bacterial surface-protein fractions, including cell wall-associated proteins (CWPs), is an effective method for identifying novel virulence factors. One proteomic approach involves isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) coupled to liquid chromatography (LC)-quadrupole mass spectrometry (MS/MS). This method has been widely used for the comparative quantitative analysis of bacterial proteomes. In this study, iTRAQ combined with LC-MS/MS was applied to compare differentially abundant CWPs of high- and low-virulence strains of E. rhusiopathiae. Proteins with higher abundance in the high-virulence strain were found to aid in predicting potential virulence factors to improve vaccines or disease-control strategies.

### Sample Protocol
　　　The CWPs of CY0160 and GW1020 were prepared as described previously, with minor modifications. Bacteria were grown in TSB (2 L) to the mid-exponential phase and harvested by centrifugation (3000 × g, 5 min, 4°C). The bacteria were washed twice with cold 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0) containing 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) and then lysed three times through a French pressure cell (Thermo, USA) at 20,000 lb/in2. Unlysed cells were removed by centrifugation (3000 × g, 30 min, 4°C). Crude cell wall-associated fractions were pelleted from the cleared lysate (45,000 × g, 1 h, 4°C), washed three times in Tris, and then incubated with mutanolysin (8000 U) and protease-inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Germany) at 37°C for 2 h. Following incubation, the mutanolysin extract was centrifuged (45,000 × g, 1 h, 4°C), and the proteins recovered in the supernatant fraction were concentrated by repeated ultrafiltration through a Millipore filter (3 kDa). Three biological replicates of CY0160 and GW1020 were processed using this method. Protein extracts were stored at -80°C until analysis. Protein concentrations were assayed by the Bradford method.  　　　Protein digestion was performed according to the FASP procedure. An eight-plex iTRAQ reagent was used to label the resulting peptide mixture according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). Briefly, 200 μg protein for each sample was added to 30 μL of STD buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT, and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 30 kDa). Then, 100 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer was added to block reduced cysteine residues, and the samples were incubated for 20 min in darkness. The filters were washed three times with 100 μL of UA buffer and then twice with 100 μL DS buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5). Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with trypsin buffer (2 μg trypsin in 40 μL DS buffer) overnight at 37°C, and the digested peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptide content was estimated by measuring the ultraviolet (UV)-light spectral density at 280 nm with an extinction coefficient of a 1.1 for a 0.1% (g/L) solution, as calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. 　　　For labeling, each iTRAQ reagent was dissolved in 70 μL of ethanol and added to the appropriate peptide mixture. Three biological replicates of the high-virulence strain CY0160 (C1, C2, and C3) were labeled with iTRAQ tags 116, 117, and 118, respectively, and three biological replicates of the low-virulence strain GW1020 (G1, G2, and G3) were labeled with tags 113, 114, and 115, respectively. The samples were then multiplexed and vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
　　　The peptide mixture was desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D.7 mm, volume 3 mL, Sigma) and then concentrated via vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 40 µL of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. MS experiments were executed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer connected to an Easy nLC autosampler (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). Ten microliters of the sample was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture (5 μg) was loaded onto the C18-reversed-phase column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column; 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated on a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min (controlled by IntelliFlow technology) over 240 min. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top-10 method that dynamically chose the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Determination of the target value was based on predictive automatic gain control (pAGC). The dynamic exclusion duration was 60 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and the resolution for the HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV, and the underfill ratio, which specified the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at the maximum fill time, was set at 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide-recognition mode enabled.　　　MS/MS spectra were searched using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA) against an Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae protein sequence database (Uniprot_Erysipelothrix_rhusiopathiae.fasta, 3394 sequences; downloaded on May 18, 2014). For protein identification, the following parameters were used: peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.1 Da, enzyme specificity set to trypsin with two missed cleavages, fixed modification of carbamidomethylation at Cys and iTRAQ 8plex at Lys and the N-terminus, variable modification of oxidation at Met, and false discovery rate (FDR) of peptides identification as set to be less than 0.01. Protein identification was supported by at least one unique peptide identification.        　　　The relative quantitative analysis of the proteins in the samples based on the ratios of iTRAQ reporter ions from all unique peptides representing each protein was performed using proteome Discoverer (version 1.4). The mean of all labeled samples was employed as a reference for calculating the iTARQ ratios of all reporter ions, and the ratio for each of the defined quantification rations for the protein group was calculated as the median of all PSMs belonging to the protein group. Then, the final ratio obtained from the relative protein quantification was normalized based on the median average protein quantification ratio. For statistical analysis, Student’s t-test was used to evaluate the significant differences in proteins abundance between CY0160 and GW1020. The fold change of proteins expression between the two compared experiment group, was calculated by the average value of three replicates from CY0160 group and GW1020 group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell wall proteins, Virulence factor, Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae, Comparative proteomics

### Affiliations
Huazhong agricultural university
College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China

### Submitter
Ya Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Meilin Jin
College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China


