### Accession
PXD042322

### Title
Immunoisolation of the trypanosome decapping enzyme ALPH1 delivers a potential subcomplex

### Description
Removal of mRNA 5’ caps primes transcripts for degradation and is central for regulating gene expression in eukaryotes. The canonical decapping enzyme DCP2 is stringently controlled by assembly into a dynamic multi-protein complex together with the 5´-3´exoribonuclease Xrn1. Kinetoplastida lack DCP2 orthologues but instead rely on the ApaH-like phosphatase ALPH1 for decapping. The enzyme is composed of a catalytic domain flanked by C-terminal and N-terminal extensions.  In our related deposition PXD038550 we analysed the ALPH1 interactome by BioID proximity labelling for the full length protein and truncated versions in order to assign domain specific interactions. We showed that Trypanosoma brucei ALPH1 acts in a complex composed of the trypanosome XRN1 ortholog XRNA and four proteins that are unique to Kinetoplastida. The interactome was validated by reverse experiments targeting T. brucei and T. cruzi XRNA by affinity capture and, additionally, the ALPH1 interacting CMGC-family kinase by BioID. Here we carried out affinity capture with T. brucei and T. cruzi ALPH1, which delivers a potential sub-complex missing the C-terminal interactor XRNA.

### Sample Protocol
(1)Cryomill affinity capture T. brucei ALPH1 : ALPH1 was expressed as C-terminal and N-terminal eYFP  fusion, respectively,  from the endogenous locus in procyclic T. brucei cells. Cells were harvested, subjected to cryomilling and affinity capture essentially as described previously (PMID: 30040867; PMID: 32221947). In brief, 2 litre cultures of PCF trypanosomes were harvested at 1500*g and washed once with serum free SDM-79. Cell pellets were processed by cryomilling at 77 K into a fine powder in a Cryomill (Retsch). Six smidgen spoons of cell powder were suspended in 6 ml ice-cold buffer A (20 mM HEPES pH7.4, 250 mM NaCl, 0.5% CHAPS, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail), sonicated with a microtip sonicator at ~20 W output for 5 x 1 second, transferred into six LoBind tubes and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation (20,000 g). The clear lysate was incubated with 3 μl GFP Trap magnetic Agarose (Chromotek) for 30 min on a rotator, then washed three times with buffer A. After pooling the 6 samples, captured protein was eluted by incubation in 30 μl 4 x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (ThermoFisher), supplemented with 2 mM DTT, at 72°C for 15 minutes and then run 1.5 cm into a NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4–12% gradient polyacrylamide gel (ThermoFisher). The respective gel region was sliced out and subjected to tryptic digest and reductive alkylation using standard procedures. Eluted proteins were analysed by LC-MSMS on an Ultimate3000 nano rapid separation LC system (Dionex) coupled to a Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 2) Cryomill affinity capture T. cruzi ALPH1: Cytoplasmic lysates from T. cruzi Dm28c expressing TcALPH1-GFP protein were generated after cell disruption through cavitation as (PMID: 19648909) with modifications. Logarithmically growing culture cells were harvested by centrifugation at 3.000g at RT, washed once with ice cold PBS, followed by resuspension in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 75 mM potassium acetate, 4 mM magnesium acetate, 2 mM DTT, supplemented with cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) to a concentration of 1 × 109 cells/ml. The resuspended cells were transferred into the Cell Disruption Vessel 4639 (Parr) and incubated at 4ºC under 70 bar pressure for 40 min, followed by rapid decompression. The lysates were centrifuged at 17,000g for 10 min to remove cellular debris.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed using the intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) in MaxQuant version 1.6.6 (PMID: 19029910; PMID: 24942700) searching the T. brucei brucei 927 annotated protein database (release 50) and the T. cruzi Dm28c2018 database (release 59) from TriTrypDB (PMID:19843604). False discovery rates (FDR) of 0.01 were calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number o hits against the reversed sequence database.  Sample layout:  (1) Affinity capture C-terminally tagged T. brucei ALPH1 (result file: pulldown_TbALPH1eYFP.txt.rar) (1.1) wt control (triplicate): (wt 1.raw, wt2.raw, wt3.raw) (1.2) ALPH1eYFP (triplicate): (Pulldown_ TbALPH1eYFP _1.raw, Pulldown_ TbALPH1eYFP _2.raw, Pulldown_ TbALPH1eYFP _3.raw)   (2) Affinity capture N-terminally tagged T. brucei ALPH1 (result file: pulldown_ eYFP TbALPH1.txt.rar) (2.1) wt control (triplicate): (wt 4.raw, wt5.raw, wt6.raw) (2.2) eYFPALPH1 (triplicate): (Pulldown_ eYFPTbALPH1 _1.raw, Pulldown_ eYFPTbALPH1_2.raw, Pulldown_ eYFP TbALPH1e _3.raw)  (3) Affinity capture C-terminally tagged T. brucei ALPH1 (3.1) GFP control: (Pulldown_Tc_GFPcontrol_1.raw, Pulldown_Tc_GFPcontrol_2.raw, Pulldown_Tc_GFPcontrol__3.raw) (3.2) TcALPH1GFP: (Pulldown_TcALPH1_1.raw, Pulldown_ TcALPH1_2.raw, Pulldown_ TcALPH1 _3.raw)

### Publication Abstract
Removal of the mRNA 5' cap primes transcripts for degradation and is central for regulating gene expression in eukaryotes. The canonical decapping enzyme Dcp2 is stringently controlled by assembly into a dynamic multi-protein complex together with the 5'-3'exoribonuclease Xrn1. Kinetoplastida lack Dcp2 orthologues but instead rely on the ApaH-like phosphatase ALPH1 for decapping. ALPH1 is composed of a catalytic domain flanked by C- and N-terminal extensions. We show that T. brucei ALPH1 is dimeric in vitro and functions within a complex composed of the trypanosome Xrn1 ortholog XRNA and four proteins unique to Kinetoplastida, including two RNA-binding proteins and a CMGC-family protein kinase. All ALPH1-associated proteins share a unique and dynamic localization to a structure at the posterior pole of the cell, anterior to the microtubule plus ends. XRNA affinity capture in T. cruzi recapitulates this interaction network. The ALPH1 N-terminus is not required for viability in culture, but essential for posterior pole localization. The C-terminus, in contrast, is required for localization to all RNA granule types, as well as for dimerization and interactions with XRNA and the CMGC kinase, suggesting possible regulatory mechanisms. Most significantly, the trypanosome decapping complex has a unique composition, differentiating the process from opisthokonts.

### Keywords
Apah-like phosphatase, Mrna decapping, Trypanosoma, Xrna, Alph1, Exoribonuclease, Mrna decay

### Affiliations
Head of Drug Discovery and Evaluation  Center for Research of Pathogenicity and Virulence of Parasites  Charles University in Prague, BIOCEV  Průmyslová 595  252 50 Vestec  Czech Republic
Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery
School of Life Sciences
University of Dundee
Dundee DD1 5EH

### Submitter
Martin Zoltner

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Zoltner
Head of Drug Discovery and Evaluation  Center for Research of Pathogenicity and Virulence of Parasites  Charles University in Prague, BIOCEV  Průmyslová 595  252 50 Vestec  Czech Republic


