### Accession
PXD008955

### Title
Protein quality control by MARCH6/TRC8

### Description
Forward genetic screens in human cells we find that the proteasome-mediated degradation of the soluble misfolded reporter, mCherry-CL1, involves two ER-resident E3 ligases, MARCH6 and TRC8. To identify a more physiological correlate we used quantitative mass spectrometry and found that TRC8 and MARCH6 depletion altered the turnover of the tail-anchored protein Heme-Oxygenase-1 (HO-1).

### Sample Protocol
SDC facilitated FASP based trypsin digestion followed by TMT 10-plex labelling and high pH revered phase fractionation.  Low pH nLC-MS was used for analysis of high pH fraction on an Orbitrap fusion using multinotch isolation of precursors for MS3 fragmentation and liberation of reporter ions.

### Data Protocol
RAw files were searched using MASCOT within Proteome Discoverer Version 1.4. Mascot percolator was used to control peptide FDR at 1%, this resulted in ~1% protein FDR as determined by inclusion of a decoy database. Reporter ion intensities were exported to Inferno RDN where intensities were loged (Quantile) normalised and "rolled up" to protein abundances. Protein abundaces were exported for replicated experiments were analysed using the LIMMA moderated t-test in R (a bioconductor package).

### Publication Abstract
Misfolded or damaged proteins are typically targeted for destruction by proteasome-mediated degradation, but the mammalian ubiquitin machinery involved is incompletely understood. Here, using forward genetic screens in human cells, we find that the proteasome-mediated degradation of the soluble misfolded reporter, mCherry-CL1, involves two ER-resident E3 ligases, MARCH6 and TRC8. mCherry-CL1 degradation is routed via the ER membrane and dependent on the hydrophobicity of the substrate, with complete stabilisation only observed in double knockout MARCH6/TRC8 cells. To identify a more physiological correlate, we used quantitative mass spectrometry and found that TRC8 and MARCH6 depletion altered the turnover of the tail-anchored protein heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). These E3 ligases associate with the intramembrane cleaving signal peptide peptidase (SPP) and facilitate the degradation of HO-1 following intramembrane proteolysis. Our results highlight how ER-resident ligases may target the same substrates, but work independently of each other, to optimise the protein quality control of selected soluble and tail-anchored proteins.

### Keywords
Erad, March6, Trc8, Protein quality control, Intramembrane proteolysis

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,  Department of Medicine,  University of Cambridge,  Cambridge,  CB2 0XY,  UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr James Nathan
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,  Department of Medicine,  University of Cambridge,  Cambridge,  CB2 0XY,  UK


