### Accession
PXD046749

### Title
Insights into PH1 disease mechanisms from the analyses of the structural stability and dynamics of AGT variants

### Description
Primary hyperoxaluria type I (PH1) is a genetic disease caused by a deficiency in the peroxisomal alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT) activity. Mutations in AGT mostly cause protein mistargeting and enhanced aggregation, although the molecular and structural basis of these mechanisms are unknown. In this work, we use hydrogen-deuterium exchange monitored by mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to provide novel insight into these pathogenic mechanisms. We characterize the wild-type (WT) protein, the LM variant (containing the mutations P11L and I340M, a haplotype more frequent in PH1 patients) and the LM G170R (the most common genotype in PH1, introducing the G170R mutation on the LM background). Our study provides the first experimental analysis of the local stability and dynamics of AGT, showing that stability is heterogeneous in the native state and providing a blueprint for frustrated regions with potentially functional relevance. The LM and LM G170R variants destabilize locally the structure. Enzymatic transamination of the PLP bound to AGT hardly affects stability. Our study thus supports that AGT misfolding is not caused by dramatic effects on the stability and dynamics of the holo-protein.

### Sample Protocol
To probe the dynamics of the AGT WT and its variants LM and LM G170R as PLP- or PMP-bound states, HDX-MS was monitored for 20, 60, 300, 1200 and 7200 s time intervals. Time points 20 and 1200 s were replicated, n = 3. The H/D reactions were prepared using a PAL DHR autosampler (CTC Analytics AG) controlled by Chronos software (AxelSemrau). Protein (5 µL of 10 µM solution) in 20 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.4, 200 mM NaCl under PLP or PMP conditions, respectively, was diluted 10× into D2O-based buffer (20 mM HEPES, pD 7.4/pHread 7.0, 200 mM NaCl). PLP was added at 10-molar excess compared to the concentration of protein. The exchange reaction was quenched using the addition of cold quench buffer (1 M glycine-HCl, pH 2.3) at the ratio 1:1 (V/V) after a time-defined interval. Samples were immediately injected into the LC system composed of the temperature-controlled box and Agilent Infinity II UPLC (Agilent Technologies) directly connected to an ESI source of timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics). To minimize the back-exchange the LC setup consisting of custom-made protease column packed by immobilized nepenthesin-2 matrix (bed volume 66 µL), trap column (SecurityGuard™ ULTRA Cartridge UHPLC Fully Porous Polar C18, 2.1mm ID, Phenomenex) and an analytical column (Luna Omega Polar C18, 1.6 µm, 100 Å, 1.0x100 mm, Phenomenex) was refrigerated to 0 °C. Proteins were digested and peptides desalted by 0.4% formic acid (FA) in water driven by the 1260 Infinity II Quaternary pump under the flow rate of 200 µL·min-1. To elute and separate desalted peptides, a water-acetonitrile (ACN) gradient (10 %–45 % in 6 min; solvent A: 0.1% FA in water, solvent B: 0.1% FA, 2% water in ACN) was delivered under the flow rate of 40 µL·min-1 by the 1290 Infinity II LC pump. The mass spectrometer operated in the MS mode with a 1Hz data acquisition. Fully deuterated controls used to compensate deuterium back-exchange were prepared for all variants manually (n = 3) using the same LC-setup under the off-line regime. Peptides were captured, dried and re-dissolved in D2O-based buffer, pD 7.4, enriched by 5 mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and incubated over night at 37 °C. Samples were then analyzed by the same setup as partially deuterated.

### Data Protocol
Acquired LC-MS data were peak picked and exported in DataAnalysis (v. 5.3, Bruker Daltonics) and further processed by the DeutEx software [38]. Data visualization was performed using MSTools (http://peterslab.org/MSTools/index.php) [39]. For peptide identification, the same LC-MS system was used but the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode with PASEF. The LC-MS/MS data were searched using MASCOT (v. 2.7, Matrix Science) against a custom-built database combining a common cRAP.fasta (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) and the sequences of AGT WT, LM, LM G170R, and the proteases. Search parameters were set as follows: no-enzyme, no modifications allowed, precursor tolerance 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.05 Da, decoy search enabled, FDR ˂ 1%, IonScore ˃ 20 and peptide length ˃ 5.

### Publication Abstract
Primary hyperoxaluria type I (PH1) is caused by deficient alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT) activity. PH1-causing mutations in AGT lead to protein mistargeting and aggregation. Here, we use hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX) to characterize the wild-type (WT), the LM (a polymorphism frequent in PH1 patients) and the LM G170R (the most common mutation in PH1) variants of AGT. We provide the first experimental analysis of AGT structural dynamics, showing that stability is heterogeneous in the native state and providing a blueprint for frustrated regions with potentially functional relevance. The LM and LM G170R variants only show local destabilization. Enzymatic transamination of the pyridoxal 5-phosphate cofactor bound to AGT hardly affects stability. Our study, thus, supports that AGT misfolding is not caused by dramatic effects on structural dynamics.

### Keywords
Protein stability; protein dynamics; functional sites; disease-causing variants; primary hyperoxaluria

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling,  Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Acad Sci, Prumyslova 595, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic
Institute of Biotechnology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, BioCeV, Prumyslova 595, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Pavla Vankova

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Man
Laboratory of Structural Biology and Cell Signaling,  Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Acad Sci, Prumyslova 595, 252 50 Vestec, Czech Republic


