### Accession
PXD006614

### Title
Missing proteins identified from the haploid cell lines: HAP1 and KBM-7

### Description
Chromosome-centric Human Proteomic Project (C-HPP) aims at identifying and characterizing protein products encoded from all protein-coding genes of human chromosomes. As evident in the recent nature papers, it is possible that those missing proteins may be low abundant in many cell types or expressed only in a few cell types. In order to identify missing proteins, we focused on extensively unexplored cell lines(HAP1, KBM-7).

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 20M HAP1 or KBM7 cell were collected. Cell pellet was lysed in HEPES buffer and SDS(sodium dodecyl sulphate) 30min at RT. Tryptic digestion used FASP methods. Tryptic peptides were fractionated 50 fraction. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed at Agilent1200 coupled to LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. MS analysis was performed data dependent acquisition mode top15 method, fragmentation method is collision induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
We used neXtProt database (release 01.23.17) and missing protein list (PE2-4) to identify missing proteins(PE2-4). Proteome Discoverer and MaxQuant were used to data-base search. Using SEQUEST and Andromeda algorithms. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragments: 10 p.p.m , 0.6 Da. Fully tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages. Modification : N-term acetylation (dynamic) cysteine carbamidomethylation (static) methionine oxidation (dynamic).Peptide validation : FDR and q-value were less than 1% FDR and PSMs q-value is greater than equal to 0.01 as a high confidence PSMs.P4569 = KBM7 (50 fractions in duplicates / total 100 raw files), P5242 = HAP1 (50 fractions in duplicates / total 100 raw files).

### Publication Abstract
Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project aims at identifying and characterizing protein products encoded from all human protein-coding genes. As of early 2017, 19&#xa0;837 protein-coding genes have been annotated in the neXtProt database including 2691 missing proteins that have never been identified by mass spectrometry. Missing proteins may be low abundant in many cell types or expressed only in a few cell types in human body such as sperms in testis. In this study, we performed expression proteomics of two near-haploid cell types such as HAP1 and KBM-7 to hunt for missing proteins. Proteomes from the two haploid cell lines were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos, producing a total of 200 raw mass spectrometry files. After applying 1% false discovery rates at both levels of peptide-spectrum matches and proteins, more than 10&#xa0;000 proteins were identified from HAP1 and KBM-7, resulting in the identification of nine missing proteins. Next, unmatched spectra were searched against protein databases translated in three frames from noncoding RNAs derived from RNA-Seq data, resulting in six novel protein-coding regions after careful manual inspection. This study demonstrates that expression proteomics coupled to proteogenomic analysis can be employed to identify many annotated and unannotated missing proteins.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Missing proteins, Hap1, Haploid cell line, Kbm-7

### Affiliations
Kyung Hee University
Department of Applied Chemistry, Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Korea

### Submitter
Jongkeon Song

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Sik Kim
Department of Applied Chemistry, Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Korea


