### Accession
PXD006413

### Title
AMPA-receptor specific biogenesis complexes control synaptic transmission and intellectual ability

### Description
AMPA-type glutamate receptors (AMPARs), key elements in excitatory neuro-transmission in the brain, are macromolecular complexes whose properties and cellular functions are determined by the co-assembled constituents of their proteome. Here we identify AMPAR complexes that transiently form in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and lack the core-subunits typical for AMPARs in the plasma membrane. Central components of these ER AMPARs are the proteome constituents FRRS1l (C9orf4) and CPT1c that specifically and cooperatively bind to the pore-forming GluA1-4 proteins of AMPARs. Bi-allelic mutations in the human FRRS1L gene are shown to cause severe intellectual disability with cognitive impairment, speech delay and epileptic activity. Virus-directed deletion or overexpression of FRRS1l strongly impact synaptic transmission in adult rat brain by decreasing or increasing the number of AMPARs in synapses and extra-synaptic sites. Our results provide insight into the early biogenesis of AMPARs and demonstrate its pronounced impact on synaptic transmission and brain function.

### Sample Protocol
Protein complexes were affinity purified from solubilized brain membranes, denatured and shortly run on SDS-PAGE gels and silver-stained. Lanes were cut into two sections (high and low MW) and digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany). Peptides were extracted, dissolved in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 µm particles; Thermo Scientific) with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (20 µl/min for 5 min), separated by reversed phase chromatography via a 10 cm C18 column (PicoTip™ Emitter, 75 µm, tip: 8 µm, New Objective, self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 ODS-3, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch HPLC; flow rate 300 nl/min) using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific), and eluted by an aequous organic gradient (eluent “A”: 0.5% acetic acid; eluent “B” 0.5% acetic acid in 80% acetonitrile; “A”/”B” gradient: 5 min 3% B, 60 min from 3% B to 30% B, 15 min from 30% B to 99% B, 5 min 99% B, 5 min from 99% B to 3% B, 15 min 3% B). Sensitive and high-resolution MS-analyses were done on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (both Thermo Scientific). Precursor signals (LC-MS) were acquired with a target value of 1,000,000 and a nominal resolution of 240,000 (FWHM) at m/z 400; scan range 370 to 1700 m/z). Up to ten data-dependent CID fragment ion spectra (isolation width 1.0 m/z with wideband activation) per scan cycle were allowed in the ion trap with a target value of 10,000 (maximum injection time 200 ms for complex mixtures and 400 ms for gel bands) with dynamic exclusion (exclusion duration 30 s; exclusion mass width ± 20 ppm), preview mode for FTMS master scans, charge state screening, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state rejection (unassigned charge states and for trypsin-digested samples also charge state 1) enabled.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were extracted using “msconvert.exe” (part of ProteoWizard; http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/, version 3.0.6906). Peak lists were searched against a modified UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (release 2017_01 for Figs. 1b, 2b and 8a, release 2015_09 or newer for remaining analyses; all rat, mouse and human entries as well as sp|P02769, sp|P00766 and sp|P00761, supplemented with the TrEMBL / NCBI entries tr|D3ZVQ3, tr|D4A4M0, tr|M0RB53, tr|D4A0X1 and XP_008765687.1 for missing AMPAR proteome constituents) using Mascot 2.6.0 (Matrix Science, UK). Initially preliminary searches with high peptide mass tolerance (± 50 ppm) were performed. After linear shift mass recalibration using in-house developed software, tolerance was reduced to ± 5 ppm for final searches. Fragment mass tolerance was set to ± 0.8 Da (ion trap MS/MS spectra). One missed trypsin cleavage and common variable modifications including S/T/Y phosphorylation were accepted for peptide identification. Significance threshold was set to p < 0.05. Proteins identified by only one specific MS/MS spectrum or representing exogenous contaminations such as keratins or immunoglobulins were eliminated. Label-free quantification of proteins was based on peak volumes (PVs = peptide m/z signal intensities integrated over time) of peptide features as described previously 30. Peptide feature extraction was done with MaxQuant (http://www.maxquant.org/ 48, version 1.4) with integrated effective mass calibration. Features were then aligned between different LC-MS/MS runs and assigned to peptides with retention time tolerance ± 1 min and mass tolerance: ± 1.5 ppm using an in-house developed software. The resulting peptide PV tables formed the basis for protein quantification. For details, please refer to the methods section of related publication.

### Publication Abstract
AMPA-type glutamate receptors (AMPARs), key elements in excitatory neurotransmission in the brain, are macromolecular complexes whose properties and cellular functions are determined by the co-assembled constituents of their proteome. Here we identify AMPAR complexes that transiently form in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and lack the core-subunits typical for AMPARs in the plasma membrane. Central components of these ER AMPARs are the proteome constituents FRRS1l (C9orf4) and CPT1c that specifically and cooperatively bind to the pore-forming GluA1-4 proteins of AMPARs. Bi-allelic mutations in the human FRRS1L gene are shown to cause severe intellectual disability with cognitive impairment, speech delay and epileptic activity. Virus-directed deletion or overexpression of FRRS1l strongly impact synaptic transmission in adult rat brain by decreasing or increasing the number of AMPARs in synapses and extra-synaptic sites. Our results provide insight into the early biogenesis of AMPARs and demonstrate its pronounced impact on synaptic transmission and brain function.

### Keywords
Excitatory synaptic transmission, Intellectual disability, Ampa-receptor biogenesis complexes, Proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Institute of Physiology II Universität Freiburg Germany
University of Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Alexander Haupt

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bernd Fakler
Institute of Physiology II Universität Freiburg Germany


