### Accession
PXD012771

### Title
Mild acid elution and MHC immunoaffinity chromatography reveal similar albeit not identical profiles of the HLA immunopeptidome

### Description
To understand and treat immunology-related diseases, a comprehensive, unbiased characterization of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) peptide ligands is of key importance. Preceding the analysis by mass spectrometry, MHC peptide ligands are typically isolated by MHC immunoaffinity chromatography (MHC-IAC). Less often, mild acid elution (MAE) is used to extract MHC class I peptide ligands. MAE may provide a cheap alternative to MHC-IAC for suspension cells, but it is thought to be hampered by the high number of contaminating peptides not derived from the MHC. Here, we optimized the MAE protocol yielding MHC peptide ligand purities of more than 80%. Subsequently, the qualitative and quantitative performance of MAE was benchmarked in direct comparisons to MHC-IAC. Peptides obtained by MAE and MHC-IAC were similar in numbers, identities and to a large extent intensities. A striking difference was the percentage of peptides containing cysteinylated cysteine residues, which was more than five times higher in MAE as compared to MHC-IAC. This benefitted the discovery of MHC allotype specific, distinct cysteinylation frequencies at individual positions of MHC peptide ligands. MAE revealed many MHC ligands with unmodified, N-terminal cysteine residues which get lost in MHC-IAC workflows. The results support the idea that MAE is particularly valuable for the high-confidence analysis of post-translational modifications by avoiding the exposure of the investigated peptides to enzymes and reactive molecules in the cell lysate. Our improved and carefully documented MAE workflow represents a high-quality, cost-effective alternative to MHC-IAC for suspension cells and should be applicable also in laboratories not specialized in MHC peptide ligand analyses.

### Sample Protocol
JY cells, THP-1 cells or a B lymphoblastoid cell line called LCL5 generated in the Rammensee laboratory by transfection of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells with the B95-8 strain of EBV were washed with PBS. MHC class I peptide ligands were isolated using either MAE or MHC-IAC, the latter employing the W6/32 antibody for MHC class I and a 1:1 mixture of L243 and Tü39 for MHC class II. Eluates were subjected to ultrafiltration. Further purification of MAE samples was performed with Oasis HLB columns (size 1 cm3, 30 mg sorbent; Waters) followed by a second desalting using C18-ZipTips (Merck Millipore). MHC-IAC samples were solely desalted on C18-ZipTips (Merck Millipore). Eluates were concentrated by vacuum-centrifugation. The volume of the concentrated samples was adjusted for LC-MS injections of 5 µl per run using 1% CH3CN / 0.05% TFA. Doing so, we ensured that each LC-MS run from JY cells corresponded to about 5 ∙ 107 cells.  We used an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a nano ultra high performance LC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray II, Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a 2 cm x 75 μm C18 trapping column (Acclaim PepMap100, Dionex) at 4 μL/min for 5.75 min. Peptides were then separated on a 25 cm x 50 µm column with C18 beads of 2 µm diameter (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Dionex) at 50 °C using a flow rate of 175 nl/min and a 90 min gradient ranging from 2.4% to 32% CH3CN in 0.1% HCOOH. One LC-MS run (150604_ThSt_C12_W6_Probe7_0komma5%_Rep2_50cm195min3s_msms31.raw) was exceptionally not performed with the 25 cm C18 column but with a 50 cm C18 column otherwise identical (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Dionex). For the 50 cm column, the gradient duration was 140 min, while the other settings were the same as for the 25 cm column. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 Th, and the “lock mass” option was enabled using the 445.120025 ion for real time internal calibrations. For all samples derived from MAE or MHC-IAC with W6/32 antibody, the measured MS1 m/z range was 310 Th - 650 Th (LCL5 cells) or 400 Th - 650 Th (JY and THP-1 cells), and only 2+ and 3+ charged precursors were allowed for fragmentation. For MHC-IAC with L243/Tü39 antibody, MS1 spectra were acquired between 300 Th and 1500 Th, and all precursors with ≥2 positive charges were eligible for fragmentation. The five most abundant precursors from every MS1 scan were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) using an isolation width of 2 Th, and they were then dynamically excluded from repeated fragmentation for 3 s. We applied a normalized collision energy of 35% and an activation time of 30 ms for CID, and we recorded MS2 spectra in the linear trap quadrupole. Automatic Gain Control targets were 500,000 ions to be reached in maximal 500 ms for MS1 and 10,000 ions to be reached in maximal 200 ms for MS2.

### Data Protocol
MS data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 from Thermo Fisher utilizing Mascot version 2.2.4 from Matrix Science as a search engine. For these database searches, the allowed MS1 mass error was usually 5 ppm, but for some experiments, it had to be homogenously increased to up to 15 ppm due to the occasional loss of the lock mass at specific retention times. For MS2 spectra, 0.5 Da mass error was accepted. Oxidation of methionine and cysteinylation of cysteine were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered in database searches regarding peptide extractions applying iodoacetamide, i.e. for all MAEs. The target protein database consisted of the human Swiss-Prot database (release 27 September 2013; 20,279 proteins; www.uniprot.org) supplemented with contaminant protein sequences. Our peptide spectral match false discovery rate (PSM FDR) cut-off of ≤5% was calculated by Percolator using the reversed target protein sequences as a decoy database. Only peptides of 8 to 12 amino acids in length were allowed. Additionally, we filtered obtained peptides to be identified with search engine rank 1 and to have a Mascot ion score ≥20. For the Euler diagrams as well as for the bar charts of MHC allotype distributions, peptides differing only in the modification status of methionine or cysteine were considered as equal. MS1 intensities were derived from MS1 area calculations of Proteome Discoverer 1.4.

### Publication Abstract
To understand and treat immunology-related diseases, a comprehensive, unbiased characterization of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) peptide ligands is of key importance. Preceding the analysis by mass spectrometry, MHC class I peptide ligands are typically isolated by MHC immunoaffinity chromatography (MHC-IAC) and less often by mild acid elution (MAE). MAE may provide a cheap alternative to MHC-IAC for suspension cells but has been hampered by the high number of contaminating, MHC-unrelated peptides. Here, we optimized MAE, yielding MHC peptide ligand purities of more than 80%. When compared with MHC-IAC, obtained peptides were similar in numbers, identities, and to a large extent intensities, while the percentage of cysteinylated peptides was 5 times higher in MAE. The latter benefitted the discovery of MHC-allotype-specific, distinct cysteinylation frequencies at individual positions of MHC peptide ligands. MAE revealed many MHC ligands with unmodified, N-terminal cysteine residues which get lost in MHC-IAC workflows. The results support the idea that MAE might be particularly valuable for the high-confidence analysis of post-translational modifications by avoiding the exposure of the investigated peptides to enzymes and reactive molecules in the cell lysate. Our improved and carefully documented MAE workflow represents a high-quality, cost-effective alternative to MHC-IAC for suspension cells.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Cysteinylation, Mild acid elution, Mhc bound peptides, Hla ligandome, Mhc immunoaffinity chromatography, Cid

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, Institute for Cell Biology, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany
Utrecht University,
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics,
Padualaan 8, 
3584 CH, Utrecht

### Submitter
Theo Sturm

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Georg Rammensee
Department of Immunology, Institute for Cell Biology, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany


