### Accession
PXD010680

### Title
Tumor heterogeneity underlies differential cisplatin sensitivity in mouse models of small cell lung cancer

### Description
SCLC is the most aggressive subtype of lung cancer characterized by a remarkable response to chemotherapy followed by development of resistance. Mechanisms of initial sensitivity and of subsequent resistance are not understood. Here we highlight a broad tumor heterogeneity in mouse models of SCLC, which includes a CDH1 high primary cisplatin-resistant peripheral neuroendocrine lesion with unique metabolic and structural profile. Cisplatin treatment preferentially eliminates CDH1 negative secondary tumor leaving behind CDH1 high primary lesions, thus revealing a striking differential response.  We profile global protein and messenger RNA levels in vehicle and cisplatin treated lung tumor populations and find a marked reduction in proliferation and a pronounced metabolic shift following cisplatin-treatment. Our proteo-transcriptomic analysis gives insight into gene expression alterations that characterize cisplatin resistance and uncovers potential novel targets to overcome resistance of distinct populations. SCLC tumors in the mouse show heterogeneity which appears, as might be the case in humans, to be one of the underlying mechanisms of differential sensitivity to cisplatin.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and digestion EAF-fixed sections of mouse lung were deparaffinized using Neo-clear® (3 times 5 minutes) and rehydrated by subsequent 3-minute incubations in 100%, 80% (v/v), and 70% (v/v) ethanol and finally water. Subsequently, tumor areas were scraped from the slide using a needle, according to a demarcated HE-stained reference slide. Scraped tumor tissues was lysed in Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0), vortexed, sonicated and, after the addition of 2 % (w/v) SDS, heat-incubated for 90 min while shaking (1400 rpm). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation for 20 minutes at 16.000 x g, and resulting clear lysate was supplemented with 4X LDS sample buffer and DTT for subsequent SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Protein lysates were separated on precast 4-12% gradient gels using the NuPAGE SDS-PAGE system (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Following electrophoresis, gels were fixed in 50% ethanol/3% phosphoric acid solution and stained with Coomassie R-250. Subsequently, gel lanes were cut into 5 bands and each band was cut into ~1 mm3 cubes. The gel cubes from one band were transferred into an eppendorf tube, reduced and alkylated dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, respectively and incubated with trypsin o/n. The peptides from each gel band were extracted in 5% TFA/50%ACN and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua in 0.05% formic acid. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% gradient (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 60 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot Mus musculus reference proteome FASTA file (release Aug 2017, 25052 entries, canonical and isoforms) using MaxQuant 1.5.4.1. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected.  Label free quantitation Proteins were quantified by spectral counting, i.e. the number of identified MS/MS spectra for a given protein. Raw counts were normalized on the sum of spectral counts for all identified proteins in a particular sample, relative to the average sample sum determined with all samples. To find statistically significant differences in normalized counts between sample groups, we applied the beta-binomial test, which takes into account within-sample and between-sample variation using an alpha level of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Small-cell lung cancer is the most aggressive type of lung cancer, characterized by a remarkable response to chemotherapy followed by development of resistance. Here, we describe SCLC subtypes in Mycl- and Nfib-driven GEMM that include CDH1-high peripheral primary tumor lesions and CDH1-negative,&#xa0;aggressive intrapulmonary metastases. Cisplatin treatment preferentially eliminates the latter, thus revealing a striking differential response. Using a combined transcriptomic and proteomic approach, we find a marked reduction in proliferation and metabolic rewiring following cisplatin treatment and present evidence for a distinctive metabolic and structural profile defining intrinsically resistant populations. This offers perspectives for effective combination therapies that might also hold promise for treating human SCLC, given the very similar response of both mouse and human SCLC to cisplatin.

### Keywords
Sclc, Tumor, Label-free, Small-cell lung cancer, Cisplatin

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


