### Accession
PXD022947

### Title
The E2F4/p130 repressor complex cooperates with oncogenic Np73 to promote cell survival

### Description
Tumor suppressor p53 and its related proteins, p63 and p73, can be synthesized as multiple isoforms lacking part of the N- or C-terminal regions. Specifically, high expression of the Np73 isoform is notoriously associated with poor prognosis in cancer. Here, we have performed proteomics analysis of Np73 using as a cellular model human papillomavirus type 38-transformed keratinocytes (38HK) that express high levels of this isoform. We find that Np73 associates with the E2F4/p130 repressor complex through a direct interaction with E2F4. Remarkably, this interaction is favored by the N-terminal truncation of p73 characteristic of Np73 isoforms and is independent of the C-terminal splicing status. We show that the Np73-E2F4/p130 complex is recruited to the promoters of specific genes, thereby enforcing inhibition of their expression both in 38HK and in cancer-derived cell lines. Consistently, silencing of E2F4 in 38HK and in cancer cells resulted in induction of senescence. In conclusion, we have identified and characterized a novel transcriptional regulatory complex that exerts pro-proliferative functions in transformed cells

### Sample Protocol
38HK (about 2x108 total cells) stably expressing Np73-TAP or TAP tag alone (negative control) were resuspended in 8 ml of cold buffer A (10 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 0.5mM DTT, 0.2 mM EDTA, protease inhibitor cocktail mix 1x, 10 mM NaF) and incubated for 30 minutes on ice. Then, cells were lysed by passing the mix through a 25 gauge needle 15 times and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13400 rpm at 4°C. The supernatant (cytoplasmic soluble fraction) was flash-frozen and stored at -80°C, while the pellet (the nuclear fraction) was resuspended in 7 ml of cold buffer B (20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 250 mM NaCl, 20% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.2 mM EDTA, protease inhibitor cocktail mix 1x, 10 mM NaF) and incubated  on ice for 1 hour. The mix was centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13,400 rpm at 4°C and the supernatant (nuclear soluble fraction) was collected.  Each lysis step was checked by Western blot (Fig. 1b, upper panel).  Buffer A was added to the nuclear soluble fraction to reach a final concentration of 200 mM NaCl and 16% glycerol. The resulting nuclear protein extract was transferred to an ultra-clear polycarbonate tube and centrifuged at 40,000 rpm for 1 hour at 4 °C using a SW41 rotor (Beckmann). After centrifugation, the supernatant was carefully collected and incubated overnight with 100 µl (dry bead volume) of prewashed IgG Sepharose beads. Beads were then washed 3 times with 10 ml of IPP150 buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl , 0.1% NP40) and once with 10 ml of TEV buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl , 0.1% NP40, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT). Subsequently, beads were resuspended in 1 ml of TEV cleavage buffer containing 15 µl (10 U/l) of acTEV protease (Invitrogen) and incubated with gentle agitation for 4 hours at 16 °C. Protein complexes were eluted by gravity flow. Then, 3 ml of calmodulin binding buffer (10 mM-mercaptoethanol, 10 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM magnesium acetate, 1 mM imidazole, 2 mM CaCl2, 0.1% NP40) and 3 µl of 1 M CaCl2 were added to the 1 ml eluate containing the protein complexes to chelate the EDTA present in the TEV cleavage buffer. The resulting mix was incubated with 100 µl of prewashed (dry bead volume) calmodulin-Sepharose beads (Agilent Technologies) for 2 hours with gentle agitation at 4 °C. Beads were then washed 3 times with 10 ml of calmodulin binding buffer. The protein complexes were recovered with 5 consecutive elutions (200 µl each) with calmodulin elution buffer (10 mM-mercaptoethanol, 10 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM magnesium acetate, 1 mM imidazole, 2 mM EGTA, 0.1% NP40). An additional elution with 1% SDS was performed to recover all the remaining proteins (Fig. 1b, lower panel).  Elution fractions 2 from the Np73-TAP and TAP purifications were partially digested with trypsin and analyzed by LC-MS using an Orbitrap ELITE instrument equipped with a C18 Accucore 50 cm column.

### Data Protocol
The generated data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cellular transformation, E2f4, Gene expression, np73, Protein-protein interactions, P53

### Affiliations
Biotechnology and Cell Signaling, UMR 7242, Strasbourg, France
CNRS

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Katia Zanier
Biotechnology and Cell Signaling, UMR 7242, Strasbourg, France


