### Accession
PXD025617

### Title
RNA pull-down-Confocal Nanoscanning (RP-CONA) detects quercetin as pri-miR-7/HuR interaction inhibitor that decreases a-Synuclein levels

### Description
RNA-protein interactions are central to all gene expression processes and contribute to a variety of human diseases. Therapeutic approaches targeting RNA-protein interactions have shown promising effects on some diseases that are previously regarded as ‘incurable’. Here we developed a fluorescent on-bead screening platform: RNA Pull-Down-COnfocal NAnoscanning (RP-CONA), to identify RNA-protein interaction modulators in eukaryotic cell extracts. Using RP-CONA, we identified small molecules that disrupt the interaction between HuR, an inhibitor of brain-enriched miR-7 biogenesis, and the conserved terminal loop of pri-miR-7-1. Importantly, miR-7’s primary target is an mRNA of α-Synuclein, which contributes to the aetiology of Parkinson’s disease. Our method identified a natural product quercetin as a molecule able to upregulate cellular miR-7 levels and downregulate the expression of α-Synuclein. This opens up new therapeutic avenues towards treatment of Parkinson’s disease as well as provides a novel methodology to search for modulators of RNA-protein interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Excised gel band with protein sample was stained with Imperial Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) de-stained overnight and proteins were digested with trypsin, as previously described (Shevchenko et al, 1996). In brief, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 13 ng μL-1 trypsin (Pierce, UK). Following digestion,the sample was diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA and and spun onto StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al (2003). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 5μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). The peptide sample was then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting it to 5 μL by 0.1% TFA. MS-analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK),coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) assembled in an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and operated at a constant temperature of 50oC. Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1% formic acid (Sigma Aldrich, UK); mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The total run time per sample was 160 min. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 120 min, then to 95% in 16 min. Survey scans were performed at resolution of 120,000 (scan range 400-1600 m/z) with an ion target of 4.0e5. MS2 was performed in the Ion Trap at a rapid scan mode with ion target of 2.0E4 and HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27 (Olsen et al, 2007). The isolation window in the quadrupole was set at 1.4 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.6.1.0 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against Homo sapiens complete/reference proteome set of UniProt database (released on 14/05/2019), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). For the first search, peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while for the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification.  Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Multiplicity was set to 2 and for heavy labels Arginine 6 and Lysine 4 were selected. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-protein interactions are central to all gene expression processes and contribute to a variety of human diseases. Therapeutic approaches targeting RNA-protein interactions have shown promising effects on some diseases that are previously regarded as 'incurable'. Here,&#xa0;we developed a fluorescent on-bead screening platform, RNA Pull-Down COnfocal NAnoscanning (RP-CONA), to identify RNA-protein interaction modulators in eukaryotic cell extracts. Using RP-CONA, we identified small molecules that disrupt the interaction between HuR, an inhibitor of brain-enriched miR-7 biogenesis, and the conserved terminal loop of pri-miR-7-1. Importantly, miR-7's primary target is an mRNA of &#x3b1;-synuclein, which contributes to the aetiology of Parkinson's disease. Our method identified a natural product quercetin as a molecule able to upregulate cellular miR-7 levels and downregulate the expression of &#x3b1;-synuclein. This opens up new therapeutic avenues towards treatment of Parkinson's disease as well as provides a novel methodology to search for modulators of RNA-protein interaction.

### Keywords
Hur, Rp-cona, Α-synuclein, Parkinson’s disease, Mir-7

### Affiliations
International Institute of Molecular and Cell biology, Warsaw, Poland
International Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology

### Submitter
Gracjan Michlewski

### Lab Head
Dr Gracjan Michlewski
International Institute of Molecular and Cell biology, Warsaw, Poland


