### Accession
PXD006518

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based quantification of the cellular response to ultraviolet radiation in HeLa cells

### Description
To better understand the cellular response to this form of DNA damage, we used highly sensitive mass spectrometry to perform comparative proteomics of phosphorylation in HeLa cells. A total of 4367 phosphorylation sites in 2100 proteins were identified, many of which had not been reported previously.

### Sample Protocol
The harvested “heavy” and “light” labeled cells were lysed with 2×NETN buffer (200 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris-Cl, 2mM EDTA, 1.0 % NP-40, pH 7.2) supplemented with 0.5% Triton X-100 on ice for 30 min, respectively. The supernatants were saved after 20,000×g centrifugation for 10 min at 4℃.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt_human database (20,274 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamido methylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, Phosphorylation on Ser was specified as variable modification. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation is a common form of DNA damage that can cause pyrimidine dimers between DNA, which can cause gene mutations, even double-strand breaks and threaten genome stability. If DNA repair systems default their roles at this stage, the organism can be damaged and result in disease, especially cancer. To better understand the cellular response to this form of damage, we applied highly sensitive mass spectrometry to perform comparative proteomics of phosphorylation in HeLa cells. A total of 4367 phosphorylation sites in 2100 proteins were identified, many of which had not been reported previously. Comprehensive bioinformatics analysis revealed that these proteins were involved in many important biological processes, including signaling, localization and cell cycle regulation. The nuclear pore complex, which is very important for RNA transport, was changed significantly at phosphorylation level, indicating its important role in response to UV-induced cellular stress. Protein-protein interaction network analysis and DNA repair pathways crosstalk were also examined in this study. Proteins involved in base excision repair, nucleotide repair and mismatch repair changed their phosphorylation pattern in response to UV treatment, indicating the complexity of cellular events and the coordination of these pathways. These systematic analyses provided new clues of protein phosphorylation in response to specific DNA damage, which is very important for further investigation. And give macroscopic view on an overall phosphorylation situation under UV radiation.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Stable isotope labeling with amino acids, Dna damage

### Affiliations
Institute of Nuclear-Agricultural Sciences, Zhejiang University, 310029, Hangzhou, China.
ptm-biolab

### Submitter
zhou lianqi

### Lab Head
Dr Yuejin Hua
Institute of Nuclear-Agricultural Sciences, Zhejiang University, 310029, Hangzhou, China.


