### Accession
PXD003628

### Title
SNX27 interactome during immune synapse formation

### Description
T lymphocyte recognition of antigenic peptides on the surface of antigen-presenting cells (APC) leads to immune synapse formation (IS). By analogy with the nervous synapse, this cell-cell communication model requires the formation of highly organized structures that delimit an active zone of membrane traffic. For T cells to connect antigen recognition with the biological response, receptors and signaling proteins must be recycled. Sorting nexin 27 (SNX27) is an endosomal protein best known for its role in recycling PDZ (PSD95, Dlg1, ZO-1)-interacting neuronal proteins via the retromer transport machinery. Alteration of this sorting pathway leads to neurodegeneration and is associated to Down syndrome, Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. In T lymphocytes, SNX27 interacts with diacylglycerol kinase zeta (DGKz), which provides a mechanistic link between diacylglycerol metabolism and membrane trafficking. Following antigen recognition, SNX27-positive endosomes polarize to the IS and a PDZ-dependent SNX27 pool accumulates at the cell-cell contact area. To test for additional SNX27 functions, we carried out proteomic analysis of the SNX27 interactome purified from T cells in contact with APC, and identified SNX27 interaction with the retromer and with members of the WASH (Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein and SCAR homologue) complex. This finding indicates the conserved nature of the SNX27/WASH/retromer complex in hematopoietic cells and suggests similarity between neurological diseases and abnormal immune/inflammatory responses. We also found PDZ-dependent SNX27 cargoes, including modulators of cytoskeletal reorganization such as zona occludens-2 (ZO-2).  ZO-2, a cytosolic component of epithelial cell-cell junctions, localized to the IS, and SNX27 silencing affected ZO-2 stability at the synapse. This study broadens our knowledge of SNX27 function in T lymphocytes, and suggests that pathways that delimit polarized structures in epithelial systems also participate in IS regulation.

### Sample Protocol
For protein-protein interaction analysis, Jurkat T cells transiently transfected with GFP vector alone or with GFP-SNX27-WT or mutant forms were lysed (30 min, 4ºC) as above. Lysates (500 g-1 mg) were incubated (1 h, 4ºC) with anti-GFP antibody, followed by 50 l 50% protein G-Sepharose slurry (1 h, 4ºC). Immunoprecipitates were washed three times in lysis buffer and eluted in sample buffer. Immunoprecipitated proteins were analyzed by Western blot for validation and by 1D-gel-MS for protein identification.  We used standard procedures for protein identification. Briefly, eluted protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE.  Sixteen bands per sample were digested by automated in-gel digestion in a Proteineer DP (Bruker Daltonics); gel plugs were reduced (10 mM DTT) and alkylated (50 mM iodoacetamide) and digested with ~10 ng trypsin (Proteomics Grade Trypsin; Sigma-Aldrich) per gel plug (18 h).  Tryptic peptides were extracted with 50% ACN, 1% TFA and dried by speed vac. Samples were pooled and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  Tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nano-HPLC system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, AB SCIEX) coupled online to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX) with a nano-spray ionization source.  The analytical column was a nano-Acquity UPLC column (1.7 m, BEH 130 C18; Waters).  The trap column was a nanoViper column Acclaim PepMap C18, 5 m (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The loading pump delivered 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 l/min; the nanopump provided a flow rate of 250 nl/min and was operated in gradient elution conditions with 0.1% formic acid in water as mobile phase A, and 0.1% formic acid in ACN as mobile phase B. Gradient elution was performed as follows: 98% A:2% B for 1 min, a linear increase to 30% B in 110 min and to 40% B in 10 min, then to 90% B in 5 min; isocratic conditions of 90% B for 5 min and return to initial conditions in 2 min.  In general, one-third of the sample was processed by nanoLC-MS in a 5 l injection volume.  Settings for TripleTOF were: ionspray voltage floating (ISVF) = 2800 V, curtain gas (CUR) = 20, interface heater temperature (IHT) = 150, ion source gas 1 (GS1) = 30, declustering potential (DP) = 85 V.  Data were acquired in an information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (AB SCIEX).  For IDA parameters, a 250-ms MS survey scan in the mass range of 350-1250 m/z was followed by 25 100-ms MS/MS scans in the mass range of 100-1500 m/z.  Switching criteria set to ions greater than m/z= 350 and smaller than m/z=1250, with a charge state of 2-5, threshold >90 counts (cps) and dynamic exclusion of 20 s.  Collision energy (CE) was set as rolling CE using a parameter script.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data for each sample fraction were processed using Analyst TF 1.7 Software.  Raw data were translated to mascot general file (mgf) format using the PeakView program v.1.2 and a Uniprot database (2014-03-26) with human taxonomy restriction (NEWT 9606), containing 39,785 protein-coding genes and their reverse entries in an in-house Mascot Server v.2.5 (Matrix Science).  Search parameters were carbamidomethyl cysteine set as fixed modification, oxidized methionines and acetylation of the peptide amino termini were considered variable modifications.  Peptide mass tolerance was set to 25 ppm in both MS and MS/MS mode, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  Accuracy of  ±10 ppm was typically found for MS and MS/MS spectra.  Each .dat file extracted from Mascot was uploaded in the Scaffold bioinformatic tool v.4.2.1 (Proteome Software), combining sample bands and replicate analyses in the same treatment conditions to enable sample inter-protein grouping and false discovery rate (FDR) filtering. FDR ≤1% at the protein level was used as cutoff value for protein identification. To interpret the biological role of genes reported, Gene Ontology (GO) clustering analysis was performed by ClueGO (v.2.2.3), a Cytoscape plug-in (v.3.3.0). PDZ-independent SNX27 interactome was clustered in molecular function GO categories with a 0.3 kappa score. Color code indicates the p value for enriched GO terms, and node size the number of mapped genes. CluePedia plug-in (v.1.2.3) was used to depict proteins associated with GO terms. The STRING interaction database (v.10) was used to show reported interactions among protein transport-related proteins.

### Publication Abstract
T Lymphocyte recognition of antigens leads to the formation of a highly organized structure termed immune synapse (IS) by analogy with the neuronals synapse. Sorting nexin 27 (SNX27) controls the endosomal traffic of PSD95, Dlg1, ZO-1 (PDZ) domain-interacting proteins, and its alteration is associated with impaired synaptic function and neurological diseases. In T-lymphocytes, SNX27-positive vesicles polarize to the IS, the identity of SNX27 interactors in these conditions nonetheless remains unknown. Here we used proteomics to analyze the SNX27 interactome purified from IS-forming T cells, and confirmed the conserved nature of the SNX27/WASH/retromer association in hematopoietic cells. Furthermore, our comparative interactome analysis of SNX27 wild-type and a mutant-deficient for PDZ cargo recognition identified the epithelial cell-cell junction protein zona occludens-2 (ZO-2) as an IS component. Biochemistry and microscopy approaches in T cells confirmed SNX27/ZO-2 PDZ-dependent interaction, and demonstrated its role controlling the dynamic localization of ZO-2 at the IS. This study broadens our knowledge of SNX27 function in T lymphocytes, and suggests that pathways that delimit polarized structures in nervous and epithelial systems also participate in IS regulation.

### Keywords
Zo-2, Immune synapse, Snx27, Pdz, T-lymphocyte

### Affiliations
Dept of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Darwin 3, Campus UAM Cantoblanco, 28079 Madrid, Spain
Department of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología/CSIC, Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Gonzalo Martínez

### Lab Head
Dr Isabel Mérida
Dept of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Darwin 3, Campus UAM Cantoblanco, 28079 Madrid, Spain


