### Accession
PXD011849

### Title
Role of SurA, BamB, BamC and HlpA for shaping the outer membrane protein composition of Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) is one of the main causative agents of nosocomial infections and the spread of multidrug-resistant strains is rising. The outer membrane composition of Pa restricts antibiotic entry and determines virulence. For efficient outer membrane protein biogenesis, the BAM complex and chaperones like Skp and SurA are crucial. Deletion mutants of bamB, bamC and the skp homolog hlpA as well as a conditional mutant of surA were investigated. The most profound effects were associated with a lack of SurA, characterized by increased membrane permeability, enhanced sensitivity to antibiotic treatment and attenuation of virulence in a Galleria mellonella infection model. Strikingly, the conditional deletion of surA in a multidrug-resistant bloodstream isolate re-sensitized the strain to antibiotic treatment. Mass spectrometry revealed striking alterations in the outer membrane composition. Thus, SurA of Pa is important for the insertion of many porins, type V secretion systems, TonB-dependent receptors, proteins involved in LPS transport and BAM complex components. Therefore, SurA of Pa serves as a promising target for developing a drug that shows antiinfective activity and sensitizes multidrug-resistant strains to antibiotics.

### Sample Protocol
2.5 x 1010 bacteria were resuspended in 0.5 ml of resuspension buffer (0.2 M Tris, 1 M sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 5000 U lysozyme, pH 8.0) and lysed with 5000 U lysozyme. Then, 5 ml of extraction buffer (2 % TritonX-100, 50 mM Tris, 10 mM MgCl2, DNase I 1:1000, pH 8.0) were added. After 2 centrifugation steps (118000 x g, 1 h, 4 °C and 372000 x g, 15 min, 4 °C) the pellet was resuspended in H2O. 10 µg protein of each sample were loaded on an SDS PAGE. Coomassie-stained gel pieces were digested in gel with trypsin, and desalted peptide mixtures were separated on an Easy-nLC 1200 system coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. The peptide mixtures were injected onto the column in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and subsequently eluted with an 127 minute segmented gradient of 5–33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode, and spectra were recorded in a mass range from m/z 300 to 2,000 with a resolution of 120,000. The 15 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and default CID settings. The target values for MS scans and MS/MS fragmentation were 106 and 5000 charges, respectively. Sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy Pseudomonas aeruginosa UCBPP-PA14 database obtained from Uniprot, containing 5,886 protein entries, and 285 commonly observed contaminants. Endoprotease trypsin was defined as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification. Initial maximum allowed mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (for the survey scan) and 0.5 Da for CID fragment ions. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach. The label-free algorithm was enabled, as was the “match between runs” option.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> is one of the main causative agents of nosocomial infections and the spread of multidrug-resistant strains is rising. Therefore, novel strategies for therapy are urgently required. The outer membrane composition of Gram-negative pathogens and especially of <i>Pa</i> restricts the efficacy of antibiotic entry into the cell and determines virulence. For efficient outer membrane protein biogenesis, the &#x3b2;-barrel assembly machinery (BAM) complex in the outer membrane and periplasmic chaperones like Skp and SurA are crucial. Previous studies indicated that the importance of individual proteins involved in outer membrane protein biogenesis may vary between different Gram-negative species. In addition, since multidrug-resistant <i>Pa</i> strains pose a serious global threat, the interference with both virulence and antibiotic resistance by disturbing outer membrane protein biogenesis might be a new strategy to cope with this challenge. Therefore, deletion mutants of the non-essential BAM complex components <i>bamB</i> and <i>bamC</i>, of the <i>skp</i> homolog <i>hlpA</i> as well as a conditional mutant of <i>surA</i> were investigated. The most profound effects for both traits were associated with reduced levels of SurA, characterized by increased membrane permeability, enhanced sensitivity to antibiotic treatment and attenuation of virulence in a <i>Galleria mellonella</i> infection model. Strikingly, the depletion of SurA in a multidrug-resistant clinical bloodstream isolate re-sensitized the strain to antibiotic treatment. From our data we conclude that SurA of <i>Pa</i> serves as a promising target for developing a drug that shows antiinfective activity and re-sensitizes multidrug-resistant strains to antibiotics.

### Keywords
Bacterial infection, Outer membrane protein biogenesis, Sura, Hlpa, Cell surface molecules, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bamc, Bamb

### Affiliations
Interfakultäres Institut für Mikrobiologie und Infektionsmedizin Tübingen (IMIT) Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene Universität Tübingen Tübingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Erwin Bohn
Interfakultäres Institut für Mikrobiologie und Infektionsmedizin Tübingen (IMIT) Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene Universität Tübingen Tübingen Germany


