### Accession
PXD046860

### Title
Integrated multi-omics and genetic analyses reveal molecular determinants underlying Arabidopsis snap33 mutant phenotype

### Description
The secretory pathway is essential for plant immunity, delivering diverse antimicrobial molecules into the extracellular space. Arabidopsis thaliana soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive-factor attachment protein receptor SNAP33 is a key actor of this process. The snap33 mutant displays dwarfism and necrotic lesions, however the molecular determinants of its macroscopic phenotypes remain elusive. Here, we isolated several new snap33 mutants that exhibited constitutive cell death and H2O2 accumulation, further defining snap33 as an autoimmune mutant. We then carried out quantitative transcriptomic and proteomic analyses showing that numerous defense transcripts and proteins were up-regulated in snap33 mutant, among which genes/proteins involved in defense hormone, pattern-triggered immunity and nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich-repeat receptor signaling. qRT-PCR analyses and hormone dosages supported these results. Furthermore, genetic analyses elucidated the diverse contributions of the main defense hormones and of some nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich-repeat receptor signaling actors in the establishment of snap33 phenotype, emphasizing the preponderant role of salicylic acid over other defense phytohormones. Moreover, the accumulation of pattern-triggered immunity and nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich-repeat receptor signaling proteins in snap33 was confirmed by immunoblotting analyses and further shown to be salicylic acid-dependent. Collectively, this study unveiled molecular determinants underlying Arabidopsis snap33 mutant phenotype and brought new insights into autoimmunity signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Three independent biological replicates of 12-day-old WT-1 and snap33-1 mutant seedlings were produced. Total proteins were digested and further prepared for data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Spectronaut software (v 14) to identify and quantify peptides and proteins. A paired Student’s t test, based on the log2 ratios of the peptide intensities of the individual peptides of a protein, was performed to uncover differential expression between samples. Resulting p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the q-value approach to control the overall FDR. Proteins with a q-value < 0.01 were considered as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
The secretory pathway is essential for plant immunity, delivering diverse antimicrobial molecules into the extracellular space. Arabidopsis thaliana soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive-factor attachment protein receptor SNAP33 is a key actor of this process. The snap33 mutant displays dwarfism and necrotic lesions, however the molecular determinants of its macroscopic phenotypes remain elusive. Here, we isolated several new snap33 mutants that exhibited constitutive cell death and H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> accumulation, further defining snap33 as an autoimmune mutant. We then carried out quantitative transcriptomic and proteomic analyses showing that numerous defense transcripts and proteins were up-regulated in the snap33 mutant, among which genes/proteins involved in defense hormone, pattern-triggered immunity, and nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich-repeat receptor signaling. qRT-PCR analyses and hormone dosages supported these results. Furthermore, genetic analyses elucidated the diverse contributions of the main defense hormones and some nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich-repeat receptor signaling actors in the establishment of the snap33 phenotype, emphasizing the preponderant role of salicylic acid over other defense phytohormones. Moreover, the accumulation of pattern-triggered immunity and nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich-repeat receptor signaling proteins in the snap33 mutant was confirmed by immunoblotting analyses and further shown to be salicylic acid-dependent. Collectively, this study unveiled molecular determinants underlying the Arabidopsis snap33 mutant phenotype and brought new insights into autoimmunity signaling.

### Keywords
Autoimmunity, Salicylic acid, Snap33, Pti, Arabidopsis, Nlr, Eti, Mapk

### Affiliations
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
KAUST

### Submitter
Naganand Rayapuram

### Lab Head
Dr Naganand Rayapuram
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia


