### Accession
PXD028738

### Title
Cervical cancer cell line panel immunopeptidomics datasets

### Description
Our extended analysis of the HLA-presented antigen landscape in cervical cancer cells using an integrative proteogenomics approach identifies, next to tumour-associated antigens and tumour-specific neoantigens, presentation of viral canonical, and alternative reading frame (ARF)-derived HLA-presented sequences, including peptides derived from HPV-E1.

### Sample Protocol
MHC class I immunoprecipitation  1 ml Protein A-Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) were washed in 50 mM borate, 50 mM KCl (pH 8.0) solution and then incubated with 2 mg of pan-HLA-I antibody (W6/32) slowly rotating for 1 hour at 4°C. The beads were washed in a column format with 0.2 M triethanolamine (pH 8.2), and the bound antibody was cross-linked by incubation with 40 mM dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride (DMP) (Sigma) (pH 8.3) for 1 hour at room temperature. Ice-cold 0.2 M Tris buffer (pH 8.0) was added to the mixture to stop the reaction. Unbound antibody was washed off the column by washing with 0.1 M citrate (pH 3.0), and the column was equilibrated in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0) for further use. 5 x 108 cells pellets were lysed by using 10 ml lysis buffer (0.5% IGEPAL 630, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)), and mixed for 30 minutes. The lysate was centrifuged at 300g for 10 minutes to remove nuclei and then at 15,000g for 60 min to pellet other insoluble material. 1 ml W6/32 cross-linked to protein A-Sepharose beads (GE) was added to cleared lysates for 1h, and beads were washed with 50mM Tris buffer (pH 8.0) containing first 150 mM NaCl, then 450 mM NaCl, and next no salt. HLA-peptide complexes were eluted by using 5 ml 10% acetic acid and dried. Peptide-HLA complexes were resuspended in 120 µl of loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 1% acetonitrile (ACN) in water). Samples were fractioned by reverse-phase (RP) high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using an Ultimate 300 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) and 4.6- by 50-mm ProSwift RP-1S column (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto the column and eluted using a 10 min gradient from 3% to 30% ACN in 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 500 nl/min, and elution was monitored by light absorbance at 280 nm. Fractions were collected at a 1-minute interval. Alternate fractions containing peptides were combined in two final fractions (odd and even), dried, resuspended in 20 ul of loading buffer and analyzed in duplicate by LC-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS2).

### Data Protocol
LC- MS2 datasets were analyzed using Peaks v10. For in-house datasets the following parameters were set: precursor mass tolerance: 5 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.03 Da; digestion: none; fixed and variable modifications: none. 6-frame translations of Trinity assemblies (Caski: 19, Dotc2: 24, SiHa: 16, Hela: 13 entries) mapping to the HPV genome were concatenated with the reviewed human entries in Uniprot (Swissprot version April 2018, containing 20,328 entries). For immunopeptidomics data, a threshold of -10lgP=15 was applied across all datasets.

### Publication Abstract
Current immunotherapeutic approaches for human papillomavirus (HPV)-driven cervical cancer target the viral oncogenes E6 and E7. We report viral canonical and alternative reading frame (ARF)-derived sequences presented on cervical tumor cells, including antigens encoded by the conserved viral gene E1. We confirm immunogenicity of the identified viral peptides in HPV-positive women, and women with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia. We observe consistent transcription of the E1, E6, and E7 genes in 10 primary cervical tumor resections from the four most common high-risk HPV subtypes (HPV16, 18, 31, and 45), suggesting the suitability of E1 as therapeutic target. We finally confirm HLA presentation of canonical peptides derived from E6 and E7, and ARF-derived viral peptides from a reverse-strand transcript spanning the HPV E1 and E2 genes in primary human cervical tumor tissue. Our results extend currently known viral immunotherapeutic targets in cervical cancer and highlight E1 as an important cervical cancer antigen.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Cell line, Human leukocyte antigen-associated peptides, Cervical cancer

### Affiliations
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Nicola Ternette

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Ternette
University of Oxford


