### Accession
PXD040686

### Title
VSG Exclusion Protein 2 (VEX2) affinity purification combined with LC-MS/MS analysis in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
UPF1-like helicases play roles in telomeric heterochromatin formation and X-chromosome inactivation and we focus here on variant surface glycoprotein (VSG) exclusion-factor-2 (VEX2), a UPF1-related protein in the African trypanosome. This bloodstream parasite evades host immunity by employing monogenic and switchable VSG expression, a form of antigenic variation which involves transcription of one telomeric VSG gene at a time. A trans-splicing compartment and the single VSG transcription factory are juxtaposed and  enriched for VEX1 and VEX2, respectively, but our understanding of the VSG exclusion mechanism remains otherwise incomplete. Here, we sought VEX2-interacting partners, using cryomilling and affinity purification followed my LC-MS/MS analysis. We confirmed previous observations that VEX2 interacts with VEX1 and CAF-1, but also found evidence for weaker interactions and/or spatial proximity to telomere binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Bloodstream form T. brucei cells (1.2 × 1010), with or without N-terminal GFP-tagged endogenous copies of VEX2 (from double allele tagging using CRISPR/Cas9, were washed three times in ice cold PBS with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, EDTA free) and subsequently cryomilled in a planetary ball mill (Retsch) into a fine grindate . Initial screening for the most suitable extraction buffer required 50 mg of frozen grindate per sample suspended in ice cold lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM MgCl2, 10 µM CaCl2, protease inhibitor cocktail) containing either 100 mM NaCl or 250 mM citrate and either 0.1% Tween-20 or 0.1% Brij58. The samples were then subjected to sonication on ice (10 cycles of 3 sec on/ 10 sec off at 40% amplitude). Samples were then spun for 10 min at 20,000g at 4°C to pellet cellular debris. The supernatant was removed and added to a low protein binding 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube containing 4 ml GFP-Trap magnetic agarose beads (Chromotek) and agitated at 4°C for 2 h. The samples were then placed on a magnetic rack and washed three times with ice-cold lysis buffer. Samples were eluted with NuPAGE LDS loading buffer containing reducing agent (Invitrogen) at 70°C for 10 min. Next, the resulting proteins were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and visualised by silver staining. Subsequently, three (NaCl / Tween-20; Citrate / Tween-20) independent pull-downs were performed and subjected to liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. For this purpose, the process described above was scaled-up. Six aliquots of 50 mg of grindate were used per condition, and six immunoprecipitation reactions conducted in parallel – the 6 samples were pooled together in the last wash. The conditions were as above, except for sonication (20 cycles were used instead of 10). After eluting the samples, these were run 2 cm into a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gradient gels (Invitrogen) and protein containing slices excised.  Gel slices containing affinity-enriched samples were first washed to remove detergents and buffer salts using MilliQ water, acetonitrile, 100 mM of ammonium bicarbonate, a 50:50 mixture of acetonitrile and 100 mM of ammonium bicarbonate, and lastly, acetonitrile (15 min each). The samples were then reduced, alkylated and subjected to overnight (>16  h) trypsin digestion (Pierce). Peptides were then extracted, dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific), resuspended in 50 µl 1% formic acid / 2% acetonitrile, centrifuged and transferred to high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) vials. Samples (10  µl) were typically analysed on a LTQ OrbiTrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano ultra HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) and EasySpray column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode with a single MS survey scan from 335 to 1800 m/z followed by 20 sequential m/z dependent MS2 scans. The 20 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation. The MS1 isolation window was set to 1.4 Da and the resolution set at 60,000. MS2 resolution was set at 15,000. The AGC targets for MS1 and MS2 were set at 3e6 ions and 2e5 ions, respectively. The normalised collision energy was set at 35%. The maximum ion injection times for MS1 and MS2 were set at 50 and 19 ms, respectively. The peptides from each fraction were separated using a mix of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in MS grade water) and B (80% acentonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and eluted from the column using a flow rate of 300  µl/min over 170  min. The column temperature was set at 50°C with a source voltage of 3 kV.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed by label-free quantification in MaxQuant (v1.6.1), searching the T. brucei L427 reference proteome (version 39, downloaded from TriTrypDB). Calculation of fold-  change relative to a sample lacking GFP-tagged VEX2 and statistical analysis were performed using Perseus (v1.5.2.6). Volcano plots were generated using Graphpad Prism v9.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vex2, Cryomilling, Lc-ms/ms, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Department of Biology University of York Heslington York YO10 5DD
Dundee University

### Submitter
Michele Tinti

### Lab Head
Dr Joana R. Correia Faria
Department of Biology University of York Heslington York YO10 5DD


