### Accession
PXD041215

### Title
Changes in Protein Turn-over Rates Regulate Tryptophan and Glucosinolate Biosynthesis, IAA Transport and Photosynthesis in Arabidopsis Growth and Defense Transitions

### Description
Changes in protein synthesis and degradation rates, transcript, protein and phytohormone abundance of 99 targets using qPCR and LC-MS parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) were measured in the transitions between optimal growth conditions (homeostasis), fully induced pattern triggered immunity (PTI) and back in Arabidopsis thaliana, chronologically. Protein turnover rates play an important role in the tryptophan and glucosinolate biosynthesis and photosynthesis associated (PAP) proteins. Most transcripts returned to normal levels 3 to 16 hours post elicitation, while protein levels remained at fully induced PTI levels up to 16 hours into the transitory phase back to optimal growth. Same measurements in the myc234 background revealed an important role of these transcription factors in the immune response including effects on protein turnover rates.

### Sample Protocol
Plant cultivation, growth, treatment, sample preparation, targeted PRM LC-MS measurements, peptide and protein identification, PRM-based area under the curve (AUC) peptide and protein quantification, mRNA isolation, cDNA synthesis and qPCR (Supplementary table Primers) and phytohormone extraction, sample preparation and SRM LC-MS phytohormone measurements were performed as described previously in the open access paper by Bassal and co-workers (Bassal et. al 2020) (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molp.2020.09.024). Measurement of protein turnover rates Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings were grown in 50 ml 25% MS medium (KNO3 , NH4NO3) on an orbital shaker at 45 rpm at 22°C under long day conditions (16 hrs light, 8 hrs dark) for ten days. Cultures were harvested in triplicate representing the start of the experiment t=0. The remaining cultures were transferred to 25% MS medium containing 15N (K15NO3 , 15NH415NO3) as the sole nitrogen source and grown further under the same conditions. Cultures were sampled in triplicate 8, 9, 10, 12, 24, 36, 48, 72 and 96 hrs after media exchange to measure protein synthesis and degradation rates under optimal growth conditions. To measure protein synthesis and degradation rates under PTI conditions, flg22 was added to a concentration of 1 µM in medium, 8 hrs after exchange to 15N medium. Cultures were sampled at this time point in triplicate and further sampled 2, 4, 6, 8, 16, 24, 32, 48, 72 and 96 hrs after flg22 injection (corresponding to 10, 12, 14, 16, 24, 32, 56, 80 and 104 hrs after media exchange). Harvested tissue was weighed and frozen at -80°C. Sample preparations, and targeted PRM LC-MS measurements as in (Bassal et. al 2020).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified using the Mascot software v2.5.0 (Matrix Science) linked to Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).The enzyme was set to trypsin. A precursor ion mass error of 5 ppm and a fragment ion mass error of 0.02 Da were tolerated in searches of the TAIR10 database amended with common contaminants (35934 sequences, 14486974 residues). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (M) tolerated as a variable modifications. A PSM, peptide and protein level false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated for all identified spectra and peptides and proteins based on the target-decoy database model. The significance threshold α was set at 0.01 to accept PSM, peptide and protein identifications. Data Analysis Quantitative analysis of PRM data was done with the Skyline software v.4.2.0 (Pino et al., 2017). A spectral library was created using the DDA/TDA measurements described above. All target protein primary structures were concatenated in a FASTA file and imported. Raw PRM data was imported with the following “Transition Settings”: Filter tab: “Precursor charges” were set to 2,3, “Ion charges” were set to 1,2 and “Ion types” were set to y,b,p, “Product ion selection” was set from m/z > precursor to 6 ions. Library tab: “Pick” was set to 6 product ions. Instrument tab: “Method match tolerance m/z” kept at a default of 0.055. Full-Scan tab: “Isotope peaks included” set to Count, “precursor mass analyzer” set to Orbitrap, “Peaks” set to 3, “Resolving power” set to 30,000 at 400 m/z. Under MS/MS filtering, the “Acquisition method” was set to Targeted, “product mass analyzer” set to Orbitrap, “resolving power”set to 17,500 at 400 m/z. In retention time filtering, “Include all matching scans” was selected. The sum of six picked product ion signal peak areas was extracted as PQI for each target peptide. For turnover rates, “protover” a python-based code program was used which measures the relative isotopic abundance (RIA) of 15N in peptides (Lyon et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein degradation rates, Auxin, Pti, Proteomics, Pin proteins, Glucosinolates, Phytohormone, Translational regulation, Photosynthesis, Protein synthesis rates, Myc2

### Affiliations
Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel
Systematic Proteomics and Bioanalytics

Proteome Analytics Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry

### Submitter
Mohammad Abukhalaf

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Hoehenwarter
Proteome Analytics Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry


