### Accession
PXD030630

### Title
Patterning of the autotrophic, mixotrophic and heterotrophic proteomes of oxygen evolving cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803

### Description
The trophic condition related proteomes of an oxygenic photosynthetic cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (glucose tolerant strain) were analyzed to get further insights into the metabolic traits governing the early exponential growth under photoautotrophic, mixotrophic and heterotrophic conditions. The cells were grown under constant light autotrophically (AT) in low (air-level) CO2 (ATLC) and in high CO2 (ATHC), mixotrophically (MT) in low (air-level) CO2 in the presence of glucose (MTLC) and heterotrophically in low (air-level) CO2 in the presence of glucose and only 10 min exposure to light every 24 hours (Light-Activated Heterotrophic Growth; LAHGLC). The proteomes of ATHC, MTLC and LAHGLC differed substantially from that of ATLC, particularly by downregulation of the inducible carbon concentrating mechanisms (CCM) and photorespiration related enzymes. On the contrary, under carbon-rich conditions (ATHC, MTLC, LAHGLC) the cells accumulated respiratory NAD(P)H dehydrogenase I complexes in the thylakoid membrane. In glucose supplemented cultures (MTLC, LAHGLC) a distinct NDH-2 protein, NdbA, additionally accumulated in the thylakoid membrane whilst the plasma membrane localized NdbC and ARTO decreased in abundance. The light-harvesting proteins together with the photosystem I and II subunits were uniquely depleted under LAHGLC condition, accumulated under ATHC and in MTLC remained at the level of the reference ATLC condition. The accumulation of P-transporters was unique, revealing only minor differences between ATLC and ATHC but strong up-regulation in MTLC and down-regulation in LAHGLC. This likely implies that MTLC stores energy surplus in the highly energetic bonds of polyphosphate polymer that can be used under unfavorable growth conditions. It is concluded that the rigor of cell growth in MTLC condition results to a great extent from high intracellular inorganic carbon conditions created upon glucose breakdown and release of CO2, beside the direct utilization of glucose-derived carbon skeletons for growth. This combination provides the MTLC cultures with excellent conditions for growth that often exceeds that of the mere photoautotrophic growth at high CO2.

### Sample Protocol
The glucose-tolerant cyanobacterial strain Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (wild type) was used. Pre-experimental cultures were grown in BG11 medium buffered with 20 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.5) under continuous white light of 50 µmol photons m-2 s-1 at 30 °C, under air enriched with 3% CO2 with agitation of 150 rpm. Experimental cultures were grown in BG11 medium buffered with 20 mM HEPES-NaOH (pH 7.5) under four different conditions; 1) autotrophic growth at low CO2 conditions (ATLC) comprising 0.04% (air-level) CO2 (LC) and continuous illumination of 50 μmol photons m-2 s-1; 2) autotrophic growth at high CO2 conditions (ATHC) comprising air enriched with 3% CO2 (HC) and continuous illumination of 50 μmol photons m-2 s-1; 3) mixotrophic growth (MTLC) comprising 0.04% (air-level) CO2, continuous illumination of 50 μmol photons m-2 s-1 and 10 mM glucose added to the medium; 4) light activated heterotrophic growth (LAHGLC) comprising 0.04% (air-level) CO2, with 50 μmol photons m-2 s-1 illumination  restricted to 10 min per 24 h and 10 mM glucose added to the medium. All experimental cultures were grown in growth chambers with cool-white LEDs (AlgaeTron AG130 by PSI Instruments, Czech) at 30 °C with agitation of 150 rpm without antibiotics. OD750 was measured using Lambda 25 UV/VIS spectrometer (PerkinElmer). For protein extraction aliquots were harvested from pre-experimental cultures, inoculated to OD750=0.1 in fresh BG11 medium with or without Glc, as described above. For protein extraction aliquots were harvested from pre-experimental cultures, inoculated to OD750=0.1 in fresh BG11 medium with or without Glc, as described above. Cultures were grown under the experimental conditions described above until OD750 close to 1.0 was reached, taking 1.5 days for MTLC and ATHC conditions or 3.5 days for ATLC and LAHGLC conditions. To monitor growth, cells were inoculated to fresh BG11 medium at OD750=0.1 in the beginning of the experiment. Cells were collected by centrifugation at 8000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C and washed twice with 50 mM TES-KOH buffer, pH 8.0. The cell pellet was suspended in a protein extraction buffer (0.1 % (w/v) RapiGest SF (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) in 8 M urea solubilized in 0.1 M Tris-HCl supplemented with 200 µM PMSF together with an equal volume of acid washed glass beads (150-212 µm, Sigma). The cells were thereafter broken using a bead beater with six cycles of 45 s shake with 3 minutes incubation on ice. Unbroken cells and glass beads were removed by centrifugation for 5 min at 1000 x g and again for 20 min at 12000 x g at room temperature. The protein concentration was measured with the Bradford method (Bio-Rad). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiotreitol (DTT, Sigma), alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) and precipitated with 1:5 v/v of 50% acetone/ 50 % ethanol o/n at -20 °C. The pellet was centrifuged at 13,200 rpm at +4 °C for 30 min and solubilized by trypsin (Sequence grade Modified, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) digestion (1:100 trypsin:protein ratio) in 50 mM Tris-HCl and 5 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) buffer for 4-5 hours at +37 °C shaking. Digestion was continued for an additional 15-16 hours following a second addition of trypsin in the same ratio. The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid (FA) (Sigma) to a final concentration of 0.5–1 % (v/v) to lower the pH below 2. The digestion mixture was incubated for 30 min at +37 °C at 130 rpm and the water immiscible RapiGest SF degradation products were removed by centrifugation. To desalt the samples, solid phase extraction (SPE) of the peptide mixture was performed with Wet Sep-Pak 100 mg C18 96 well plate according to manufacturer’s protocol. The eluted peptide samples were vacuum-dried (Savant SPD1010, SpeedVac Concentrator, Thermo Scientific) and solubilized in 0,1 % (v/v) FA and 2 % (v/v) ACN and stored at -80 °C prior to MS analysis. The set of iRT peptides (Biognosys) was added to the sample prior to LC-MS injection.

### Data Protocol
The LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. The four biological replicates from each condition were injected on an analytical C18 column (75 mm/40 cm, ReproSil-Pur 1.9 mm 120 A˚ C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) or acetoni- trile/water [80:20 (v/v)] with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). Peptides were separated by a two-step 110 min gradient from 5% to 26% B in 70 min followed by 26% to 49% B increase in 30 min. MS data were acquired automatically by using Thermo Xcalibur 3.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A data dependent acquisition method consisted of an Orbitrap MS survey scan of mass range 300–1,800m/z followed by HCD fragmentation for 12 most intense peptide ions. The spectra were registered with a resolution of 120,000 and 15,000 (at m/z 200) for full scan and for fragment ions, respectively, and normalized collision energy of 27%. The automatic gain control was set to a maximum fill time of 100 ms and 250 ms to obtain maximum number of 3e6 and 1e5 ions for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively. Data files were searched for protein identification against Synechocystis database retrieved from Cyanobase (Kaneko et al. 1996) (3672 entries, October 23, 2012) using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an in-house server running the Mascot 2.6.1 (Perkins et al. 1999) algorithm (Matrix Science). The precursor value was restricted to monoisotopic with a mass tolerance of ±4 ppm and frag- ment ion mass tolerance of ±0.02 Da. Two missed cleavages were allowed and decoy searches were performed. For the validation of the spectrum identifications, we used a Percolator algorithm (Käll et al. 2007) with relaxed false discovery rate of 0.05. The

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mixotrophy, Heterotrophy, Carbon metabolism, Autotrophy, Synechocystis, Photosynthesis, Adaptation

### Affiliations
University of Turku Faculty of Technology Department of Life Technologies Molecular Plant Biology Group Tykistökatu 6 20520 Turku Finland
University of Turku

### Submitter
Dorota Muth-Pawlak

### Lab Head
Dr Eva-Mari Aro
University of Turku Faculty of Technology Department of Life Technologies Molecular Plant Biology Group Tykistökatu 6 20520 Turku Finland


