### Accession
PXD005479

### Title
Proteomic profiling of NCI-60 extracellular vesicles uncovers common protein cargo and cancer type-specific biomarkers

### Description
Packed with biological information, extracellular vesicles (EVs) offer exciting promise for biomarker discovery and applications in therapeutics and non-invasive diagnostics. Currently, our understanding of EV contents is confined by the limited cells from which vesicles have been characterized utilizing the same enrichment method. Using sixty cell lines from the National Cancer Institute (NCI-60), here we provide the largest proteomic profile of EVs in a single study, identifying 6,071 proteins with 213 common to all isolates. Proteins included established EV markers, and vesicular trafficking proteins such as Rab GTPases and tetraspanins. Differentially-expressed proteins offer potential for cancer diagnosis and prognosis. Network analysis of vesicle quantity and proteomes identified EV components associated with vesicle secretion, including CD81, CD63, syntenin-1, VAMP3, Rab GTPases, and integrins. Integration of vesicle proteomes with whole-cell molecular profiles revealed similarities, suggesting EVs provide a reliable reflection of their progenitor cell content, and are therefore excellent indicators of disease.

### Sample Protocol
For protein purification and separation by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), 20 µg of vesicular protein from each sample was loaded into a 4-20% polyacrylamide gel (Lonza, 59511). Following electrophoresis, gels were fixed and Coomassie-stained as previously detailed. Samples were fractionated by cutting gel lanes into five sections. Sections were subsequently subdivided into 1 mm3 cubes before trypsin-digesting as described. Following protein digestion, samples were submitted to the Florida State University Translational Science Laboratory for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. The digest was freeze-dried and resuspended in 30 μL 0.1% FA and analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS). An externally calibrated Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos nLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap (high-resolution electrospray tandem mass spectrometer) was used with the following parameters:  A 2 cm trap column of 100 μm internal diameter (i.d.) (SC001 Easy Column from Thermo-scientific) was followed by a 10 cm analytical column of 75 μm i.d. (SC200 Easy Column from Thermo-scientific). Both trap column and analytical column had C18-AQ packaging. Separation was carried out using Easy nanoLC II (Thermo-Scientific) with a continuous, vented column configuration.  A 5 μL sample was aspirated into a 20 μL sample loop and loaded onto the trap. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min for separation on the analytical column. Mobile phase A was composed of 99.9 H2O (EMD Omni Solvent), and 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B was composed of 99.9% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. A 1 hour linear gradient from 0% to 45% B was performed. The LC eluent was directly nano-sprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). During the chromatographic separation, the LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in a data-dependent mode and under direct control of the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometry data were acquired using the following parameters: 10 data-dependent collisional-induced-dissociation (CID) MS/MS scans per full scan. All measurements were performed at room temperature and three technical replicates were run for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected from each of five fractions were pooled by sample and analyzed using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30). The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using the integrated Andromeda peptide search engine and a recent (March 2016) UniProt knowledgebase reviewed (Swiss-prot) human protein database. The database was appended with a list of common contaminants in MaxQuant, and search parameters used were either the default settings for this version of the software, or as follows. Instrument type was set to Orbitrap, using label free quantitation, and first search peptide tolerance set to 10 ppm, and main search peptide tolerance at 4.5 ppm. Digestion mode was set specific for trypsin, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Fixed modifications included only carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications included oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation (STY). A maximum of five modifications were allowed per peptide. False discovery rate was set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Packed with biological information, extracellular vesicles (EVs) offer exciting promise for biomarker discovery and applications in therapeutics and non-invasive diagnostics. Currently, our understanding of EV contents is confined by the limited cells from which vesicles have been characterized utilizing the same enrichment method. Using sixty cell lines from the National Cancer Institute (NCI-60), here we provide the largest proteomic profile of EVs in a single study, identifying 6,071 proteins with 213 common to all isolates. Proteins included established EV markers, and vesicular trafficking proteins such as Rab GTPases and tetraspanins. Differentially-expressed proteins offer potential for cancer diagnosis and prognosis. Network analysis of vesicle quantity and proteomes identified EV components associated with vesicle secretion, including CD81, CD63, syntenin-1, VAMP3, Rab GTPases, and integrins. Integration of vesicle proteomes with whole-cell molecular profiles revealed similarities, suggesting EVs provide a reliable reflection of their progenitor cell content, and are therefore excellent indicators of disease.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Biomarkers, Co-inertia, Microvesicles, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Florida State University College of Medicine
Florida State University

### Submitter
David Meckes

### Lab Head
Dr David Meckes
Florida State University College of Medicine


