### Accession
PXD013690

### Title
Dynamic metabolic reprogramming in dendritic cells: an early response to influenza infection that is essential for effector function

### Description
In response to influenza infection we found that dendritic cells (DCs), cells that are critical in mounting an effective immune response, undergo a profound metabolic shift. DCs alter the concentration and location of hundreds of proteins, including c-MYC, mediating a shift to a highly glycolytic phenotype that is also flexible in terms of fueling respiration.

### Sample Protocol
Samples are 1:1 mixtures of unlabelled and 18O labelled dendritic cells. DC_HSS030-31_16O-18O is a 1:1 mixture of DC_HSS030 (16O) and DC_HSS031 (18O). DC_HSS032-33_16O-18O is a 1:1 mixture of DC_HSS032 (16O) and DC_HSS033 (18O). DC_HSS034-35_16O-18O is a 1:1 mixture of DC_HSS034 (16O) and DC_HSS035 (18O). After mixing, samples were digested with trypsin, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with SEQUEST using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline.

### Publication Abstract
Infection with the influenza virus triggers an innate immune response that initiates the adaptive response to halt viral replication and spread. However, the metabolic response fueling the molecular mechanisms underlying changes in innate immune cell homeostasis remain undefined. Although influenza increases parasitized cell metabolism, it does not productively replicate in dendritic cells. To dissect these mechanisms, we compared the metabolism of dendritic cells to that of those infected with active and inactive influenza A virus and those treated with toll-like receptor agonists. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, pulse chase substrate utilization assays and metabolic flux measurements, we found global metabolic changes in dendritic cells 17 hours post infection, including significant changes in carbon commitment via glycolysis and glutaminolysis, as well as mitochondrial respiration. Influenza infection of dendritic cells led to a metabolic phenotype distinct from that induced by TLR agonists, with significant resilience in terms of metabolic plasticity. We identified c-Myc as one transcription factor modulating this response. Restriction of c-Myc activity or mitochondrial substrates significantly changed the immune functions of dendritic cells, such as reducing motility and T cell activation. Transcriptome analysis of inflammatory dendritic cells isolated following influenza infection showed similar metabolic reprogramming occurs in vivo. Thus, early in the infection process, dendritic cells respond with global metabolic restructuring, that is present in inflammatory lung dendritic cells after infection, and this is important for effector function. These findings suggest metabolic switching in dendritic cells plays a vital role in initiating the immune response to influenza infection.

### Keywords
Dendritic cells, Influenza, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Heather Smallwood
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


