### Accession
PXD009785

### Title
LED lamps induce a differential regulation of proteins and enhance somatic embryo maturation in Carica papaya

### Description
The use of light-emitting diode (LED) lamps could be an alternative method to improve somatic embryogenesis, yielding more efficient somatic embryo development and maturation than the use of conventional fluorescent lamps. The aim of this work was to study the influence of light quality on the somatic embryo development and differential abundance of proteins during the maturation of papaya (Carica papaya) cv. ‘Golden’ embryogenic cultures, using LED lamps with different wavelengths. Of all the LED treatments, the white plus medium blue (WmB - 450/530 nm) light resulted in the best somatic embryo production after 28 days of maturation. The WmB and fluorescent treatments generated 82.4 and 47.6 cotyledonary stage somatic embryos, respectively. By a comparative shotgun proteomics analysis between WmB LED and fluorescent lamps treatments, a total of 28 up-regulated and 7 down-regulated proteins were identified. Among the proteins up-regulated in the cultures treated with WmB LED light compared with fluorescent light were the indole-3-acetic acid-amido synthetase (GH3), pyrophosphate-energized vacuolar membrane proton pump (H+-PPase), and actin-depolymerizing factor 2 (ADF2) proteins, which are involved in the regulation of auxin levels by auxin conjugation and transport. Additionally, proteins related to energetic supply, protein metabolism, cell wall remodeling, internal trafficking, and cell division were up-regulated, showing a significantly higher abundance in the embryogenic cultures incubated under WmB LED light than those incubated under fluorescent light.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction For proteomic analyses, samples at 14 days of culture from the best lamp treatment (WmB LED lamp), which was determined based on the somatic embryo production, and from the fluorescent lamp (the conventional lamp used for the in vitro culture) treatment were used. The protein extraction was performed according to Balbuena et al. (2011). Three biological replicates (300 mg FM each) from each treatment were macerated in mortar and pistil using liquid nitrogen, and proteins were extracted with 7 M urea (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, U.K.), 2 M thiourea (GE Healthcare), 1% dithiothreitol (DTT; GE Healthcare), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF; Sigma-Aldrich), 2% Triton X-100 (GE Healthcare) and 5 μM pepstatin (Sigma-Aldrich). The samples were vortexed for 5 min, incubated on ice for 30 min, and centrifuged at 16000 xg for 20 min at 4 ºC, and the supernatants were collected. The total protein concentration was determined by the 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare).  Protein digestion  The protein digestion was performed according to Reis et al. (2016). The extracted proteins (100 μg from each biological replicate) were first precipitated with methanol chloroform for detergent removal according to Nanjo et al. (2012). Subsequently, the samples were resuspended in buffer containing 7 M urea and 2 M thiourea and desalted on Amicon Ultra 3-kDa centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore). Next, twenty-five microliters of 0.2% (v/v) RapiGest® surfactant (Waters, Milford, USA) was added to each sample. The resultant mixtures were briefly vortexed and incubated in an Eppendorf Thermomixer® (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at 80 °C for 15 min. Afterward, 2.5 μL of 100 mM DTT was added to each sample, and the samples were then incubated at 60 °C for 30 min. Following the incubation, 2.5 μL of 300 mM iodoacetamide (GE Healthcare) was added to each sample, after which the samples were incubated in the dark for 30 min at 25 °C. Afterward, 5 μL of 100 mM DTT was added to quench the excess iodoacetamide. Protein digestion was carried out by adding 20 μL of trypsin (50 ng µL-1) (Promega, Madison, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) per sample, followed by incubation for 15 h at 37 °C. Then, 10 μL of 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each sample for RapiGest® precipitation and trypsin activity inhibition, after which the samples were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. The incubation was followed by centrifugation at 16000 xg for 20 min. The peptide mixtures were transferred to total recovery vials (Waters) for direct use in a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters).  Analyses by mass spectrometry  Nano-LC-electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS/MS analysis was carried out using a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) coupled to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters). The peptide mixtures were separated by liquid chromatography by loading 1 μg of digested protein onto a nanoAcquity UPLC 5-μm C18 trap column (180 μm x 20 mm; Waters) followed by loading onto a nanoAcquity HSS T3 1.8 μm analytical column (75 μm x 150 mm; Waters) at a rate of 400 nL min-1 at 45 °C. For peptide elution, the binary gradient consisted of MS water (Tedia, Fairfield, USA) and 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) as mobile phase A and acetonitrile (Tedia) and 0.1% formic acid as mobile phase B. The gradient elution started at 7% of solution B, increased to 40% of solution B for 91.12 min, increased to 99.9% of solution B until 92.72 min, persisted at 99.9% of solution B until 106 min, decreased to 7% of solution B until 106.1 min, and then persisted at 7% of solution B until the run ended at 120 min. Mass spectrometry was performed in the positive and resolution (V) modes, with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 35000 and ion mobility, and in the data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. The ion mobility separation (IMS) used an IMS wave velocity of 600 m.s-1 (HDMSE); the transfer collision energy increased from 19 to 55 V in high-energy mode; the cone and capillary voltages were 30 and 2750 V, respectively; and the source temperature was 70 °C. For time-of-flight (TOF) parameters, the scan time was set to 0.5 s in continuum mode, and the mass range was 50-2000 Da. Human [Glu1] fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich) at 100 fmol.µL-1 was used as an external calibrant, and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 s. Mass spectrum acquisition was carried out over 90 min using MassLynx v.4.0 software (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Spectra processing and comparative analysis were performed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics v. 2.0 software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK). The following search parameters were used: 150 counts for the low-energy threshold, 50 counts for the elevated energy threshold, and 750 counts for the intensity threshold; a missed cleavage of one; a minimum fragment ion per peptide equal to two, a minimum fragment ion per protein equal to five, and a minimum peptide per protein equal to two; fixed modifications of the carbamidomethyl (C) group and variable modifications of the oxidation (M) and phosphoryl (STY) groups; a default maximum false discovery rate of (FDR) 1%; a peptide score greater than four and a peptide maximum mass error of 10 ppm. The C. papaya protein database, from Phytozome V12.1 (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html) was used for protein identification. The label-free relative quantitative analyses were performed based on the normalized protein ion counts. After the data were processed, only proteins present in all three runs were considered. Based on the analyzed by analysis of variance (ANOVA; p<0.05) results, differentially abundant proteins were considered up-regulated if their Log2 fold change (FC) was greater than 0.5 and down-regulated if their Log2 FC was less than -0.5. Finally, the proteins were submitted to functional characterization by Blast2GO software (www.blast2go.com) (Conesa et al., 2005). Sequences with a biological process not identified by Blast2GO were manually analyzed with the UniprotKB (http://www.uniprot.org/blast/), NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and Phytozome (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/pz/portal.html#) online BLAST tools. BLAST was performed against the nonredundant (nr) Plants/viridiplantae_protein_sequences database using the following settings: number of blast hits, 20; blast E-value cut-off, 1.0 x 10-6; blast program, BLASTP; high-scoring segment pair length cut-off, 33; low complexity filter.

### Publication Abstract
The use of light-emitting diode (LED) lamps has been shown to be a promising approach for improving somatic embryo maturation during somatic embryogenesis. The aim of this work was to study the influence of the light source on somatic embryo differentiation and its relationship with the differential abundance of proteins in the Carica papaya L. 'Golden' embryogenic callus at 14 days of maturation. The white plus medium-blue (W<sub>m</sub>B) LED and fluorescent lamp treatments produced an average of 82.4 and 47.6 cotyledonary somatic embryos per callus, respectively. A shotgun proteomics analysis revealed 28 upaccumulated and 7 downaccumulated proteins. The proteins upaccumulated in the embryogenic callus matured under the W<sub>m</sub>B LED lamp compared with that matured under the fluorescent lamp included indole-3-acetic acid-amido synthetase (GH3) and actin-depolymerizing factor 2 (ADF2), which are involved in the regulation of auxin levels by auxin conjugation and transport. Additionally, proteins related to energy production (aconitate, ADH1, GAPCp, PKp and TPI), cell wall remodeling (PG and GLPs), and intracellular trafficking (NUP50A, IST1, small GTPases and H<sup>+</sup>-PPase) showed significantly higher abundance in the embryogenic callus incubated under the W<sub>m</sub>B LED lamp than in that incubated under the fluorescent lamp. The results showed that the W<sub>m</sub>B LED lamp improved somatic embryo maturation in association with the differential accumulation of proteins in the C. papaya 'Golden' embryogenic callus.

### Keywords
Somatic embryogenesis, Comparative proteomics led, Carica papaya l., Clonal propagation, Light-emitting diode, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.  Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.
UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL DO NORTE FLUMINENSE

### Submitter
Vanildo Silveira

### Lab Head
Dr Vanildo Silveira
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.  Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil.


