### Accession
PXD007090

### Title
Proteome, acetylome and succinylome analysis of pCAR1-free and pCAR1-harbouring Pseudomonas putida KT2440 (2)

### Description
The impact of the conjugative plasmid pCAR1, which is involved in carbazole degradation, on the proteome, acetylome, and succinylome of host Pseudomonas putida KT2440 was investigated using a stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative analysis.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labeling, pCAR1-free and pCAR1-harbouring strains of a lysine auxotroph of KT2440 (ΔlysA1ΔlysA2) were grown in minimal succinate medium supplemented with lysine (“light”) and 13C6-lysine (“heavy”), respectively. Cells of the logarithmic and early stationary phases were collected. Equal amounts of proteins from the pCAR1-free and pCAR1-harbouring strains were mixed and digested by trypsin, and subjected to nano LC-MS/MS analysis to detect the proteome. To detect the acetylome and succinylome, trypsin digestion followed by affinity enrichment of acetylated and succinylated peptides were performed using anti-acetyllysine and anti-succinyllysine antibodies, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples were analysed by reverse-phase nano HPLC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer. The acquired MS raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (Ver.1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific). For identification data were searched against P. putida KT2440 and pCAR1 protein sequence databases (NC_002947 and NC_011838) using the MASCOT search engine (Ver. 2.5.1). The search parameters were set to allow for up to two missed cleavages. Variable modifications included 13C6-label (Lys), oxidation (Met), and acetylation (Lys and protein N-terminus) for acetylome samples or succinylation (Lys and protein N-terminus) for succinylome samples. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the interplay between a plasmid and its host system is a bottleneck towards prediction of the fate of plasmid-harbouring strains in the natural environments. Here, we studied the impact of the conjugative plasmid pCAR1, involved in carbazole degradation, on the proteome of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 using SILAC method. Furthermore, we investigated two acyl lysine modifications (acetylation and succinylation) that respond to the metabolic status of the cell and are implicated in regulation of various cellular processes. The total proteome analysis revealed that the abundance of key proteins involved in metabolism, signal transduction and motility was affected by pCAR1 carriage. In total, we identified 1359 unique acetylation sites on 637 proteins and 567 unique succinylation sites on 259 proteins. Changes in the acylation status of proteins involved in metabolism and translation by pCAR1 carriage were detected. Remarkably, acylation was identified on proteins involved in important plasmid functions, including partitioning and carbazole degradation, and on nucleoid-associated proteins that play a key role in the functional interaction with the chromosome. This study provides a novel insight on the functional consequences of plasmid carriage and improves our understanding of the plasmid-host cross-talk.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Pcar1, Pseudomonas putida kt2440, Silac

### Affiliations
UTokyo
Biotechnology Research Center, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

### Submitter
Saori Kosono

### Lab Head
Dr Saori Kosono
Biotechnology Research Center, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.


