### Accession
PXD032785

### Title
SWATH-MS based characterization for proteome profile data of chemicals

### Description
Profile data analysis is useful to reveal the mode of action of low molecular weight compounds. Although transcriptome data have been the main target of the profile data analysis, it is unknown whether omics data in different layers could deserve the profile data analysis. In the first place, what is not described as numerical data does not serve for analyses. Therefore, understanding the characteristics of omics data in different layers is crucial. In this study, we examined whether proteome data obtained by SWATH-MS (Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical Mass Spectra) is useful to understand the mode of action of low molecular weight compounds. We demonstrated that proteome data obtained by SWATH-MS was useful for profile data analyses to the same extent as transcriptome data. Furthermore, we revealed a new mode of action of natural compound harmine as a result of profile data analysis using SWATH-MS data.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were seeded in 6-well plates at 1.0×105 cells/well and maintained for 48 hours. After drug treatment, cell morphology was checked by eye observation through microscope. After that, cells were washed twice with PBS and collected using cell scraper. Pelleted cells were stored in -80℃ freezer until being used for experiments. Briefly, 40-50 µg protein of MCF7 cells were solubilized in denaturing buffer (7 M guanidium hydrochloride, 0.5 M Tris–HCl (pH 8.5), 10 mM EDTA). The solubilized proteins were reduced by dithiothreitol for 1 h at 25˚C, and, subsequently, S-carboxymethylated with iodoacetamide for 1 h at 25˚C. The alkylated proteins were precipitated with methanol-chloroform-water mixture. The precipitates were solubilized in 6 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and diluted 5-fold with 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) containing 0.05% ProteaseMax surfactant (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The dilutions were reacted with lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C, Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Osaka, Japan) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:100 for 3 h at 30˚C. Subsequently, Lys-C digested proteins were treated with TPCK-treated trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:100 for 16 h at 37˚C. After C18 clean up, the protein digestions of MCF7 cells were injected into an NanoLC 425 system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) coupled with an electrospray-ionization Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA), which was set up for a single direct injection and analyzed by SWATH-MS acquisition. The peptides were directly loaded onto a self-packed C18 analytical column, prepared by packing ProntoSIL 200-3-C18 AQ beads (3 μm, 120Å, BISCHOFF Chromatography, Germany) in a PicoFrit tip (ID 75 μm, PF360-75-10-N5, New Objective) of 20 cm length. After sample loading, the peptides were separated and eluted with a linear gradient; 98% A: 2% B to 65% A: 35% B (0-120 min), increase to 0% A: 100% B (120-121 min), maintained at 0% A: 100% B (121-125 min), reduced to 98% A: 2% B (125-126 min), and then maintained at 98% A: 2% B (126-155 min). Mobile phase A composition was 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The flow rate was 300 nL/min. The eluted peptides were positively ionized and measured in the SWATH mode. The measurement parameters are described as follows: SWATH window, 64 variable windows from 400 m/z to 1200 m/z; Product ion scan range, 50-2000 m/z; declustering potential, 100; rolling collision energy value, 0.0625 × [m/z of each SWATH window] - 3.5; collision energy spread, 15; accumulation time, 0.05 second for each SWATH window).

### Data Protocol
Spectral alignment and data extraction from SWATH data were performed with the SWATH Processing Micro App in Peakview version 2.2 (SCIEX) using two spectral libraries: an in-house spectral library and a publicly available pan human library (PHL) for increasing the identification number of expressed proteins. The parameters for peak data extraction by Peakview were described as follows: Number of Peptide per Protein, 999; Number of transitions per Peptide, 6; Peptide Confidence Threshold, 99%; False Discovery Rate (FDR) Threshold, 1.0%; XIC Extraction Window, ±4.0 min; XIC width (ppm), 50.

### Publication Abstract
Transcriptomic data of cultured cells treated with a chemical are widely recognized as useful numeric information that describes the effects of the chemical. This property is due to the high coverage and low arbitrariness of the transcriptomic data as profiles of chemicals. Considering the importance of posttranslational regulation, proteomic profiles could provide insights into the unrecognized aspects of the effects of chemicals. Therefore, this study aimed to address the question of how well the proteomic profiles obtained using data-independent acquisition (DIA) with the sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra, which can achieve comprehensive and arbitrariness-free protein quantification, can describe chemical effects. We demonstrated that the proteomic data obtained using DIA-MS exhibited favorable properties as profile data, such as being able to discriminate chemicals like the transcriptomic profiles. Furthermore, we revealed a new mode of action of a natural compound, harmine, through profile data analysis using the proteomic profile data. To our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the properties of proteomic data obtained using DIA-MS as the profiles of chemicals. Our 54 (samples) &#xd7; 2831 (proteins) data matrix would be an important source for further analyses to understand the effects of chemicals in a data-driven manner.

### Keywords
Mcf7, New mode of action, Swath-ms, Olsa

### Affiliations
Tohoku University
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University

### Submitter
Risa Sato

### Lab Head
Dr Yasuo Uchida
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University


