### Accession
PXD033900

### Title
Identification of dGTP-interacting mitochondrial proteins by affinity purification and LC-ESI-MS/MS

### Description
Imbalanced mitochondrial dNTP pools are known players in the pathogenesis of multiple human diseases. However, we have shown that dGTP is largely overrepresented over the other dNTPs in mitochondria of mouse tissues and human cultured cells. Here, we have performed affinity purification studies and identified NDUFA10, an accessory subunit of respiratory complex I, as the protein binding most of the dGTP contained in mitochondria. This interaction provides a possible link between oxidative metabolism and regulation of dNTP availability and thus with DNA maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
5 mg of fresh mouse liver mitochondria obtained by differential centrifugation were lysed at 1 mg/mL in binding buffer BB (75 mM Hepes pH 7.9; 200 mM NaCl; 5% glycerol; 1 mM DTT; 2% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside [DDM]; 1x cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail without EDTA [PrIC; Roche]; 1x phosphatase inhibitor cocktail PhosSTOP™ [PhIC; Roche]) for 15 min on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4°C and further precleared by incubation with blank agarose (Jena Bioscience) for 45 min at 4°C and 15 min at room temperature (RT). The precleared supernatants were incubated with 60 µL/mg blank or immobilized ɣ-amino-octyl-dGTP agarose (Jena Bioscience) for 15 min at RT followed by 45 min at 4ºC for affinity purification. Resins were pre-equilibrated with at least 3 volumes of BB prior to incubation with the lysates. All steps involving bead transfer were performed by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 2 min at 4°C. After binding, beads were washed for 5 min in washing buffer (75 mM Hepes pH 7.9; 200 mM NaCl; 5% glycerol; 1 mM DTT; 0.05% DDM; 1xPrIC; 1xPhIC) at 4ºC as follows: 4 x 5 mL, 1 x 3 mL and 1 x 1 mL. Later, we treated beads for 30 min at RT with at least two-bead volumes of elution buffer (75 mM Hepes pH 7.9; 85 mM dGTP; 200 mM NaCl; 1 mM DTT; 1xPrIC; 1xPhIC) and centrifuged at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4ºC. Eluted proteins were precipitated with 15% TCA and 0.2% sodium deoxycholate. After overnight (ON) incubation, samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g, washed with ice-cold acetone, air-dried and reconstituted in 2 x SDS loading buffer (125 mM Tris pH 6.8; 4% SDS; 20% glycerol; 200 mM DTT; 1% bromophenol blue). pH was adjusted with 1 M Tris pH 9.  Eluted proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE. The gel was fixed for 1 h in 45% methanol/1% acetic acid followed by ON staining with Coomassie Blue G250 (G250) solution (17% (NH4)2SO4; 0.1% G250; 34% methanol; 0.5% acetic acid). 4 bands (1-4) were visualized, excised, minced and washed with 200µL of 50 mM NH₄HCO₃/50% ethanol for 20 min and dehydrated with 200µL of ethanol for 20 min. Samples were reduced with 200 μl of 10 mM DTT in 50 mM NH₄HCO₃ for one hour at 56°C, followed by 30 min (in the dark) alkylation with 200 μl of 55 mM Iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH₄HCO₃. The gel pieces were then washed with 200µL of 25 mM NH₄HCO₃ for 20 min, and dehydrated with 100µL of acetonitrile (ACN) for 10 min. The acrylamide pieces were rehydrated and fully covered in a 2.7 ng/µL modified porcine trypsin (Promega) solution in 25 mM NH₄HCO₃ (40 µL). After ON trypsin digestion at 37ºC, peptides were extracted by incubation with 20 µL of ACN for 15 min at 37ºC, followed by 30 min at RT with 130µL of 0.2% TFA. The eluted peptides were SpeedVac-dried and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Tryptic digests were analyzed using a linear ion trap Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific [Thermo]). Xcalibur software package, version 2.2.0 (Thermo) was used for Instrument control. Peptide mixtures were fractionated by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo) with a two-linear-column system. Digests were loaded onto a trapping guard column (EASY-column, 2 cm long, ID 100 µm and packed with Reprosil C18, 5 µm particle size from Proxeon, Thermo) at 4µL/min. Then, samples were eluted from the analytical column (EASY-column, 10 cm long, ID 75 µm and packed with Reprosil, 3 µm particle size from Proxeon, Thermo). Separation was achieved with a mobile phase of 0.1% formic acid in water (Buffer A’) and ACN with 0.1% formic acid (Buffer B’), and applying a linear gradient from 0 to 35% of buffer B’ for 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Ions were generated applying a voltage of 1.9 kV to a stainless steel nano-bore emitter (Proxeon, Thermo), connected to the end of the analytical column, on a Proxeon nano-spray flex ion source. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. A scan cycle was initiated with a full-scan MS spectrum (m/z 300-1600) acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. The 20 most abundant ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation fragmentation in the linear ion trap when their intensity exceeded a minimum threshold of 1000 counts, excluding singly charged ions. Accumulation of ions for both MS and MS/MS scans was performed in the linear ion trap, and the AGC target values were set to 1 × 106 ions for survey MS and 5000 ions for MS/MS experiments. The maximum ion accumulation time was 500 and 200 ms in the MS and MS/MS modes, respectively. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired per spectrum. Ions subjected to MS/MS with a relative mass window of 10 ppm were excluded from further sequencing for 20 s. For all precursor masses, a window of 20 ppm and isolation width of 2 Da was defined. Orbitrap measurements were performed enabling the lock mass option (m/z 445.120024) for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate mgf files. Processed runs were loaded to ProteinScape software (Bruker Daltonics) and peptides were identified using Mascot (Matrix Science) to search the SwissProt database, restricting taxonomy to mouse proteins. MS/MS spectra were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment tolerance of 0.8 Da, trypsin specificity with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Significance threshold for the identifications was set to p<0.05 for the probability-based Mascot score, minimum ions score of 20, and the identification results were filtered to 1% FDR at peptide level, based on searches against a Decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
Imbalanced mitochondrial dNTP pools are known players in the pathogenesis of multiple human diseases. Here we show that, even under physiological conditions, dGTP is largely overrepresented among other dNTPs in mitochondria of mouse tissues and human cultured cells. In addition, a vast majority of mitochondrial dGTP is tightly bound to NDUFA10, an accessory subunit of complex I of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. NDUFA10 shares a deoxyribonucleoside kinase (dNK) domain with deoxyribonucleoside kinases in the nucleotide salvage pathway, though no specific function beyond stabilizing the complex I holoenzyme has been described for this subunit. We mutated the dNK domain of NDUFA10 in human HEK-293T cells while preserving complex I assembly and activity. The NDUFA10<sup>E160A/R161A</sup> shows reduced dGTP binding capacity in vitro and leads to a 50% reduction in mitochondrial dGTP content, proving that most dGTP is directly bound to the dNK domain of NDUFA10. This interaction may represent a hitherto unknown mechanism regulating mitochondrial dNTP availability and linking oxidative metabolism to DNA maintenance.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse, Pull-down, Dgtp

### Affiliations
Vall d'Hebron Research Institute-CIBERER
Research Group on Neuromuscular and Mitochondrial Disorders, Vall d’Hebron Institut de Recerca, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia

### Submitter
Yolanda Cámara

### Lab Head
Dr Ramon Martí
Research Group on Neuromuscular and Mitochondrial Disorders, Vall d’Hebron Institut de Recerca, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia


