### Accession
PXD015659

### Title
Site mapping of PGK1 O-GlcNAcylation

### Description
To identify the site(s) of O-GlcNAcylation on PGK1, we transiently co-expressed Flag-tagged PGK1 and OGT in HEK293T cells. After immunoprecipitation using anti-Flag M2 beads and in-gel trypsin digestion, resulted peptides were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis

### Sample Protocol
Flag-tagged PGK1 and HA-tagged OGT were co-transfected in HEK293T cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After 48 h, Flag-tagged PGK1 was isolated from the cells using anti-Flag-M2 magnetic beads. The bound protein was eluted in a buffer (4% SDS and 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). After SDS-PAGE (8-15% Bis-Tris gels) and staining with Bio-Safe Coomassie blue R250 Stain (0.25%; Bio-Rad), The PGK1 protein band was excised and manually digested in-gel with trypsin. The extracted peptides were lyophilized and reconstituted in 1×binding buffer (Glycoprotein Isolation Kit WGA, Thermo Scientific) and incubated with WGA lectin resin (Glycoprotein Isolation Kit WGA, Thermo Scientific) at 4°C with end-to-end rotation overnight. The resin was washed according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and the bound peptides were eluted with the provided elution buffer.

### Data Protocol
The eluent was further purified by reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent 1100) using a preparative reverse-phase column (Agilent Eclipse XDB-C18; 5μm, 9.4×250 mm) and a gradient of 5–30% B buffer over 20 min at 4 ml min-1 (A buffer, 0.5% aqueous AcOH; B buffer, 100% MeCN). Fractions eluting between 5–12 min were collected, pooled, lyophilized and subjected to nanoLC-LTQ-CID/ETD-MS analysis on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos. Data search were performed by Proteome Discovery (MASCOT search engine, version 1.3) with O-GlcNAc (Ser/Thr) set as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Many cancer cells display enhanced glycolysis and suppressed mitochondrial metabolism. This phenomenon, known as the Warburg effect, is critical for tumor development. However, how cancer cells coordinate glucose metabolism through glycolysis and the&#xa0;mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle is largely unknown. We demonstrate here that phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK1), the first ATP-producing enzyme in glycolysis, is reversibly and dynamically modified with O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) at threonine 255 (T255). O-GlcNAcylation activates PGK1 activity to enhance lactate production, and simultaneously induces PGK1 translocation into mitochondria. Inside mitochondria, PGK1 acts as a kinase to inhibit pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex to reduce oxidative phosphorylation. Blocking T255 O-GlcNAcylation of PGK1 decreases colon cancer cell proliferation, suppresses glycolysis, enhances the&#xa0;TCA cycle, and inhibits tumor growth in xenograft models. Furthermore, PGK1 O-GlcNAcylation levels are elevated in human colon cancers. This study highlights O-GlcNAcylation as an important signal for coordinating glycolysis and the&#xa0;TCA cycle to promote tumorigenesis.

### Keywords
Pgk1

### Affiliations
zhejiang university
Zhejiang university

### Submitter
Hao Nie

### Lab Head
Dr Wen Yi
zhejiang university


