### Accession
PXD013353

### Title
Probing the Tumour Suppressor Function of BAP1 in CRISPR-engineered Human Liver Organoids

### Description
The deubiquitinating enzyme BAP1 is a tumour suppressor, amongst others involved in cholangiocarcinoma. BAP1 has many proposed molecular targets, while its Drosophila homolog is known to deubiquitinate Histone H2AK119. Here, we mutate BAP1 by CRISPR/Cas9 in normal human liver organoids. We find that BAP1 controls the expression of junctional/cytoskeleton components by regulating chromatin accessibility. Consequently, we observe loss of multiple epithelial characteristics, while motility increases. Importantly, restoring the catalytic activity of BAP1 in the nucleus rescues these cellular and molecular changes. We engineer human liver organoids to combine four common cholangiocarcinoma mutations (TP53, PTEN, SMAD4, NF1). In this genetic background, BAP1 loss results in acquisition of malignant features upon xenotransplantation. Thus, control of epithelial identity through the regulation of chromatin accessibility appears a key aspect of BAP1’s tumour suppressor function. Organoid technology combined with CRISPR/Cas9 provides an experimental platform for mechanistic studies of cancer gene function in a human context.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared and mass spectrometry performed as described in (Lindeboom et al., 2018). Briefly, organoids were harvested with Cultrex Organoids Harvesting Solution (Trevigen) and lysed by using SDS buffer (4% SDS, 1 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris pH 7,5) for 3 min at 95°C followed by sonication (Biorupter Pico, 5 cycles 30s on/off). Protein lysates (65μg / sample) were alkylated with chloroacetamide and digested with trypsin using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al., 2009b). For absolute quantification, 1,5 μg of a standard range of proteins (UPS2, Sigma) was added to each lysate. The digested peptides were subjected to a Strong Anion eXchange (SAX) (Wisniewski et al., 2009a) fractionation, flow through, pH11, 8, 5, and 2 samples were collected. The peptides were desalted and stored on StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Samples were applied to on‐line Easy‐nLC 1000 (Thermo) separation using different 214‐min gradients of acetonitrile (7–30%, 5–23%, 8–27%, 9–30%, 11–32%, and 14–32% for unfractionated, flow through, pH 11, 8, 5, and 2, respectively) followed by washes at 60% followed by 95% acetonitrile for 240 min of total data collection. Mass spectra were collected on a LTQ‐Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) in data‐dependent top‐speed mode with dynamic exclusion set at 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were analysed in MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with match-between‐runs, iBAQ, and label‐free quantification enabled. A human UniProt protein sequence database downloaded at 01-12-2015 was used to identify proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The deubiquitinating enzyme BAP1 is a tumor suppressor, among others involved in cholangiocarcinoma. BAP1 has many proposed molecular targets, while its Drosophila homolog is known to deubiquitinate histone H2AK119. We introduce BAP1 loss-of-function by CRISPR/Cas9 in normal human cholangiocyte organoids. We find that BAP1 controls&#xa0;the expression of junctional and cytoskeleton components by regulating chromatin accessibility. Consequently, we observe loss of multiple epithelial characteristics while motility increases. Importantly, restoring the catalytic activity of BAP1 in the nucleus rescues these cellular and molecular changes. We engineer human liver organoids to combine four common cholangiocarcinoma mutations (TP53, PTEN, SMAD4, and NF1). In this genetic background, BAP1 loss results in acquisition of malignant features upon xenotransplantation. Thus, control of epithelial identity through the regulation of chromatin accessibility appears to be a key aspect of BAP1's tumor suppressor function. Organoid technology combined with CRISPR/Cas9 provides an experimental platform for mechanistic studies of cancer gene function in a human context.

### Keywords
Human liver organoids, Human tumor modelling, Crispr-cas9, Human cholangiocarcinoma, Multiomics, Bap1

### Affiliations
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences
Hubrecht Institute, KNAW (Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences), Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Rik Lindeboom

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Clevers
Hubrecht Institute, KNAW (Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences), Utrecht, The Netherlands


