### Accession
PXD009596

### Title
Human Pap test LC-MS/MS metaproteomics

### Description
The human cervical-vaginal area contains proteins derived from microorganisms that may prevent or predispose women to gynecological conditions. The liquid Pap test fixative is an unexplored resource for analysis of microbial communities and the microbe-host interaction. Previously, we showed that the residual cell-free fixative from discarded Pap tests of healthy women could be used for mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomic identification of cervical-vaginal proteins.  In this study, we reprocessed these MS raw data files for metaproteomic analysis to characterize the microbial community composition and function of microbial proteins in the cervical-vaginal region. This was accomplished by developing a customized protein sequence database encompassing microbes likely present in the vagina. High-mass accuracy data were searched against the protein FASTA database using a two-step search method within the Galaxy for proteomics platform.  Data was analyzed by MEGAN6 (MetaGenomeAnalyzer) for phylogenetic and functional characterization.  We identified over 300 unique peptides from a variety of bacterial phyla and Candida.  Peptides corresponding to proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism, oxidation-reduction, and transport were identified.  By identifying microbial peptides in Pap test supernatants it may be possible to acquire a functional signature of these microbes, as well as detect specific proteins associated with cervical health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
De-identified residual (waste) Pap test samples in SurePathTM vials were obtained from women at least 50 years old with normal cervical cytology and without obvious signs of infection or visible blood contamination.SurePathTM vials were vortexed to resuspend proteins and to release cells/proteins from the cervical sampling device that remained in each vial.  The residual fluid was centrifuged for 5 min at 800 x g to pellet the cells, and the supernatant was removed for analysis.  Equal volumes of the cell-free SurePathTM fixative from 40 normal Pap test samples (median age of 58 years; ranging from 50-76 years) were pooled prior to trypsin digestion.  Pooled and individual samples (~50-100 µg protein) were prepared for mass spectrometry by Filter Aided Sample Preparation.  Peptides were 2D fractionated offline by high pH reverse phase chromatography and submitted to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA) as described in Boylan et al., Clin Proteomics 2014, 11:30.

### Data Protocol
High accuracy MS/MS data was searched using a two-step method (Jagtap et al., 2013 and Jagtap et al., 2015)against a database composed of microbial and human protein sequences.  The database of microbial species of the urogenital tract [331,242 sequences from 130 bacterial proteomes plus Candida was generated from Human Microbiome Project reference genomes using an in-house program, MicPrDB (https://github.com/somiafiuni/MicPrDB) and merged with a “target” version of the Human Uniprot database and contaminant sequences, and 3-frame translated cDNA protein sequences [2,674,981 sequences in the 3-frame translated cDNA (EnSEMBL) database plus the target version of  the human Uniprot database with contaminant sequences (November 2014)]. The database search was performed with ProteinPilot™ within the Galaxy for proteomics (Galaxy-P) platform. Accession numbers associated with all microbial peptide identifications from the first search were merged with the human database plus contaminants to create a “target-decoy” database used for the calculation of the false discovery rate (FDR).  This refined target-decoy database of human plus bacterial proteins and translated 3-frame cDNA sequences was used to search high mass accuracy peak lists to identify distinct peptide sequences from spectra at 5% local FDR.  High confidence peptide matches were analyzed by using the downstream metagenomic/metaproteomic analysis tool MEGAN6 to parse BLASTP searches of peptide spectra. The BLASTP settings were as described in Jagtap et al., 2015 and Rudney et al., 2015.Briefly, all instances of the spectrum for a given peptide (PSMs) were retained, to allow for spectral counting. The PSMs list was split into a list of short sequences (≤30 amino acids), and a list of long sequences (>30 amino acids) and searched against the BLAST-NR database, using BLASTP parameters described below. For short peptide sequences, the following parameters were used - set expectation value cutoff: 200 000; scoring matrix: PAM30; gap costs: Existence 9, Extension 1; word size for wordfinder algorithm: 2; multiple hits window size: 15; threshold: minimum score to add a word to the BLAST lookup table: 16; and use composition-based statistics: 0 or F. Longer peptides were subjected to following BLASTP parameters: set expectation value cutoff: 10; scoring matrix: BLOSUM62; gap costs: existence 11, extension 1; word size for wordfinder algorithm: 3; multiple hits windowsize: 40; threshold: minimum score to add a word to the BLAST lookup table: 11; use composition-based statistics: 2,T or D.  MEGAN6 uses the Lowest Common Ancestor algorithm (LCA) to assign reads to taxa. It allows functional analyses using several different ontological systems. The greatest number of hits was obtained with InterPro2GO for functional classification to Gene Ontology categories and IPR protein families, and those results are reported here. The MEGAN6 parameters used were: minScore = 25.0, maxExpected = 10.0, top Percent = 10.0, min Support = 1, weighted LCA Percent = 80.0.

### Publication Abstract
The human cervical-vaginal area contains proteins derived from microorganisms that may prevent or predispose women to gynecological conditions. The liquid Pap test fixative is an unexplored resource for analysis of microbial communities and the microbe-host interaction. Previously, we showed that the residual cell-free fixative from discarded Pap tests of healthy women could be used for mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomic identification of cervical-vaginal proteins. In this study, we reprocessed these MS raw data files for metaproteomic analysis to characterize the microbial community composition and function of microbial proteins in the cervical-vaginal region. This was accomplished by developing a customized protein sequence database encompassing microbes likely present in the vagina. High-mass accuracy data were searched against the protein FASTA database using a two-step search method within the Galaxy for proteomics platform. Data was analyzed by MEGAN6 (MetaGenomeAnalyzer) for phylogenetic and functional characterization. We identified over 300 unique peptides from a variety of bacterial phyla and Candida. Peptides corresponding to proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism, oxidation-reduction, and transport were identified. By identifying microbial peptides in Pap test supernatants it may be possible to acquire a functional signature of these microbes, as well as detect specific proteins associated with cervical health and disease.

### Keywords
Pap test, Metaproteomics, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Professor, Department of Laboratory Medicine &Pathology Adjunct Professor, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology& Women's Health Director, Ovarian Cancer Early Detection Program University of Minnesota Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Kristin Boylan

### Lab Head
Dr Amy P. N. Skubitz
Professor, Department of Laboratory Medicine &Pathology Adjunct Professor, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology& Women's Health Director, Ovarian Cancer Early Detection Program University of Minnesota Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA


