### Accession
PXD018001

### Title
Drosophila melanogaster eye Proteomics

### Description
Absolute (molar) quantification determines proteins stoichiometry in complexes, networks and metabolic pathways. We employed MS Western workflow to determine molar abundances of proteins critical for morphogenesis and phototransduction (PT) in eyes of Drosophila melanogaster using a single chimeric 264 kDa protein standard that covers, in total, 197 peptides from 43 proteins. Each protein was independently quantified with 2 to 4 proteotypic peptides with the coefficient of variation of less than 15 %, better than 1000-fold dynamic range and sub-femtomole sensitivity. We determined molar abundances and stoichiometric ratios of the components of the PT machinery and the rhabdomere, and how they are changing when rhabdomere morphogenesis is perturbed by genetic manipulation of the evolutionary conserved gene crumbs (crb).

### Sample Protocol
Absolute quantification of proteins was performed by the method of MS Western 9 . Eyes of 3-5 days old Drosophila females of each genotype were dissected to a total of 40 per biological replicate in a lysis buffer and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for later analysis. The frozen eyes were thawed on ice and crushed using a micro hand mixer (Carl Roth, Germany). The crude extract was then centrifuged for 15 min at 13000 rpm and 4oC to remove tissue debris. The clear supernatant was then transferred to a fresh Protein Lo-Bind tube (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The total protein content from the eyes was loaded on a precast 4 to 20% gradient 1-mm thick polyacrylamide mini-gels from Anamed Elektrophorese (Rodau, Germany) for 1D SDS PAGE. Separate gels were run for 1 pmol of BSA and isotopically labelled chimeric standard containing 3 to 5 unique quantitypic peptides per each of 43 eye proteins 9. QunatitypicQuantitypic peptides were selected in preliminary semi-quantitative LC-MS/MS analyses of eyes extract; they did not contain methionine and cysteine amino acid resides and miscleaved sites. The Coomassie stained lane was cut into 6 slices and each of which was co-digested by trypsin (Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade from (Promega, Madison) together with bands of BSA and of the chimera standard. MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode on a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with a Dionex Ultimate 3000- HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Peptide matching was carried out using Mascot v.2.2.04 software (Matrix Science, London, UK) by searches against Drosophila melanogaster (July 2015) protein sequence database downloaded from Uniprot site. Precursor mass tolerance was 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.03 Da; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: acetyl (protein N terminus), oxidation (M); labels: 13C(6) (K) and 13C(6)15N(4) (R); cleavage specificity: trypsin, with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. Peptides having the ions score above 15 were accepted (p < 0.05). The chromatographic alignment and feature detection were carried using Progenesis LC-MS v.4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK). The absolute quantification was performed by calculating the abundances for the labelled and the unlabelled peptide using an in-house software. The statistical analysis were carried out in OriginLab (2017) (OriginLab Corp, Northampton MA).

### Publication Abstract
Absolute (molar) quantification of proteins determines their molar ratios in complexes, networks, and metabolic pathways. MS Western workflow is employed to determine molar abundances of proteins potentially critical for morphogenesis and phototransduction (PT) in eyes of Drosophila melanogaster using a single chimeric 264&#xa0;kDa protein standard that covers, in total, 197 peptides from 43 proteins. The majority of proteins are independently quantified with two to four proteotypic peptides with the coefficient of variation of less than 15%, better than 1000-fold dynamic range and sub-femtomole sensitivity. Here, the molar abundance of proteins of the PT machinery and of the rhabdomere, the photosensitive organelle, is determined in eyes of wild-type flies as well as in crumbs (crb) mutant eyes, which exhibit perturbed rhabdomere morphogenesis.

### Keywords
Drosophila, Qconcat

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics

### Submitter
Bharath Kumar Raghuraman

### Lab Head
Dr Andrej Shevchenko
Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics


