### Accession
PXD021875

### Title
Comparative proteomics analyses of rhizomes and stolons in bermudagrass

### Description
As an important perennial warm-season turfgrass species, bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon L.) form underground-growing rhizomes and aboveground-growing stolons simultaneously, making it a fast propagating clonal plant with strong regeneration ability. However, the intrinsic difference between the two types of specialized stems are still uncharacterized, especially at the molecular level. In the current study, we compared the internode proteomes of rhizomes and stolons at the same developmental stage in the bermudagrass cultivar Yangjiang using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ). The results indicated that 228 protein species were differentially accumulated in the two specialized stems. These DAPs comprise complex protein networks to finely regulate diverse cellular activities in the two types of specialized stems. Notably, photosynthesis and flavonoid biosynthesis were significantly regulated in stolons, whereas sucrose and starch metabolism were significantly regulated in rhizomes.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from the second internodes of stolons and rhizomes using the previously described method. Briefly, approximately 0.5 g of sample was ground in liquid nitrogen to a fine powder, which was completely suspended in 10 ml of lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% SDS, 40 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.5, 10 mM DTT, 2 mM EDTA and 1 mM PMSF) with sonication on ice. The homogenate was centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C to remove debris. Subsequently, four volumes of ice-cold acetone were added, and the proteins were precipitated at -20 °C overnight. After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C, the precipitate was collected and washed with ice-cold acetone three times. The collected protein pellets were dried with N2 to remove any remaining acetone. The dried protein powder was resuspended in 1 ml of dissolution buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0). The resulting supernatant was reduced by adding 10 mM DTT. The reduction continued for 30 min at 56°C. The sample was then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein concentration was determined using the Bradford method.      For trypsin digestion, 100 μg of protein was diluted with four volumes of digestion buffer (100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and digested with 2 μg of Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, USA) at 37°C overnight. The digested peptides were desalted using a Strata-X C18 SPE column (Sigma, Shanghai, China), dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 500 mM TEAB (pH 8.0). For iTRAQ labeling, six peptide samples from stolons and rhizomes (each with three biological replicates) were labeled with iTRAQ tags following the manufacturer's protocol for the iTRAQ® Reagents 8-PLEX Multiplex Kit (SCIEX, Framingham, USA). Specifically, the three stolon samples were labeled with iTRAQ8-113, iTRAQ8-114 and iTRAQ8-115, whereas the three rhizome samples were labeled with iTRAQ8-116, iTRAQ8-117 and iTRAQ8-118, respectively. The labeled peptides were pooled together, desalted using a Strata-X C18 SPE column, dried by vacuum centrifugation and fractionated into 12 fractions using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, USA) with a Durashell C18 column (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å).       For LC-MS/MS analyses, the fractionated peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile, 98% H2O), loaded onto a reversed-phase precolumn (20 mm × 100 μm, 5 μm) and separated using a reversed-phase analytical column (150 mm × 75 μm, 3 μm) in an Eksigent nanoLC system (Eksigent, Livermore, USA). The gradient for MS analysis was set as follows: starting at 7% to 20% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile, 2% H2O) over 24 min, then 20%–35% solvent B over 8 min, thereafter increasing to 80% solvent B over 55 min and holding at 80% solvent B for the last 3 min, with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS data were collected using information-dependent acquisition mode in a high speed TripleTOF™ 5600plus mass spectrometer (ABSciex, Concord, Canada) coupled with the Eksigent nanoLC system. The mass spectrometer was operated in a manner in which a 0.25 s survey scan (MS) in the mass range of 350-1500 m/z was collected, from which the top 30 ions were selected for automated MS/MS in the mass range of 100-1500 m/z and each MS/MS event consisted of a 0.05 s scan. Once a target ion had been fragmented by MS/MS, its mass and isotopes were excluded for a period of 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Analyses of the raw MS spectra generated by LC-MS/MS were performed with ProteinPilot™ 4.5 software (ABSciex) using the Paragon algorithm. Specifically, a high-confidence peptide database (210,172 sequences, 69,486,195 residues) derived from a full-length transcriptome sequencing project of bermudagrass was used as the search database. The searches were performed using the following settings: type of search, iTRAQ 8-PLEX (peptide labeled); enzyme, trypsin; Cys alkylation, iodoacetamide; instrument, TripleTOF™ 5600plus; bias correction, true; background correction, true; ID focus, biological modifications; search effort, thorough ID; protein mass, unrestricted; unused score, ≥ 1.3; confidence, ≥ 95%; unique peptides, ≥ 1. For protein species quantification, the quantitative protein ratios between stolons and rhizomes were weighted and normalized by the mean ratio of the three replicates. Only ratios ≥ 2 or ≤ 0.5 and p-values≤ 0.05 in one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Student-Newman-Keuls tests were considered as differentially accumulated protein species.

### Publication Abstract
As an important perennial warm-season turfgrass species, bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon L.) forms underground-growing rhizomes and aboveground-growing stolons simultaneously, making it a fast propagating clonal plant with strong regeneration ability. In the current study, we compared the internode proteomes of rhizomes and stolons at the same developmental stage in the bermudagrass cultivar Yangjiang using iTRAQ. The results indicated that 228 protein species were differentially accumulated in the two specialized stems. In agreement with the different contents of starch, chlorophyll, anthocyanin and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> in the two types of stems, photosynthesis and flavonoid biosynthesis were enriched with differentially accumulated protein species (DAPs) in stolons, whereas starch and sucrose metabolism, glycolysis, and H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> metabolism were enriched with DAPs in rhizomes. Burying stolons in the soil resulted in the gradual degradation of chlorophyll and anthocyanin, accumulation of starch, and increment of H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, which is similar to the physiological characteristics of rhizomes. These results collectively revealed that stolons and rhizomes of bermudagrass have significant differences at the proteome level and light might play important regulatory roles in the discrepancy of the proteome profiles and specialization of the two stems, providing new insights into the adaptation of plant stems to aboveground and underground growth. BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: As two types of specialized stems that grow underground and aboveground respectively, rhizomes and stolons play important roles in overwintering and ecological invasion of many perennial and clonal plants. However, because rhizomes and stolons rarely coexist in single plant species, the differences between the two stems remain unclear at the molecular level. In this study, through an iTRAQ comparative proteomic analysis, we reported the identification of 228 differentially accumulated protein species (DAPs) in rhizomes and stolons of bermudagrass for the first time. We found that the 228 DAPs were interconnected to form protein networks in regulating diverse cellular activities and biochemical reactions. We also observed that stolons growing underground showed similar physiological activities and DAP expression as those of underground-growing rhizomes, suggesting that light might play important regulatory roles in the specialization of stolons and rhizomes. These results expanded our understanding of the mysterious adaption of plant stems to different growth conditions.

### Keywords
Cynodon dactylon, Stolon, Rhizome, Proteome, Bermudagrass

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China
Yangzhou University

### Submitter
Bing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Zhang
College of Animal Science and Technology, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China


