### Accession
PXD028038

### Title
Mass Dynamics 1.0: A streamlined, web-based environment for analyzing, sharing and integrating Label-Free Data

### Description
Label Free Quantification (LFQ) of shotgun proteomics data is a popular and robust method for the characterization of relative protein abundance between samples. Many analytical pipelines exist for the automation of this analysis and some tools exist for the subsequent representation and inspection of the results of these pipelines. Mass Dynamics 1.0 (MD 1.0) is a web-based analysis environment that can analyse and visualize LFQ data produced by software such as MaxQuant. Unlike other tools, MD 1.0 utilizes cloud-based architecture to enable researchers to store their data, enabling researchers to not only automatically process and visualize their LFQ data but annotate and share their findings with collaborators and, if chosen, to easily publish results to the community. With a view toward increased reproducibility and standardisation in proteomics data analysis and streamlining collaboration between researchers, MD 1.0 requires minimal parameter choices and automatically generates quality control reports to verify experiment integrity. Here, we demonstrate that MD 1.0 provides reliable results for protein expression quantification, emulating Perseus on benchmark datasets over a wide dynamic range.

### Sample Protocol
Different LFQ benchmarking datasets are chosen to verify that MD 1.0 recovers comparable results to Perseus. These include two datasets with PRIDE14 identifiers PXD0002793, and PXD01098115  which have ground truth and one “real world” scenario , with PRIDE identifier PXD00205716. For information on the sample processing of each of these datasets please see the corresponding pride submissions.

### Data Protocol
This submission includes input files, generated from RAW data in other PRIDE repositories that were processed with MaxQuant and output files, provided by the MD 1.0 platform.   MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 was used with default parameters except for an LFQ min. ratio of 1 and enabling match between runs. Output files used for quality control include msms.txt, peptides.txt, modificationSpecificPeptides.txt, proteinGroups.txt and evidence.txt whilst only proteinGroups.txt was used for quantification. Where MaxQuant labelled spiked proteins as potential contaminants, proteinGroups.txt was manually edited to remove this label so these rows would be present in subsequent processing.   MD 1.0 Processing is described as follows:   Statistical analysis is performed using R version 4.1.0.  An experiment design file is generated from user input during experimental setup in the application prior to processing which is thereafter automatic. Samples can be grouped into two or more experimental groups  and all pairwise statistical comparisons will be generated between those groups by the following workflow.  The samples or experimental groups uploaded over several submissions will not be automatically compared.   The following steps are then taken to perform the analysis: 1. Proteins corresponding to reverse sequences, potential contaminants, and proteins only identified by site are filtered out.  2. Intensities provided inside proteinGroups.txt are converted to log2 scale.  3. Missing values are imputed using the MNAR (“Missing Not at Random”) method with a mean shift of negative 1.8 and a standard deviation of 0.3 as recommended in the Perseus protocol.  4. Protein groups where more than 50% of intensities are imputed for both conditions are excluded from the quantitative analysis. 5. Differential expression (DE) analysis is performed  using linear models with the Bioconductor package limma, in particular using the limma-trend method. P-values are calculated using the robust empirical Bayes procedure to compute moderated t-statistics.   6. The Benjamini–Hochberg correction is used to account for multiple testing.    All the code used to reproduce the above-mentioned workflow using MaxQuant output is provided in the LFQProcessing R package, available on GitHub. To extend the use of the workflow to output from software other than MaxQuant, the analysis steps were also implemented for a generic format of summarised protein intensities and are available in the MassExpression R package on GitHub

### Publication Abstract
Label-free quantification (LFQ) of shotgun proteomics data is a popular and robust method for the characterization of relative protein abundance between samples. Many analytical pipelines exist for the automation of this analysis, and some tools exist for the subsequent representation and inspection of the results of these pipelines. Mass Dynamics 1.0 (MD 1.0) is a web-based analysis environment that can analyze and visualize LFQ data produced by software such as MaxQuant. Unlike other tools, MD 1.0 utilizes a cloud-based architecture to enable researchers to store their data, enabling researchers to not only automatically process and visualize their LFQ data but also annotate and share their findings with collaborators and, if chosen, to easily publish results to the community. With a view toward increased reproducibility and standardization in proteomics data analysis and streamlining collaboration between researchers, MD 1.0 requires minimal parameter choices and automatically generates quality control reports to verify experiment integrity. Here, we demonstrate that MD 1.0 provides reliable results for protein expression quantification, emulating Perseus on benchmark datasets over a wide dynamic range. The MD 1.0 platform is available globally via: https://app.massdynamics.com/.

### Keywords
Maxquant, Web-based software tool, Benchmarking, Automated data analysis, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
MassDynamics
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia, Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia

### Submitter
Joseph Bloom

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Webb
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia, Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia


