### Accession
PXD042864

### Title
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida and mutant supernatant LC-MS/MS analysis

### Description
A T3SS translocators deletion strain (△popBD) of P. plecoglossicida was constructed to investigate the function of T3SS. Then comparative secretome analysis of the P. plecoglossicida wild-type (WT) and △popBD mutant strains was conducted by label-free quantitation (LFQ) mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
10 mL of P.plecoglossicida WT or △popBD mutant culture were incubated for 12 h (exponential phase) and 24 h (stationary phase), shaking at 200 rpm at 28 ℃. After incubation, the culture supernatants secreted by P. plecoglossicida were collected and centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 5 min. Afterward, the sample was passed through a 0.22 μm membrane filter to ensure that no intact bacteria remained. Proteins in culture supernatants were precipitated overnight on ice with 6% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA, Sigma), collected after centrifuging at 15,000 × g for 15 min at 4°C, and washed twice with ice-cold 80% (v/v) acetone. Then the precipitate samples were solubilized in SDT (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6) buffer for sample lysis and protein extraction. The amount of protein was quantified using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method was used to digest proteins with trypsin. After digesting, the peptides were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed ID 7 mm, volume 3 mL; Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation. Upon centrifugation, the solutions were reconstituted in 40 μL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. For each sample, 20 g of protein was mixed with 5 x loading buffer and boiled for 5 minutes. The proteins were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14 mA, 90 min), and visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. A Q Exactive mass spectrometer conjunction with an Easy nLC were used to perform LC-MS/MS analysis. Reverse-phase trap columns connected to C18-r reversed-phase analytical columns were loaded with peptides in 0.1% formic acid, then separated with a linear gradient of buffer B, which consist of 84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode.  MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top10 method, dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. It was set to 3e6 for the automatic gain control (AGC) target and 10 milliseconds for the maximum injection time. The dynamic exclusion duration set as 40.0 s. A survey scan was acquired at 70,000 m/z 200 resolution, and HCD spectra resolution were acquired at 17,500 m/z 200, with a 2 m/z isolation width. The normalized collision energy was 30 eV, and the underfill ratio was defined as 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
To identify and quantify the peptides in each sample, the raw MS data was combined and searched using MaxQuant 1.5.3.17 software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsried, Germany). We identified the proteins by searching the UniProt P. plecoglossicida database (ID: UP000014440) which contains 4883 protein sequences. The identification parameters were set as follows: trypsin was selected as the enzyme; maximum missed cleavages set as 2; fixed modifications- carbamidomethyl; variable modifications-methionine oxidation; main search, first search and MS/MS tolerance were 6 ppm, 20 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) of protein and peptide identification was ≤0.01. For the quantified proteins, only p-values below 0.05 and fold changes above 2.0 were considered significant by the two-sided t-test. The protein sequences were searched using the NCBI database and InterProScan software. A multi-class SVM classification system, CELLO (http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/), was used to predict protein subcellular localization. The gene ontology (GO) terms were mapped, and sequences were annotated using the software program Blast2GO. The GO annotation results were plotted using R scripts. Following annotation, the studied proteins were BLAST searched against the online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://geneonto logy.org/) to retrieve their KEGG orthology identifications were subsequently mapped to pathways in the KEGG database. After annotation, a BLAST search was conducted against the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://geneonto logy.org/) to identify the proteins' KEGG orthology, and then mapped to KEGG pathways. Based on Fisher's exact tests, enriched analyses were performed using the whole set of quantified proteins as the background. Further adjustment of the derived p-values was made using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction. A significant functional category or pathway was defined as having a p-value of less than 0.05. Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) among the studied proteins were determined using STRING software (http://string-db.org/)by retrieving information from the IntAct molecular interaction database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact/)

### Publication Abstract
The Gram-negative bacterium <i>Pseudomonas plecoglossicida</i> has caused visceral granulomas disease in several farmed fish species, including large yellow croaker (<i>Larimichthys crocea</i>), which results in severe economic losses. Type III secretion systems (T3SS) are protein secretion and translocation nanomachines widely employed by many Gram-negative bacterial pathogens for infection and pathogenicity. However, the exact role of T3SS in the pathogenesis of <i>P. plecoglossicida</i> infection is still unclear. In this study, a T3SS translocators deletion strain (&#x25b3;<i>popBD</i>) of <i>P. plecoglossicida</i> was constructed to investigate the function of T3SS. Then comparative secretome analysis of the <i>P. plecoglossicida</i> wild-type (WT) and &#x25b3;<i>popBD</i> mutant strains was conducted by label-free quantitation (LFQ) mass spectrometry. The results show that knockout of T3SS translocators popB and popD has an adverse effect on the effector protein ExoU secretion, flagella assembly, and biofilm formation. Further experimental validations also confirmed that <i>popB-popD</i> deletion could affect the <i>P. plecoglossicida</i> flagella morphology/formation, adherence, mobility, and biofilm formation. These data indicate that a cross-talk exists between the <i>P. plecoglossicida</i> T3SS and the flagella system. Our results, therefore, will facilitate the further under-standing of the pathogenic mechanisms leading to visceral granulomas disease caused by <i>P. plecoglossicida</i>.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas plecoglossicida; secretome; type iii secretion systems; popbd; flagella; lc-ms/ms analysis

### Affiliations
FAFU
Fujian agriculture and forestry university

### Submitter
Pan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Pan Qin
Fujian agriculture and forestry university


