### Accession
PXD033785

### Title
Label Free Quantification Mass Spectrometry Identifies Protein Markers of Chemoresistance in Serous Ovarian Cancer

### Description
Ovarian cancer is still the most lethal gynecological cancer, despite advances in patients’ strati-fication and treatment. Only about 80% of patients respond to the first line of treatment and many suffer a relapse with a treatment resistant disease. Here, we have identified three potential markers for chemoresistance using primary tumour samples. Moreover, we have shown their concurrent regulation in a chemoresistant cell line. This implies those cells as a useful model to study chemoresistance and to test novel drugs.

### Sample Protocol
. Using data independent acquisition nano-flow liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (DIA LC-MS), three protein markers were identified in ovarian cancer patients who did not respond to standard EOC chemotherapy regimens compared with those who did: gelsolin, calmodulin, and thioredoxin. The differential expression of the three protein markers was confirmed by im-munohistochemistry. A Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed high levels of gelsolin and thioredoxin mRNA expression correlated with increased overall and progression free survival, respectively, in a large online repository of EOC patient data. Importantly, differential expression of the three protein markers was further confirmed when comparing parental OVCAR-5 cells to carboplatin resistant OVCAR-5 cells using DIA LC-MS analysis, indicating them as a valuable tool for research into chemoresistance and next generation chemotherapeutic drugs.

### Data Protocol
Inorder to generate spectral libraries for the DIA assay, the DDA spectra were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) with the Andromeda search engine [14] against the UniProt human database.Thestandard Bruker Q-TOF settings with a mass error tolerance of 40 ppm and variable oxidation as methionine, carbamidomethyl of cysteines as fixed modification and trypsin as the digestion enzyme were used. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides, with a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
Eighty percent of ovarian cancer patients initially respond to chemotherapy, but the majority eventually experience a relapse and die from the disease with acquired chemoresistance. In addition, 20% of patients do not respond to treatment at all, as their disease is intrinsically chemotherapy resistant. Data-independent acquisition nano-flow liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (DIA LC-MS) identified the three protein markers: gelsolin (GSN), calmodulin (CALM1), and thioredoxin (TXN), to be elevated in high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) tissues from patients that responded to chemotherapy compared to those who did not; the differential expression of the three protein markers was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Analysis of the online GENT2 database showed that mRNA levels of GSN, CALM1, and TXN were decreased in HGSOC compared to fallopian tube epithelium. Elevated levels of GSN and TXN mRNA expression correlated with increased overall and progression-free survival, respectively, in a Kaplan-Meier analysis of a large online repository of HGSOC patient data. Importantly, differential expression of the three protein markers was further confirmed when comparing parental OVCAR-5 cells to carboplatin-resistant OVCAR-5 cells using DIA LC-MS analysis. Our findings suggest that GSN, CALM1, and TXN may be useful biomarkers for predicting chemotherapy response and understanding the mechanisms of chemotherapy resistance. Proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD033785.

### Keywords
Chemoresistance, Mass-spectrometry, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Lloyd Sansom Chair President Australasian Proteome Society Treasurer international HUPO  Clinical Health Sciences Bradley Building, HB 8-28 North Terrace University of South Australia Adelaide, South Australia 5000 m: +61 434 079 108
Research associate

### Submitter
Parul Mittal

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Peter Hoffmann
Lloyd Sansom Chair President Australasian Proteome Society Treasurer international HUPO  Clinical Health Sciences Bradley Building, HB 8-28 North Terrace University of South Australia Adelaide, South Australia 5000 m: +61 434 079 108


