### Accession
PXD020277

### Title
Site-specific N-glycoproteomic analysis of Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and Hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
In this study,we performed integrated glycoproteomic and global proteomic analysis of tumor tissues of ICC and HCC to investigate the differences in site-specific glycosylation and proteins between ICC and HCC tumors. The paired paracancer tissue were also included as controls to determine the site-specific glycosylation changes in ICC and HCC tumors. The alteration extents in glycopeptide, global proteome, and normalized glycosylation in different sample groups were systematically compared.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue samples were prospectively collected from patients undergoing intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) resection at the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University, China. Proteins were extracted and digested with sequencing grade trypsin. Each peptide and glycopeptide samples underwent triplicate LC-MS/MS runs on an Oritrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer equipped with an Easy-nLC™ 1200 system.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS date of intact glycopeptides and peptides were searched against an in house software and Proteome Discoverer for site-specific glycosylatio and proteomic analysis, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Primary liver cancer, mainly comprising hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC), remains a major global health problem. Although ICC is clinically different from HCC, their molecular differences are still largely unclear. In this study, precision N-glycoproteomic analysis was performed on both ICC and HCC tumors as well as paracancer tissues to investigate their aberrant site-specific N-glycosylation. By using our newly developed glycoproteomic methods and novel algorithm, termed 'StrucGP', a total of 486 N-glycan structures attached on 1235 glycosites were identified from 894 glycoproteins in ICC and HCC tumors. Notably, glycans with uncommon LacdiNAc (GalNAc&#x3b2;1-4GlcNAc) structures were distinguished from their isomeric glycans. In addition to several bi-antennary and/or bisecting glycans that were commonly elevated in ICC and HCC, a number of LacdiNAc-containing, tri-antennary, and core-fucosylated glycans were uniquely increased in ICC. More interestingly, almost all LacdiNAc-containing N-glycopeptides were enhanced in ICC tumor but not in HCC tumor, and this phenomenon was further confirmed by lectin histochemistry and the high expression of &#x3b2;1-4 GalNAc transferases in ICC at both mRNA and protein expression levels. The novel N-glycan alterations uniquely detected in ICC provide a valuable resource for future studies regarding to the discovery of ICC diagnostic biomarkers, therapeutic targets, and mechanism investigations.

### Keywords
Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma(icc), Glycoproteome, Site-specific glycosylation, Lc-ms/ms, Intact glycopeptide, Hepatocellular carcinoma(hcc)

### Affiliations
Northwest University

### Submitter
Jun Li

### Lab Head
Dr Shisheng Sun
Northwest University


