### Accession
PXD024381

### Title
Corynebacterium diphtheriae proteome adaptation to cell culture medium and serum

### Description
ost-pathogen interactions are often studied in vitro using primary or immortal cell lines. This set-up avoids ethical problems of animal testing and has the additional advantage of lower costs. However, the influence of cell culture media on bacterial growth and metabolism is not considered or investigated in most cases. To address this question growth and proteome adaptation of Corynebacterium diphtheriae strain ISS3319 were investigated in this study. Bacteria were cultured in standard growth medium, cell culture medium and fetal calf serum. Mass spectrometric analyses and label-free protein quantification hint to an increased bacterial pathogenicity when grown in cell culture medium as well as an influence of the growth medium on the cell envelope.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria and growth conditions C. diphtheriae strain ISS3319 was cultured under constant shaking in Brain Heart Infusion broth (BHI) (Oxoid), RPMI 1640 (Capricorn, Epsdorfergrund, Germany) or Fetal Calf Serum (FCS) (Capricorn, Epsdorfergrund, Germany) in bluffed flasks at 37 °C. For growth experiments an overnight culture was inoculated to an optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 0.15 and grown at 37 °C under constant shaking. Colony forming units (CFU) and OD600 were determined every hour for 8 h and and after 24 h. Experiments were carried out in three independent biological replicates, mean and standard deviation were calculated for every time point. Sample preparation of proteomic analysis Protein samples were prepared as described. Bacteria grown in BHI medium, RPMI 1640 and FCS were harvested for whole proteome analysis and lysed with a homogenizer using glass beads (5.5 m s-1, 30 s, 5 cycles, 4 °C). 40 µg of extracted proteins were alkylated (40 mM CAA final concentration), precipitated with acetone (80 % final concentration, overnight, 4 °C), resuspended in 100 mM TEAB buffer with 2 µg trypsin and digested overnight at 37 °C. 25 µg of the resulting peptides (three biological replicates of secreted proteins and whole proteome from bacteria grown in BHI, RPMI 1640 and FCS) were purified using C18 stage tips, vacuum dried, resuspended in 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) before supplied for LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry Mass spectrometric analysis were carried out as described previously. For separation of peptides, 10 µg were supplied to a nanoflow Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Sunnydale, CA, USA) and loaded onto a EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific; C18 with 2 µm particle size, 50 cm x 75 µm) with a flow rate of 200 nl min-1 and an increasing acetonitrile concentration over 120 min. An Orbitap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for analysis of all samples using following settings: spray voltage 2000 V, transfer tube temperature 275 °C, scan range for MS 1 detection in the Orbitrap 300–2000 (m/z), 50 ms maximum injection time, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 400,000 and Orbitrap resolution of 120.000. For collision-induced dissociation the most intense ions were selected with collision energy of 35 %. For ion trap detection a maximum injection time of 250 ms and an AGC target of 100 were set.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer program package 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and C. diphtheriae NCTC13129 database (Proteome Id: UP000002198) in UniProt (www.uniprot/proteomes) were used to analyze the resulting raw data files with following settings: I) theoretical masses of peptides were generated with a maximum of two missed cleavages, as described in, II) fixed modification: carbamidomethyl on cysteine, II) dynamic: oxidation of methionine, III) mass tolerance for survey scans: 10 ppm and 0.6 Da for fragment mass measurements, VI) False discovery rate (FDR): 1 % for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Metabolic pathway, Label-free, Diphtheria, Host-pathogen interaction

### Affiliations
FAU Erlangen
Department Biologie Professur für Mikrobiologie (Prof. Dr. Burkovski)

### Submitter
Jens Möller

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Burkovski
Department Biologie Professur für Mikrobiologie (Prof. Dr. Burkovski)


