### Accession
PXD005995

### Title
Label-free differential proteomics analysis of Ba/F3 expressing WT and mutant R98S RPL10

### Description
We recently identified a recurrent mutation in the ribosomal gene RPL10 that results in substitution of residue arginine 98 by a serine (R98S) of the ribosomal protein L10 (RPL10) in the contest of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). To gain insights into the mechanisms by which the RPL10 R98S mutation contributes to T-ALL development, we screened for proteins that are differentially expressed between RPL10 wild type (WT) and RPL10 R98S (R98S) expressing cells. These experiments were conducted in the mouse pro-B Ba/F3 cell line, a well-established hematopoietic model for oncogenic studies.

### Sample Protocol
Cells derived from 3 monoclonal Ba/F3 cultures expressing WT or R98S RPL10 were lysed in lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology) with addition of 5mM Na3VO4 and protease inhibitors (Complete, Roche). Twenty µg of protein as determined by the Bradford method was run through a 12% SDS-PAGE (Bio-Rad) and Coomassie stained using Simply Blue Safe Stain (Invitrogen). Entire SDS–PAGE gel lanes were sliced into pieces and proteins were reduced-alkylated before overnight digestion using Trypsin/LysC Mix (Promega). The resulting peptides were extracted and vacuum dried. Peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips and each sample was fractionated using SCX StageTips. All fractions were again vacuum dried prior to mass spectrometric analysis. For LC MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended and separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system in-line connected with an Orbitrap Q Exactive Mass-Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database searching was performed using Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science), MS-Amanda and SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 against a homemade database consisting of the human RL10 R98S protein (Uniprot Accession: P27635) and in the mouse reference proteome (UniProt release 2015_04; 45182 sequences). All searches were performed with trypsin cleavage specificity, up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed, and ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.05 Da for the fragments. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), phosphorylation (STY) were considered as variable modifications. Further processing of mass spectrometry data was performed in Scaffold 4 software (Proteome Software), using the quantitative value (normalized total spectra) setting. Unsupervised average-linkage hierarchical clustering was performed in IBM SPSS 23.0 with Euclidean distance as similarity metric.

### Publication Abstract
Several somatic ribosome defects have recently been discovered in cancer, yet their oncogenic mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here we investigated the pathogenic role of the recurrent R98S mutation in ribosomal protein L10 (RPL10 R98S) found in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). The JAK-STAT signaling pathway is a critical controller of cellular proliferation and survival. A proteome screen revealed overexpression of several Jak-Stat signaling proteins in engineered RPL10 R98S mouse lymphoid cells, which we confirmed in hematopoietic cells from transgenic Rpl10 R98S mice and T-ALL xenograft samples. RPL10 R98S expressing cells displayed JAK-STAT pathway hyper-activation upon cytokine stimulation, as well as increased sensitivity to clinically used JAK-STAT inhibitors like pimozide. A mutually exclusive mutation pattern between RPL10 R98S and JAK-STAT mutations in T-ALL patients further suggests that RPL10 R98S functionally mimics JAK-STAT activation. Mechanistically, besides transcriptional changes, RPL10 R98S caused reduction of apparent programmed ribosomal frameshifting at several ribosomal frameshift signals in mouse and human Jak-Stat genes, as well as decreased Jak1 degradation. Of further medical interest, RPL10 R98S cells showed reduced proteasome activity and enhanced sensitivity to clinical proteasome inhibitors. Collectively, we describe modulation of the JAK-STAT cascade as a novel cancer-promoting activity of a ribosomal mutation, and expand the relevance of this cascade in leukemia.

### Keywords
Rpl10 r98s, Leukemia, T-all, Ribosomal mutation

### Affiliations
KU Leuven
Department of Oncology, Laboratory for Disease mechanisms in cancer, KU Leuven Campus Gasthuisberg O&N1, Herestraat 49 - box 603 3000 Leuven (Belgium)

### Submitter
Laura Fancello

### Lab Head
Dr Kim de Keersmaecker
Department of Oncology, Laboratory for Disease mechanisms in cancer, KU Leuven Campus Gasthuisberg O&N1, Herestraat 49 - box 603 3000 Leuven (Belgium)


