### Accession
PXD028035

### Title
SILAC & LC-MSMS in total cell extracts or in the secretome of POU5F1B- vs. GFP-overexpressing SW480 cells

### Description
The treatment of colorectal cancer (CRC) is an unmet medical need in absence of early diagnosis. Here, upon characterizing cancer-specific transposable element-driven transpochimeric gene transcripts (TcGTs) produced by this tumor, we found that expression of the hominid-restricted retrogene POU5F1B through aberrant activation of a primate-specific endogenous retroviral promoter is a strong negative prognostic CRC biomarker. Correlating this observation, we could demonstrate that POU5F1B fosters the proliferation and metastatic potential of CRC cells. We further determined that POU5F1B, in spite of its phylogenetic relationship with the POU5F1/OCT4 transcription factor, is a membrane-enriched protein that associates with protein kinases and known targets or interactors as well as with cytoskeleton-related molecules, and induces intracellular signaling events and the release of trans-acting factors involved in cell growth and cell adhesion. As POU5F1B is an apparently non-essential gene only lowly expressed in normal tissues, and as POU5F1B-containing TcGTs are detected in other tumors besides CRC, our data provide interesting leads for the development of cancer therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). SILAC experiments were performed as described (Ong, S.–E. & Mann, M. Nat. Protoc. 2006). POU5F1B- and GFP-overexpressing SW480 cells were grown in parallel in heavy or medium SILAC labeling mixes for 15 days (~9 cell divisions), performing a second independent experiment with inverted labeling. SILAC RPMI 1640 culture medium was complemented with 200 mg/L light L-proline, 150 mg/L heavy L-lysine (K8), and 50 mg/L heavy L-arginine (R10) for the heavy amino-acid labeling; and 200 mg/L light L-proline, 150 mg/L medium L-lysine (K4), and 50 mg/L medium L-arginine (R6) for the medium amino-acid labeling. Medium and heavy cells were combined and lysed as a mixed population. The day 15 time point was used for LC-MS/MS analysis of the total cell proteome after verifying that it allowed ~96% SILAC amino-acid incorporation rate.  For the secretome studies, exponentially growing SILAC-labeled cells were washed twice with PBS and incubated in 10 mL serum-free SILAC medium at 37°C for 24h. The cell death rate was below 2% (measured by trypan blue staining). Conditioned medium (CM) was collected, centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 10 min, filtrated through 0.22 μm membranes adding protease inhibitors (Roche). Medium and heavy labeled CM were combined at equal volumes and stored at -80°C. CM from SILAC cells at day 15, corresponding to maximum amino acid incorporation rate, was used for further analysis. CM was concentrated using Amicon Ultra-4 and -0.5 centrifugal filters with 3 kDa cutoff (Millipore). Each sample was digested by Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (Wiśniewski, JR at al. Nat Methods, 2009) with minor modifications. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was replaced by Tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) as reducing agent and Iodoacetamide by Chloracetamide as alkylating agent. A combined proteolytic digestion was performed using Endoproteinase Lys-C and Trypsin. Peptides were desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips (Kulak NA et al, Nat Methods, 2014) and dried down by vacuum centrifugation. Samples were then fractionated into 12 fractions using an Agilent OFFGEL 3100 system. Resulting fractions were desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips and dried by vacuum centrifugation. For LC MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended and separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system in-line connected with an Orbitrap Lumos Fusion Mass-Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 (Cox, J. & Mann, M. Nat Biotechnol, 2008) against concatenated database consisting of the UniProt human database (Uniprot release 2019_06, 74468 sequences) and common fetal bovine serum proteins (Shin, J. et al. PLOS ONE, 2015). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S,T,Y), Gln to pyro-Glu and acetylation (Protein N-term) were considered as variable modifications. SILAC quantifications was performed by MaxQuant using the standard settings with the re-quantification mode enabled. Significance B values were calculated using Perseus Software (Tyanova S. et al. Nat Methods, 2016). SILAC total cell and secretome candidates were selected when both experimental replicates showed p value<0.05 (outlier detection test as computed by MaxQuant), high intensity (above quantile 25%), and fold changes in the same direction for both replicates.

### Publication Abstract
The treatment of colorectal cancer (CRC) is an unmet medical need in absence of early diagnosis. Here, upon characterizing cancer-specific transposable element-driven transpochimeric gene transcripts (TcGTs) produced by this tumor in the SYSCOL cohort, we find that expression of the hominid-restricted retrogene POU5F1B through aberrant activation of a primate-specific endogenous retroviral promoter is a strong negative prognostic biomarker. Correlating this observation, we demonstrate that POU5F1B fosters the proliferation and metastatic potential of CRC cells. We further determine that POU5F1B, in spite of its phylogenetic relationship with the POU5F1/OCT4 transcription factor, is a membrane-enriched protein that associates with protein kinases and known targets or interactors as well as with cytoskeleton-related molecules, and induces intracellular signaling events and the release of trans-acting factors involved in cell growth and cell adhesion. As POU5F1B is an apparently non-essential gene only lowly expressed in normal tissues, and as POU5F1B-containing TcGTs are detected in other tumors besides CRC, our data provide interesting leads for the development of cancer therapies.

### Keywords
Human, Sw480, Overexpression, Lc-msms, Colorectal cancer, Silac, Pou5f1b

### Affiliations
EPFL

### Submitter
Julien Duc

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Trono
EPFL


