### Accession
PXD016994

### Title
mito-TAILS analysis of EPEC infection

### Description
Mito-TAILS N-terminomics analysis of proteolytic events during EPEC infection of human epithelial cells, on whole-cell level and mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates and enriched mitochondrial proteomes were subjected to TAILS analysis. Lysines and free N-termini were labeled by dimethylation and negatively enriched by extraction of unlabeled tryptic peptides by a HPG-ALD soluble polymer. Enriched N-terminal fractions were desalted and analyzed by nanoLC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were matched against a concatenated human-EPEC database using Maxquant 1.5.2. Variable modifications were N-terminal acetylation, pyroglutamation, oxidation (M). Heavy/light dimethylation on N-terminus and lysine were used as quantitative labels.

### Publication Abstract
Plasmids can provide a selective advantage for microorganisms to survive and adapt to new environmental conditions. Plasmid-encoded traits, such as antimicrobial resistance (AMR) or virulence, impact the ecology and evolution of bacteria and can significantly influence the burden of infectious diseases. Insight about the identity and functions encoded on plasmids on the global scale are largely lacking. Here, we investigate the plasmidome of 24 samples (22 countries, 5 continents) from the global sewage surveillance project. We obtained 105-Gbp Oxford Nanopore and 167-Gbp Illumina NextSeq DNA sequences from plasmid DNA preparations and assembled 165,302 contigs (159,322 circular). Of these, 58,429 carried genes encoding for plasmid-related and 11,222 for virus/phage-related proteins. About 90% of the circular DNA elements did not have any similarity to known plasmids. Those that exhibited similarity had similarity to plasmids whose hosts were previously detected in these sewage samples (e.g., Acinetobacter, Escherichia, <i>Moraxella</i>, Enterobacter, <i>Bacteroides</i>, and Klebsiella). Some AMR classes were detected at a higher abundance in plasmidomes (e.g., macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B, macrolide, and quinolone) compared to the respective complex sewage samples. In addition to AMR genes, a range of functions were encoded on the candidate plasmids, including plasmid replication and maintenance, mobilization, and conjugation. In summary, we describe a laboratory and bioinformatics workflow for the recovery of plasmids and other potential extrachromosomal DNA elements from complex microbiomes. Moreover, the obtained data could provide further valuable insight into the ecology and evolution of microbiomes, knowledge about AMR transmission, and the discovery of novel functions. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> This is, to the best of our knowledge, the first study to investigate plasmidomes at a global scale using long read sequencing from complex untreated domestic sewage. Previous metagenomic surveys have detected AMR genes in a variety of environments, including sewage. However, it is unknown whether the AMR genes were present on the microbial chromosome or located on extrachromosomal elements, such as plasmids. Using our approach, we recovered a large number of plasmids, of which most appear novel. We identified distinct AMR genes that were preferentially located on plasmids, potentially contributing to their transmissibility. Overall, plasmids are of great importance for the biology of microorganisms in their natural environments (free-living and host-associated), as well as for molecular biology and biotechnology. Plasmidome collections may therefore be valuable resources for the discovery of fundamental biological mechanisms and novel functions useful in a variety of contexts.

### Keywords
Infection, Proteolysis, Epec, Tails

### Affiliations
Center for Blood Research, UBC, Vancouver BC
UBC

### Submitter
Theo Klein

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Overall
Center for Blood Research, UBC, Vancouver BC


