### Accession
PXD013328

### Title
Ligand-dependent spatiotemporal signaling profiles of the mu-opioid receptor are controlled by distinct protein-protein interaction networks

### Description
Ligand-dependent differences in the regulation and internalization of the mu-opioid receptor (MOR) have been linked to the degree of severity of the side effects that limit the use of opiates in the treatment of pain. For example, activation of the MOR by morphine and DAMGO ([D-Ala2,N-MePhe4,Gly-ol]-enkephalin) causes distinct patterns of spatiotemporal signaling which are dependent on the distribution pattern of the receptor at the plasma membrane after activation. Morphine stimulation of MOR activates a Gβγ-protein kinase C (PKC)α-phosphorylation pathway that limits the distribution of the MOR and is associated with a sustained increase in cytosolic extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK). In contrast, DAMGO causes a redistribution of the MOR at the plasma membrane (prior to receptor internalization), that facilitates transient activation of cytosolic and nuclear ERK. Here, we use proximity biotinylation proteomics to dissect the different protein-interaction networks that underlie the spatiotemporal signaling of morphine and DAMGO. We found that DAMGO, but not morphine, activates Rac1 (Ras‐related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1). Rac1 activation is dependent on the scaffolding proteins IQ motif-containing GTPase-activating protein-1 (IQGAP1) and Crk-like protein (CRKL), and CRKL is required for the transient increase in nuclear ERK. In contrast, morphine increased the proximity of the MOR to desmosomes, specialized and highly-ordered membrane domains. Knockdown of desmosomal proteins junction plakoglobin (JUP) or desmocolin-1 (DSC1) switched the morphine spatiotemporal signaling profile to mimic that of DAMGO, revealing a transient increase in nuclear ERK. Identifying the MOR-interaction networks that control differential spatiotemporal signaling represents an important step towards understanding how signal compartmentalization contributes to the development of tolerance and dependence.

### Sample Protocol
For analysis by immunoblotting, HEK293 cells in 3.5 mm dishes were transfected with 1 μg FLAG-MOR-APEX2. For analysis by mass spectrometry, HEK293 cells in 10 cm dishes were transfected with 5 μg FLAG-MOR-APEX2, with three plates used for each experimental condition. 48 hours post-transfection, the media was replaced with that containing 500 μM biotin-tyramide (Iris Biotech GmbH) and incubated for 1 hour. During this time, the cells were treated with either vehicle (0.1% v/v DMSO), 1 μM DAMGO or 1 μM morphine (mass spectrometry analysis only) for the indicated time. Biotin-labelling was initiated by addition of 1 mM H2O2 for 1 min. The media was removed, the cells were placed on ice, washed three times with ice-cold quenching buffer (10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM sodium azide in PBS), then incubated in quenching buffer for 20 min. The quenching buffer was removed and the cells were scraped in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.2% w/v SDS, protease mini EDTA-free inhibitor cocktail [Roche], 1 mM DTT). The lysates were transferred to conical tubes containing pre-chilled 20% v/v Triton X-100 in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4. The samples were sonicated on ice (five 30 s on/off cycles at 50% amplitude; Qsonica Q125), centrifuged (16,000xg for 10 min at 4°C) and the supernatants were incubated with either 25 μL (immunoblotting) or 100 μL (mass spectrometry) streptavidin magnetic beads (ThermoFisher Scientific) overnight at 4°C.  After magnetic separation (3 min at room temperature), the supernatant was removed and beads were washed with wash buffer 1 (2% w/v SDS) for 8 min at room temperature. The samples were again separated on a magnetic stand (3 min at room temperature) and then washed once with wash buffer 2 (0.1% w/v deoxycholic acid, 1% v/v Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5) followed by wash buffer 3 (0.5% w/v deoxycholic acid, 0.5% v/v NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM LiCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4) and then final two washes with 100 mM HEPES pH 8.1. For immunoblotting, the proteins were eluted in Laemmli buffer by boiling for 15 min. For mass spectrometry, the proteins were eluted in FASP lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH 7.6, 4% w/v SDS, 100 mM DTT) at 95°C for 15 min. The supernatant was digested with trypsin using the FASP Protein Digestion Kit (Expedeon) overnight at 37°C. Digested peptides were desalted using ZipTips (Merck Millipore). Samples were eluted (70% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid) and then dried by SpeedVac (Labconco). Samples were resuspended (2% v/v acetonitrile, 1% v/v formic acid, 33 nM iRT peptides) by sonication at 37°C for 10 min before LC-MS/MS. HEK293 cells were transfected with MOR-APEX2 and stimulated with the indicated treatments (vehicle, DAMGO, morphine) for 10 min or 60 min on three independent occasions (three biological replicates, 6 samples in each replicate). Time-matched vehicle treated samples were used as controls. Peptide and protein searches were performed using MaxQuant at a FDR threshold of 1% (described in detail below). All 374 identified proteins were input for Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (described in detail below). The statistical significance of the ligand-induced change in log2 for proteins of interest was determined by two-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple comparison test. Using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system equipped with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RS autosampler, an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm x 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) and an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific), the tryptic peptides were separated by increasing concentrations of 80% ACN / 0.1% formic acid at a flow of 250 nl/min for 120 min and analysed with a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using in-house, LFQ-optimized parameters.   In detail, the eluent was nebulised and ionised using a nano electrospray source with a distal coated fused silica emitter (New Objective). The capillary voltage was set at 1.7 kV. The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent acquisition mode to automatically switch between full MS scans and subsequent MS/MS acquisitions. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 375–1575) were acquired in the Orbitrap with 70,000 resolution (at m/z 200) after accumulation of ions to a 3 x 106 target value with a maximum injection time of 54 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s. The 12 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the collision cell by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a fixed injection time of 54 ms, 17,500 resolution and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2 x 105.

### Data Protocol
Acquired .raw files were analysed with MaxQuant v1.6.0.16 (50) to identify and quantify peptides and proteins using the human SwissProt database downloaded from Uniprot in November 2017. The database, which contained 20,243 entries, was appended by the iRT peptide sequences. The parameters for MaxQuant searches were as follows: precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm (parts per million) for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was entered as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was used as the enzymatic protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 1%, using the target-decoy approach and only unmodified and razor peptides were used for quantification. Label-free quantification was switched on with minimum peptide ratio count of 2. The ProteinGroups.txt file generated by MaxQuant was further analyzed with Perseus v1.6.0.7 (51) after proteins that were identified “only-by-site”, reverse hits and potential contaminants were removed. IPA (version 01-14) requires values in all the experimental conditions input for analysis. To maximize the proteins included in this analysis, we performed two rounds of imputation to generate values where a signal was not detected for all experimental conditions.  First, a fixed log2 value of 16 was imputed for the missing experimental conditions when a protein was not identified in vehicle-treated samples but was found in samples treated with either DAMGO or morphine or both, and vice versa. The value used was smaller than the lowest log2 value identified from all 374 proteins (log2 of 17.1). This allowed us to keep proteins in the dataset that are either recruited to MOR or move away from MOR following stimulation. The second imputation step was for missing values for proteins that were not detected in every biological replicate.  In this case, the missing values were subjected to several rounds of imputation with Perseus v.1.6.0.7 to define the optimal imputation parameters. The missing values were randomly replaced from a normal distribution by varying the parameters for width (of the Gaussian distribution relative to the standard deviation of measured values) and down shift (of the Gaussian distribution used for the random numbers). It is important that the imputed values meet three criteria: they do not form a separate normal distribution, they start at approximately the same point for all biological replicates, and the distribution is narrower than that of the measured values. We found a 0.5 width and 1.5 downshift were the best-fit parameters across all replicates.  All values (experimental and imputed) from the three biological replicates were expressed as average log2 change compared to vehicle treated controls. These values were imported into IPA for analysis. First, a core analysis was performed to quickly identify relationships, mechanisms, functions and pathways specific to a particular treatment condition (i.e. DAMGO 10 or 60 min, morphine 10 or 60 min). Second, a comparison between the four treatment conditions was performed to allow prediction of activation/inhibition of canonical pathways and generation of networks of interacting proteins. This allowed us to generate protein-interaction network heat maps (Figures 2B, 3A and 4A and Tables 1-3). Statistical analysis was performed without imputed values (Figure 2C, 3C and 4C).  Please note: Biological replicate 4 was excluded from further analysis due to consistently lower number of proteins identifed across all samples when compared to the other 3 replicates. PM samples (APEX2 targeted to the plasma membrane with a Lyn11 kinase domain) that was designed as an additional plasma membrane control were also excluded due to a difference in plasma membrane distribution compared to the APEX2 tagged mu-opioid receptor (MOP-APEX2). Initial analysis from the 3 replicates revealed that about 30% of protein IDs didn't overlap between these two samples, which would lead to false positive/negative samples and exclusion of potentially useful proteins interacting with the receptor. Hence, we weren't confident in using it as a control and didn't include the dataset in our subsequent analysis. The final list of the data subset used in the manuscript can be found in:  experimentalDesignTemplate-USED FOR DATA ANALYSIS.txt

### Publication Abstract
Ligand-dependent differences in the regulation and internalization of the &#x3bc;-opioid receptor (MOR) have been linked to the severity of adverse effects that limit opiate use in pain management. MOR activation by morphine or [d-Ala<sup>2</sup>,<i>N</i>-MePhe<sup>4</sup>, Gly-ol]enkephalin (DAMGO) causes differences in spatiotemporal signaling dependent on MOR distribution at the plasma membrane. Morphine stimulation of MOR activates a G&#x3b1;<sub>i/o</sub>-G&#x3b2;&#x3b3;-protein kinase C (PKC) &#x3b1; phosphorylation pathway that limits MOR distribution and is associated with a sustained increase in cytosolic extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activity. In contrast, DAMGO causes a redistribution of the MOR at the plasma membrane (before receptor internalization) that facilitates transient activation of cytosolic and nuclear ERK. Here, we used proximity biotinylation proteomics to dissect the different protein-interaction networks that underlie the spatiotemporal signaling of morphine and DAMGO. We found that DAMGO, but not morphine, activates Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 (Rac1). Both Rac1 and nuclear ERK activity depended on the scaffolding proteins IQ motif-containing GTPase-activating protein-1 (IQGAP1) and Crk-like (CRKL) protein. In contrast, morphine increased the proximity of the MOR to desmosomal proteins, which form specialized and highly-ordered membrane domains. Knockdown of two desmosomal proteins, junction plakoglobin or desmocolin-1, switched the morphine spatiotemporal signaling profile to mimic that of DAMGO, resulting in a transient increase in nuclear ERK activity. The identification of the MOR-interaction networks that control differential spatiotemporal signaling reported here is an important step toward understanding how signal compartmentalization contributes to opioid-induced responses, including anti-nociception and the development of tolerance and dependence.

### Keywords
Protein complex, G protein-coupled receptor (gpcr), Proteomics, Opioid, Extracellular signal regulated kinase (erk), Desmosome, Cell compartmentalization, Ras‐related c3 botulinum toxin substrate 1 (rac1)

### Affiliations
Drug Discovery Biology Theme Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences Monash University 399 Royal Parade (Mail address: 381 Royal Parade) Parkville VIC 3052 Australia
Monash University, Melbourne

### Submitter
Srgjan Chivchiristov

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Louise Halls
Drug Discovery Biology Theme Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences Monash University 399 Royal Parade (Mail address: 381 Royal Parade) Parkville VIC 3052 Australia


