### Accession
PXD036899

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of co-immunoprecipitation products of METTL3

### Description
N6-methyladenosine (m6A) methylation of mRNA by the methyltransferase complex (MTC), with core components including METTL3-METTL14 heterodimers and Wilms’ tumor 1-associated protein (WTAP), contributes to breast tumorigenesis, but the mechanism of MTC assembly remains elusive. Here, we identify a novel cleaved form METTL3a (residues 239-580 of METTL3), that is highly expressed in breast cancer. Furthermore, we find that both METTL3a and full-length METTL3 are required for MTC assembly, RNA m6A deposition, as well as cancer cell proliferation. Mechanistically, we find that METTL3a is required for METTL3-METTL3 interaction, which is a prerequisite step for recruitment of WTAP in MTC assembly. Analysis of m6A sequencing data shows that depletion of METTL3a globally disrupts m6A methylation, and METTL3a mediates mTOR activation via m6A-mediated suppression of TMEM127 expression. Consequently, we find that METTL3 cleavage is mediated by proteasome in an mTOR-dependent manner, revealing positive regulatory feedback between METTL3a and mTOR signaling. Our findings reveal METTL3a as an important component for MTC assembly, and suggest the METTL3a-mTOR axis as a potential therapeutic target for breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were solubilized with EBC buffer supplemented with complete protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Rhoche Applied Bioscience). Lysates were clarified by centrifugation and then mixed with primary antibodies or anti-Flag M2 beads (blocked with BSA for 1h) overnight. Bound complexes were washed with NETN buffer six times. The eluate from immunoprecipitation was resolubilized in 8M urea, then each sample was reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated (50  mM IAA, 30 min, room temperature in the dark). After trypsin digestion overnight at 37°C, the peptide was desalted by using C18 StageTip columns and resolubilized in 0.1% formic acid. The liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to the QExactive HF (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75µm*150mm, 3 µm, C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and separated over a 120 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 2–100% buffer B at a 300 nl/min flow rate, where buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ACN. After peptide separation, the QExactive HF was operated in data-dependent mode. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 200) was set to 60,000, while MS/MS scans resolution was set to 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 and MS/MS spectra were correlated against the human Uniprot database (uniprot-Homo sapiens [9606]-192901-20201111.fasta).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
293t  lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, Medical Research Institute, Frontier Science Center for Immunology and Metabolism, jing zhang lab,wuhan university, wuhan china
wuhan university

### Submitter
Chaojun Yan

### Lab Head
Dr Jing zhang
Department of Thyroid and Breast Surgery, Medical Research Institute, Frontier Science Center for Immunology and Metabolism, jing zhang lab,wuhan university, wuhan china


