### Accession
PXD027592

### Title
Protein profile analysis of 12 human vitreous samples using labelfree method

### Description
To study the differences in protein profiles before and after intravitreal ranibizumab (IVR) treatment, 12 vitreous humor (VH) samples were collected from 6 proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) patients before (pre group) and after IVR treatment (post group). LC–MS/MS and bioinformatics analysis were performed to identify differentially expressed proteins.Targeted proteins were validated by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM).

### Sample Protocol
VH samples were lysed, and proteins were extracted by using SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT; pH 7.6). The concentration of protein was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). A filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure17 was used for protein digestion. Two hundred micrograms of protein from each sample was added to 30 μl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0)). Protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37°C. The peptides were desalted on C18 cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (Sigma)), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. UV light spectral density at 280 nm was used to estimate the peptide content. Label-free LC-MS/MS quantification analysis was performed on a trapping ion mobility (IM) mass spectrometer (Bruker, timsTOF™ Pro). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. A Pierce high pH reversed-phase fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific) was used to fractionate samples into 6 fractions by increasing acetonitrile step-gradient elution according to the instructions. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 10 method by dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (100–1700 m/z) for higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The raw MS data for each sample were combined and searched using MaxQuant 1.5.3.17 software

### Data Protocol
Hierarchical clustering analysis was performed by using Cluster 3.0 and Java TreeView software. The protein sequences of the selected differentially expressed proteins were locally searched using NCBI BLAST and InterProScan to find homologous sequences. Gene Ontology (GO) terms were mapped, and the sequences were annotated using the software program Blast2GO (https://www.blast2go.com/). The GO annotation results were plotted by R scripts. Proteins were blasted against the online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://geneontology.org/) to retrieve their KEGG orthology identifications. Enrichment analysis was performed based on Fisher’s exact test. Protein–protein interactions (PPIs) were retrieved from the IntAct molecular interaction database using gene symbols or STRING software, and p-values less than 0.05 were considered significant. IBM SPSS 20.0 (SPSS, Inc., USA) and SAS (version 9.4) were used for statistical analysis. The Venn diagram was generated using an online tool developed by the Van de Peer Laboratory (Bioinformatics & Evolutionary Genomics). Comparisons among groups were conducted using t-test. Definition of proteins with present or absent expression was that, two or more times in one set of samples are not null values, and all the data in the other set are null values. Quantifiable proteins can be defined as more than half of the biological replicates have quantitative information. When screening differentially expressed proteins, the criterion of fold change (FC) >2 times or FC <0.5 times, and P value<0.05 was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) accounts for severe impact on vision, its mechanism is still poorly understood. To compare the differences of vitreous protein profiles in PDR patients before and after a complete anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) loading dose with ranibizumab treatment. Twelve vitreous humor (VH) samples were collected from six PDR patients before (set as pre group) and after (set as post group) intravitreal injection of ranibizumab (IVR) treatment. LC-MS/MS and bioinformatics analysis were performed to identify differentially expressed proteins. Proteins were validated with targeted proteomics using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) in a validation set consisting of samples from the above patients. A total of 2680 vitreous proteins were identified. Differentially expressed proteins were filtrated with fold change &#x2265;2.0 (post group/ pre group protein abundance ratio &#x2265;2 or &#x2264; 0.5) and <i>p</i>-value &lt;0.05. 11 proteins were up-regulated and 17 proteins were down-regulated, while consistent presence/absence expression profile group contains one elevated protein and nine reduced proteins, among which seven proteins were identified as potential biomarkers for IVR treatment through PRM assays. Bioinformatics analysis indicated the up-regulated proteins were significantly enriched in "GnRH secretion" and "Circadian rhythm" signaling pathway. This report represents the first description of combined label-free quantitative proteomics and PRM analysis of targeted proteins for discovery of different proteins before and after IVR treatment in the same patient. IVR treatment may protect against PDR by promoting SPP1 expression through "GnRH secretion" and "Circadian rhythm" signaling pathway.

### Keywords
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy; proteomics; ranibizumab; label-free; lc–ms/ms; prm

### Affiliations
Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai First People’s Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital,Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Eye Diseases, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Ocular Fundus Diseases, Shanghai Engineering Center for Visual Science and Photomedicine, Shanghai engineering center for precise diagnosis and treatment of eye diseases

### Submitter
xinping she

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi Zheng
Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital,Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Eye Diseases, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Ocular Fundus Diseases, Shanghai Engineering Center for Visual Science and Photomedicine, Shanghai engineering center for precise diagnosis and treatment of eye diseases


