### Accession
PXD005903

### Title
Integrated lysine acetylation stoichiometry and proteomics analysis in human cells

### Description
Lysine acetylation is a widespread posttranslational modification that targets a large number of biological pathways. Recent studies reveal that lysine acetylation sites exhibit mainly low stoichiometry. Here we explored three sample preparation methods, the use of detergents for the chemical acetylation reaction in combination with stable and efficient alkylating reagent, to analyze the stoichiometry of acetylation in three human cell lines. We identified and determined the acetylation occupancy in about 1500 protein in each cell line. Lysine acetylation is highly dynamic, we determined variations in the acetylation stoichiometry when nearby residues are phosphorylated. The stoichiometric analysis in combination with quantitative proteomics allowed us to better understand the role of this PTM in different cells. We found that high abundance of the deacetylase SIRT1 correlates with less acetylation occupancy and abundance of ribosomes, proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis, rRNA processing, among others. We confirmed through the inhibition of SIRT1 with EX-527, followed by quantitative proteomics and acetylation stoichiometry analyzes, the negative role of this deacetylase on transcription and translation pathways. In addition, we found that SIRT1 positively regulates several metabolic pathways.

### Sample Protocol
For cell harvest, the culture medium was removed and cells were washed two time with PBS and incubated five minutes with versene solution at 37ºC. Collected cells were washed with cold PBS. Cells were lysed in SDS 4%, DTT 0.1M, Tris 0.1M pH 8.6. Cells were incubated for one minute in lysis buffer and briefly sonicated on ice (20 pulses one second each). Samples were incubated 30 minutes at 40ºC to completely reduce disulfide bridges. Free cysteine residues were modified with IAA for 30 minutes at room temperature in darkness. In solution sample preparation Proteins were precipitated with 9 volumes of cold ethanol overnight at -20ºC, the pellet was washed three times with 90% ethanol solution. Precipitated was solubilized with SDS 0.5%, SDC 0.5%, TEAB 0.1M pH 8.0. Chemical acetylation reaction of unmodified lysine residues was performed in two consecutive steps, of addition of 100 fold molar excess of NAS-d3 in DMSO and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour each step. O-acetylation was reverted incubating the sample with 5% hydroxylamine for 20 minutes. An ethanol precipitation step as previously described was performed and the sample was solubilized in ABC 50mM, SDC 0.5%. Trypsin was added to a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme:substrate) and incubated for 16 h at 37ºC. SDC was removed by ethyl acetate extraction under acidic conditions, one volume ethyl acetate was added to the sample and acidified with TFA 0.5%. After vigorous vortex and centrifugation, organic phase was discarded and an additional step of ethyl acetate extraction without TFA was achieved. Finally, the mixture of peptides was desalted with RP chromatography, dried and stored at -80ºC until LC-MS/MS analysis. In gel sample preparation Proteins were loaded on SDS-PAGE gel, when proteins entered the concentrator gel the run was stopped and the slice was cut. Gel was washed with water, dehydrated with acetonitrile and rehydrated with a solution of TEAB 0.1M containing 100 fold molar excess of NAS-d3 and incubated for one hour at room temperature. This step was repeated once, after washing the gel the O-acetylation was reverted incubating gel with 5% hydroxylamine for 20 minutes. After washing and dehydrating gel slice was rehydrated with ABC 50 mM and trypsin (1:50 enzyme:substrate), incubated at 37ºC for 16 hours. The peptide mixture was extracted in the presence of water/acetonitrile/formic acid. Finally peptides were desalted, dried and store at -80ºC until LC-MS/MS analysis. In filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) The protein sample was load onto 10kDa cutoff filter, subjected to buffer exchange with TEAB 0.1M, SDS 0.5%, SDC 0.5% and incubated with 100 fold molar excess of the lysine acetylation chemical reagent NAS-d3, for 1 hour. A second addition of the acetylating reagent was included and incubated for another hour. O-acetylation was reverted by exchanging the buffer with a solution containing 5% hydroxylamine and incubating for 20 minutes. For protein digestion, the buffer was exchanged with ABC 50mM, SDC 0.5% and trypsin was added to a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme:substrate). The reaction was incubated for 16 h at 37ºC and the mixture of peptides was collected by centrifugation. SDC elimination and preparation of the sample for LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described for the in solution sample preparation.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed on Ultimate 3000 RSLC UPLC nano system from Dionex coupled to a high resolution mass spectrometer Q-Exactive from Thermo. Samples were first trapped on a home-made Pre-Column (Magic AQ C18; 3μm-200 Å; 2cm x 100μm ID) and then separated following a 250 minutes elution gradient using a capillary column at 250μl/min (Nikkyo Technos Co; Magic AQ C18; 3μm-100Å; 15cm x 75μm ID). The mobile phases were the following ones: A) 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water and B) 90:10 (v:v) acetonitrile:water, 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive data-dependent acquisition mode and the full MS range was from 300-2000Th. The ten most intense ions were isolated in the quadrupole and fragmented under HCD with 35% energy. Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed by means of MaxQuant v1.5.3.30 (30) using Arg-C as digestion enzyme and incorporating lysine and N-terminal protein acetylation (normal (d0) and heavy (d3)) as variable modifications, phosphorylation (STY) was also included as variable. The parameters files are included in the supplementary information. For lysine acetylation stoichiometric analysis we used Pview software (16), which calculates the stoichiometry of lysine acetylation based on the XIC. The full software parameters are provided in the supplementary material however, we were highly rigorous for the selection and calculation of acetylated peptides to avoid false positive reports. GRAVY index of identified peptides and proteins was calculated online (http://www.gravy-calculator.de/) by the program developed by Dr. Stephan Fuchs from the University of Greifswald. The functional enrichments of identified proteins were performed online by means of DAVID bioinformatics Resources v6.8.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation is a widespread posttranslational modification affecting many biological pathways. Recent studies indicate that acetylated lysine residues mainly exhibit low acetylation occupancy, but challenges in sample preparation and analysis make it difficult to confidently assign these numbers, limiting understanding of their biological significance. Here, we tested three common sample preparation methods to determine their suitability for assessing acetylation stoichiometry in three human cell lines, identifying the acetylation occupancy in more than 1,300 proteins from each cell line. The stoichiometric analysis in combination with quantitative proteomics also enabled us to explore their functional roles. We found that higher abundance of the deacetylase sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) correlated with lower acetylation occupancy and lower levels of ribosomal proteins, including those involved in ribosome biogenesis and rRNA processing. Treatment with the SIRT1 inhibitor EX-527 confirmed SIRT1's role in the regulation of pre-rRNA synthesis and processing. Specifically, proteins involved in pre-rRNA transcription, including subunits of the polymerase I and SL1 complexes and the RNA polymerase I-specific transcription initiation factor RRN3, were up-regulated after SIRT1 inhibition. Moreover, many protein effectors and regulators of pre-rRNA processing needed for rRNA maturation were also up-regulated after EX-527 treatment with the outcome that pre-rRNA and 28S rRNA levels also increased. More generally, we found that SIRT1 inhibition down-regulates metabolic pathways, including glycolysis and pyruvate metabolism. Together, these results provide the largest data set thus far of lysine acetylation stoichiometry (available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005903) and set the stage for further biological investigations of this central posttranslational modification.

### Keywords
Stoichiometry, Cancer cells, Proteomics, Deacetylase inhibitor, Lysine acetylation, Sirt1

### Affiliations
CCG-UNAM
Programa de Genómica Funcional de Procariontes, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas-UNAM. Av. Universidad s/n, Col. Chamilpa, Cuernavaca, Morelos. CP 62210. México.

### Submitter
Jeovanis Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Manuel Encarnación-Guevara
Programa de Genómica Funcional de Procariontes, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas-UNAM. Av. Universidad s/n, Col. Chamilpa, Cuernavaca, Morelos. CP 62210. México.


