### Accession
PXD030189

### Title
A continuous assay set to screen and characterize novel protein N-acetyltransferases unveils rice GNAT2 activity

### Description
Protein N-acetyltransferases (NATs) belong to the Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferases (GNATs) superfamily. GNATs catalyze the transfer of acetyl from acetyl-CoA to the reactive amine moiety of a wide range of acceptors. NAT sequences are difficult to distinguish from other members of the GNAT superfamily and there are many uncharacterized GNATs. To facilitate the discovery and characterization of new GNATs, we have developed a new continuous, non-radioactive assay. This assay is virtually independent of the substrate and can be used to get substrate specificity hints. We validated first the assay with the well-characterized Schizosaccharomyces pombe NatA (SpNatA). The SpNatA kinetic parameters were determined with various peptides confirming the robustness of the new assay. We reveal that the longer the peptide substrate the more efficient the enzyme. As a proof of concept of the relevance of the new assay, we characterize a NAA90 member from rice (Oryza sativa), OsGNAT2. We took advantage of an in vivo medium-scale characterization of OsGNAT2 specificity to identify and then validate in vitro several specific peptide substrates. With this assay, we reveal long-range synergic effects of basic residues on OsGNAT2 activity. Overall, this new, high-throughput assay allows better understanding of the substrate specificity and activity of any GNAT.

### Sample Protocol
E.coli cultures were grown with pETM41-OsGNAT2 plasmids to express the protein of interest. Theses cells, and control bacteria not expressing OsGNAT2, were harvested and processed following the SILProNAQ protocol. Briefly, the protein were denatured and alkylated using DTT and iodoacetamide, then the free protein N-termini and lysines side-chains were heavily labeled using d3-n-acetoxysuccinimide, before being subjected to trypsin digestion. The resulting peptides mixtures were desalted and fractionated by SCX chromatography. The SCX fractions 2 to 11, enriched in acetylaed N-termini, were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a nanoLC coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos.

### Data Protocol
The 10 individual mass spectrometry raw files corresponding to each sample were analysed together using Mascot Distiller to perform database search and quantitation. The quantitation results were then exported and parsed using the eNcounter script to consolidate the N-terminome analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Protein N-acetyltransferases (NATs) belong to the general control non-repressible 5 (Gcn5)-related N-acetyltransferases (GNATs) superfamily. GNATs catalyze the transfer of acetyl from acetyl-CoA to the reactive amine moiety of a wide range of acceptors. NAT sequences are difficult to distinguish from other members of the GNAT superfamily and there are many uncharacterized GNATs. To facilitate the discovery and characterization of new GNATs, we have developed a new continuous, non-radioactive assay. This assay is virtually independent of the substrate and can be used to get substrate specificity hints. We validated first the assay with the well-characterized <i>Schizosaccharomyces pombe</i> NatA (SpNatA). The SpNatA kinetic parameters were determined with various peptides confirming the robustness of the new assay. We reveal that the longer the peptide substrate the more efficient the enzyme. As a proof of concept of the relevance of the new assay, we characterized a NAA90 member from rice (<i>Oryza sativa</i>), OsGNAT2. We took advantage of an <i>in vivo</i> medium-scale characterization of OsGNAT2 specificity to identify and then validate <i>in vitro</i> several specific peptide substrates. With this assay, we reveal long-range synergic effects of basic residues on OsGNAT2 activity. Overall, this new, high-throughput assay allows better understanding of the substrate specificity and activity of any GNAT.

### Keywords
Modifications, Yeast, Nata, Acetylation, Gnat, N-acetyltransferase, Rice

### Affiliations
Protein Maturation, Cell fate and Therapeutics Institute for Integrative, Biology of the Cell (I2BC)  CNRS UMR9198, Bâtiment 21, 1 avenue de la Terrasse F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France
Institut de Biologie Intégrative de la Cellule - CNRS

### Submitter
Jean Baptiste BOYER

### Lab Head
Dr Carmela GIGLIONE
Protein Maturation, Cell fate and Therapeutics Institute for Integrative, Biology of the Cell (I2BC)  CNRS UMR9198, Bâtiment 21, 1 avenue de la Terrasse F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France


