### Accession
PXD010623

### Title
Protemic analysis of the effect of c-di-GMP and c-di-AMP on the protein expression of Mycobacterium smegmatis

### Description
c-di-GMP and c-di-AMP are important conserved second messenger in bacteria, they play a critical role in a wide range of cellular processes, such as motility, virulence, biofilm formation, cell-cycle progression and cell development, but there are only two c-di-GMP receptors and one c-di-AMP receptors were identified in mycobacteria so far, to identify more c-di-GMP and c-di-AMP receptors we compare the protein expression level of c-di-GMP or c-di-AMP synthesis enzyme overexpression strain with the wild type Mycobacterium smegmatis.

### Sample Protocol
M. smegmatis was grown in 7H9 medium at 37 °C and cultured to OD600 1.2. The cells were suspended in lysis buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 40mM Tris-HCl, pH8.5, 1mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA) and sonicated in ice. The proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 1 h and alkylated by 55 mM IAM in the darkroom for 1 h. The final samples were kept at -80 °C for further analysis. Next step is iTRAQ labeling and SCX fractionation. 100 μg proteins were digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37 °C for 16 h and further processed according to the manufacture’s protocol (Applied Biosystems). SCX chromatography was performed with a LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan).

### Data Protocol
For LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis, each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1% FA) and centrifuged at 20 000g for 10 min. 10μl supernatants were loaded and data acquisition was performed with a Triple TOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON). Raw data files were converted into MGF files and protein identifications were performed by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) against database containing Mycobacterium smegmatis mc2 155 protein sequences. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) is an important second messenger in bacteria, and its regulatory network has been extensively studied. However, information regarding the activation mechanisms of its receptors remains limited. In this study, we characterized the two-component regulator DevR as a new c-di-GMP receptor and further uncovered a novel co-activation mechanism for effective regulation of DevR in mycobacteria. We show that high c-di-GMP levels induce the expression of the <i>devR</i> operon in <i>Mycobacterium smegmatis</i> and increase mycobacterial survival under oxidative stress. The deletion of either DevR or its two-component kinase DevS significantly weakened the stimulating effect of c-di-GMP on oxidative-stress tolerance of mycobacteria. We also found that DevR senses the c-di-GMP signal through its C-terminal structure and that c-di-GMP alone does not directly affect the DNA-binding activity of DevR. Strikingly, c-di-GMP stimulated DevR phosphorylation by the kinase DevS, thereby activating DevR's DNA-binding affinity. In summary, our results indicated that c-di-GMP triggers a phosphorylation-dependent mechanism that co-activates DevR's transcriptional activity. Our findings suggest a novel paradigm for the cross-talk between c-di-GMP signaling and two-component regulatory systems that activates transcription of stress-response genes in bacteria.

### Keywords
Ittaq, C-di-gmp, Mycobacterium smegmatis, C-di-amp

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China

### Submitter
Qingbin Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Zheng-Guo He
National Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China


