### Accession
PXD040466

### Title
Identification of NEDD8 sites at endogenous levels of NEDD8 expression upon NEDP1 (SENP8, DEN1) knockout.

### Description
We developed a strategy that allows the identification of NEDP1 dependent NEDDylation sites under endogenous expression of wild type NEDD8. We combined the use of anti-diGly antibodies that recognise both ubiquitin and NEDD8 modified peptides upon trypsin digestion with short treatment of cells with the ubiquitin E1 inhibitor MLN7243 (UAEi), that dramatically reduces ubiquitin but not NEDD8 modification. By eliminating the majority of ubiquitin-derived diGly peptides upon MLN7243 treatment, we would be able to quantify NEDP1 dependent diGly peptides. Extracts from parental and NEDP1 knockout HCT116 cells both treated with UAEi were used for the isolation of diGly modified peptides and mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Di-Glycine motif peptide identification was performed by Cell Signaling Technology, following UbiScan protocols and instructions (Cell Signaling Technology) using ubiquitin Branch Motif Antibody (K-ε-GG) ♯3925. Peptides were loaded onto 10cm x 75μm PicoFrit Capillary column packed with Magic C18 AQ reversed-phase resin. The column was developed with a 90min linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid delivered at 280nL/min. MS parameters settings: MS run time 96min, MS1 Scan Range (300.0-1500.00), Top 20 MS/MS (Min Signal 500, isolation width 2.0, normalized coll. energy 35.0, activation-Q 0.250, activation time 20.0, lock mass 371.101237, charge state rejection enabled, charge state 1+ rejected, dynamic exclusion enabled, repeat count 1, repeat duration 35.0, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 40.0, exclusion mass width relative to mass, exclusion mass width 10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were evaluated using SEQUEST 3G and the SORCERER 2 platform from Sage-N Research (v4.0, Milpitas CA). Searches were performed against the most recent update of the NCBI human database with mass accuracy of +/- 50ppm for precursor ions and 1Da for product ions. Results were filtered with mass accuracy of +/- 5 ppm on precursor ions and presence of the intended motif (K-ε-GG).

### Publication Abstract
The elimination of aberrant inclusions is regarded as a therapeutic approach in neurodegeneration. In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), mutations in proteins found within cytoplasmic condensates called stress granules (SGs) are linked to the formation of pathological SGs, aberrant protein inclusions, and neuronal toxicity. We found that inhibition of NEDP1, the enzyme that processes/deconjugates the ubiquitin-like molecule NEDD8, promotes the disassembly of physiological and pathological SGs. Reduction in poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase1 activity through hyper-NEDDylation is a key mechanism for the observed phenotype. These effects are related to improved cell survival in human cells, and in <i>C. elegans</i>, <i>nedp1</i> deletion ameliorates ALS phenotypes related to animal motility. Our studies reveal NEDP1 as potential therapeutic target for ALS, correlated to the disassembly of pathological SGs.

### Keywords
Digly, Ubiquitin, Antibody, Anti-digly antibodies, Neddylation, Uaei, Inhibitor, Nedd8

### Affiliations
CRBM-CNRS, Montpellier, France
CRBM-CNRS

### Submitter
Dimitris Xirodimas

### Lab Head
Dr Dimitris Xirodimas
CRBM-CNRS, Montpellier, France


