### Accession
PXD013779

### Title
Characterization of SGK3-PROTAC1, a highly specific SGK3 kinase PROTAC degrader

### Description
SGK3 is a PX domain containing protein kinase activated at endosomes downstream of Class 1 and 3 PI3K family members by growth factors and oncogenic mutations. SGK3 plays a key role in mediating resistance of breast cancer to Class 1 PI3K or Akt inhibitors, by substituting for loss of Akt and restoring proliferative pathways such as mTORC1 signaling. Here we describe the development of SGK3-PROTAC1, a Proteolysis Targeting Chimera (PROTAC) compound formed by the fusion of the 308-R SGK3 inhibitor with the VH032 VHL binding ligand via a 13-atom linker. In HEK293 cells, 0.3 µM SGK3-PROTAC1 induced 50% degradation of endogenous SGK3 within 2 hours, with maximal 85% degradation observed within 8 hours, accompanied by a loss of phosphorylation of NDRG1, an SGK3 substrate. SGK3-PROTAC1 did not degrade closely related SGK1 and SGK2 isoforms and proteomic analysis in HEK293 cells revealed that SGK3 was the only cellular protein whose cellular levels was significantly reduced following treatment with SGK3-PROTAC1. Low doses of SGK3-PROTAC1 (0.1-0.3 µM) restored sensitivity of SGK3 dependent ZR-75-1 and CAMA-1 breast cancer cells to Akt (AZD5363) and PI3K (GDC0941) inhibitors, under conditions which an epimer analogue incapable of binding to the VHL E3 ligase had no impact. SGK3-PROTAC1 suppressed proliferation of ZR-75-1 and CAMA-1 cancer cell lines treated with a PI3K inhibitor (GDC0941) more effectively than could be achieved by a conventional SGK isoform inhibitor (14H). This work provides a further example of the benefit of the PROTAC approach in targeting protein kinase signaling pathways with greater efficacy and selectivity than can be achieved with conventional inhibitors. SGK3-PROTAC1 will be an important reagent to explore the roles of the SGK3 pathway.

### Sample Protocol
THE cells were lysed with 8 M Urea buffer containing protease inhibitor and phosphoatase inhibitors. The cell lysate were digested with Lys-C and trypsin. The peptide from cell lysate digest were desalted using C18 column and were then labelled with TMT tag. The TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated by basic reverse phase chromatography. The concatenated 30 fractions were analysed by orbitrap Fusion Lumos operated in positive ion data dependent mode with synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 analysis for reporter ion quantitation.

### Data Protocol
All the acquired LC-MS data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer software v.2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot search engine. A maximum missed cleavages for trypsin digestion was set to 2. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0. 5 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine (+57.021 Da) and TMT-10plex tags on N termini as well as lysine (+229.163 Da) were set as static modifications. Variable modifications were set as oxidation on methionine (+15.995 Da). Data were searched against a complete UniProt mouse (20,414 entry downloaded at July 2018) with a 1% FDR using Percolator.  Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation. Reporter ion abundances were corrected for isotopic impurities based on the manufacturer’s data sheets. Signal-to-noise (S/N) values were used to represent the reporter ion abundance with a co-isolation threshold of 50% and an average reporter S/N threshold of 10 and above required for quantitation from each MS3 spectra to be used. The S/N value of each reporter ions from each PSM were summed to represent the abundance of the quantified protein. The summed abundance is used for protein quantitation. The precursor spectra with higher than 50% co-isolation were excluded for quantitation. The total peptide amount was used for the normalisation. The quantification were calculated by the average of four biological replicates values. The standard deviation of four biological replicates lower than 25% were used for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
SGK3 is a PX domain containing protein kinase activated at endosomes downstream of class 1 and 3 PI3K family members by growth factors and oncogenic mutations. SGK3 plays a key role in mediating resistance of breast cancer cells to class 1 PI3K or Akt inhibitors, by substituting for the loss of Akt activity and restoring proliferative pathways such as mTORC1 signaling. It is therefore critical to develop tools to potently target SGK3 and obstruct its role in inhibitor resistance. Here, we describe the development of SGK3-PROTAC1, a PROTAC conjugate of the 308-R SGK inhibitor with the VH032 VHL binding ligand, targeting SGK3 for degradation.&#xa0; SGK3-PROTAC1 (0.3 &#x3bc;M) induced 50% degradation of endogenous SGK3 within 2 h, with maximal 80% degradation observed within 8 h, accompanied by a loss of phosphorylation of NDRG1, an SGK3 substrate. SGK3-PROTAC1 did not degrade closely related SGK1 and SGK2 isoforms that are nevertheless engaged and inhibited by 308-R. Proteomic analysis revealed that SGK3 was the only cellular protein whose cellular levels were significantly reduced following treatment with SGK3-PROTAC1. Low doses of SGK3-PROTAC1 (0.1-0.3 &#x3bc;M) restored sensitivity of SGK3 dependent ZR-75-1 and CAMA-1 breast cancer cells to Akt (AZD5363) and PI3K (GDC0941) inhibitors, whereas the cis epimer analogue incapable of binding to the VHL E3 ligase had no impact. SGK3-PROTAC1 suppressed proliferation of ZR-75-1 and CAMA-1 cancer cell lines treated with a PI3K inhibitor (GDC0941) more effectively than could be achieved by a conventional SGK isoform inhibitor (14H). This work underscores the benefit of the PROTAC approach in targeting protein kinase signaling pathways with greater efficacy and selectivity than can be achieved with conventional inhibitors. SGK3-PROTAC1 will be an important reagent to explore the roles of the SGK3 pathway.

### Keywords
Degradation, Protac, Sgk3

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council (MRC) Protein Phosphorylation andUbiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Houjiang Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Houjiang Zhou
Medical Research Council (MRC) Protein Phosphorylation andUbiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK


