### Accession
PXD022110

### Title
Identification of novel protein-coding sequences in Eucalyptus grandis plants by high-resolution mass spectrometry

### Description
Eucalyptus species are widely used in the forestry industry, and a significant increase in the number of sequences available in database repositories has been observed for these species. In proteomics, a protein is identified by correlating the theoretical fragmentation spectrum derived from genomic/transcriptomic data against the experimental fragmentation mass spectrum acquired from large-scale analysis of protein mixtures. Proteogenomics is an alternative approach that can identify novel proteins encoded by regions previously considered as non-coding. This study aimed to confidently identify and confirm the existence of previously unknown protein-coding sequences in the Eucalyptus grandis genome.

### Sample Protocol
Eucalyptus grandis stems were extracted and in-gel digested. The tryptic peptides were submitted to two filtering steps: the first using a Costar® Spin-X® centrifuge tube filters and a second using a Millipore C18 Ziptip® previous to acquisition of mass spectrometric data. Acquisition of high-resolution mass spectra was carried out concomitantly to the chromatographic separation. The spectra were acquired in a Q-Exactive™ (Thermo Scientific) system operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode for the 20 most abundant peptide ions. Later, to validate the identification of novel peptides, the parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) approach was used.

### Data Protocol
Sequences from the following E. grandis National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) RefSeq databases were downloaded and virtually translated into the three possible reading frames using the publicly available Virtual Ribosome v.2.0 software: mRNA (53,109 entries), ncRNA (8,388 entries), and transcribed RNA (4,172 entries). Peptide identification was carried out using the Comet searching tool embedded in the PatternLab for Proteomics tool. Genomic mapping and visualization were performed using a Web-based tool provided by NCBI, Genome Data Viewer (GDV), which is embedded in the tblastn result page. The PEAKS Studio 10.5 de novo sequencing software was used for automated de novo sequencing from MS/MS spectra. In order to detect single amino acid variants, the data sets were searched using the SPIDER software, integrated into the PEAKS software, against the E. grandis reference database.

### Publication Abstract
Eucalyptus species are widely used in the forestry industry, and a significant increase in the number of sequences available in database repositories has been observed for these species. In proteomics, a protein is identified by correlating the theoretical fragmentation spectrum derived from genomic/transcriptomic data against the experimental fragmentation mass spectrum acquired from large-scale analysis of protein mixtures. Proteogenomics is an alternative approach that can identify novel proteins encoded by regions previously considered as non-coding. This study aimed to confidently identify and confirm the existence of previously unknown protein-coding sequences in the Eucalyptus grandis genome. To this end, we used a modified spectral correlation strategy and a dedicated de novo peptide sequencing pipeline. Upon the strategy used here, we confidently identified 41 novel peptide forms and six peptides containing at least one single amino acid substitution. The most representative genomic class of novel peptides was identified as originating from alternative reading frames. In contrast, no clear single amino acid substitution pattern was identified. Validation of the identifications was carried out using a parallel reaction monitoring approach that provided further mass spectrometry support for the existence of the novel peptide sequences. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022110.

### Keywords
Proteomics., Proteogenomics, Parallel reaction monitoring, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Technology, Proteomics, UNESP, Brazil
UNESP

### Submitter
Gabriel Jorge

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriel Lemes Jorge
Department of Technology, Proteomics, UNESP, Brazil


