### Accession
PXD002924

### Title
Nucleocytoplasmic O-Man glycoproteome

### Description
Dynamic cycling of N-Acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) on serine (Ser) and threonine (Thr) residues (O-GlcNAcylation) is an essential process in all eukaryotic cells except yeast, e.g Saccharomyces cerevisiae. O-GlcNAcylation modulates signaling and cellular processes in an intricate interplay with protein phosphorylation, and serves as a key sensor of nutrients by linking the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway (HBP) to cellular signaling. A longstanding conundrum has been how yeast survives without O-GlcNAcylation in light of its similar phosphorylation signaling system. We previously developed a sensitive lectin enrichment and mass spectrometry workflow for identification of the human O-Mannose (O-Man) glycoproteome, and used this to identify a pleothora of O-linked mannose glycoproteins in human cell lines including the large family of cadherins and protocadherins. Here, we applied the workflow to yeast with the aim to characterize the yeast O-Man glycoproteome, and doing so we discovered hitherto unknown O-Man glycosites on nuclear, cytoplasmic and mitochondrial proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The type of nucleocytoplasmic proteins and the localization of identified O-Man residues mirrors that of the O-GlcNAc glycoproteome in other eukaryotic cells, indicating that the two different types of O-glycosylations serve the same important biological functions. The discovery opens for exploration of the enzyme machinery that is predicted to regulate the discovered nucleocytoplasmic O-Man glycosylation. It is likely that manipulation of this type of O-Man glycosylation will have wide applications for yeast bioprocessing.

### Sample Protocol
LWAC isolation of O-Man glycopeptides Cell extracts were prepared from a total of 100 OD600 units of packed yeast cells with acid washed 5 mm glass beads in ice-cold 0.1% Rapigest (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate by vortexing in reciprocal shaker (Hybaid RiboLyser) for 4 x 25 s with 1 min intervals at 4°C. Samples were digested with 25 µg trypsin (Roche) over night (ON), heat-inactivated by incubation at 95°C, 20 min and treated with 8U PNGaseF ON at 37°C. An additional 4 U PNGase F was added and incubated for 4 h at 37°C. The digests were acidified with 12 µl TFA, incubated at 37°C, 20 min, cleared by centrifugation at 10,000 × g, 10 min and purified by Sep-Pak C18 (Waters) columns. The LWAC protocol for isolation of O-Man glycopeptides was as previously described (16).  nLC/MS/MS.  Mass spectrometric analyses were performed essentially as previously described (16). Samples were analyzed on a set up composed of an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via a nanoSpray Flex ion source to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro hybrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The EASY-nLC 1000 was equipped with a polar end-capped C18-silica column; 21 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter and 1.9-μm particle size. Briefly, a precursor MS1 scan (m/z 355–1,700) of intact peptides was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution setting of 30,000, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS2 and ETD-MS2 of the five most abundant multiply charged precursors in the MS1 spectrum.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described (16) with minor modifications as outlined below. Raw data files (.raw) were processed using the Sequest HT node and searched against the canonical S. cerevisiae proteome (7225 entries) downloaded from the Uniprot database (October, 2013). Spectral assignments at the medium confidence level (p>0.01) and below were resubmitted to a second Sequest HT node using semi-specific tryptic cleavage. Final results were filtered for high-confidence (p<0.01) identifications only. Spectra matched to peptides with nucleocytoplasmic O-Man modifications were inspected manually to verify the accuracy of the assignments. Signal peptides were retrieved manually from Uniprot or through the SignalP tool (server version 4.1); transmembrane domains were predicted with TMHMM (server version 2.0); both tools available at http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/.

### Publication Abstract
Dynamic cycling of N-Acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) on serine and threonine residues (O-GlcNAcylation) is an essential process in all eukaryotic cells except yeast, including Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe. O-GlcNAcylation modulates signaling and cellular processes in an intricate interplay with protein phosphorylation and serves as a key sensor of nutrients by linking the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway to cellular signaling. A longstanding conundrum has been how yeast survives without O-GlcNAcylation in light of its similar phosphorylation signaling system. We previously developed a sensitive lectin enrichment and mass spectrometry workflow for identification of the human O-linked mannose (O-Man) glycoproteome and used this to identify a pleothora of O-Man glycoproteins in human cell lines including the large family of cadherins and protocadherins. Here, we applied the workflow to yeast with the aim to characterize the yeast O-Man glycoproteome, and in doing so, we discovered hitherto unknown O-Man glycosites on nuclear, cytoplasmic, and mitochondrial proteins in S. cerevisiae and S. pombe. Such O-Man glycoproteins were not found in our analysis of human cell lines. However, the type of yeast O-Man nucleocytoplasmic proteins and the localization of identified O-Man residues mirror that of the O-GlcNAc glycoproteome found in other eukaryotic cells, indicating that the two different types of O-glycosylations serve the same important biological functions. The discovery opens for exploration of the enzymatic machinery that is predicted to regulate the nucleocytoplasmic O-Man glycosylations. It is likely that manipulation of this type of O-Man glycosylation will have wide applications for yeast bioprocessing.

### Keywords
O-glycoproteomics, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Departments of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark

### Submitter
Adnan Halim

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Clausen
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Departments of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark


