### Accession
PXD013847

### Title
Role of Ssd1 in modulating protein abundance in aneuploid wild yeast

### Description
We discovered that wild yeast strains can tolerate extra chromosomes, a condition known as aneuploidy, whereas well-studied laboratory strains cannot.  Understanding why some cells can tolerate aneuploidy and others cannot could have far-reaching impact, as for example, 85% of solid tumors are aneuploidy and often benefit from extra chromosomes, and thus identifying mechanisms of aneuploidy sensitization could have therapeutic applications.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells were lyzed by adding methanol up to 90%; extracted proteins were digested using trypsin in solution, desalted, separated using capillary chromatography, and ionized into Orbitrap Tribrid Lumos mass spectrometer. Raw spectra were collected over 2 hr gradient, and each sample was injected twice.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched in MaxQuant (v. 1.6.1.0) against custom Saccharomyces cerevisiae YPS1009 strain database. Protein abundances were determined using MaxLFQ using default settings with the addition of "match between runs."

### Publication Abstract
Aneuploidy is highly detrimental during development yet common in cancers and pathogenic fungi - what gives rise to differences in aneuploidy tolerance remains unclear. We previously showed that wild isolates of <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> tolerate chromosome amplification while laboratory strains used as a model for aneuploid syndromes do not. Here, we mapped the genetic basis to Ssd1, an RNA-binding translational regulator that is functional in wild aneuploids but defective in laboratory strain W303. Loss of <i>SSD1</i> recapitulates myriad aneuploidy signatures previously taken as eukaryotic responses. We show that aneuploidy tolerance is enabled via a role for Ssd1 in mitochondrial physiology, including binding and regulating nuclear-encoded mitochondrial mRNAs, coupled with a role in mitigating proteostasis stress. Recapitulating <i>ssd1&#x394;</i> defects with combinatorial drug treatment selectively blocked proliferation of wild-type aneuploids compared to euploids. Our work adds to elegant studies in the sensitized laboratory strain to present a mechanistic understanding of eukaryotic aneuploidy tolerance.

### Keywords
Yeast, Aneuploidy, Ssd1, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison

### Submitter
Evgenia Shishkova

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua Coon
University of Wisconsin - Madison


