### Accession
PXD020818

### Title
The length distribution of MHC-I binding peptides

### Description
The current study provides an opportunity to identify specific MHC I motifs in vitro. The combination of random peptide library, LC-MS/MS and De Novo Sequencing can be an important complement to the identification of MHC I motif. Insight into the length distribution of MHC-I binding peptides helps us better understand the molecular mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Random peptide library was synthesized for renaturing the specific MHC class I molecules in vitro. The refolded complexes were concentrated and purified with a Superdex 200 16/60 column in Tris buffer (20 mM Tris [pH 8] and 50 mM NaCl), followed by Resource Q anion-exchange chromatography (GE Healthcare) in Tris buffers (Buffer A: 20 mM Tris [pH 8] and 5 mM NaCl; Buffer B:20 mM Tris [pH 8] and 500 mM NaCl). The peptide-containing fractions were eluted by acidification with 10% acetic acid and placed in 65℃ for 15mins. Next, the peptides were concentrated by a 3-kDa filter and desalted using C18 tips. In brief, the desalting tips were firstly revitalized by 200μl methanol and then equilibrated with 200μl of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Secondly, the peptides need to be washed twice with 200μl of 0.1% (v/v) TFA and eluted with 200μl of a solution containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 75% (v/v) acetonitrile. The desalted peptides were performed at the EasyNano LC 1000 system (San Jose, California, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to be separated. The peptide components were loaded into a trap column (5-μm pore size, 150-μm i.d. ×3-cm length, 100Å) and separated by a custom-made C18 column (3-μm pore size, 75-μm i.d. 315-cm length, 100Å) with a flow rate of 450μl/min.A 60-min linear gradient was applied as follows: 3% B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile [v/v] / 97% A (0.1% formic acid in H2O [v/v]) to 6% B in 8 min, 6% B to 22% B in 37 min, 22% B to 35% B in 8 min, 35% B to 100% B in 2 min, and 100% B for 5 min. The acquisition of MS data was using a Q Exactive HF (Bremen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent acquisition mode. The top 20 precursors by intensity from mass range m/z 300 to 1800 were sequentially fragmented with higher energy collisional dissociation, normalized collision energy 27. The dynamic exclusion time was 20s. Automatic gain control for MS1 and MS2 was set to 3e6 and 1e, and the resolution for MS1 and MS2 was set to 120 and 30K.

### Data Protocol
Based on the MS/MS information, De Novo Sequencing of the Peaks Studio resolved peptides from each spectrum (FDR=1%) as previous report. The parameters were set as follows: the enzyme was set to no-specific, the variable modifications were adjusted Oxidation (M)/Deamidated(N,Q), peptide mass tolerance was about ± 10 ppm, the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Swine mhc class i，random peptide library，lc-ms/ms，de novo sequencing

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

### Submitter
Xiaohui Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Nianzhi Zhang
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.


