### Accession
PXD029061

### Title
H2A.Z regulates zygotic genome activation

### Description
Affinity Purification Mass Spectrometry (AP-MS) of Drosophila ovaries expressing an H2A.Z-FlagHA transgene to identify interacting partners of H2A.Z to elucidate potential maternally supplied histone chaperones that deposit H2A.Z on the transcription start site (TSS).

### Sample Protocol
Bait (H2A.Z-FlagHA) and control pull-downs were prepared following the paramagnetic bead-based single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) method. Pull-downs were buffered, reduced (DTT 12mM), alkylated (2-iodoacetamide 40mM). 100µg SP3 beads were added in acetonitrile (70%) and incubated for 15 min. Beads suspension was washed with ethanol (70%) and acetonitrile (100%). Samples were digested with LysC/Trypsin. Peptides were eluted with ultra HPLC-grade water, dried, and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were measured on a Thermo Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to a Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatographer. Samples were injected twice using a non-linear gradient 5min: 5%, 40min: 60%, 4min: 80% for the first injection and 5 min: 10%, 40 min: 40 %, 4 min: 80% for the second injection, both at 250 nl/min flow rate. Measurements were carried out in data-dependent mode employing the published "sensitive method" (Kelstrup, C. D., et al. J. Proteome Res. 11, 3487–3497 (2012)).

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.14. A D. melanogaster UniProt database (Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL, 23370 entries), together with a common contaminants database was used. Precursor tolerance was set to 20 ppm followed by 4.5 ppm for main search and fragment tolerance was 25 ppm. Trypsin/P and D.P were used as enzymes. Up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification. Variable modifications included oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q), acetylation (protein N-termini, K), and phosphorylation (S, T). Only the first three variable modifications were used for quantification. MaxLFQ was used to determine protein abundance. Peptide and protein FDR were ser at 1%.  Downstream analysis was done in R (R Foundation) employing in-house developed scripts that used the Bioconductor R package "DEP" as base. After removal of contaminants and reverse sequences, only proteins with at least 2 valid quantification values were taken into consideration. Data was vsn-normalized and missing values were imputed by using a left-censored method (width 0.5, downshift 1.8). A linear model was fitted (limma R package, trend=TRUE) to identify significantly enriched or depleted proteins. p-values were corrected for multiple hypotheses following the Benjamini-Yekutieli1 procedure and an adjusted p-value < 0.05 was used as thereshold.

### Publication Abstract
During embryogenesis, the genome shifts from transcriptionally quiescent to extensively active in a process known as Zygotic Genome Activation (ZGA). In Drosophila, the pioneer factor Zelda is known to be essential for the progression of development; still, it regulates the activation of only a small subset of genes at ZGA. However, thousands of genes do not require Zelda, suggesting that other mechanisms exist. By conducting GRO-seq, HiC and ChIP-seq in Drosophila embryos, we demonstrate that up to 65% of zygotically activated genes are enriched for the histone variant H2A.Z. H2A.Z enrichment precedes ZGA and RNA Polymerase II loading onto chromatin. In vivo knockdown of maternally contributed Domino, a histone chaperone and ATPase, reduces H2A.Z deposition at transcription start sites, causes global downregulation of housekeeping genes at ZGA, and compromises the establishment of the 3D chromatin structure. We infer that H2A.Z is essential for the de novo establishment of transcriptional programs during ZGA via chromatin reorganization.

### Keywords
Zga, Co-ip ms, H2a.z

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Alejandro Gomez-Auli

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Iovino
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany


