### Accession
PXD018056

### Title
Target identification of the novel Toxoplasma gondii rhoptry kinase RON13

### Description
The Toxoplasma gondii rhoptry neck protein RON13 was first identified as a substrate of aspartyl protease 3 by Terminal Amine Isotopic Labelling of Substrates (TAILS8, Dogga et al. 2017). It harbours a kinase domain the activity of which is important for host cell invasion. To identify the targets of RON13, we engineered a transgenic T. gondii line in the RH ΔKu80 background exploiting the tetracycline repressor system (Meissner et al. 2001). Here, the change of promoter resulted in the overall downregulation of RON13 expression leading to parasites that display significantly diminished infection capability. This defect can be rescued by complementation with an active version of RON13 kinase. We have performed phosphopeptide enrichment and shotgun proteomics using the parental line and three mutant strains: RON13 knock-down (RON13-KD), RON13 knock-down complemented with wildtype RON13 as well as RON13 knock-down complemented with the catalytically dead kinase in which an essential aspartate was replaced by alanine. Comparison of the results between the parental line and RON13-KD allowed us to identify phosphosites that were differentially phosphorylated. Validation of those phosphosites was performed using the comparison between the two complemented lines with the active or the inactive versions of RON13.

### Sample Protocol
T. gondii tachyzoites from the four strains, i.e. ΔKu80 (parental line), RON13-KD, RON13-KD complemented with wild-type or the catalytically dead enzyme were cultured using human foreskin fibroblasts as host cells. After 48 hours, we collected and syringe homogenised the supernatant prior to differential centrifugation at 200 g for 5 min to pellet the host cells. The supernatant containing extracellular parasites was filtered to remove cell debris and the parasites were washed 5 times in PBS containing protease inhibitors. Proteins were extracted using sodium dodecyl sulfate and prepared processed for mass spectrometry using a modified Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method (Wisniewski et al. 2009). Peptides were collected for mass spectrometry representing the “input” sample. Phosphopeptides were then enriched using Ti-IMAC representing the “IP” sample. Reverse phase liquid chromatography was performed using a Waters ACQUITY system with a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 20 mm trap column and a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class 25 cm HSS T3 analytical column. MS/MS analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer Full MS/data-dependent (dd)-MS2 mode. For the full scans, a scan range of 350 – 1500 m/z at a resolution of 120’000 was used with an automatic gain control (AGC) target at 3 × 10e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The 20 top most intense ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, Nagaraj et al. 2010) with a maximum injection time of 119 ms and detected at 60’000 resolution with a scan range of 200-2000 m/z and an AGC target of 1 × 10e5 (fixed mass 130 m/z).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3; Cox and Mann 2008), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2008). Spectra were searched against a GT1 protein database from ToxoDB (release 44). The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Active host cell invasion by the obligate intracellular apicomplexan parasites relies on the formation of a moving junction, which connects parasite and host cell plasma membranes during entry. Invading Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites secrete their rhoptry content and insert a complex of RON proteins on the cytoplasmic side of the host cell membrane providing an anchor to which the parasite tethers. Here we show that a rhoptry-resident kinase RON13 is a key virulence factor that plays a crucial role in host cell entry. Cryo-EM, kinase assays, phosphoproteomics and cellular analyses reveal that RON13 is a secretory pathway kinase of atypical structure that phosphorylates rhoptry proteins including the components of the RON complex. Ultimately, RON13 kinase activity controls host cell invasion by anchoring the moving junction at the parasite-host cell interface.

### Keywords
Rhoptry, Toxoplasma gondii, Kinase, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Chandra Ramakrishnan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Adrian B. Hehl
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich


