### Accession
PXD023563

### Title
Targeted analysis of alternative protein isoforms in AC16 cells

### Description
AC16 cells (Human Cardiomyocyte Cell Line) were digested by trypsin and analyzed by parallel reaction monitoring.

### Sample Protocol
AC16 cell lysates were digested using a FASP protocol

### Data Protocol
PRM data were converted to mzML and searched using Comet.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative splicing is prevalent in the heart and implicated in many cardiovascular diseases, but not every alternative transcript is translated and detecting non-canonical isoforms at the protein level remains challenging. Here we show the use of a computation-assisted targeted proteomics workflow to detect protein alternative isoforms in the human heart. We build on a recent strategy to integrate deep RNA-seq and large-scale mass spectrometry data to identify candidate translated isoform peptides. A machine learning approach is then applied to predict their fragmentation patterns and design protein isoform-specific parallel reaction monitoring detection (PRM) assays. As proof-of-principle, we built PRM assays for 29 non-canonical isoform peptides and detected 22 peptides in a human heart lysate. The predictions-aided PRM assays closely mirrored synthetic peptide standards for non-canonical sequences. This approach may be useful for validating non-canonical protein identification and discovering functionally relevant isoforms in the heart.

### Keywords
Ac16, Prm

### Affiliations
UC Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus
University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus

### Submitter
Maggie Pui Yu Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Maggie Pui Yu Lam, PhD
University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus


