### Accession
PXD013407

### Title
Systems biology decodes herpes simplex virus 1

### Description
Since the genome of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) was first sequenced more than 30 years ago, the 84 genes it was thought to encode have been intensively studied. Here, we unravel the full complement of viral transcription and translation during lytic infection with base-pair resolution by computational integration of multi-omics data. This includes a total of 201 viral transcripts and 296 open reading frames (ORFs), comprising all known large ORFs, 55 large novel ORFs including a novel spliced ORF in the ICP0 locus that initiates from a non-AUG start codon and a novel strongly translated ORF in the ICP34.5 locus as well as multiple short ORFs. By defining viral gene modules, we link translation of ORFs to the expression of transcript isoforms. This explained translation of the vast majority of viral ORFs as well as N-terminal extensions and truncations thereof. We show that N-terminal extensions initiating from non-AUG start codons govern subcellular protein localization and packaging of key viral regulators and structural proteins. This work has great implications for future functional studies, vaccine design and novel oncolytic therapies.

### Sample Protocol
After cell lysis, protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay and 200 ug of each sample were mixed with equal amount protein extracted from untreated cells grown in SILAC light medium. Protein disulfide bridges were then reduced in DTT 2mM for 30 minutes at 25 °C and successively free cysteines were alkylated in 11 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes at room temperature in the dark. LysC digestion was performed by adding LysC (Wako) in a ratio 1:40 (w/w) to the sample and incubating it for 18 hours under gentle shaking at 30 °C. After LysC digestion, the samples were diluted 3 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, 10 µl of immobilized trypsin (Applied Biosystems) were added and samples were incubated 4 hours under rotation at 30 °C. Digestion was stopped by acidification with 10 ul of trifluoroacetic acid and removal of trypsin beads by centrifugation. The resulting peptide mixtures were loaded on Empore cartridges (3M) following the instructions of the manufacturer and eluted with 70% acetonitrile. The acetonitrile was then removed by evaporation in a rotation vacuum concentrator. The samples were then fractionated by in-solution isoelectric focusing. Briefly, samples were diluted to 2.5 ml with MilliQ water, 150 µl of ampholite solution (pH range 3-10, 40% w/w, Bio-Rad) were added and the sample was then loaded into the focusing chamber of the Microrotofor device. Focusing was performed by application constant power current (1W, limiting voltage 500V, limiting current 10 mA). After reaching stable voltage (~ 2.5 hours) the focusing was allowed to run for other 30 minutes before harvesting. The resulting fractions were desalted on STAGE Tips (max 15 µg per StageTip), dried and reconstituted to 25 µl of 0.5 % acetic acid in water prio to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed using the MaxQuant proteomics pipeline (v.1.6.5.0) and the built in the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al.  J Proteome Res. 2011). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was chosen as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N terminus were chosen as variable modifications. The search engine peptide assignments were filtered at 1% FDR and the feature match between runs was not enabled; second peptide feature was enabled, while other parameters were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
The predicted 80 open reading frames (ORFs) of herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) have been intensively studied for decades. Here, we unravel the complete viral transcriptome and translatome during lytic infection with base-pair resolution by computational integration of multi-omics data. We identify a total of 201 transcripts and 284 ORFs including all known and 46 novel large ORFs. This includes a so far unknown ORF in the locus deleted in the FDA-approved oncolytic virus Imlygic. Multiple transcript isoforms expressed from individual gene loci explain translation of the vast majority of ORFs as well as N-terminal extensions (NTEs) and truncations. We show that NTEs with non-canonical start codons govern the subcellular protein localization and packaging of key viral regulators and structural proteins. We extend the current nomenclature to include all viral gene products and provide a genome browser that visualizes all the obtained data from whole genome to single-nucleotide resolution.

### Keywords
Systems biology, Genome annotation, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Berlin Institute for Medical Systems Biology at the Max Delbrueck Centrum for Molecular Medicine
Berlin Institute for Medical System Biology @  Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association  Hannoversche Str. 28, 10115 Berlin Germanyt

### Submitter
Guido Mastrobuoni

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Kempa
Berlin Institute for Medical System Biology @  Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association  Hannoversche Str. 28, 10115 Berlin Germanyt


