### Accession
PXD013018

### Title
XL-MS and Native MS for CSN-CRL2 complexes

### Description
Cullin-Ring E3 Ligases (CRLs) regulate a multitude of cellular pathways through specific substrate receptors. The COP9 signalosome (CSN) deactivates CRLs by removing NEDD8 (N8) from activated Cullins. The structure of stable CSN-CRL can be used to understand this mechanism of regulation. Here we present the first structures of the neddylated and deneddylated CSN-CRL2 complexes by combining single particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) with chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry (MS). These structures reveal a conserved mechanism of CSN activation, consisting of conformational clamping of the CRL2 substrate by CSN2/CSN4, release of the catalytic CSN5/CSN6 heterodimer and finally activation of the CSN5 deneddylation machinery. Using hydrogen deuterium exchange-MS we show that CRL2 binding and conformational activation of CSN5/CSN6 occur in a neddylation-independent manner. The presence of NEDD8 is required to activate the CSN5 active site. Overall, by synergising cryo-EM with MS, we identified novel sensory regions of the CSN that mediate its stepwise activation mechanism and provide a framework for better understanding the regulatory mechanism of other Cullin family members.

### Sample Protocol
20 μl of approximately 20 μM CSN-CRL2~N8, CSNWT-CRL2 and apo CSNWT were each incubated with 1-5 mM bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) cross-linker for 1 hr at 25°C and 350 rpm in a thermomixer. After cross-linking, complexes were (i) separated by gel electrophoresis (NuPAGE) followed by in-gel digestion (CSNWT-CRL2, CSNWT and CSN-CRL2~N8) or (ii) digested in solution (CSNWT-CRL2) and generated peptides were pre-fractionated by gel filtration (CSN-CRL2~N8). Gel electrophoresis was performed using the NuPAGE system according to manufacturer’s protocols. In-gel digestion was performed as described before51. Digestion in solution was performed in the presence of RapiGest (Waters) according to manufacturer’s protocols. For gel filtration, peptides were dissolved in 30% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and separated on a Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 column (GE Healthcare) at a flowrate of 50 µl min-1.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted into Mascot generic format (mgf) files using pXtract (http://pfind.ict.ac.cn/software/pXtract/index.html). Mgf’s were searched against a reduced database containing CSN and CRL2 proteins using pLink1.0 search engine. Search parameters were: instrument spectra, HCD; enzyme, trypsin; max missed cleavage sites, 3; variable modifications, oxidation (methionine) and carbamidomethylation (cysteine); cross-linker, BS3; min peptide length, 4; max peptide length, 100; min peptide mass, 400 Da; max peptide mass, 10,000 Da; False Discovery Rate, 1%. Potential cross-linked di-peptides was evaluated by their spectral quality.

### Publication Abstract
Cullin-Ring E3 Ligases (CRLs) regulate a multitude of cellular pathways through specific substrate receptors. The COP9 signalosome (CSN) deactivates CRLs by removing NEDD8 from activated Cullins. Here we present structures of the neddylated and deneddylated CSN-CRL2 complexes by combining single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) with chemical cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS). These structures suggest a conserved mechanism of CSN activation, consisting of conformational clamping of the CRL2 substrate by CSN2/CSN4, release of the catalytic CSN5/CSN6 heterodimer and finally activation of the CSN5 deneddylation machinery. Using hydrogen-deuterium exchange&#xa0;(HDX)-MS we show that CRL2 activates CSN5/CSN6 in a neddylation-independent manner. The presence of NEDD8 is required to activate the CSN5 active site. Overall, by synergising cryo-EM with MS, we identify sensory regions of the CSN that mediate its stepwise activation and provide a framework for understanding the regulatory mechanism of other Cullin family members.

### Keywords
Crl2, Cullin ring e3 ligase, Xl-ms, Native ms, Cop9 signalosome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
King's College London
King's College London, Chemistry Department, 7 Trinity Street, London, SE1 1DB, UK

### Submitter
Andy Lau

### Lab Head
Dr Argyris Politis
King's College London, Chemistry Department, 7 Trinity Street, London, SE1 1DB, UK


