### Accession
PXD013615

### Title
ATLANTIC: Activity landscapes of tumor cell lines determine drug responses

### Description
Analysis of cancer cell line (CCL) genomes, proteomes and phenotypic drug responses are emerging approaches to uncover molecular mechanisms of drug action. We extended this paradigm to measuring proteome activity landscapes by integrating quantitative data for 10,000 proteins and 55,000 phosphorylation sites from 125 CCLs with large drug sensitivity data collections. To engage the scientific community in mining the thousands of novel functional associations generated by this work, we provide an interactive web resource termed ATLANTIC (http://atlantic.proteomics.wzw.tum.de). For instance, we found that Progesterone Receptor (PGR) phosphorylation is a stronger drug response predictor than PGR expression alone in hormone receptor positive breast cancer patients. We also demonstrate that Adenylate kinase isoenzyme 1 (AK1) inactivates chemotherapeutic drugs such as Cytarabine. Consequently, high AK1 levels correlated with poor survival of Cytarabine-treated acute myelogenous leukemia patients qualifying AK1 as a treatment stratification and drug response marker and possibly as a drug target.

### Sample Protocol
Internal reference peptides for quality control A library of 60 phosphopeptides (synthesized by Marx et al) and their corresponding non-phosphorylated counterpart sequences (for a total of 120 peptides) were spiked into each batch of cell line lysate prior to enzymatic digestion. After desalting the pooled peptides using STAGETips, the dried down eluates were reconstituted in 800 μL of 0.1% FA. We added 5 μL reconstituted spike-in peptides to each batch of cell line lysate. Acetone precipitation and re-solubilisation Total cell lysates of the CRC65 cell line panel were acetone-precipitated and re-suspended in urea buffer (40 mM Tris/HCl pH = 7.6, 8 M urea) containing protease (Complete mini without EDTA; Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (Phosphatase Inhibitor cocktail 1 and 2; Sigma Aldrich) at 1× and 5× the final concentration recommended by the manufacturer, respectively, as well as 20 nM calyculin A as described previously. Enzymatic Digestion We used 2 mg/3.5 mg of protein per cell line of the NCI60/CRC65 cell line panel, respectively. To reduce disulfide bonds, DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM followed by incubation for 40 min at room temperature on thermoshaker at 700 rpm. Alkylation of cysteine residues was achieved by addition of chloroacetamide to a final concentration of 55 mM and incubation for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted to a final concentration of 1.5 M urea by addition of 40 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.6. 1 mM CaCl2 was added to each sample to improve trypsin digestion. Subsequently, proteins were digested overnight at 37°C and 700 rpm in a thermomixer using sequencing grade trypsin or Glu-C (Promega) at a protease‐to‐protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w). A second batch of trypsin was added to trypsin digests of the NCI60 panel at 1:50 protease-to-protein ratio (w/w) after 4 h and digestion was continued overnight. The next day, the peptide digest was acidified using TFA to reach a final pH of 2-3. After centrifugation for 5 min at 5,000 ×g, desalting of the peptide mixture supernatant was achieved using Sep‐Pak cartridges (50 mg sorbent per cartridge; Waters) and a vacuum manifold according to the manufacturer's instructions. The SepPak eluate was adjusted to an ACN concentration of 30% and directly used for phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptide enrichment using Fe-IMAC chromatography Phosphopeptide enrichment was essentially performed as previously described using 2 mg and 3 mg of protein digest for the NCI60 [PMID: 28188522] and CRC65 [PMID: 25394399] panel, respectively. Briefly, we used a Fe-IMAC column (ProPac IMAC-10 column, 4 × 50 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Aekta HPLC system, which was initially charged with FeCl3 and equilibrated with IMAC solvent A (30% ACN, 0.07% TFA). Afterwards, Sep-Pak-eluted peptides adjusted to a final concentration of 30% ACN were loaded onto the column. Subsequently, peptides were eluted in a step-wise gradient from 0% to 11.5% solvent B (0.3% NH4OH) in 5 min and 11.5% to 26% solvent B in 19 min. A UV chromatogram at 214 nm and 280 nm was recorded for each enrichment run. Both the flow-through and the phosphopeptide elution fraction were collected, dried down and stored at -80°C. Basic-high pH RP fractionation   We used 50 μg dried full proteome digest and the entire phosphorylated fraction of peptides for the NCI60 panel (2 mg starting material) or one third of it for the CRC65 panel (3 mg starting material). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode using data dependent acquisition, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2 spectra. Full scan MS1 spectra were recorded from 360 m/z to 1300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z) using an AGC target value of 3e6 charges and a maximum injection time of 10 ms.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1) [PMID: 27809316] by searching the MS2 data against all canonical protein sequences as annotated in the UniProt reference database (42,118 entries containing canonical human protein sequences/isoforms and spike-in phosphopeptide library sequences [PMID: 23685481]; downloaded 14th of November 2016) using the embedded search engine Andromeda [PMID: 27809316]. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as a fixed modification and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. Depending on the dataset, Trypsin/P or Glu-C was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment ion tolerances were 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. We enabled iBAQ quantification only for full proteome data and used ‘match-between-runs’ for all analyses. The alignment time window was set to 20 min with a matching time window of 1 min. Search results were filtered for 1% PSM, peptide and protein FDR and a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids. We additionally excluded all modified peptides with Andromeda scores lower than 40. Raw files of CRC65 full proteomes, acquired by Frejno et al. [PMID: 29101300] were downloaded and reprocessed using the exact same parameters as mentioned above.

### Publication Abstract
Integrated analysis of genomes, transcriptomes, proteomes and drug responses of cancer cell lines (CCLs) is an emerging approach to uncover molecular mechanisms of drug action. We extend this paradigm to measuring proteome activity landscapes by acquiring and integrating quantitative data for 10,000 proteins and 55,000 phosphorylation sites (p-sites) from 125 CCLs. These data are used to contextualize proteins and p-sites and predict drug sensitivity. For example, we find that Progesterone Receptor (PGR) phosphorylation is associated with sensitivity to drugs modulating estrogen signaling such as Raloxifene. We also demonstrate that Adenylate kinase isoenzyme 1 (AK1) inactivates antimetabolites like Cytarabine. Consequently, high AK1 levels correlate with poor survival of Cytarabine-treated acute myeloid leukemia patients, qualifying AK1 as a patient stratification marker and possibly as a drug target. We provide an interactive web application termed ATLANTiC (http://atlantic.proteomics.wzw.tum.de), which enables the community to explore the thousands of novel functional associations generated by this work.

### Keywords
Crc65, Nci60, Pharmacoproteomics, Tumor cell lines, Drug sensitivity

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany
TUM

### Submitter
Martin Frejno

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Freising, Germany


