### Accession
PXD038504

### Title
Proinsulin dependent interaction between ENPL-1/GRP94 and ASNA-1 in neurons is required to maintain insulin secretion in C. elegans.

### Description
Maturation of insulin is crucial for insulin secretion and function. ENPL[1]1/GRP94/HSP90B1 plays an important role in this process. ASNA-1/TRC40/GET3 and ENPL-1/GRP94 are conserved insulin secretion regulators in Caenorhabditis elegans and mammals and mouse mutants display type 2 diabetes. ENPL-1 and GRP94 bind proinsulin and regulate proinsulin levels in C. elegans and cultured cells. Here we found that ASNA-1 and ENPL-1 co-operated to regulate insulin secretion in worms via a physical interaction that required pro-DAF-28/insulin but occurred independently of the insulin binding site of ENPL-1. ASNA-1 acted in neurons to promote DAF-28/insulin secretion. The interaction occurred in insulin expressing neurons and was sensitive to changes in pro-DAF-28 levels. The chaperone form of ASNA-1 is likely bound to ENPL-1. Loss of asna-1 disrupted Golgi trafficking pathways. ASNA-1 localization was affected in enpl-1 mutants and ENPL-1 overexpression partially bypassed ASNA[1]1 requirement. Taken together, we find a functional interaction between ENPL-1 and ASNA-1 which is necessary to maintain proper insulin secretion in C. elegans and provides insights about how their loss might produce diabetes in mammals.

### Sample Protocol
Worms were lysed in buffer containing 2%SDS in 50 mM TEAB. Protein concentration of the lysates was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). The samples were digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Briefly, samples (30 µg) were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol (60°C, 30 min) transferred to 10 kDa MWCO Pall Nanosep centrifugation filters (Sigma-Aldrich), washed repeatedly with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (DB, 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 50 mM TEAB) prior to alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate in DB (30 min, room temperature). Digestion was performed by addition of Pierce MS grade Trypsin (0.3 µg, at 37°C, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated overnight. An additional portion of trypsin (0.3 µg ) was added and incubated for another three hours. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and labelled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The peptide samples were combined, SDC was removed by acidification with 10% TFA and further purified using HiPPR Detergent Removal Resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The TMT-set was pre-fractionated into 40 fractions by basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a gradient from 3% to 90% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium formate buffer, pH 10.00 over 35 min  The fractions were concatenated into 20 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid.  The fractions were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 35 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a gradient from 3% to 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid over 80 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. MS scans was performed at a resolution of 120,000, m/z range 380-1380. The most intense multiply charged precursor ions were selected for MS2 fragmentation with top speed cycle of 3, 0.7m/z isolation window and a dynamic exclusion within 10 ppm during 60 seconds. Produced MS2 fragment ions were detected in the ion trap followed by multinotch (simultaneous) isolation of the top 5 most abundant fragment ions for further fragmentation (MS3) by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 65% and detection in the Orbitrap at 50 000 resolutions, m/z range 100-500.

### Data Protocol
Identification and relative quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was performed by matching against Caenorhabditis elegans Uniprot Database (November 2018) using Mascot 2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with zero missed cleavage, methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification, cysteine alkylation, TMT-modification on lysine and peptide N-termini were set as fixed modifications.  Percolator was used for the validation of identified proteins. TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with 3 mmu mass tolerance, and the TMT reporter intensity values for each sample were normalized on the total peptide amount. Only peptides unique for a given protein were considered for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Er chaperone, Diabetes, Insulin secretion

### Affiliations
Gothenburg University
Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SE413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Johannes Fuchs

### Lab Head
Dr Gautam Kao
Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, SE413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden


