### Accession
PXD009391

### Title
Comparison of proteins in secretory/excretory products of the salmon louse, Lepeophtheirus salmonis.

### Description
Comparative Proteomics of the Secretory/Excretory products (SEPs) of 2 life stages L.salmonisusing LC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Salmon lice were collected directly from farmed fish and maintained at 6oC in aerated sea water. For the collection of S/E material from adult stages of the parasite, 3 replicate preparations were made from 10 live adult female lice which had been placed into 10ml of sterile saline (0.85% NaCl) and agitated for 3 h at 6oC. For pre-adult stages, duplicate preparations of 120 pre-adult lice of mixed sex were placed into 10ml of sterile saline and agitated for 3 h at 6oC.  Proteins were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid. Precipitated material was centrifuged at 10, 000 x g for 30 min, supernatants were discarded and the pellets allowed to air dry. The pellets were then re-suspended in 50µl 0.1% Sarkosyl in dH2O. The protein concentrations of each re-suspended pellet were determined using a(BCA) protein assay. Ten microlitre samples containing between 0.1 and 1.9 mg/ml-1 of protein in each E/S preparation were denatured with Lithium Dodecyl Sample buffer (Invitrogen) for 5 min at 100oC.The proteins were separated by electrophoresis using a 12% Bis-Tris NuPage gel at 150V for 90 min. Following electrophoresis, resolved proteins were visualised with colloidal Coomassie Blue. Gel lanes were excised and each sliced horizontally from top to bottom to yield a series of ~25 equal gel slices of 2.5 mm deep. Each gel slices was were then subjected to standard in-gel destaining, reduction, alkylation and trypsinolysis procedures. Digested samples were analtysed using a Bruker AmaZon Ion Trap. Liquid chromatography was performed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC system (Dionex) comprising a WPS-3000 well-plate micro auto sampler, a FLM-3000 flow manager and column compartment, a UVD-3000 UV detector, an LPG-3600 dual-gradient micropump and an SRD-3600 solvent rack controlled by Chromeleon™ chromatography software (Dionex). A micro-pump flow rate of 246 µl/min-1 was used in combination with a cap-flow splitter cartridge, affording a 1/82 flow split and a final flow rate of 3 µl/min-1 through a 5 cm x 200 m ID (polystyrene-divinylbenzine) monolithic reversed phase column (Dionex) maintained at 50C. Samples of 4 l were applied to the column by direct injection.  Peptides were eluted by the application of a 15 min linear gradient from 8-45% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and directed through a 3nl UV detector flow cell.  LC was interfaced directly with a 3-D high capacity ion trap mass spectrometer (amaZon-ETD, Bruker Daltonics) via a low-volume (50l/min-1 maximum) stainless steel nebuliser (Agilent) and ESI.

### Data Protocol
Deconvoluted MS/MS data in .mgf (Mascot Generic Format) format were imported into ProteinScape™ V3.1 (Bruker Daltonics) proteomics data analysis software for downstream mining of a custom L. salmonis database. This custom database was constructed from all the “Lepeophtheirus salmonis” protein entries found in the NCBInr database as of January 2018 and comprised 38,092 sequences in total. Database searches were conducted utilising the Mascot™ V2.5.1(Matrix Science) search engine.  Mascot search parameters were set in accordance with published guidelines and to this end, fixed (carbamidomethyl “C”) and variable (oxidation “M” and deamidation “N,Q”) modifications were selected along with peptide (MS) and secondary fragmentation (MS/MS) tolerance values of 0.5Da whilst allowing for a single 13C isotope. Protein identifications obtained from each of the 25 individual gel slices per lane were compiled using the “protein list compilation” feature within Proteinscape[26]. From the compiled protein lists individual protein identifications were inspected manually and considered significant only if a): two peptides were matched for each protein, b) peptides were represented by a sequence coverage of >5% and c) each matched peptide contained an unbroken “b” or “y” ion series represented by a minimum of four contiguous amino acid residues.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Esi-lc-ms/ms, E/s, Excretory/secretory products, Ion-trap, L. salmonis

### Affiliations
Moredun Resaerch INstitute
Neil F. Inglis Moredun Proteomics Facility Moredun Research Institute Pentlands Science Park Bush Loan Penicuik Midlothian EH26 0PZ  Tel +44 131 445 5111

### Submitter
Kevin Mclean

### Lab Head
Dr Neil Inglis
Neil F. Inglis Moredun Proteomics Facility Moredun Research Institute Pentlands Science Park Bush Loan Penicuik Midlothian EH26 0PZ  Tel +44 131 445 5111


