### Accession
PXD005599

### Title
Phosphoproteome analysis of petunia corolla treated with ethylene and air

### Description
Senescence represents the last stage of flower development. Phosphorylation is one of the key post-translational modifications that regulate protein functions in diverse biological pathways and contexts. Generally, kinases may be more required than phosphatases during plant growth and development. However, little is known about global phosphorylation change during flower senescence. In this work, we quantitatively investigated the petunia phosphoproteome following ethylene or air treatment. In total, 2170 phosphosites in 1184 protein groups were identified, among which 2059 sites in 1124 proteins were quantified. Treatment with ethylene resulted in 711 down-regulated and only 117 up-regulated phosphosites using a 1.5-fold threshold (P<0.05), showing that ethylene negatively regulates global phosphorylation levels and that phosphorylation of lots of proteins was not necessary during flower senescence. Our results show that protein dephosphorylation may play an important role of in ethylene-induced corolla senescence in petunia and that phosphatases may be more required than kinases during flower senescence. In addition, our results show that ethylene regulates ethylene and ABA signaling transduction pathways via phosphorylation level, and plant mRNA splicing machinery was a major target of ethylene-induced dephosphorylation. Moreover, ethylene treatment increases the number of alternative splicing of precursor RNAs in petunia corollas.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction Protein extraction was performed according to the method of Guo et al (Guo et al., 2016). Petunia corollas were ground in liquid nitrogen, then the cell powder was transferred to the centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM DTT and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Three biology replicates were performed. Trypsin Digestion Trypsin digestion was performed according to the method of Guo et al (Guo et al., 2016). The protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Then, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 100 μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. TMT Labeling  TMT labeling was performed according to the method of Guo et al (Guo et al., 2016). After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μl ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  HPLC Fractionation The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions, Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Affinity Enrichment To enrich phosphopeptides, peptide mixtures were first incubated with an IMAC microsphere suspension with vibration. The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% ACN/6% TFA and 30% ACN/0.1% TFA, sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added, and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis  Three parallel analyses for each fraction were performed. LC-MS/MS Analysis was performed according to previously described protocols(Wu et al., 2015). Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 8% to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 26 min, 25% to 38% in 8 min and climbing to 85% in 4 min then holding at 85% for the last 4min, all at a constant flow rate of 280 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1.5E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Three biology replicates were performed.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) (Tyanova 2016). Tandem mass spectra were searched against petunia genome (https://solgenomics.net/organism/Petunia_axillaris/genome). Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. The mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and to 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation on Met; phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, Tyr; and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteome; petunia; ethylene; flower senescence; dephosphorylation

### Affiliations
College of Forestry and Landscape Architecture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China
Guangdong Key Laboratory for Innovative Development and Utilization of Forest Plant Germplasm, College of Forestry and Landscape Architecture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China

### Submitter
Yixun Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yixun Yu
College of Forestry and Landscape Architecture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China


