### Accession
PXD005893

### Title
Shotgun Proteomic Analysis of Proteins Present in Mosquito Ovaries at 24 and 72 h After a Blood Meal

### Description
Female mosquitoes require a blood meal for oogenesis, and thereby receive a substantial iron load in the forms of holo-transferrin and hemoglobin. Our previous data showed that during digestion of a blood meal, the gut iron concentration decreases 10-fold, while that of the ovaries doubles from ingestion to 72 hours post feeding. Approximately 72 hours post feeding, eggs are laid with ~125 ng Fe each. We are interested in the effects of the blood meal on the expression of iron related proteins detected in the ovaries during time post feeding before eggs are laid. We have used shotgun proteomic analysis to identify proteins in the developing ovaries of Aedes aegypti; this information provides further insight into the effect of a blood meal on mosquito oogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue Collection and Sample Preparation  On six different occasions, 15 mated, adult female Ae. aegypti were collected at 24 or 72 h post blood meal (PBM). The animals were cold anesthetized, and ovary pairs were dissected into disruption buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9; 1.5 mM MgCl2; 0.5 mM DTT added fresh; 2x Protease Inhibitor cocktail (Catalogue # 539131; EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA) added fresh). Ovaries from each time point were pooled; thus, samples at each time interval represented a total of 90 ovary pairs collected from 6 different, laboratory-raised Ae. aegypti mosquito populations. Samples underwent three cycles of freezing in liquid N2, thawing on ice with homogenization for 30 sec, and then centrifugation at 100,000 g for 30 min, 4oC, to separate soluble and insoluble fractions. Insoluble fractions were suspended and washed three times in 1 M NaCl, centrifuged at 15,000 g for 5 min, 4oC. After washing, the insoluble fractions were suspended in extraction buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8; 2% w/v SDS; 100 mM NaEDTA; 20 mM DTT), boiled for 5 min and centrifuged at 15,000 g for 5 min, 4oC. The supernatants from the insoluble fractions were pooled with the soluble fractions. Protein concentrations for the pooled samples were determined by SDS-Lowry (Peterson, 1977).  Ovary Proteome Analysis  Samples from each pooled time point were divided into several 1.5 ml microfuge tubes of 30 ug protein per tube. All samples were frozen and stored at -80oC until LC-MS/MS analysis. For analysis, LC-MS/MS samples were thawed and proteins from each time point were processed by the Arizona Proteomics Consortium (University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ) as follows: 30 ug of ovary protein from each time point was boiled 20 min in Laemmli buffer (31.5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8; 10% glycerol; 1% SDS; 0.005% Bromophenol Blue) containing 50 mM DTT as the reductant, separated via 12% SDS-PAGE, and stained with Bio-Safe Coomassie Blue (Catalogue # 1610786; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Each gel lane was cut into 8 slices according to molecular weight (MW): Slice 8, 200-150 kDa; Slice 7, 150-100 kDa; Slice 6, 100-70 kDa; Slice 5, 70-50 kDa; Slice 4, 50-35 kDa; Slice 3, 35-25 kDa; Slice 2, 25-17 kDa; Slice 1, 17-10 kDa. Proteins in each gel slice were trypsin digested overnight (1 ug trypsin (Catalogue # V511; Promega, Madison, WI):5 ug sample protein) at 37oC, following the protocol provided by the Arizona Proteomics Consortium. Digested peptides were extracted from the individual gel pieces and stored separately at -20oC. Prior to analysis, individual gel band extracts were thawed and desalted using the protocol provided by the Arizona Proteomics Consortium.  Samples were analyzed by LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) equipped with an Advion nanomate ESI source (Advion, Ithaca, NY). Peptides (0.5 ug injected for each gel slice) were eluted from a C18 pre-column (100 μm i.d. × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) onto an analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 10 cm, C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. Solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) was used for the following concentrations and times: 5%, 5 min; 5−7%, 5 min; 7−15%, 45 min; 15−35%, 60 min; 35−40%, 28 min; 40−85%, 5 min; 85%, 10 min; a return to 5% in 1 min, and another 10 min hold of 5% solvent B. All flow rates were 400 nL/min. Data-dependent scanning was performed by Xcalibur, v 2.1.0, software (Andon et al., 2002) using a survey mass scan at 60,000 resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer scanning mass/charge (m/z) 400−1600, followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS of the 14 most intense ions in the linear ion trap analyzer. Precursor ions were selected by the monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) setting, with selection or rejection of ions held to a ±10 ppm window. Dynamic exclusion was set to place any selected m/z on an exclusion list for 45 s after a single MS/MS. After LC-MS/MS, the results for 8 gel pieces per time point were combined and peptide identification was performed using SeQuence IDentfication (SQID) (Li et al., 2011) against the Ae. aegypti database downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI; Genome ID: 44, downloaded on June 23, 2012). The search was performed with the forward database appended with a reverse database; the false discovery rate (FDR) was determined as FDR = 2 * ReverseID / (ForwardID + ReverseID). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed and methionine oxidation (M+16) and carbamidomethylation (C+57) were searched as variable modifications. The result spectra list for each time point was generated in Scaffold (Version 3.1.2; Proteome Software, Portland, OR) and ranked using a SQID score column to calculate peptide FDR. A 5% peptide FDR, a minimum of two unique peptides per protein, and a 1% protein FDR were used as the threshold for protein identification. Experimental results represent two time points each analyzed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Criteria for identifying proteins at 24 and 72 h PBM  A candidate protein was validated as being only detected at either 24 h or 72 h PBM by meeting the following three criteria for duplicate analyses: (1) a minimum of two unique peptides per protein were identified; (2) all peptides had a greater than 95% identification confidence; and (3) peptides were only identified at one time point.  Bioinformatic Analysis of the Ovary Proteome  Scaffold identified protein Genbank GI numbers were analyzed for their correct unique identifiers using Batch Entrez (NCBI-Resource-Coordinators, 2014). Those identifiers that were found to be an old version were updated with a new GI number, while those identifiers that were found to be eliminated were further analyzed by BLASTP (NCBI-Resource-Coordinators, 2014) to obtain the correct GI Number. UniProtKB (UniProt-Consortium, 2015) analysis was performed using the corrected GI numbers; entry information for each identified protein was obtained (UniProtKB ID: Status, Protein names, Gene names, and Length; Gene Ontology (GO): Biological Process, Molecular Function, and Cellular Component; GO Identifiers: Developmental Stage, Induction, Tissue Specificity, Pathway, Subcellular Location, Protein Families, Metal Binding, PubMed ID, Cross-reference (STRING), and Cross-reference (InterPro)). Duplicate protein entries (the same protein identified with separate GI numbers) were found. The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID version 6.7 (Huang da et al., 2009a, b)) was used to analyze the Gene names obtained from the UniProtKB analysis; DAVID identifiers were recorded and the proteomic data set was annotated and grouped by GO terms for biological process, molecular function, and cellular component. Some proteins were not found in the DAVID database. Proteins found in the DAVID database were further analyzed using functional annotation clustering with a minimum p<0.05 to identify enrichment of GO categories against the Ae. aegypti genomic background.

### Publication Abstract
Aedes aegypti [Linnaeus in Hasselquist; yellow fever mosquito] transmits several viruses that infect millions of people each year, including Zika, dengue, yellow fever, chikungunya, and West Nile. Pathogen transmission occurs during blood feeding. Only the females blood feed as they require a bloodmeal for oogenesis; in the bloodmeal, holo-transferrin and hemoglobin provide the females with a high iron load. We are interested in the effects of the bloodmeal on the expression of iron-associated proteins in oogenesis. Previous data showed that following digestion of a bloodmeal, ovarian iron concentrations doubles by 72 hr. We have used shotgun proteomics to identify proteins expressed in Ae. aegypti ovaries at two oogenesis developmental stages following blood feeding, and tandem mass tag-labeling proteomics to quantify proteins expressed at one stage following feeding of a controlled iron diet. Our findings provide the first report of mosquito ovarian protein expression in early and late oogenesis. We identify proteins differentially expressed in the two oogenesis development stages. We establish that metal-associated proteins play an important role in Ae. aegypti oogenesis and we identify new candidate proteins that might be involved in mosquito iron metabolism. Finally, this work identified a unique second ferritin light chain subunit, the first reported in any species. The shotgun proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005893, while the tandem mass tag-labeled proteomic data are available with identifier PXD028242.

### Keywords
Ovary, Proteomics, Ferritin, Blood meal, Aedes aegypti, Iron, Eggs

### Affiliations
University of Arizona Professor Emerita, Department of Nutritional Science Associate Dean, Bart Cardon Career and Academic Services
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Dawn Geiser

### Lab Head
Dr Joy J. Winzerling
University of Arizona Professor Emerita, Department of Nutritional Science Associate Dean, Bart Cardon Career and Academic Services


