### Accession
PXD000282

### Title
EPAC1 knockout mouse effects in platelets and plasma

### Description
ABSTRACT FOR BOTH PLASMA AND PLATELET-LYSATE In this article we describe the involvement of exchange factor activated by cAMP 1 (Epac1) in hemostasis and platelet activation. We have used plasma and platelet-lysate from EPAC1 knockout mice and wild-type control mice in label-free proteomics with an Orbitrap Velos Pro. Blood was obtained from wild-type and Epac1-/- mice euthanized with CO2. Approximately 1000 ul was drawn from the left ventricle into a 2 ml syringe, containing 100 ul ACD and 200 ul modified Tyrode`s buffer. The blood was centrifuged at 200g for 5 minutes at room temperature, and the resulting platelet-rich plasma (PRP) centrifuged at 700g for another 10 minutes in the presence of 10 ul ACD. The resulting platelet-poor plasma (PPP) was transferred to Eppendorf tubes and the pelleted platelets resuspended in modified Tyrode`s buffer and adjusted to 2.5 x 108 platelets/ml. Platelets were allowed to rest at room temperature before experimentation. For proteomics analysis, platelets were further purified by size-exclusion through Sepharose CL-2B gel (Pharmacia Biotec, Sweden) as previously described by Jensen et al. in Blood 2004; 104. Plasma was crude or depleted for Albumin prior to trypsination and LCMS with quantification using Progenesis LCMS. The platelet-lysates were fractioned on SDS-PAGE prior to trypsination and LC-MS analysis with MaxQuant quantification. Label-free protein quantification for plasma The software Progenesis LC-MS® Ver 2.7 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, UK) was used for label-free quantification and comparison of LC-MS proteomics data based on the volume, m/z and retention time of the MS1 features (peptides). In Progenesis, the LC-MS runs were automatically aligned, and only features with charges between +2 to +7 and containing associated MSMS spectra were accepted for export as an mgf file for identification. The mgf file was search against the human SwissProt Mus musculus database (version September 2012) using SearchGUI Ver 1.8.9. The search criteria were: trypsin as the protease with no miss-cleavages accepted, fixed carbamidomethylation on cystein, variable oxidation on methionine, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.7 and OMSSA as the search engine. The search result and associated spectra were combined and assigned to proteins in Peptide Shaker Ver 0.17.3 (http://peptideshaker.googlecode.com) at 1% FDR. The results were exported from PeptideShaker as validated PSMs in a Phenyx format, and imported back into Progenesis. The protein abundances reported from Progenesis were based on the sum of the normalized abundance of the unique identified petides.  The proteomics raw files and PRIDE XML identification files were uploaded to PRIDE using ProteomeXchange ver 1.0.4, and the projects are public available. Two PRIDE XML files were generated using PeptideShaker, one for crude plasma and one for albumin-depleted plasma.

### Sample Protocol
Blood was obtained from mice euthanized with CO2. Between 750 – 1000 ul was drawn from the left ventricle into a 2 ml syringe, containing 100 ul ACD, 200 ul Ca2+-free Tyrode’s solution, 5 mM glucose and 0.05% bovine serum albumin. The blood was centrifuged at 300 × g for 5 minutes at RT, and the resulting platelet-rich plasma centrifuged at 1000 × g for another 10 min in the presence of 10 ul ACD. The supernatant was transferred to Eppendorf tubes and the pelleted platelets resuspended in Tyrode’s buffer and adjusted to 3.5 x 108 platelets/ml. For proteomic analyses, platelets were further purified by size-exclusion through Sepharose CL-2B gel (Pharmacia Biotec, Sweden). Platelet proteins (10 ug total in SDS-sample buffer) were then separated on a 10 % SDS-polyacrylamide gel. The gel was sliced crosswise into 23 bands and digested in-gel with trypsin. Plasma samples (150 ug) were depleted for albumin using the Qproteome Murine Albumin Depletion Kit with spin columns as described by the manufacturer (Qiagen). Depleted samples (average 61 ug) were desalted using four volumes of ice-cold acetone and incubated O/N at -20°C. The tryptic peptides were analyzed on an LC-MS system with instruments and columns from Thermo Scientific. The peptides were injected into an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system connected online with positive electrospray ionization on a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer. The plasma peptides (2.5 μg) were eluted with a 180 min biphasic acetonitrile (I) gradient from a 50 cm analytical column (Dionex #164570, Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper column, 75 μm i.d. × 50 cm, packed with 3 μm C18 beads), whereas the platelet-derived peptides were separated with a 90 min gradient on a 15 cm analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 15 cm x 75µm i.d.  nanoViper column, packed with 2µm C18 beads). The mass spectrometer was operated in the DDA-mode (data-dependent-acquisition) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Instrument control was through Tune 2.7 and Xcalibur 2.2. Survey full scan MS spectra (from 300 to 2000 m/z ) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution R = 60000 at 400 m/z (after accumulation to a target value of 1E6 in the linear ion trap with maximum allowed ion accumulation time of 500 ms). The 7 most intense eluting peptides above an ion threshold value of 1000 counts, and charge states 2 or higher, were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1E4 and fragmented in the high-pressure linear ion trap by low-energy CID (collision-induced-dissociation) with normalized collision energy of 35% and wideband-activation enabled. The maximum allowed accumulation time for CID was 200 ms, the isolation width maintained at 2 Da, activation q = 0.25, and activation time of 10 ms. The resulting fragment ions were scanned out in the low-pressure ion trap at normal scan rate, and recorded with the secondary electron multipliers. One MS/MS spectrum of a precursor mass was allowed before dynamic exclusion for 20 s. Lock-mass internal calibration was not enabled.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis LC-MS® Ver 2.6 (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd, Newcastle, UK) and SearchGUI/PeptideShaker were used for plasma protein quantification and identification, respectively. In Progenesis, the LC-MS runs were automatically aligned, and only features with charges between +2 to +7 and containing associated MSMS spectra were accepted for export as an mgf file for identification. The mgf file was search against the human SwissProt Mus musculus database (version September 2012) using SearchGUI. The search criteria were: trypsin as the protease with no miss-cleavages accepted, fixed carbamidomethylation on cystein, variable oxidation on methionine, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.7 and OMSSA as the search engine. The search result and associated spectra were combined and assigned to proteins in Peptide Shaker at 1% FDR. The results were exported from PeptideShaker as validated PSMs in a Phenyx format, and imported back into Progenesis. The protein abundances reported from Progenesis were based on the sum of the normalized abundance of the unique identified peptides. MaxQuant module with Andromeda Ver 1.3.05 was used for platelet protein quantification and identification.

### Publication Abstract
Epac1 (Exchange protein directly activated by cAMP 1) limits fluid loss from the circulation by tightening the endothelial barrier. We show here that Epac1<sup>-/-</sup> mice, but not Epac2<sup>-/-</sup> mice, have prolonged bleeding time, suggesting that Epac1 may limit fluid loss also by restraining bleeding. The Epac1<sup>-/-</sup> mice had deficient in vitro secondary hemostasis. Quantitative comprehensive proteomics analysis revealed that Epac1<sup>-/-</sup> mouse platelets (thrombocytes) had unbalanced expression of key components of the glycoprotein Ib-IX-V (GPIb-IX-V) complex, with decrease of GP1b&#x3b2; and no change of GP1b&#x3b1;. This complex is critical for platelet adhesion under arterial shear conditions. Furthermore, Epac1<sup>-/-</sup> mice have reduced levels of plasma coagulation factors and fibrinogen, increased size of circulating platelets, increased megakaryocytes (the GP1b&#x3b2; level was decreased also in Epac1<sup>-/-</sup> bone marrow) and higher abundance of reticulated platelets. Viscoelastic measurement of clotting function revealed Epac1<sup>-/-</sup> mice with a dysfunction in the clotting process, which corresponds to reduced plasma levels of coagulation factors like factor XIII and fibrinogen. We propose that the observed platelet phenotype is due to deficient Epac1 activity during megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis, and that the defects in blood clotting for Epac1<sup>-/-</sup> is connected to secondary hemostasis.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Plasma, Epac1 knockout, Platelets, Label-free

### Affiliations
Institute of Marine Research
Proteomics Unit at the University of Bergen, Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen

### Submitter
Eystein Oveland

### Lab Head
Dr Professor PhD Frode Selheim
Proteomics Unit at the University of Bergen, Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen


