### Accession
PXD015278

### Title
Identification of SART3 as a pre-miR-34a–binding protein

### Description
MicroRNAs (miRNAs or miRs) are small, noncoding RNAs that are implicated in the regulation of nearly all biological processes. Global miRNA biogenesis is altered in many cancers and RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) have been shown to play a role in this process, presenting a promising avenue for targeting miRNA dysregulation in disease. miR-34a exhibits tumor-suppressive functions by targeting cell cycle regulators CDK4/6 and anti-apoptotic factor Bcl-2, among other regulatory pathways such as Wnt, TGF-, and Notch signaling. Many cancers show downregulation or loss of miR-34a, and synthetic miR-34a supplementation has been shown to inhibit tumor growth in vivo; however, the post-transcriptional mechanisms by which miR-34a is lost in cancer are not entirely understood. Here, we have used a proteomics-mediated approach to identify Squamous cell carcinoma antigen recognized by T-cells 3 (SART3) as a putative pre-miR-34a-binding protein. SART3 is a spliceosome recycling factor and nuclear RBP with no previously reported role in miRNA regulation. We demonstrate that SART3 binds pre-miR-34a with specificity over pre-let-7d and begin to elucidate a new functional role for this protein in non-small lung cancer cells. Overexpression of SART3 led to increased miR-34a levels, downregulation of the miR-34a target genes CDK4 and CDK6, and cell cycle arrest in the G1 phase. In vitro binding studies showed that the RNA-recognition motifs within the SART3 sequence are responsible for selective pre-miR-34a binding. Collectively, our results present evidence for an influential role of SART3 in miR-34a biogenesis and cell cycle progression.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown to 80% confluency, washed with PBS and harvested with a cell scraper. Cells were collected in 1 mL lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.5% Triton X-100, and freshly added Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) per 10 cm dish, kept on ice, and lysed by sonication. Lysate concentrations were normalized to 1 mg/mL by BCA assay (Thermo), and 200 µL of lysate was aliquoted for each pulldown. To the lysate aliquots, 100 µL binding buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 0.05% Tween20, freshly added 2 mM ZnCl) was added, and a biotinylated pre-miR probe was added to a final concentration of 500 nM. Mixtures were incubated at room temp. for 30 min. To ensure an excess of miRNA relative to beads, 5 µL of streptavidin-coated magnetic resin (Roche) per sample was aliquoted and washed with binding buffer. Lysate incubations were added to the streptavidin beads and incubated at room temp for 1 h with constant agitation. Flow-throughs from each pulldown were collected, and resins were washed once with a stringent buffer (100 mM phosphate pH 7, 200 mM NaCl, 0.25% Tween20) and 3 times with PBS. Protocols for in-solution digestion are adapted from Yu et. al (92). Beads were resuspended in 50 µL of 0.1M NH4HCO3 buffer (pH~8). Cysteines were reduced by adding 50 µL of 10 mM DTT and incubating at 45 C for 30 min. Samples were cooled to room temp. and cysteines were alkylated with 65 mM 2-Chloroacetamide for 30 min at room temp. Proteins were digested over night with 1 µg sequencing grade trypsin at 37 C. Digestion was stopped by acidification and peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters), then dried using a vacufuge. Resulting peptides were dissolved in 8 µL of 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile solution and 2 µL of peptide solution were resolved on a nanocapillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 µm, 50 cm, Thermo) over 180 min. Eluent was directly introduced into an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo) using an EasySpray source. MS1 scans were acquired at 120K resolution (AGC target=1x106; max IT=50 ms). Data-dependent collision induced dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired using Top speed method (3 s) following each MS1 scan (NCE ~32%; AGC target 1x105; max IT 45 ms).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) (93). MS/MS spectra were searched with Andromeda against the reference human database from Uniprot (02-02-2014 download – 39,882 sequences) appended with common contaminants and the automatically generated reverse database for the decoy search, which was used to calculate the false-discovery rate (FDR). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021464 Da) was set as a fixed modification; acetylation of protein N-termini (42.010565 Da) and oxidation of methionine (15.994915 Da) were set as variable modifications. Other search parameters included fixed main-search MS1 error of 4.5ppm, with 0.5 Da mass deviation allowed for fragment ions; minimum peptide length of 7; two missed cleavages were allowed. Match between runs was enabled for consecutively run samples within the same cell line, with a match time window of 0.5 min

### Publication Abstract
MicroRNAs (miRNAs or miRs) are small, noncoding RNAs that are implicated in the regulation of most biological processes. Global miRNA biogenesis is altered in many cancers, and RNA-binding proteins play a role in miRNA biogenesis, presenting a promising avenue for targeting miRNA dysregulation in diseases. miR-34a exhibits tumor-suppressive activities by targeting cell cycle regulators CDK4/6 and anti-apoptotic factor BCL-2, among other regulatory pathways such as Wnt, TGF-&#x3b2;, and Notch signaling. Many cancers exhibit down-regulation or loss of miR-34a, and synthetic miR-34a supplementation has been shown to inhibit tumor growth <i>in vivo</i> However, the post-transcriptional mechanisms that cause miR-34a loss in cancer are not entirely understood. Here, using a proteomics-mediated approach in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells, we identified squamous cell carcinoma antigen recognized by T-cells 3 (SART3) as a putative pre-miR-34a-binding protein. SART3 is a spliceosome recycling factor and nuclear RNA-binding protein with no previously reported role in miRNA regulation. We found that SART3 binds pre-miR-34a with higher specificity than pre-let-7d (used as a negative control) and elucidated a new functional role for SART3 in NSCLC cells. SART3 overexpression increased miR-34a levels, down-regulated the miR-34a target genes <i>CDK4/6</i>, and caused a cell cycle arrest in the G<sub>1</sub> phase. <i>In vitro</i> binding experiments revealed that the RNA-recognition motifs within the SART3 sequence are responsible for selective pre-miR-34a binding. Our results provide evidence for a significant role of SART3 in miR-34a biogenesis and cell cycle progression in NSCLC cells.

### Keywords
Rbps, Proteomics, Mirna, Mir34, Sart3

### Affiliations
Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Michigan
University of Michigan

### Submitter
Dylan  Mitchell

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda Lee Garner
Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Michigan


