### Accession
PXD008010

### Title
Melanoma BRAFV600E induced proteome

### Description
By analyzing of the changes in proteome mediated by the oncogene BRAFV600E in melanoma cells we provide new insights on the pathways upregulated in these cells and possible new targets for therapy.

### Sample Protocol
B16 cells infected either with pBABE-Ctrl and pBABE-BRAFV600E were grown for at least 6 passages (2 weeks) in SILAC media: light media LYS 12C Arg 12C for pBABE-Ctrl and heavy media Lys 13C Arg 12C for pBABE-BRAFV600E. Cells were then lysed in MRC buffer (50mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, containing 1mM EDTA,     1mM     EGTA,     1mM     sodium     orthovanadate,     10mM     sodium, b-glycerophosphate, 5mM sodium pyrophosphate, 50mM sodium fluoride, 0.27M sucrose,  1%  (v/v)  NP40,  1%  (v/v)  2-mercaptoethanoland  Complete™  proteinase inhibitor  cocktail  (Roche;  one  tablet  per  50  ml)). Heavy and light lysates were pooled 1:1 based on the protein quantitation values. 20µg of the mixture was separated on a 4-12% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) using the MOPS buffer system. The gel was stained with coomassie and the lanes excised into forty equal segments using a grid. Gel segments were reduced using dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and then subjected to digestion with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). Digests were analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a NanoAcquity HPLC system (Waters, MA) interfaced to a Q Exactive tandem mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). A 30 min gradient was employed per segment (20h total LC/MS/MS time). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 70,000 and 17,500FWHM resolution, respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS from each MS scan. Dynamic exclusion and repeat settings ensured each ion was selected only once and excluded for 30s thereafter.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant v1.5.1.0 which served to recalibrate mass, determine peak areas for light and heavy peptides and search data against the combined forward and reverse Swissprot mouse protein database (Jan 2015; 20,556 entries) using the Andromeda search engine. The database was appended with common background proteins. Search parameters were precursor mass tolerance 7ppm, product ion mass tolerance 20ppm, 2 missed cleavages allowed, fully tryptic peptides only, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine, variable modifications of oxidized methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation. A protein and peptide FDR of 1% was set. Data were normalized by shifting the median H/L ratio to 1. Further data analysis was done using Perseus 1.5.0.15. GSEA and STRING software were used to highlight specific proteomic signatures and interactome maps, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Reprogramming of mRNA translation has a key role in cancer development and drug resistance <sup>1</sup> . However, the molecular mechanisms that are involved in this process remain poorly understood. Wobble tRNA modifications are required for specific codon decoding during translation<sup>2,3</sup>. Here we show, in humans, that the enzymes that catalyse modifications of wobble uridine 34 (U<sub>34</sub>) tRNA (U<sub>34</sub> enzymes) are key players of the protein synthesis rewiring that is induced by the transformation driven by the BRAF <sup>V600E</sup> oncogene and by resistance to targeted therapy in melanoma. We show that BRAF <sup>V600E</sup> -expressing melanoma cells are dependent on U<sub>34</sub> enzymes for survival, and that concurrent inhibition of MAPK signalling and ELP3 or CTU1 and/or CTU2 synergizes to kill melanoma cells. Activation of the PI3K signalling pathway, one of the most common mechanisms of acquired resistance to MAPK therapeutic agents, markedly increases the expression of U<sub>34</sub> enzymes. Mechanistically, U<sub>34</sub> enzymes promote glycolysis in melanoma cells through the direct, codon-dependent, regulation of the translation of HIF1A mRNA and the maintenance of high levels of HIF1&#x3b1; protein. Therefore, the acquired resistance to anti-BRAF therapy is associated with high levels of U<sub>34</sub> enzymes and HIF1&#x3b1;. Together, these results demonstrate that U<sub>34</sub> enzymes promote the survival and resistance to therapy of melanoma cells by regulating specific mRNA translation.

### Keywords
Mouse, Melanoma, Brafv600e

### Affiliations
Laboratory of   Cancer   Signaling, University  of  Liège, C.H.U.  Sart  Tilman, Liège  4000,  Belgium
ULG- GIGA liege Belgium

### Submitter
Francesca Rapino

### Lab Head
Dr Francesca Rapino
Laboratory of   Cancer   Signaling, University  of  Liège, C.H.U.  Sart  Tilman, Liège  4000,  Belgium


