### Accession
PXD005308

### Title
Integrated Analysis of Global Proteome and Phosphoproteome in Cisplatin Resistant Bladder Cancer Cell Revealed the Molecular Signature Predictive to Patient Survival

### Description
Cisplatin-based chemotherapy is the standard care regimen in bladder cancer (BC). However, resistance to the therapy whose molecular mechanisms of the resistance are not fully elucidated rapidly develops in BC patients. Here we introduced multidimensional proteomic analysis providing different levels of protein information, which included global proteome and phosphorpoteome perturbed by EGF using the cisplatin resistant BC model. Integrated analysis of protein expression and phosphorylation provided comprehensive profiles of altered proteins in cisplatin resistant cells that are dependent and independent on EGF, as well as suggesting significance of protein phosphorylation in resistance mechanisms in BC. From the reconstruction of cisplatin resistance associated network model and subsequent kinase enrichment analysis, we have identified three key kinases, CDK2, CHEK1, and ERBB2 as central regulators mediating cisplatin resistance. Experimental validation showed phosphorylation events in these central kinases and their putative substrates, suggesting evidence that activation of three kinases are important to acquired resistance to cisplatin in BC. Expanded analysis with this proteomic discovery to transcriptome profiles from BC cohorts nominated the 7 gene panel associated with poor survival after cisplatin-based chemotherapy. These findings provide insightful strategies to classify high-risk BC patients upon current chemotherapies and to identify therapeutic targets for recurrence disease.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis. All peptide samples were separated on a UPLC system that was equipped with analytical columns column (75 μm x 50 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) and trap columns (75μm x 2cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å). The temperature of the analytical columns was at 60 °C. The solvent A and B were 0.1 % formic acid in water and 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. A 180 min gradient (from 1% to 40% solvent B over 160 min, from 40 % to 80 % solvent B over 5 min, 80 % solvent B for 10 min and 1% solvent B for 5min) was used for the analysis of profiling of global proteome. Then, a 120 min gradient (from 5% to 40% solvent B over 120 min, from 40 % to 80 % solvent B over 2 min, 80 % solvent B for 10 min and 1 % solvent B for 2 min, 1 % solvent B for 20 min) was used for phosphoproteome analysis. The flow rate of all experiments was set to 250 nL/min. The eluted peptides from LC was mass-analyzed on Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The electric potential of electrospray ionization was kept at 2.0 kV and the temperature of desolvation capillary was set to 250 °C. Full MS scans were acquired for the mass range of 400 – 2000 Th at a resolution of 70,000. The 10 most abundant ions with charge 2,3,4,5 were dynamically selected with an isolation width of 2.0 Th and fragmented with an exclusion duration of 30 s and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30 for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 with a fixed first m/z of 100 Th. Maximum ion injection times were 120 ms and 120 ms for full MS and MS/MS scan, respectively. Automated gain control (AGC) target value was set to 1.0 x 106 for both MS and MS/MS scan

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification. MS and MS/MS spectra were converted from Thermo .RAW files into mzML format using msconvert in the ProteoWizard software package (downloaded from http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net) and searched with MSGF+ against Universal Protein Resource human database (Uniprot released 2016_02, 20,198 entries, http://www.uniprot.org/). Search parameters were as follows: 20 ppm tolerance for precursor ion mass error and fixed modification for carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) to cysteine, variable modification for methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da), phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da) to serine, threonine, tyrosine, TMT (+229.162932) to N-termini and lysine and acetylation (+42.010564) to N-terminal of protein. Peptide identification stringency is set at a maximum of 1 % peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) FDR by target-decoy way. The intensities of all TMT-6 plex reporter ions were extracted using MASIC software [PMCID: PMC2487672].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Cisplatin resistance, Bladder cancer, Biological network, Molecular signature

### Affiliations
Kyung Hee University
KHU

### Submitter
Jae Hun Jung

### Lab Head
Dr Kwang Pyo Kim
Kyung Hee University


