### Accession
PXD003916

### Title
Candida albicans is resistant to polyglutamine aggregation and toxicity

### Description
Disruption of protein quality control can be detrimental, having toxic effects on single cell organisms, and causing neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s and Huntington’s in humans. Here we examined the effects of polyQ aggregation in a major fungal pathogen of humans, Candida albicans, with the goal of identifying new approaches to disable this fungus. However, we discovered that expression of poly-glutamine (polyQ) stretches up to 230Q had no effect on C. albicans ability to grow and withstand proteotoxic stress. Bioinformatics analysis demonstrates that C. albicans has a similarly glutamine rich proteome to the unicellular fungus Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which exhibits polyQ toxicity with as few as 72Q. Surprisingly, global transcriptional profiles indicated no significant change upon induction of up to 230Q. Proteomic analysis highlighted two key interactors of 230Q, Sis1 and Sgt2, however, loss of either protein had no additional effect on C. albicans toxicity. Our data suggest that C. albicans has evolved powerful mechanisms to overcome aggregation prone proteins, providing a unique model for studying polyQ associated diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Untagged wild-type (CaLC239, SN95) and 230Q (CaLC3256) were grown in the absence or presence of 50 μg/mL doxycycline as described in the growth conditions section. Cells were harvested at an OD600 0.8 at 4,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C, washed twice with ice-cold 1x PBS and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were resuspended in 10 ml of lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl and 20% glycerol, with one protease inhibitor cocktail per 50 ml (complete, EDTA-free tablet, Roche Diagnostics), 1 mM PMSF (EMD Chemicals) and 0.5% Tween 20). Cells were disrupted by bead beating twice for 4 minutes with a 7-minute break on ice between cycles. Lysates were centrifuged at 1,300×g for two 5-minute cycles, recovering the supernatant at each stage. The combined lysate was centrifuged twice at 21,000×g, first for 10 minutes and second for 5 minutes at 4°C and protein concentrations determined using the Bradford assay. Protein A/G beads (Santa Cruz SC-2003) were prepared for pre-clearing as per manufacturer’s instructions, and protein samples were pre-cleared for 1.5 hours at 4°C with end-to-end rotation.  Anti-FLAG immunoprecipitations were performed by diluting protein samples to 20 mg/ml in lysis buffer containing 1x Triton X-100, and incubating at 4°C overnight with end-to-end rotation as per the manufacturer's specifications. Protein samples were eluted by washing beads 2x with lysis buffer with detergent followed by 3x with lysis buffer without detergent. Fresh elution buffer (9.5 M NH4OH, pH 11.0-12.0, 0.5 mM EDTA) was then added at three times the bead volume and samples incubated at 4°C for 15 minutes with end-over-end rotation. This was repeated 3 times. Samples were digested in-solution as described previously (60). Briefly, DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and samples were incubated with end-over-end rotation at room temperature for 30 minutes. Trypsin (Promega, MS grade) was added and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C with end-over-end rotation. Reactions were stopped by adding 5 μl of 1.0% TFA. Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap analyzer (Q-Exactive, ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA) outfitted with a nanospray source and EASY-nLC nano-LC system (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA).  Lyophilized peptide mixtures were dissolved in 11 μL of 0.1% formic acid and 5 μL were loaded onto a 75 μm x 50 cm PepMax RSLC EASY-Spray column filled with 2 μM C18 beads (ThermoFisher San, Jose CA) at a pressure of 800 Bar. Peptides were eluted over 60 min at a rate of 250 nl/min using a 0 to 35% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were introduced by nano-electrospray into the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher). The instrument method consisted of one MS full scan (400–1500 m/z) in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6, maximum ion injection time of 120 ms and a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 data-dependent MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17,500, an AGC target of 1e6, maximum ion time of 120 ms, and one microscan. The intensity threshold to trigger a MS/MS scan was set to 1.7e4.  Fragmentation occurred in the HCD trap with normalized collision energy set to 27. The dynamic exclusion was applied using a setting of 10 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted, charge state deconvoluted and deisotoped by Xcalibur version 2.2. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.4.1.14) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Sequest was set up to search Uniprot-C_albicans.fasta (Downloaded Feb 28 2014, 9082 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search the Uniprot-C_albicans database (Downloaded Feb 28 2014, 9082 entries) also assuming trypsin. Sequest and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.5.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from Sequest were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (61) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability, contained at least 1 identified peptide and were present in both biological replicates. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (62). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Disruption of protein quality control can be detrimental, having toxic effects on single cell organisms and contributing to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington's in humans. Here, we examined the effects of polyglutamine (polyQ) aggregation in a major fungal pathogen of humans, Candida albicans, with the goal of identifying new approaches to disable this fungus. However, we discovered that expression of polyQ stretches up to 230Q had no effect on C. albicans ability to grow and withstand proteotoxic stress. Bioinformatics analysis demonstrates that C. albicans has a similarly glutamine-rich proteome to the unicellular fungus Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which exhibits polyQ toxicity with as few as 72Q. Surprisingly, global transcriptional profiles indicated no significant change upon induction of up to 230Q. Proteomic analysis highlighted two key interactors of 230Q, Sis1 and Sgt2; however, loss of either protein had no additional effect on C. albicans toxicity. Our data suggest that C. albicans has evolved powerful mechanisms to overcome the toxicity associated with aggregation-prone proteins, providing a unique model for studying polyQ-associated diseases.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Aggregation, Toxicity, Polyq proteins

### Affiliations
Bioinformatics Solutions Inc
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1A8, Canada.

### Submitter
Jonathan Krieger

### Lab Head
Dr Leah E. Cowen
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 1A8, Canada.


