### Accession
PXD030970

### Title
Mass spectrometry-based proteomic comparison of BirA-SMN, BirA-SMN-Y109C and BirA proxisomes.

### Description
Although recent advances in gene therapy provide hope for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) patients, the pathology remains the leading genetic cause of infant mortality. SMA is a monogenic pathology that originates from the loss of the SMN1 gene in most cases or mutations in rare cases. Interestingly, SMN1 mutations occur broadly either within the TUDOR methyl-arginine (Rme) reader domain of SMN or its carboxy terminal oligomerization domain. We hypothesized that in SMN1 mutant cases, SMA may emerge from aberrant protein-protein interactions between SMN and key neuronal factors. Using a proximity-dependent biotinylation proteomic (BioID) approach, we have identified and validated a number of SMN-interacting proteins, including Fragile X mental retardation family members (FMRFM), such as FMRP itself as well as FXR1 and FXR2, some depending on a wild-type version of the TUDOR domain.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM (Sigma) supplemented with penicillin, streptavidin, and glutamine (Sigma). The expression of BirA, BirA-SMN and BirA-SMN-Y109C mutant was induced for 72 hours using 1 µg/mL doxycycline (Sigma). After 48 hours, biotin (Sigma) was added at 50 µM for another 24 hours. Cells were rinced twice with 5 mL ice-cold PBS to removed excess biotin, which interferes with the streptavidin-sepharose purification scheme. Cells were harvested by scraping in PBS, resuspended in 600 μL lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.5% NP-40, 0.25% triton X-100, supplemented with EDTA-free Complete [Roche] protease inhibitor cocktail), briefly sonicated, and cleared by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 25000 rcf. Cleared lysates were incubated 2 hours at 4°C on a rotator with 25 μL pre-washed streptavidin-sepharose beads (GE Healthcare). After 2 hours of incubation, samples were washed 4 times with 1 mL lysis buffer and resuspended in 50 μL Laemmli sample buffer. Three replicates of BirA, BirA-SMN and BirA-SMN-Y109C proxisomes were prepared. The eluted proteins solubilized in Laemmli buffer were stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Biorad), proteins were digested in-gel using modified trypsin (sequencing purity, Promega). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 120 min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.8.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, May 2022 download), a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (human keratins, trypsin, etc.), and the corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 20 ppm. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable), Biotin (K, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, peptide score ≥ 25, allowing to reach a false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% as calculated on peptide spectrum-match scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and minimum of one specific peptide per protein group).

### Publication Abstract
Although recent advances in gene therapy provide hope for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) patients, the pathology remains the leading genetic cause of infant mortality. SMA is a monogenic pathology that originates from the loss of the <i>SMN1</i> gene in most cases or mutations in rare cases. Interestingly, several <i>SMN1</i> mutations occur within the TUDOR methylarginine reader domain of SMN. We hypothesized that in <i>SMN1</i> mutant cases, SMA may emerge from aberrant protein-protein interactions between SMN and key neuronal factors. Using a BioID proteomic approach, we have identified and validated a number of SMN-interacting proteins, including fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) family members (FMR<sub>FM</sub>). Importantly, SMA-linked SMN<sub>TUDOR</sub> mutant forms (SMN<sub>ST</sub>) failed to interact with FMR<sub>FM</sub> In agreement with the recent work, we define biochemically that SMN forms droplets in vitro and these droplets are stabilized by RNA, suggesting that SMN could be involved in the formation of membraneless organelles, such as Cajal nuclear bodies. Finally, we found that SMN and FMRP co-fractionate with polysomes, in an RNA-dependent manner, suggesting a potential role in localized translation in motor neurons.

### Keywords
Bioid, Survival motor neuron (smn), Nanolc-ms/ms, Spinal muscle atrophy (sma)

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


