### Accession
PXD018053

### Title
Mouse early diabetic nephropathy LC-MS/MS analysis

### Description
The present study aims to evaluate the alterations induced by type I diabetes and the associated hyperglycemia on the proteome of renal tissue using a transgenic experimental animal model. Diabetic  and non-diabetic  kidney  samples were analyzed by liquid nano-chromatography mass spectrometry and protein abundance was evaluated bylabel free quantification.

### Sample Protocol
The animals were divided in two groups: (1) double transgenic mice (dTg), Ins-HA+/−, TCR-HA+/− dTg that rapidly developed an aggressive diabetes; and (2) the single transgenic mice (sTg) Ins-HA+/−, TCR-HA−/−. All of them were compared to a BALB/c (WT) mouse strain control group. Each animal group comprised 10 mice.  The renal cortical homogenates from each specimen were suitably processed for mass spectrometric analysis and their corresponding peptides were separated in 3-25% acetonitrile gradient using the EASY–nLC II system (Thermo Scientific). The high performance LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) system was used to generate mass spectra using the Top 12 Data-Dependent method and CID fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The protein inference was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) in the mouse Swiss-Prot 11.2017 database with Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrix Science) search engine. Trypsin was set as the enzyme of choice with a maximum of 2 missed cleaveges. ProCon 0.9.641 was used to convert .msf files to .mzid files.

### Publication Abstract
Nephropathy is a major chronic complication of diabetes. A crucial role in renal pathophysiology is played by hydrogen sulphide (H<sub>2</sub> S) that is produced excessively by the kidney; however, the data regarding H<sub>2</sub> S bioavailability are inconsistent. We hypothesize that early type 1 diabetes (T1D) increases H<sub>2</sub> S production by a mechanism involving hyperglycaemia-induced alterations in sulphur metabolism. Plasma and kidney tissue collected from T1D double transgenic mice were subjected to mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis, and the results were validated by immunological and gene expression assays.T1D mice exhibited a high concentration of H<sub>2</sub> S in the plasma and kidney tissue and histological, showed signs of subtle kidney fibrosis, characteristic for early renal disease. The shotgun proteomic analyses disclosed that the level of enzymes implicated in sulphate activation modulators, H<sub>2</sub> S-oxidation and H<sub>2</sub> S-production were significantly affected (ie 6 up-regulated and 4 down-regulated). Gene expression results corroborated well with the proteomic data. Dysregulation of H<sub>2</sub> S enzymes underly the changes occurring in H<sub>2</sub> S production, which in turn could play a key role in the initiation of renal disease. The new findings lead to a novel target in the therapy of diabetic nephropathy. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018053.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Diabetes, Kidney

### Affiliations
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology "N. Simionescu"
Proteomics Department, Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology, Romania

### Submitter
Felicia Antohe

### Lab Head
Dr Felicia Antohe
Proteomics Department, Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology, Romania


