### Accession
PXD041351

### Title
Adipocyte p53 coordinates the adipose tissue immune cell landscape upon intermittent fasting

### Description
In obesity, sustained adipose tissue (AT) inflammation constitutes a cellular memory that limits the effectiveness of weight loss interventions. Yet, its fasting regimen-dependent regulation is unknown. Here, we show that cyclic intermittent fasting (IF) exacerbates the lipid-associated macrophage (LAM) inflammatory phenotype of visceral AT in obese mice. Importantly, we provide evidence that this increase in LAM abundance is almost entirely dependent on p53-driven adipocyte apoptosis. Adipocyte-specific deletion of p53 prevents LAM accumulation in AT during IF and increases the catabolic state of adipocytes, ameliorates metabolic flexibility, and insulin sensitivity. Finally, in cohorts of obese/diabetic patients, we describe a p53 polymorphism that links to long-term efficacy of a fasting-mimicking diet and that the expression of LAM markers and p53 in AT negatively correlates with maintaining weight loss after bariatric surgery. Overall, our results demonstrate that p53 signaling in adipocytes dictates LAM accumulation in AT under IF and that adipocyte p53 modulates fasting effectiveness in mice and humans.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics was performed as previously described (79). In short, harvested eWAT depots were homogenized with RIPA buffer using metal beads and the LT TissueLyser (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States). Lysed samp,les were sonicated, centrifuged at 14.000 rpm for 15 min and the protein concentration in the supernatant was quantified with BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States). Proteins were precipitated with methanol/chloroform. The pellet containing the proteins was reconstituted with 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5) and 2 % sodium deoxycholate and alkylated by adding 5 mM TCEP and 30 mM chloroacetamide at 56 °C for 10 min. Afterwards, proteins were lysed with 1:100 Lys-C and 1:50 trypsin at 37 °C overnight and lysis was stopped by adding 1 % trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %.  Digested peptides were desalted on an Oasis HLB plate (Waters, Massachusetts, United States) and dried, before adding 2 % formic acid. Peptides were subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis. A total of 1000 ng of tryptic peptides was analyzed using an Ultimate3000 high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-x mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States). Buffer A was water acidified with 0.1 % formic acid; buffer B consisted of 80 % acetonitrile and 20 % water with 0.1 % formic acid. Peptides were trapped for 1 min at 30 μL/min with 100 % buffer A (0.3 mm by 5 mm with PepMap C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States). Afterwards, peptides were separated by a 50-cm analytical column packed with C18 beads (Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 μm; Agilent Technologies, California, United States). The gradient was 9 to 40 % B in 155 min at 400 nL/min. Buffer B was then raised to 55 % in 10 min and elevated to 99 % for the cleaning step. Peptides were ionized using a spray voltage of 1.9 kV and a capillary heated at 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire full-scan MS spectra (350 to 1400 mass/charge ratio) for a maximum injection time of 120 ms at a mass resolution of 120.000 and an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 3 × 106. Up to 25 of the most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. HCD fragmentation was performed in the HCD cell, with the readout in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 15,000 (isolation window of 1.4 Th) and an AGC target value of 1 × 105 with a maximum injection time of 25 ms and a normalized collision energy of 27 %.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed by using MaxQuant v1.6.17 software using the integrated Andromeda search engine and the Mouse UniProt Reference Proteome. MaxQuant analysis was performed by using the standard parameters (the “label-free quantification” and “match between runs” were selected with automatic values) with only the addition of deamidation (N) as variable modification. Data analysis was done with Perseus v1.6.14. The proteins were filtered for reverse, potential contaminants and identified by site. Label-free quantification was calculated by MaxQuant and missing values were imputed by Perseus using the automatic settings (width, 0.3; down shift, 1.8; mode, separately for each column). The z-score (mean per row) was calculated, ANOVA testing (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR, 0.05) was performed to analyze statistical significance, and hierarchical clustering was performed. Pathway analysis of differentially expressed proteins in each cluster was performed by using the enrichR package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fasting, Adipose tissue, Proteomics, P53

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Biology, Histology and Embryology
UCL

### Submitter
riccardo zenezini chiozzi

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Prokesch
Division of Cell Biology, Histology and Embryology


