### Accession
PXD018823

### Title
BLM complex composition in unperturbed cells

### Description
The Bloom syndrome DNA helicase BLM contributes to chromosome stability through its roles in double-strand break repair by homologous recombination and DNA replication fork restart during the replication stress response. Loss of BLM activity leads to Bloom syndrome, which is characterized by extraordinary cancer risk and small stature. Here, we have analyzed the composition of the BLM complex in unperturbed cells and identified a direct physical interaction with the Mcm6 subunit of the minichromosome maintenance (MCM) complex by co-immunopecipitations using endogenous and recombinant proteins as well as two-hybrid analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Exponentially growing cells were lysed in 20 mM Tris pH 7.4, 10 mM KCl, 1 μM EDTA, 0.2% NP40, 50% glycerol, 0.6 mM βME, 1 mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail [Pierce] for 2 min on ice to isolate nuclei. Nuclei were lysed in 20 mM Tris pH 7.4, 10 mM KCl, 0.4 M NaCl, 1 μM EDTA, 50% glycerol, 0.6 mM βME, 1 mM PMSF, and protease inhibitor cocktail supplemented with 25 U/ml benzonase (Novagen). Nuclear lysate was precleared and incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-BLM A300-110A (Bethyl) or IgG crosslinked to Protein G Agarose (Pierce). Complexes were washed extensively with nuclear lysis buffer before elution. For LC-MS/MS, complexes were eluted in 50 μl 0.2 M glycine, pH 2.6 and immediately neutralized with 50 μl Tris, pH 8.0. To analyze BLM complex composition, co-immunoprecipitation eluates were prepared for mass spectrometry by FASP (Expedeon), followed by trypsin digestion (Promega), desalting and concentration, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus (ThermoFisher).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was analyzed using MaxQuant processing suite. Spectra were compared against the UniProt reference proteome data set for Homo sapiens (Proteome ID: UP000005640).

### Publication Abstract
The Bloom syndrome DNA helicase BLM contributes to chromosome stability through its roles in double-strand break repair by homologous recombination and DNA replication fork restart during the replication stress response. Loss of BLM activity leads to Bloom syndrome, which is characterized by extraordinary cancer risk and small stature. Here, we have analyzed the composition of the BLM complex during unperturbed S-phase and identified a direct physical interaction with the Mcm6 subunit of the minichromosome maintenance (MCM) complex. Using distinct binding sites, BLM interacts with the N-terminal domain of Mcm6 in G1 phase and switches to the C-terminal Cdt1-binding domain of Mcm6 in S-phase, with a third site playing a role for Mcm6 binding after DNA damage. Disruption of Mcm6-binding to BLM in S-phase leads to supra-normal DNA replication speed in unperturbed cells, and the helicase activity of BLM is required for this increased replication speed. Upon disruption of BLM/Mcm6 interaction, repair of replication-dependent DNA double-strand breaks is delayed and cells become hypersensitive to DNA damage and replication stress. Our findings reveal that BLM not only plays a role in the response to DNA damage and replication stress, but that its physical interaction with Mcm6 is required in unperturbed cells, most notably in S-phase as a negative regulator of replication speed.

### Keywords
Human, Gm00637, Q exactive plus

### Affiliations
University of South Florida
Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology and Molecular Biology University of South Florida Tampa, Florida

### Submitter
Kristina Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Kristina Hildegard Schmidt
Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology and Molecular Biology University of South Florida Tampa, Florida


