### Accession
PXD033227

### Title
AKT/PACS2 participates in renal vascular hyperpermeability by regulating endothelial fatty acid oxidation in diabetic mice

### Description
HUVECs were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) and cultured in an Endothelial Cell Medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) containing 5% fetal bovine serum at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator. Cells were treated with 30 mM glucose and 0.1 mM palmitic acid (P0500, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) dissolved in 0.5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 48 h to simulate HGHF treatment. The Akt inhibitor MK-2206 2HCl was purchased from Selleck Chemicals (S1078, Houston, TX, USA).

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from HUVECs in the presence or absence of HGHF. Peptide samples (2 μg) were separated and analyzed by Kangchen Biotech (Shanghai, China) using the EASY-nLC1200 system and Q Exactive mass spectrometer (120 minutes/sample), respectively [33]. Differentially expressed peptides were identified at P < 0.05 and fold-change > 2, followed by gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis by using Blast2Go 4.0.7 software.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant (Version 1.5.6.0). The protein sequence database (Uniprot_organism_2016_09) was downloaded from UNIPROT. This database and its reverse decoy were then searched against by MaxQuant software. The quantification type was LFQ with match between run and iBAQ; Trypsin was set as specific enzyme with up to 3 miss cleavage; Oxidation [M] and Acetyl [protein N-term] were considered as variable modification (max number of modifications per peptide is 3), Carbamidomethyl [C] was set as fixed modification; Both peptide and protein FDR should be less than 0.01. Only unique & razor peptides were used for quantification. All the other parameters were reserved as default.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetes is a chronic metabolic disorder that can cause many microvascular and macrovascular complications, including diabetic nephropathy. Endothelial cells exhibit phenotypic and metabolic diversity and are affected by metabolic disorders. Whether changes in endothelial cell metabolism affect vascular endothelial function in diabetic nephropathy remains unclear. In diabetic mice, increased renal microvascular permeability and fibrosis, as well as increased MAMs and PACS2 in renal endothelial cells, were observed. Mice lacking PACS2 improved vascular leakage and glomerulosclerosis under high fat diet. <i>In vitro</i>, PACS2 expression, VE-cadherin internalization, fibronectin production, and Smad-2 phosphorylation increased in HUVECs treated with high glucose and palmitic acid (HGHF). Pharmacological inhibition of AKT significantly reduced HGHF-induced upregulation of PACS2 and p-Smad2 expression. Blocking fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation (FAO) ameliorated the impaired barrier function mediated by HGHF. Further studies observed that HGHF induced decreased FAO, CPT1&#x3b1; expression, ATP production, and NADPH/NADP<sup>+</sup> ratio in endothelial cells. However, these changes in fatty acid metabolism were rescued by silencing PACS2. In conclusion, PACS2 participates in renal vascular hyperpermeability and glomerulosclerosis by regulating the FAO of diabetic mice. Targeting PACS2 is potential new strategy for the treatment of diabetic nephropathy.

### Keywords
Fatty acid oxidation, Mitochondria, Endothelial cell, Pacs2, Diabetes, Endoplasmic reticulum, Vascular permeability

### Affiliations
1 Health Management Center, the Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, China; 2 Department of Cardiology, the Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, China;
The Third Xiangya Hospital

### Submitter
Zhihao Shu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhihao Shu
1 Health Management Center, the Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, China; 2 Department of Cardiology, the Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, China;


