### Accession
PXD028709

### Title
Mapping the Melanoma Plasma Proteome (MPP) using Single-Shot Proteomics and Custom Protein Databases

### Description
We mapped the Melanoma Plasma Proteome (MPP) of undepleted samples a new strategy for protein identification refered here as Wise MS transfer (WiMT). We were able to identify more than 1,000 protein in undepleted plasma samples which shows a deep coverage of the plasma proteome. The MPP of undeplted samples was well characterized showing a great potential for large-scale screening of melanoma proteomics studies and other neoplastic diseases.

### Sample Protocol
We developed a straightforward methodology for protein identification called Wise MS Transfer (WiMT). A multi-level dynamic database is built throughout the search process, from different immuno-depletion strategies and pools of samples by applying single-shot proteomics. Immunodepletion of plasma for the development of the database was performed using a Multiaffinity Removal Column human-7 (4,6 x 50mm), a Multiaffinity Removal Column human-14 (4,6 x 100mm) (Agilent Technologies), and Seppro® SuperMix LC2 (6,4 x 63mm) (Sigma-Aldrich) coupled to a 1260 Infinity LC System (Agilent Technologies. Sample digestion of the immunodepleted samples and undepleted samples were performed using S-Trap (Protifi) plate and the enzymes Lys-C and trypsin. The data were acquired using the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode in an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed on Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, San José, CA). For peptide identification MSPepSearch was used against the Human spectral library “ProteomeTools_HCD28_PD”, using a UniProt human database (Date: 2020-01-28). The SEQUEST HT was also used against the same UniProt human database to unassigned peptides from MSPepSearch. The node Feature Mapper was used in the consensus workflow for chromatographic alignment and identification of peptides based on MS1 information.Peptide and protein quantifications were performed based on the Label-free quantification approach, using the precursor ion intensity to infer peptide abundancy, and considering all peptides to calculate the abundance at a protein level. The bioinformatic analysis was perfomed on Perseus software, DAVID functional annotation tool, KEGG pathway and Bionic Visualizations- Proteomaps.

### Publication Abstract
Plasma analysis by mass spectrometry-based proteomics remains a challenge due to its large dynamic range of 10 orders in magnitude. We created a methodology for protein identification known as Wise MS Transfer (WiMT). Melanoma plasma samples from biobank archives were directly analyzed using simple sample preparation. WiMT is based on MS1 features between several MS runs together with custom protein databases for ID generation. This entails a multi-level dynamic protein database with different immunodepletion strategies by applying single-shot proteomics. The highest number of melanoma plasma proteins from undepleted and unfractionated plasma was reported, mapping &gt;1200 proteins from &gt;10,000 protein sequences with confirmed significance scoring. Of these, more than 660 proteins were annotated by WiMT from the resulting ~5800 protein sequences. We could verify 4000 proteins by MS1t analysis from HeLA extracts. The WiMT platform provided an output in which 12 previously well-known candidate markers were identified. We also identified low-abundant proteins with functions related to (i) cell signaling, (ii) immune system regulators, and (iii) proteins regulating folding, sorting, and degradation, as well as (iv) vesicular transport proteins. WiMT holds the potential for use in large-scale screening studies with simple sample preparation, and can lead to the discovery of novel proteins with key melanoma disease functions.

### Keywords
Malignant melanoma; plasma; proteome; proteomics; biomarkers; wimt

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Proteomics/LADETEC, Universidade Federal Do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 21941-598, Brazil
Proteomics Unit, Institute of Chemistry, Universidade Federal Do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 21941-909, Brazil
Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Biomedical Center, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lund University, Lund, BMC D13, 22184, Swede
Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Biomedical Centre, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lerund University, Lund, Sweden Chemical Genomics Global Research Lab, Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul,Republic of Korea Department of Surgery, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan

### Submitter
Natália Almeida

### Lab Head
Dr György Marko-Varga
Clinical Protein Science & Imaging, Biomedical Centre, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Lerund University, Lund, Sweden Chemical Genomics Global Research Lab, Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul,Republic of Korea Department of Surgery, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan


