### Accession
PXD024204

### Title
Quantitative Label-free Comparison of the Metabolic Protein Fraction in Old and Modern Wheat Italian Genotypes by a Shotgun Approach

### Description
Wheat represents one of the most important cereals for mankind. However, since wheat proteins are also the causative agent of several adverse reactions, during the last decades, consumers have shown an increasing interest in the old wheat genotypes, which are generally perceived as more “natural” and healthier than the modern ones. Comparison of nutritional value for modern and old wheat genotypes is still controversial, and to evaluate the real impact of these foods on human health comparative experiments involving old and modern genotypes are desirable. The nutritional quality of grain is correlated with its proteomic composition that depends on the interplay between the genetic characteristics of the plant and external factors related to the environment. We report here the label-free shotgun quantitative comparison of the metabolic protein fractions of two old Sicilian landraces (Russello and Timilia) and the modern variety Simeto, from the 2010-11 and 2011-12 growing seasons. The overall results show that Timilia presents the major differences with respect to the other two genotypes investigated. These differences may be related to different defense mechanisms and some other peculiar properties of these genotypes. On the other hand, our results confirm previous results leading to the conclusion that with respect to a nutritional value evaluation, there is a substantial equivalence between old and modern wheat genotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Collection and preparation for proteomics analyses  Two old Sicilian durum wheat landraces, Russello (released in 1910, a selection from landrace “Russie”) and Timilia Reste Bianche (1900, indigenous landrace population from Sicily), were chosen for the analysis. Simeto (1988), an improved durum wheat variety widespread in Italy and other Mediterranean countries, was chosen as representative of the most widespread commercial cultivars. Three biological replicates of Russello, Timilia, and Simeto were provided from the Cereal Research Centre (CREA) of Foggia (Italy). The genetic materials were sowed at Foggia, during the 2010-11 and 2011-12 growing seasons, following a randomized block design with three replicates for each season. Grain samples were harvested, and the flours were stored at 4°C. Wheat flour (200 mg) were suspended in 2 mL cold (4°C) extraction solution (50 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM EDTA, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, pH 7.8). The solution was incubated on ice (5 min) with intermittent mixing and centrifuged (13523 g, 15 min, 4°C). The supernatants from these extractions were stored at -80°C until required. The concentration for each extract was determined by a fluorimetric assay using the Qubit Protein Assay kit with the Qubit 1.0 Fluorometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Milan, Italy). Chicken lysozyme C (0.8 µg) was added as an internal standard to 50 µg (about 50 µL) of each protein extract. Finally, 50 µg of each sample was reduced adding 39 µg of DTT (3 h, 20°C), alkylated with 94 µg of IAA (1 h, in the dark at 20°C) and digested by porcine trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin Porcine, lyophilized, Promega) at an enzyme-substrate ratio of 1:50 (overnight, 37°C). To obtain a final concentration of 25 ng/µL for each sample, and 0.4 ng/µL for Chicken lysozyme, a 5% aqueous solution of formic acid was added to obtain a final volume of 2 mL.  Mass spectrometry analysis  Mass spectrometry data were acquired on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid® (Q-OT-qIT) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Liquid chromatography was carried out using a Thermo Scientific Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system (Sunnyvale, CA). One microliter of peptide mixture was loaded onto an Acclaim ®Nano Trap C18 Column (100 µm i.d. x 2 cm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å). After washing the trapping column with solvent A (H2O + 0.1% FA) for 3 min at a flow rate of 7 μL/min, the peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto a PepMap® RSLC C18 EASY-Spray column (75 µm i.d. x 50 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å) and separated by elution at a flow rate of 0.25 µL/min at 40°C by a linear gradient of solvent B (ACN + 0.1% FA) in A, 5% for 3 min, followed by 5% to 20% in 32 min, 20% to 40% in 30 min, 40% to 60% in 20 min and 60% to 98% in 15 min, finishing by holding 98% B 5 min, 98% to 5% in 1 min, and re-equilibrating at 5% B for 20 min. The eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization using a source voltage of 1.75 kV and introduced into the mass spectrometer through a heated ion transfer tube (275 °C). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 200 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120 K resolution (@ 200 m/z). Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 Th with the quadrupole. HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 35, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. Only those precursors with charge state 2÷4 and intensity above the threshold of 5∙103 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles, meaning it would continuously perform MS2 events until the list of non-excluded precursors diminished to zero or 3 s, whichever is shorter. MS/MS spectral quality was enhanced enabling the parallelizable time option (i.e. by using all parallelizable time during full scan detection for MS/MS precursor injection and detection). Mass spectrometer calibration was performed by using the Pierce® LTQ Velos ESI Positive Ion Calibration Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data acquisition was carried out by utilizing the Xcalibur v. 3.0.63 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three LC-MS/MS replicates for each biological sample were performed.

### Data Protocol
Database search and protein identification  Protein identification was obtained processing MS data by the PEAKS X de novo sequencing software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON Canada). Data were searched against a dedicated protein database, including only the reviewed entries of Triticum, Oryza, Hordeum, Avena, Secale, Maize, and Brachypodium species plus the entry of Chicken Lysozyme C (UniProt Acc. No. P00698), downloaded from the UniProt database (release February 2020, 7803 entries). In addition, the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (c-RAP) contaminant database (www.thegpm.org) was included in the database search  Database search was carried out using the following parameters: i) full tryptic peptides with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage sites; ii) oxidation of methionine, and transformation of N-terminal glutamine and N-terminal glutamic acid residue in the pyroglutamic acid form as variable modifications; iii) carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was 10 ppm and the max fragment mass error was set to 0.6 Da. Peptide Spectral Matches (PSMs) were validated using a Target Decoy PSM Validator node based on q-values at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) ≤ 0.1%. PEAKS score thresholds for PSMs were set to achieve for each database search FDR values for PSMs, Peptide sequences, and Proteins identified below the 0.1% value. A protein was considered identified if a minimum of two unique peptides were matched. Proteins containing the same peptides and that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony (groups of parsimony). In these cases, proteins from Triticum, when identified, were always chosen as the group’s reference protein. When a group of parsimony did not contain a component from Triticum, the reference protein was selected from the species closest related to Triticum and represented in the group.  Label-Free Quantification  Label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis was performed by the PEAKS Q module, which uses ion peak intensity on MS1. PEAKS Q selects the three most abundant unique peptides for protein quantification by excluding peptides with both modified and unmodified forms and redundant peptides. When a protein is identified with one or two unique peptides only these are used for the quantification. More in detail, the quantification method is based on the detection, separately for each sample, of the peptide features (mass, retention time, and signal intensity) in multiple samples. Then, using the EM (expectation-maximization) algorithm, the features of the same peptide from different samples are aligned together using a high-performance retention time alignment algorithm. The following parameters were set for label-free quantification analysis: mass error tolerance (i.e. the mass shift between different runs) 10 ppm; retention time (RT) shift tolerance 3 min (i.e. the maximum elution time range considered for the quantification of an identified peptide between different runs). The only peptide features having the following parameters were considered for the quantification: quality ≥ 7 (a parameter depending by m/z difference, RT difference, isotope distribution, etc.); average area of the MS signal intensity ≥ 105; peptide charge 2, 3, or 4. A protein was quantified when: i) at least two its unique peptides satisfied the parameters above reported; ii) was identified in a minimum of five out of nine nanoLC-MS/MS runs per flour sample; and iii) had a p-value < 0.05 and a significance ≥ 20 (significance method ANOVA;  the significance score was calculated as the -10log10 of the significance testing p-value). Finally, in the pairwise comparison, a protein was considered differentially expressed when showed a fold change ≤ 0.5 or ≥ 2.

### Publication Abstract
Wheat represents one of the most important cereals for mankind. However, since wheat proteins are also the causative agent of several adverse reactions, during the last decades, consumers have shown an increasing interest in the old wheat genotypes, which are generally perceived as more "natural" and healthier than the modern ones. Comparison of nutritional value for modern and old wheat genotypes is still controversial, and to evaluate the real impact of these foods on human health comparative experiments involving old and modern genotypes are desirable. The nutritional quality of grain is correlated with its proteomic composition that depends on the interplay between the genetic characteristics of the plant and external factors related to the environment. We report here the label-free shotgun quantitative comparison of the metabolic protein fractions of two old Sicilian landraces (Russello and Timilia) and the modern variety Simeto, from the 2010-2011 and 2011-2012 growing seasons. The overall results show that Timilia presents the major differences with respect to the other two genotypes investigated. These differences may be related to different defense mechanisms and some other peculiar properties of these genotypes. On the other hand, our results confirm previous results leading to the conclusion that with respect to a nutritional value evaluation, there is a substantial equivalence between old and modern wheat genotypes. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier &lt;PXD024204&gt;.

### Keywords
Old and modern wheat genotypes; label-free quantitation; high-resolution mass spectrometry; proteome analysis; metabolic proteins

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Organic Mass Spectrometry, Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania, Viale A. Doria 6, 95125, Catania, Italy
University of Catania

### Submitter
Vincenzo Cunsolo

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Salvatore Foti
Laboratory of Organic Mass Spectrometry, Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Catania, Viale A. Doria 6, 95125, Catania, Italy


