### Accession
PXD003881

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Benchmark Dataset to evaluate label-free quantitative methods- LC/Orbitrap Fusion MS analysis of E coli proteomes spiked-in Human proteins at 5 different levels (N=20)

### Description
To unbiasedly evaluate the quantitative performance of different quantitative methods, and compare different  popular proteomics data processing workflows, we prepared a benchmark dataset where the various levels of spikeed-in E. Coli proteome that true fold change (i.e. 1 fold, 1.5 fold, 2 fold, 2.5 fold and 3 fold) and true identities of positives/negatives (i.e. E.Coli proteins are true positives while Human proteins are  true negatives) are  known. To best mimic the proteomics application in comparison of multiple replicates, each fold change group contains 4 replicates, so there are 20 LC-MS/MS analysis in this benchmark dataset. To our knowledge, this spike-in benchmark dataset is largest-scale ever that encompasses 5 different spike level, >500 true positive proteins, and >3000 true negative proteins (2peptide criteria, 1% protein FDR), with a wide concentration dynamic range.  The dataset is ideal to test quantitative accuracy, precision, false-positive biomarker discovery and missing data level.

### Sample Protocol
We prepared a set of spike-in samples by spiking E.Coli proteome(at small portions, representing altered proteins) into human proteome(large portion, representing unchanged background proteins). DH5α E. Coli lysate were spiked in human pancreatic cancer cells(Panc-1) lysate at five different levels: 1 fold(3% E.Coli), 1.5 fold(4.5% E.Coli), 2 fold(6% E.Coli), 2.5 fold(7.5% E.Coli) and 3 fold(9% E.Coli).  The mixed samples were alkylated, precipitated and digested.4 µL of samples containing 2 µg peptides were loaded onto a reversed-phase trap (300 µm ID x1 cm), with 1% mobile phase B at a flow rate of 10 µL/min, and the trap was washed for 3 min. A series of nanoflow gradients (flow rate at 250 nL/min) was used to back-flush the trapped samples onto the nano-LC column (75-µm ID x 100 cm) for separation. A 2.5-hr gradient was used to achieve sufficient peptide separation. An Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer was used for MS analysis. For general analysis, the instrument was operated in the data dependent mode: MS1 spectral were collected at a resolution of 120 000. MS2 spectra were collected at a resolution of 15 000 in Orbitrap. Precursors were fragmented by HCD at a normalized collision energy of 35%. In order to minimize carry-over effect, the analysis was performed in a end-over-end and alternating manner: A1, B1, C1, D1, E1, E2, D2, C2, B2, A2…

### Data Protocol
Database searching: MS GF+ searching using concatenated human and E.Coli database; Searching result merging: Scaffold 4.0. Identification criteria: <1% Protein FDR and Pepetide FDR with at leat 2 unique peptides. Quantitation: IonStar(SIEVE+IonStar-processing)

### Publication Abstract
Reproducible quantification of large biological cohorts is critical for clinical/pharmaceutical proteomics yet remains challenging because most prevalent methods suffer from drastically declined commonly quantified proteins and substantially deteriorated quantitative quality as cohort size expands. MS2-based data-independent acquisition approaches represent tremendous advancements in reproducible protein measurement, but often with limited depth. We developed IonStar, an MS1-based quantitative approach enabling in-depth, high-quality quantification of large cohorts by combining efficient/reproducible experimental procedures with unique data-processing components, such as efficient 3D chromatographic alignment, sensitive and selective direct ion current extraction, and stringent postfeature generation quality control. Compared with several popular label-free methods, IonStar exhibited far lower missing data (0.1%), superior quantitative accuracy/precision [&#x223c;5% intragroup coefficient of variation (CV)], the widest protein abundance range, and the highest sensitivity/specificity for identifying protein changes (&lt;5% false altered-protein discovery) in a benchmark sample set (<i>n</i> = 20). We demonstrated the usage of IonStar by a large-scale investigation of traumatic injuries and pharmacological treatments in rat brains (<i>n</i> = 100), quantifying &gt;7,000 unique protein groups (&gt;99.8% without missing data across the 100 samples) with a low false discovery rate (FDR), two or more unique peptides per protein, and high quantitative precision. IonStar represents a reliable and robust solution for precise and reproducible protein measurement in large cohorts.

### Keywords
Human, Ecoli, Benchmark, Label-free, Ionstar, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
University at Buffalo

### Submitter
XIAOMENG SHEN

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
University at Buffalo


