### Accession
PXD030810

### Title
HOXB13 WT and G84E mass spectrometry

### Description
To identify potential cofactors of HOXB13 in suppressing lipogenic programs in prostate cancer cells, we performed tandem affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry analysis of WT and G84E HOXB13 expressed in LNCaP cells. Out of the HOXB13-enriched proteins are previously reported interactors such as AR and its cofactors FOXA1, GATA2, and NKX3. However, these interactions were not disrupted by G84E as compared to WT HOXB13. Interestingly, we found strong interactions of HOXB13 with HDAC1/3 and their corepressors NCoR1/2 and TBL1X. Notably, these interactions were drastically reduced by G84E mutation.

### Sample Protocol
LNCaP cells stably expressing HOXB13 WT-SFB or G84E-SFB were lysed in NETN (100mM NaCl, 20mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.0, 1mM EDTA, and 0.5% (vol/vol) NP-40) buffer containing protease inhibitors for 20 min at 4 °C. Crude lysates were subjected to centrifugation at 21,100 × g for 30 min. Supernatants were then incubated with streptavidin-conjugated beads (GE Healthcare) for 4 h at 4 °C. The beads were washed three times with NETN buffer, and bounded proteins were eluted with NETN buffer containing 2 mg/ml biotin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h twice at 4 °C. The elutes were incubated with S-protein beads (EMD Millipore) overnight at 4 °C. The beads were eluted with SDS sample buffer and subjected to SDS-PAGE. Protein bands were excised and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis using Orbitrap Velos Pro™ system.

### Data Protocol
The SEQUEST algorithm is used for protein identification and peptide sequencing. The quality of proteins and peptides was evaluated by two most important scores:XCorr(cross correlation) and ΔCn(delta correlation).The peptide with ΔCn less than 0.1 was rejected. All contaminants, reverse proteins database mataches and any carry over proteins were removed.

### Publication Abstract
HOXB13, a homeodomain transcription factor, critically regulates androgen receptor (AR) activities and androgen-dependent prostate cancer (PCa) growth. However, its functions in AR-independent contexts remain elusive. Here we report HOXB13 interaction with histone deacetylase HDAC3, which is disrupted by the HOXB13 G84E mutation that has been associated with early-onset PCa. Independently of AR, HOXB13 recruits HDAC3 to lipogenic enhancers to catalyze histone deacetylation and suppress lipogenic regulators such as fatty acid synthase. Analysis of human tissues reveals that the HOXB13 gene is hypermethylated and downregulated in approximately 30% of metastatic castration-resistant PCa. HOXB13 loss or G84E mutation leads to lipid accumulation in PCa cells, thereby promoting cell motility and xenograft tumor metastasis, which is mitigated by pharmaceutical inhibition of fatty acid synthase. In summary, we present evidence that HOXB13 recruits HDAC3 to suppress de novo lipogenesis and inhibit tumor metastasis and that lipogenic pathway inhibitors may be useful to treat HOXB13-low PCa.

### Keywords
Hoxb13, Tandem affinity purification, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Xiaodong Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Jindan Yu
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA


