### Accession
PXD003772

### Title
Characterisation of the protein cargo of murine plasma microparticles released during experimental cerebral malaria

### Description
Cerebral malaria (CM) is a severe complication of a Plasmodium falciparum infection and is still responsible for a high number of deaths and long term disabilities in children in sub-Saharan Africa. The pathogenesis of this syndrome remains incompletely understood but a number of mechanisms and effectors have been proposed, including plasma microparticles (MP). These submicron vesicles released by potentially all cells carry proteins and nucleic acids derived from the mother cell. In CM, their numbers are increased in patients’ circulation and, in the mouse model, they can be localised within inflamed vessels, suggesting their involvement in vascular damage. In the present work we define, for the first time, the protein cargo of MP during experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) with the overarching hypothesis that characterising this content could help in better understand CM pathogenesis.  Using qualitative and quantitative high-throughput proteomics we compared MP proteins from non-infected mice and mice infected with P. berghei ANKA at two different stages of infection, i.e., pre-clinical phase and full blown syndrome. Overall, we identified 368 proteins, 60 of which were differentially expressed, as determined by quantitative comparison using the TMT® isobaric labelling. The analysis with Ingenuity® IPA highlighted important networks significantly represented among the proteins over-expressed (n=42) or identified only (n=21) in ECM, comprising mechanisms already proposed to be involved in CM, such as endothelial activation. Two proteins of interest, carbonic anhydrase I (CA-I) and S100A8, were verified by western blot on newly collected MP samples from DBA/1 (n=16) and C57BL/6 (n=8) mice, and confirmed to be associated with ECM MP. These results demonstrate that MP protein cargo represents a novel ECM pathogenic trait to consider in the understanding of CM pathogenesis. The identification of the cellular source of MP containing proteins associated to the disease state will contribute to further understanding their involvement in CM.

### Sample Protocol
MP were prepared from platelet free plasma (PFP) obtained from DBA/1 mice, non-infected (NI) or infected with Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA) parasite, by centrifugation at 18’000g for 45 minutes at 15˚C. To remove possible plasma protein contaminations (not specifically bound to MP), MP pellet was washed twice with PBS/3.2% sodium citrate and centrifuged at 18’000g for 45 min at 15°C after each washing step. Proteins were extracted from pelleted MP using repeated freeze/thaw cycles as previously reported (Comelli L et al, 2014 Mol Biosyst; 10:1146).  TMTzero (TMT0) qualitative experiment - MP proteins from one NI and one ECM mouse were used. For each sample, extracted proteins were re-suspended in Rapigest SF 0.1% (Waters Corporation, MA, USA) in triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) 0.1M, pH 8.0; alkylated with TCEP 50mM (Sigma-Aldrich), reduced with iodoacetamide 400mM (Sigma-Aldrich) and digested with trypsin 0.2 µg/µL overnight at 37°C (Promega Corporation, WI, USA). Digested samples were then labelled with the TMT0 reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) following manufacturer’s instruction, except for the amount of tag used to label the samples. Due to the low amount of proteins in MP samples, one TMT vial (0.8mg) was used to label two samples. After TMT labelling, samples were cleaned with C18 ultra-micro spin column (Harvard apparatus, MA, USA) and dried under vacuum.  TMTsixplex (TMT6) quantitative experiment - MP obtained from 400 µL of PFP from non-infected mice (NI, n=4), PbA-infected mice at day 3 post infection (d3 pi, n=4) and PbA-infected mice at the stage of cerebral malaria (ECM, n=4) were used to perform two TMTsixplex parallel experiments. Protein extraction, peptide sample preparation and labelling were performed as reported for the TMT0 experiment. Before protein reduction, each sample was spiked with 0.05 µg of bovine beta-lactoglobulin (Sigma-Aldrich) as an internal control. For the first TMT6 experiment NI samples were labelled with the tags TMT-126 and TMT-127; d3 pi samples with the tags TMT-128 and TMT-129; ECM samples with the tags TMT-130 and TMT-131. For the second TMT6 experiment NI samples were labelled with the tags TMT-128 and TMT-129; d3 pi samples with the tags TMT-130 and TMT-131; ECM samples with the tags TMT-126 and TMT-127.After labelling, the 6 samples of each experiment were combined into a unique pooled sample, cleaned with C18 ultra-micro spin column and dried under vacuum.  Tandem mass spectrometry analyses - MS analyses were performed on a QExactive Orbitrap (OT) Plus (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with an Ultimate 3000 HPLC and autosampler system (Dionex, Amsterdam, Netherlands). Peptide samples were concentrated and desalted onto a micro C18 pre-column (300µm x 5mm, Dionex) with H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1% TFA) at 15 µL/min. After 4 min wash, the pre-column was switched (Valco 10 port valve, Dionex) into line with a fritless nano column (75 µm x 15 cm) containing C18 media (1.9 µm, 120 Å, Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) manufactured according  to Gatlin et al. (Anal Biochem 1998; 263:93). High voltage 2000 V was applied to low volume Titanium union (Valco) with the column oven heated to 45°C (Sonation, Biberach, Germany) and the tip positioned ~0.5 cm from the heated capillary (T=300°C).  For the TMTsixplex sample, the analytical peptide separation was run at a flow rate of 200 nl/min for 260 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 0.1% (solvent B) as follows: 0-4 min 2%B, then to 45%B at 246 min and to 80%B at 248 min, and finally 2%B till 260 min. For the TMTzero samples, a gradient of 140 min was applied as follows: 0-4 min 2%B, then to 45%B at 126 min and to 80%B at 127 min, and finally 2%B till 140min, at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The QExactive mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent mode as previously reported (Kelstrup et al. J Proteome Res 2012; 11:3487). A survey scan m/z spectra 350-1750 was acquired in the Orbitrap with 70,000 resolution at m/z 200, and accumulation target value of 1x106 ions and lockmass enabled (m/z 445.12003). Up to the 10 most abundant ions (>80,000 counts, underfill ratio 10%) with charge state ≥ +2 and <+7 were sequentially isolated (width m/z 2.5) and fragmented in the HCD collision cell (NCE = 30) with a maximum injection time of 100ms, 17,500 resolution at m/z 200 and target value set at 1x105. The first mass was set at m/z 100 to include TMT reporters.  All mass spectrometry analyses were carried out at the Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of New South Wales, Australia.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data analysis was performed using EasyProt platform v2.3 (Gluck F, et al. J Proteomics 2013; 79:146). Raw data were first converted into .mgf files and peak lists generated with MS convert (ProteoWizard 3.0.7529, available at http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net/tools.shtml). Protein identifications were obtained by searching peptide spectral matches against the SwissProt/UniProt database (version October 2014 - 546,790 entries) using the following settings: i) Mus musculus for the taxonomy; ii) trypsin as the digestion enzyme with only one missed-cleavage allowed; iii) carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines as variable modification; iv) only peptides with at least 6 residues were considered for protein identification and v) the precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm. Additionally, the TMT0 or the TMT6 modifications on lysines and peptide N-termini were added as fixed PTM in the respective experiments. Only proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides and FDR≤ 1%, calculated as reported in (26), were considered as true identification matches.  For the quantitative experiment, protein relative quantification was obtained using the IsoQuant tool embedded in the EasyProt platform. All peptides corresponding to one unique entry in the job, having FDR≤ 1% and an intensity signal in each of the 6 TMT tags were considered for quantification.  For both TMT6 experiments, relative quantification values were obtained computing the protein ratios ECM/d3 pi, ECM/NI and d3 pi/NI after isotopic purity correction according to the algorithm given by the manufacturer. To reduce biases due to potential differences in protein amount among the 6 TMT channels, the reporter ion intensities were normalized using the “median log peptide ratios=0” method (Gluck F, et al. J Proteomics 2013; 79:146) prior to ratio calculation. The distribution of the relative intensities of all peptides considered for protein quantification was checked for normality (Shapiro-Wilk normality test). The ratio threshold for considering a protein differentially abundant between the compared conditions was calculated as previously reported (Tiberti N, et al. MCP 2010; 9:2783) and the significance level was set at 0.01 (Mann-Whitney U test). The technical performance of the two experiments was evaluated through the rate of labelled peptides and the normalised relative intensity distribution of bovine beta-lactoglobulin (spiked internal control) across the 6 tags.  For all TMT0 and TMT6 experiments a second search against the UniProtKB/TrEMBL database (version December 2012 - 4,870,157 entries), choosing the Plasmodium berghei taxonomy (ID 5821) was done to search for parasite proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebral malaria (CM) is a severe complication of Plasmodium falciparum infection responsible for thousands of deaths in children in sub-Saharan Africa. CM pathogenesis remains incompletely understood but a number of effectors have been proposed, including plasma microparticles (MP). MP numbers are increased in CM patients' circulation and, in the mouse model, they can be localised within inflamed vessels, suggesting their involvement in vascular damage. In the present work we define, for the first time, the protein cargo of MP during experimental cerebral malaria (ECM) with the overarching hypothesis that this characterisation could help understand CM pathogenesis. Using qualitative and quantitative high-throughput proteomics we compared MP proteins from non-infected and P. berghei ANKA-infected mice. More than 360 proteins were identified, 60 of which were differentially abundant, as determined by quantitative comparison using TMT<sup>TM</sup> isobaric labelling. Network analyses showed that ECM MP carry proteins implicated in molecular mechanisms relevant to CM pathogenesis, including endothelial activation. Among these proteins, the strict association of carbonic anhydrase I and S100A8 with ECM was verified by western blot on MP from DBA/1 and C57BL/6 mice. These results demonstrate that MP protein cargo represents a novel ECM pathogenic trait to consider in the understanding of CM pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Tandem mass tag (tmt), Qexactive orbitrap, Experimental cerebral malaria, Protein cargo, Microparticles

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences Faculty of Sciences University of Technology Sydney Australia
Department of Infectious - Tropical Diseases and Microbiology, IRCCS Sacro Cuore Don Calabria Hospital, Negrar (VR)

### Submitter
Natalia Tiberti

### Lab Head
Dr Valery Combes
School of Life Sciences Faculty of Sciences University of Technology Sydney Australia


