### Accession
PXD016334

### Title
Cross-regulation of viral kinases with cyclin A secures shutoff of host DNA synthesis

### Description
Herpesviruses encode conserved protein kinases to optimize virus infection by targeted phosphorylation. How these kinases bind to cellular factors and how this impacts their regulatory functions is poorly understood. Here, we use quantitative proteomics to determine the interactomes of eight herpesvirus kinases. We identify Cyclin A binding as a distinguishing feature of betaherpesvirus kinases that were previously described as viral mimics of cyclin-dependent kinases (v-CDKs), inert to cellular control. RXL motifs within the non-catalytic regions of roseolo- and muromegalovirus v-CDKs serve as Cyclin A docking sites and closely overlap with nuclear localization signals (NLS). By competing with NLS function, Cyclin A binding redirects NLS-RXL containing v-CDKs to cytoplasmic substrates at late times of infection. Concomitantly, Cyclin A is sequestered to the cytoplasm, which is essential for the viral inhibition of cellular DNA replication. Our data highlight a fine-tuned and physiologically important interplay between a cellular cyclin and viral CDK-like kinases.

### Sample Protocol
This project combines four datasets. (i) An AP-MS study of 7 conserved herpesviral kinases,(ii) An AP-MS dataset of the mouse cytomegalovirus kinase M97 in infected cells at 12 and 36 hours post infection. (iii) an experiment involving phosphoproteomics and measurement of whole cell lysates 24 hours post infection of MCMV wildtype and MCMV-M97 mutant viruses in 3T3 cells Phosphopeptide enrichment. (iv) A direct SILAC-based AP-MS comparison of interactors to HHV5-UL97 and HHV4-BGLF4 kinases. For the phospho experiment, SILAC-labeled cells were harvested 24 hours post MCMV infection via scraping. Cells were lysed with 6M urea/2M thiourea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. Samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested by lysyl endopeptidase (Wako Pure Chemicals) at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 100:1 (w/w) for 3 h. Subsequently, samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 2 M urea. Digestion with proteomics-grade modified trypsin (Promega) was performed at a enzyme-to-protein ratio of 100:1 (w/w) under constant agitation for 16 h. Enzyme activity was quenched by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were desalted with C18 Stage Tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003) prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis (whole cell lysate samples). An aliquot of the whole cell lysates were further processed for phosphopeptide enrichment. The tryptic digests corresponding to 200 μg protein per condition were desalted with big C18 Stage Tips packed with 10 mg of ReproSil‐Pur 120 C18‐AQ 5‐μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted with 200 μL loading buffer, consisting of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 6% TFA (vol/vol). Phosphopeptides were enriched using a microcolumn tip packed with 0.5 mg of TiO2 (Titansphere, GL Sciences). The TiO2 tips were equilibrated with 20 μL of loading buffer via centrifugation at 100 g. 50 μL of each sample were loaded on a TiO2 tip via centrifugation at 100 g and this step was repeated until all the sample was loaded. The TiO2 column was washed with 20 μL of the loading buffer, followed by 20 μL of 50% ACN/0.1% TFA (vol/vol)). The bound phosphopeptides were eluted using successive elution with 30 μL of 5% ammonium hydroxide and 30 μL of 5% piperidine (Kyono et al., 2008). Each fraction was collected into a fresh tube containing 30 μL of 20% formic acid. 3 μL of 100% formic acid was added to further acidify the samples. The phosphopeptides were desalted with C18 Stage Tips prior to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Affinity purification. At 12 and 36 hours post infection (M97 interactome) or 1 day post transfection (HHV-kinases interactomes), cells were harvested by scraping in PBS. After centrifugation at 300 g, cell pellets were lysed in 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 125 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1% Nonidet P-40 (NP-40), 0.1% SDS, 5% glycerol, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 2 µg/ml aprotinin, 10 µg/ml leupeptin, 1 µM pepstatin, 0.1 mM Pefabloc. For HA affinity purification, a µMACS HA isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec) was employed according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with the following modifications. The first washing step was carried out using lysis buffer. Lysis buffer without detergent was used for the following washing step. The final washing buffer was 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4). Samples were eluted in a total volume of 0.2 ml 8 M guanidine hydrochloride at 95°C. Proteins were precipitated from the eluates by adding 1.8 ml LiChrosolv ethanol and 1 µl GlycoBlue. After incubation at 4°C overnight, samples were centrifuged for 1 h at 4°C and ethanol was decanted before samples were resolved in 8 M urea. Finally, samples were reduced, alkylated, digested and desalted as described above (phosphoproteomics).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed and processed using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 (M97 interactomes) or 1.6.0.1 (phosphoproteomics, whole cell lysates and interactomes of HHV-CHPKs) software (Cox and Mann, 2008). Search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, fixed cysteine carbamidomethyl modification, and variable modifications including methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, asparagine/glutamine deamidation. In addition, serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylations were searched as variable modifications for phosphoproteome analysis. Arg10 and Lys8 and Arg6 and Lys4 were set as labels where appropriate. The peptide mass tolerance was 6 ppm for MS scans and 20 ppm for MS/MS scans. The “match between runs” option was disabled and “re-quantify” as well as “iBAQ” (intensity based absolute quantification) options were enabled. Database search was performed using Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) against a protein database of MCMV strain Smith and a current Uniprot database of mus musculus proteins with common contaminants. Raw-data from AP-MS samples of HEK293T cells were searched against a recent Uniprot Database of human proteins and the sequences of transgenic HHV kinases including common contaminants. False discovery rate was set to 1% at peptide, protein and modification site level.

### Publication Abstract
Herpesviruses encode conserved protein kinases (CHPKs) to stimulate phosphorylation-sensitive processes during infection. How CHPKs bind to cellular factors and how this impacts their regulatory functions is poorly understood. Here, we use quantitative proteomics to determine cellular interaction partners of human herpesvirus (HHV) CHPKs. We find that CHPKs can target key regulators of transcription and replication. The interaction with Cyclin A and associated factors is identified as a signature of &#x3b2;-herpesvirus kinases. Cyclin A is recruited via RXL motifs that overlap with nuclear localization signals (NLS) in the non-catalytic N termini. This architecture is conserved in HHV6, HHV7 and rodent cytomegaloviruses. Cyclin A binding competes with NLS function, enabling dynamic changes in CHPK localization and substrate phosphorylation. The cytomegalovirus kinase M97 sequesters Cyclin A in the cytosol, which is essential for viral inhibition of cellular replication. Our data highlight a fine-tuned and physiologically important interplay between a cellular cyclin and viral kinases.

### Keywords
Conserved herpesvirus protein kinases, Hsv-1, Hcmv, Ebv, Mcmv

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin

### Submitter
Boris Bogdanow

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
MDC Berlin


