### Accession
PXD035839

### Title
Chemical Targeting of the Redox Switch in the Transcription Factor ΔFOSB

### Description
Purified protein fragments (~8 kDa bZIP domains, ΔFOSB and JunD) were reacted with individual compounds selected from a previous library screen. Reacted proteins were analyzed by LC-MS/MS peptide mapping and LC-MS intact mass analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Reacted protein samples were prepared for peptide mapping by DTT reduction, iodoacetamide alkylation, and trypsin digestion. Samples were prepared for intact mass analysis by 1:100 dilution into 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed by BioPharma Finder v4.1 using the Intact Mass and Peptide Mapping workflows.

### Publication Abstract
The AP1 transcription factor &#x394;FOSB, a splice variant of FOSB, accumulates in the brain in response to chronic insults such as exposure to drugs of abuse, depression, Alzheimer's disease&#xa0;and tardive dyskinesias, and mediates subsequent long-term neuroadaptations. &#x394;FOSB forms heterodimers with other AP1 transcription factors, e.g. JUND, that bind DNA under control of a putative cysteine-based redox switch. Here, we reveal the structural basis of the redox switch by determining a key missing crystal structure in a trio, the &#x394;FOSB/JUND bZIP domains in the reduced, DNA-free form. Screening a cysteine-focused library containing 3200 thiol-reactive compounds, we identify specific compounds that target the redox switch, validate their activity biochemically and in cell-based assays, and show that they are well tolerated in different cell lines despite their general potential to bind to cysteines covalently. A crystal structure of the &#x394;FOSB/JUND bZIP domains in complex with a redox-switch-targeting compound reveals a deep compound-binding pocket near the DNA-binding site. We demonstrate that &#x394;FOSB, and potentially other, related AP1 transcription factors, can be targeted specifically and discriminately by exploiting unique structural features such as the redox switch and the binding partner to modulate biological function despite these proteins previously being thought to be undruggable.

### Keywords
Compound screening peptide mapping intact mass

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston, TX 77555 USA
University of Texas Medical Branch

### Submitter
Aaron Bailey

### Lab Head
Dr Gabrielle Rudenko
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston, TX 77555 USA


