### Accession
PXD028531

### Title
Trans cohorts metabolic reprograming towards glutaminolysis in long-term successfully treated HIV-Infection: potential role in accelerated aging and latency reversal

### Description
Despite successful combination antiretroviral therapy (cART), persistent low-grade immune activation together with inflammation and toxic antiretroviral drugs can lead to long-lasting metabolic flexibility and adaptation in people living with HIV (PLWH). Our study investigated alterations in the plasma metabolic profiles by comparing PLWH on long-term cART(>5years) and matched HIV-negative controls (HC) in two cohorts from low- and middle-income countries (LMIC), Cameroon and India, respectively to understand the system-level dysregulation in HIV-infection. Using untargeted and targeted LC-MS/MS-based metabolic profiling and applying advanced system biology methods, an altered amino acid metabolism, more specifically to glutaminolysis in PLWH than HC were reported. A significantly lower level of neurosteroids were observed in both cohorts and could potentiate neurological impairments in PLWH. Further, modulation of cellular glutaminolysis promoted increased cell death and latency reversal in pre-monocytic HIV-1 latent cell model U1, which may be essential for the clearance of the inducible reservoir in HIV-integrated cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted by adding 8M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate lysis buffer. Samples were vortexed and sonicated in cold bath for 10 min. Protein concentration was estimated with Pierce Micro BCA assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Extracted proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min at 37C and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAM) for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested with trypsin (sequencing grade from Promega) with a 1:25 ratio enzyme:protein overnight at 37C. Resulting peptides were cleaned-up using C-18 stage tips (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions and dried in a speedvacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). Cleaned peptides were labeled with TMT11™ tags (ThermoFisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and individual TMT tags were dissolved in dry acetonitrile (ACN). Peptides were labeled by adding the respective TMT tag solution, the mix was incubated for 1 hour at room temperature, the reaction was quenched by adding 5% hydroxylamine and incubated for 15 min at RT. Labeled peptides were mixed in three different batches, a pool of samples was used across the three batches to normalize and evaluate batch effect (TMT channel 131).  Labeled peptides were fractionated by high pH (HpH) reversed-phase chromatography and concatenated to a total of 12 fractions.  Fractionated peptides were analyzed on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) hyphenated to an Orbitrap™ Lumos™ mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in an Acclaim PepMap trap column, 2 μm x 75 μm ID x 2 cm (Thermo Scientific) and separated in an EASY-Spray™ HPLC Column, 2 μm x 75 μm ID x 500 mm (Thermo Scientific) using a 120 min linear gradient. Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, isolating the top 20 most intense precursors at 120,000 mass resolution in the mass range of m/z 375 – 1400, maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms and dynamic exclusion of 30 s, precursors were isolated with 0.7 Th width. MS/MS scans were obtained using high collision energy of 34%, resolution of 45,000 and maximum IT of 86 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were searched against both SwissProt human and human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) databases using the search engine Mascot Server v2.5.1 (MatrixScience Ltd) in Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (ThermoFisher Scientific) software environment allowing maximum two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, TMT6plex modification of lysine and N-termini were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hiv-infection, Aging, Glutaminolysis, Antiretroviral therapy, Latency

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistr and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Campus Solna, 17165 Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
JIMMY RODRIGUEZ

### Lab Head
Dr Akos Vegvari
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistr and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Campus Solna, 17165 Stockholm, Sweden


