### Accession
PXD001898

### Title
Global proteogenomic analysis of human MHC I peptides derived from non­canonical reading frames

### Description
Using high­throughput mass spectrometry, we probed the six­reading­frame translation of human B cells’ transcriptome. We report that about 10% of MHC I­associated peptides (MAPs) derive  from non­canonical reading frames. These so­called cryptic MAPs originate from allegedly non- coding genomic sequences and from out­of­frame translation. Their biogenesis and properties  differ in many ways from those of conventional MAPs. Thus, cryptic MAPs come from very  short proteins with atypical C­termini, and they are coded by transcripts bearing long UTRs  selectively enriched in destabilizing elements. Cryptic MAPs increase the complexity of the  immunopeptidome and represent an heretofore unexploited source of potential tumor­specific  epitopes. In a more general context, the features of cryptic MAPs suggest that mRNA instability  is instrumental in the biogenesis of MAPs. Associated RNA-seq accession: GSE67174 .

### Sample Protocol
MAPs were eluted from B-LCL and sequenced by mass spectrometry as previously described : Granados,D.P. et al. Impact of genomic polymorphism on the repertoire of human MHC class I-associated peptides. Nat Commun 5, 3600 (2014)

### Data Protocol
Mascot search engine (Matrix Science) was used in combination with custom databases including reverse sequences. Mass tolerance on the precursor and fragment ions were set to 5 p.p.m and 0.02 Da, respectively. Searches were performed without enzyme specificity and cysteinylation, phosphorylation (on Ser, Thr and Tyr), oxidation (Met) and deamidation (Asn, Gln) were used as variable modifications. Following each database search, we converted raw files to peptide maps containing m/z values, charge state, retention time and intensity above detection threshold (≥ 8,000) using ProteoProfile (http://proteomics.iric.ca/tools/ProteoProfile/). Peptide maps were further aligned to derive a list of peptides identified by each database as well as their abundance across the four replicates.

### Publication Abstract
In view of recent reports documenting pervasive translation outside of canonical protein-coding sequences, we wished to determine the proportion of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-associated peptides (MAPs) derived from non-canonical reading frames. Here we perform proteogenomic analyses of MAPs eluted from human B cells using high-throughput mass spectrometry to probe the six-frame translation of the B-cell transcriptome. We report that &#x223c; 10% of MAPs originate from allegedly noncoding genomic sequences or exonic out-of-frame translation. The biogenesis and properties of these 'cryptic MAPs' differ from those of conventional MAPs. Cryptic MAPs come from very short proteins with atypical C termini, and are coded by transcripts bearing long 3'UTRs enriched in destabilizing elements. Relative to conventional MAPs, cryptic MAPs display different MHC class I-binding preferences and harbour more genomic polymorphisms, some of which are immunogenic. Cryptic MAPs increase the complexity of the MAP repertoire and enhance the scope of CD8 T-cell immunosurveillance.

### Keywords
Proteogenomic cryptic mhc lc-msms maps

### Affiliations
IRIC - University of Montreal
University of Montreal - IRIC

### Submitter
Olivier Caron-Lizotte

### Lab Head
Dr Olivier Caron-Lizotte
IRIC - University of Montreal


