### Accession
PXD011357

### Title
Mucolytic activity of Akkermansia muciniphila enables Human Milk Oligosaccharides degradation.

### Description
This study was conducted in order to monitor whether or not Akkermansia muciniphila was able to grow and utilize human milk and human milk oligosaccharides by deploying its mucin degrading enzymes. Interestingly, A. muciniphila was able to grow in human milk producing Short Chain Fatty Acids and degrade milk oligosaccharides (2’-fucosyllactose, 3’-siallylactose) as well as lactose.

### Sample Protocol
A. muciniphila was grown in basal medium supplemented with 0.5% purified mucin or 10% human milk, and each condition was performed in 4 biological replicates. After 15 hours (mucin) and 48 hours (human milk), cells (2 mL) were pelleted, washed and re-suspended in 500 µL lysis buffer (100 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0, 4% (w/v) SDS, 7.7 mg/mL Dithiotreitol [DTT]). Cells were lysed by sonication and x ug protein was loaded on a protein gel, run shortly and in-gel digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.1.0) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Akkermansia muciniphila is a well-studied anaerobic bacterium specialized in mucus degradation and associated with human health. Because of the structural resemblance of mucus glycans and free human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs), we studied the ability of A. muciniphila to utilize human milk oligosaccharides. We found that A. muciniphila was able to grow on human milk and degrade HMOs. Analyses of the proteome of A. muciniphila indicated that key-glycan degrading enzymes were expressed when the bacterium was grown on human milk. Our results display the functionality of the key-glycan degrading enzymes (&#x3b1;-L-fucosidases, &#x3b2;-galactosidases, exo-&#x3b1;-sialidases and &#x3b2;-acetylhexosaminidases) to degrade the HMO-structures 2'-FL, LNT, lactose, and LNT2. The hydrolysation of the host-derived glycan structures allows A. muciniphila to promote syntrophy with other beneficial bacteria, contributing in that way to a microbial ecological network in the gut. Thus, the capacity of A. muciniphila to utilize human milk will enable its survival in the early life intestine and colonization of the mucosal layer in early life, warranting later life mucosal and metabolic health.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Sialyllactose, Fucosyllactose, Early life, Akkermansia muciniphila, Human milk oligosaccharides

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


