### Accession
PXD020631

### Title
Proteome analysis reveals a significant host-specific response in Rhizobium  leguminosarum bv viciae endosymbiotic cells

### Description
We study the proteomic profile of endosymbiotic cells (bacteroids) induced by R. leguminosarum bv viciae strain UPM791 in nodules from two different hosts. Comparative analysis of bacteroids induced in pea and lentil nodules revealed the existence of a significant host-specific differential response affecting multiple bacterial proteins, and also  revealed the presence of different sets of plant-derived nodule-specific cysteine rich (NCR) peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digests of cell extracts were characterized through RP-LC MS/MS in a Orbitrap System. Also, iTRAQ labelling was used to compare levels of expression of bacterial proteins in both hosts.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.4, Thermo Scientific). Database search was performed against Uniprot-Fabaceae.fasta, the proteome deduced from Rlv UPM791 genome, and in-silico translation of RNA-seq contigs from pea and lentil bacteroids. The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragment ions and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation, Cys carbamidomethylation, and iTRAQ reagent labeling at the N-terminus and lysine residues. Search against decoy database (integrated decoy approach) using false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The Rhizobium-legume symbiosis is a beneficial interaction in which the bacterium converts atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia and delivers it to the plant in exchange for carbon compounds. This symbiosis implies the adaptation of bacteria to live inside host plant cells. In this work, we apply RP-LC-MS/MS and isobaric tags as relative and absolute quantitation techniques to study the proteomic profile of endosymbiotic cells (bacteroids) induced by Rhizobium leguminosarum bv viciae strain UPM791 in legume nodules. Nitrogenase subunits, tricarboxylic acid cycle enzymes, and stress-response proteins are among the most abundant from over 1000 rhizobial proteins identified in pea (Pisum sativum) bacteroids. Comparative analysis of bacteroids induced in pea and in lentil (Lens culinaris) nodules revealed the existence of a significant host-specific differential response affecting dozens of bacterial proteins, including stress-related proteins, transcriptional regulators, and proteins involved in the carbon and nitrogen metabolisms. A mutant affected in one of these proteins, homologous to a GntR-like transcriptional regulator, showed a symbiotic performance significantly impaired in symbiosis with pea but not with lentil plants. Analysis of the proteomes of bacteroids isolated from both hosts also revealed the presence of different sets of plant-derived nodule-specific cysteine-rich peptides, indicating that the endosymbiotic bacteria find a host-specific cocktail of chemical stressors inside the nodule. By studying variations of the bacterial response to different plant cell environments, we will be able to identify specific limitations imposed by the host that might give us clues for the improvement of rhizobial performance.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Lentil, Rhizobium, Ncr peptides, Pea, Bacteroids

### Affiliations
CBGP UPM-INIA, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid
Centro de Biotecnología y Genomica de Plantas UPM-INIA, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid

### Submitter
Jose Palacios

### Lab Head
Dr Jose Palacios
Centro de Biotecnología y Genomica de Plantas UPM-INIA, Universidad Politecnica de Madrid


