### Accession
PXD032297

### Title
Pattern Analysis of Organellar Maps for Interpretation of Pro-teomic Data

### Description
The human proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT) was stably expressed as a fu-sion protein with a BioID2-HA in the C-terminal position (PCFT-BioID2). The uncom-plxed biotin transferase was used as a control to identify proteins that are biotinylated randomly due to sheer abundance and/or an unnatural affinity to the BioID2 ligase. HeLa PCFT-BioID2 cells expressed the PCFT fusion protein which localized to the plasma mem-brane and exhibited robust transport typical of PCFT. HeLa PCFT-BioID2 and BioID2 cells were cultured in complete DMEM (biotin-free), with and without biotin (50 μM; 16 h) then biotinylated proteins were selected on streptavidin beads.

### Sample Protocol
In the proton-coupled folate transporter group (PCFT), the bait protein, folate trans-porter (P41440), was expressed as a fusion with BirA to label interaction partners with biotin. In the ground reference group (GR), BirA was expressed independently and not localized to any subcellular region. Cells were incubated with 50 µM biotin for 16 h then washed 2 times with 1X PBS and lysed in 2.4 mL of lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4; 500 mM NaCl; 0.4% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate, 1 mM dithiothreitol, and 1X complete protease inhibitor. After collecting the cells, lithium dodecyl sulfate was added to a 2% (w/v) final concentration. Cells were sonicated twice for 1 min at a 30% duty cycle with an output level of 4 (Sonifer-250; Branson) and an equal volume of 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4 was added before centrifugation at 16,500 x g for 10 min. The supernatant was collected in a 15-mL conical tube and incubated with 50 µL streptavidin-coated Dynabeads over-night with rotation.  The Dynabeads were washed twice to remove background proteins by mixing 200 µL of 1% (w/v) lithium dodecyl sulfate, 2X PBS with the 50 µL bed volume of beads at room temperature. Beads were collected using a magnetic stand and the supernatant was collected as Wash 1. The beads were washed a third time to remove background proteins with 200 µL 1% (w/v) unbuffered lithium dodecyl sulfate at room temperature. The su-pernatant from the low ionic strength wash was collected as Wash 2. Biotinylated proteins  were eluted from the Dynabeads by incubating the beads 2 times in 100 µL 1% (w/v) lith-ium dodecyl sulfate, 25 µM biotin at 65 °C for 5 minutes before collecting the supernatant as the Eluate.  Wash-1, Wash-2, and Elute samples were reduced and alkylated in 1% (w/v) lithium docecyl sulfate buffered with 20 mM TEAB by incubation with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 56 °C followed by incubation with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature. Samples were acidified by adding 10% of the original volume of 12% phosphoric acid and precipitated by adding 7 volumes of 90% methanol, 10% TEAB. Pre-cipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation and washed twice with 0.5 mL 90% methano1, 1% TEAB to remove residual detergent. The precipitate was resuspended in 40 mM HEPES, pH 7.9 before adding 0.1 µg Promega Trypsin and incubating for 1 hr at 47 °C then 6 hr at 37 °C.  Peptides from sample digests were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 75 µm x 2 cm C-18 trap and separated using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm x 25 cm C-18 column with gradients generated by an Easy-1000 nanoLC coupled to a Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrom-eter. Peptides were separated on a 50 min gradient with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The gradient started at 94% Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and was ramped to 12% Solvent B (99.9% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid) for 12 minutes, then ramped to 20% Solvent B for 12 minutes, then to 28% Solvent B for 8 minutes, 40% Solvent B for 5 minutes, 95% Solvent B for 1 minute, and held at 95% Solvent B for 12 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and data dependent acquisition. The precursor ions were detected at 120K resolution in the orbitrap with a scan range of 340 – 1600 m/z, maximum injection time of 100 ms, 1E6 AGC target and 250% normalized AGC target. Precursor ions were excluded for 15 s after the first acquisition. Precursor ions above a minimum inten-sity of 3000 and charge states from 2-7 were selected for isolation and fragmentation using CID with 29% collision energy, 10 ms activation time, and 0.25 activation Q. Fragment ions were detected in the ion trap with a rapid scan rate and 100 ms maximum injection time. The AGC target was set to 1E5 with a 100% normalized AGC target.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.4) against a human reference da-tabase (UniProt, accessed 12/21/2018) using Sequest HT. The enzyme was set to trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Dynamic modifications were oxidation of me-thionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. Carbamidomethylation of cyste-ine was set as a static modification. The false discovery rate was calculated using the target decoy PSM validator node with concatenated scores. Match between runs was enabled for each sample type and quantitation was made using precursor ion intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Localization of organelle proteins by isotope tagging (LOPIT) maps are a coordinate-directed representation of proteome data that can aid in biological interpretation. Analysis of organellar association for proteins as displayed using LOPIT is evaluated and interpreted for two types of proteomic data sets. First, test and control group protein abundances and fold change data obtained in a proximity labeling experiment are plotted on a LOPIT map to evaluate the likelihood of true protein interactions. Selection of true positives based on co-localization of proteins in the organellar space is shown to be consistent with carboxylase enrichment which serves as a positive control for biotinylation in streptavidin affinity selected proteome data sets. The mapping in organellar space facilitates discrimination between the test and control groups and aids in identification of proteins of interest. The same representation of proteins in organellar space is used in the analysis of extracellular vesicle proteomes for which protein abundance and fold change data are evaluated. Vesicular protein organellar localization patterns provide information about the subcellular origin of the proteins in the samples which are isolates from the extracellular milieu. The organellar localization patterns are indicative of the provenance of the vesicular proteome origin and allow discrimination between proteomes prepared using different enrichment methods. The patterns in LOPIT displays are easy to understand and compare which aids in the biological interpretation of proteome data.

### Keywords
Proteomics; pattern analysis; bioinformatics; proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
Wayne State University
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA

### Submitter
Jordan Burton

### Lab Head
Dr Paul M. Stemmer
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA


