### Accession
PXD003120

### Title
Downregulation of LATS kinases alters p53 to promote cell migration

### Description
p53 is a pivotal tumor suppressor and a major barrier against cancer. We now report that silencing of the Hippo pathway tumor suppressors LATS1 and LATS2 in non-transformed mammary epithelial cells reduces p53 phosphorylation and increases its  association with the p52 NF-κB subunit. Moreover, it partly shifts p53’s conformation and transcriptional output towards a state resembling cancer-associated p53 mutants,  and endow p53 with the ability to promote cell migration. Notably, LATS1 and   LATS2 are frequently downregulated in breast cancer; we propose that such   downregulation might benefit cancer by converting p53 from a tumor suppressor into   a tumor facilitator.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed using NP-40 lysis buffer. For MS analysis of p53 immunoprecipitant a mixture of PAb1801, DO-1, PAb421 antibodies was used. Lysates were incubated with the bound antibodies for 16 hours at 4oC and washed with NP-40 lysis buffer.For MS analysis the beads were additionally washed with 150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH=8.0 and proteins were released from beads using on-beads trypsin digestion as previously described (Hubner et al. 2010). Peptides were then purified on C18 stageTips.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.25 (Cox and Mann 2008)). MS/MS spectra were searched against the reference Uniprot human proteome by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011). False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.01 was used on both the peptide and protein levels and determined by a decoy database. Peptides   and proteins were quantified using a label-free algorithm in MaxQuant. Prior to   bioinformatics analysis, the resulting protein list was filtered to eliminate common   contaminants and decoy database hits.

### Publication Abstract
p53 is a pivotal tumor suppressor and a major barrier against cancer. We now report that silencing of the Hippo pathway tumor suppressors LATS1 and LATS2 in nontransformed mammary epithelial cells reduces p53 phosphorylation and increases its association with the p52 NF-&#x3ba;B subunit. Moreover, it partly shifts p53's conformation and transcriptional output toward a state resembling cancer-associated p53 mutants and endows p53 with the ability to promote cell migration. Notably, LATS1 and LATS2 are frequently down-regulated in breast cancer; we propose that such down-regulation might benefit cancer by converting p53 from a tumor suppressor into a tumor facilitator.

### Keywords
Cox-2, Nfkb2, Homeostasis, Cell-migration, Tp53, Cancer

### Affiliations
The Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel
Tel Aviv University

### Submitter
Yair Pozniak

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
The Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel


