### Accession
PXD009108

### Title
PPARgamma regulates a cell-to-cell communication program in human methastatic melanoma cells

### Description
We mapped the proteins secreted by A375 melanoma cells in the presence or absence of the PPARagonist rosiglitazone.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein concentrations of secretome samples were determined by densitometry on whole lanes of a Coomassie blue-stained gel, compared with an externally quantified complex standard (cell lysate).  Samples were lyophilized and resuspended in 8.0M Urea in 50 mM triethylammoniumbicarbonate (TEAB, ph 8.0). 60 ug total protein for each sample were used as input. Cysteines were reduced and alkylated in 5mM TCEP, 20mM chloroacetamide for 45 min at 37C in the dark. Samples were then diluted 1:1 (v:v) with TEAB 50mM and digested for 2h with 0.5 ug modified Trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) at 37C. After a second 1:1 dilution with TEAB buffer a second tryptic digestion was carried out by adding 2 ug Trypsin and incubating for 5h at 37C. Digests were acidified with 0.5% TFA, desalted on micro-C18 plates (Waters), dried and redissolved in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid.  For the in depth analysis, digests were fractionated by strong cation exchange on SCX StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) into 6 fractions as described (Kulak et al.).  MS  For initial secretome mapping, peptide mixtures were analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive Plus  mass spectrometer interfaced to a Dionex RSLC 3000 nano-LC system. Peptide separation was performed on an EasySpray nanocolumn (50 cm x 75 um ID) at 250 nl/min from 2% to 55% MeCN in 107 min. Data dependent acquisition was used to select precursors with 2+-5+ charges for collision induced dissociation.   For the in-depth analysis of fractionated samples, a Fusion Orbitrap trihybrid instrument (Thermo Fischer Scientific) was used, operated with a “universal”  acquisition method (Hebert et al). Resolution of full scan spectra was at 70’000 resolution and 120’000 on the Q-exactive and Fusion MS, respectively.  MS/MS spectra were acquired at high resolution in the Q-Exactive system (17’500) and at low resolution (ion trap) on the Fusion MS.     References :  Kulak, N. A., Pichler, G., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., & Mann, M. (2014), Nature Methods, 11(3), 319–24.  Hebert, A. S., Richards, A. L., Bailey, D. J., Ulbrich, A., Coughlin, E. E., Westphall, M. S., & Coon, J. J. (2013). Molecular & Cellular Proteomics : MCP, 13(1), 1–23.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were processed with MaxQuant  (Cox et al 2008, Tyanova et al 2016 )  to obtain label free quantitation (LFQ) values (Cox et al 2014). Samples for the three replicates were prepared and analysed at several weeks/months distance and this results in major differences in analytical conditions. For this reason and to avoid generating false positives and data matching artefacts, the match between runs feature (Cox et al. 2014) was applied only within samples prepared together and not between biological replicates.  Unfractionated samples :   MaxQuant output data were processed with Perseus (Tyanova et al 2018). LFQ values were log2 transformed and filtered to keep only proteins identified by at least 2 MS/MS spectra and with valid values in at least two replicates per condition (1699 protein groups). After normalization by median subtraction, missing values were imputed with standard MaxQuant parameters (width 0.3, downshift 1.8). A paired T-test comparing samples in each biological replicate pair was performed, with cutoff at p-value 0.05. 140 protein groups passed the test. Imputed values were thereafter removed from the data and are present as NaN in the Supplementary Table XX.  In-depth analysis of replicate 3 Data analysis was similar for fractionated samples, without T-test (no replicates available). LFQ values were log2 transformed and normalization was applied by median subtraction. Missing data were substituted by zeroes. A fold-change was calculated by subtracting the obtained log2 LFQ values.   References :  Cox, J., & Mann, M. (2008).  Nature Biotechnology, 26(12), 1367–72. http://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1511 Tyanova, S., Temu, T., & Cox, J. (2016).  Nature Protocols, 11(12), 2301–2319.  Cox, J., Hein, M. Y., Luber, C. a, Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., & Mann, M. (2014). Molecular & Cellular Proteomics : MCP, 13(9), 2513–26.  Tyanova, S., & Cox, J. (2018).  Methods in Molecular Biology (Clifton, N.J.), 1711, 133–148.

### Publication Abstract
In addition to improving insulin sensitivity in type 2 diabetes, the thiazolidinedione family of compounds and the pharmacologic activation of their best-characterized target PPAR&#x3b3; have been proposed as a therapeutic option for cancer treatment. In this study, we reveal a new mode of action for the thiazolidinedione rosiglitazone that can contribute to tumorigenesis. Rosiglitazone activated a tumorigenic paracrine communication program in a subset of human melanoma cells that involves the secretion of cytokines, chemokines, and angiogenic factors. This complex blend of paracrine signals activated nonmalignant fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and macrophages in a tumor-friendly way. In agreement with these data, rosiglitazone promoted human melanoma development in xenografts, and tumors exposed to rosiglitazone exhibited enhanced angiogenesis and inflammation. Together, these findings establish an important tumorigenic action of rosiglitazone in a subset of melanoma cells. Although studies conducted on cohorts of diabetic patients report overall benefits of thiazolidinediones in cancer prevention, our data suggest that exposure of established tumors to rosiglitazone may be deleterious.<b>Significance:</b> These findings uncover a novel mechanism by which the thiazolidinedione compound rosiglitazone contributes to tumorigenesis, thus highlighting a potential risk associated with its use in patients with established tumors. <i>Cancer Res; 78(22); 6447-61. &#xa9;2018 AACR</i>.

### Keywords
Melanoma, Ppar, Rosiglitazone, Secretome, Label-free quantitation

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Center for Integrative Genomics University of Lausanne Quartier Sorge 1015 Lausanne Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Liliane Michalik
Center for Integrative Genomics University of Lausanne Quartier Sorge 1015 Lausanne Switzerland


