### Accession
PXD004628

### Title
Highly Multiplexed Quantitative Mass Spectrometry Analysis of Ubiquitylomes

### Description
Systems-wide quantitative analysis of ubiquitylomes has proven to be a valuable tool for elucidating targets and mechanisms of the ubiquitin-driven signaling systems, as well as gaining insights in neurodegenerative diseases and cancer. Current mass spectrometry methods for ubiquitylome detection require large amounts of starting material and rely on stochastic data collection to increase replicate analyses. We describe a method compatible with cell line and tissue samples for large-scale quantification of 5,000-9,000 ubiquitylation forms across ten samples simultaneously. Using this method we reveal site-specific ubiquitylation in mammalian brain and liver tissues, as well as in cancer cells undergoing proteasome inhibition. To demonstrate the power of the approach for signal-dependent ubiquitylation, we examined protein and ubiquitylation dynamics for mitochondria undergoing PARKIN and PINK1-dependent mitophagy. This analysis revealed the largest collection of PARKIN and PINK1-dependent ubiquitylation targets to date in a single experiment, and also revealed a subset of proteins recruited to the mitochondria during mitophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed and after tryptic digestion, peptides were then enriched using a di-glycine remnant antibody, labeled with 10-plex tandem mass tags (TMT), combined and separated into six fractions using a high-pH reversed phase spin cartridge. Samples were analyzed in 3 h nLC-MS/MS experiments using an SPS-MS3 method on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. We excluded +2 precursors from selection during MS analysis to increase the amount of instrument time dedicated to ubiquitylated peptides.

### Data Protocol
A compilation of in-house software was used to convert mass spectrometric data (Thermo “.raw” files) to mzXML format, as well as to correct monoisotopic m/z measurements and erroneous peptide charge state assignments3. Assignment of MS/MS spectra was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm4. The Btz-treated cells utilized the Homo sapiens UniProt database (downloaded on 2014). The mice tissues analysis utilized the Mouse UniProt database (downloaded on 2014). Each database was concatenated with a database composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order as well as known contaminants (human keratins). Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Da. Peptide’s N/C terminus was required to have lysC/trypsin specificity [1 1 KR] and allowing up to 4 missed cleavages. TMT tags on peptide N termini/lysine residues (+229.16293 Da) and cysteines NEM-alkylation (+125.04767 Da) were set as static modifications; while methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da) and lysine ubiquitylation (+ 114.04293 Da) were set as dynamic modifications.  Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to the 1 % false discovery rate (FDR)5. PSM filtering was performed using an in-house linear discrimination analysis algorithm 3, considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn-difference score, peptide ion mass accuracy, charge state, missed cleavages and precursor mass accuracy. Linear discrimination scores were used to assign probabilities to each MS2 spectrum. These probabilities were then used to filter the dataset to a final protein-level FDR of 1 %. Additionally, principles of parsimony were used to assign redundant peptides to proteins.  To quantify the confidence of each ubiquitylation site, we used a modified version of Ascore6. To confidently localize ubiquitylation sites only the ones with Ascore values > 13 (p ≤ 0.05) were considered.

### Publication Abstract
System-wide quantitative analysis of ubiquitylomes has proven to be a valuable tool for elucidating targets and mechanisms of the ubiquitin-driven signaling systems, as well as gaining insights into neurodegenerative diseases and cancer. Current mass spectrometry methods for ubiquitylome detection require large amounts of starting material and rely on stochastic data collection to increase replicate analyses. We describe a method compatible with cell line and tissue samples for large-scale quantification of 5,000-9,000 ubiquitylation forms across ten samples simultaneously. Using this method, we reveal site-specific ubiquitylation in mammalian brain and liver tissues, as well as in cancer cells undergoing proteasome inhibition. To demonstrate the power of the approach for signal-dependent ubiquitylation, we examined protein and ubiquitylation dynamics for mitochondria undergoing PARKIN- and PINK1-dependent mitophagy. This analysis revealed the largest collection of PARKIN- and PINK1-dependent ubiquitylation targets to date in a single experiment, and it also revealed a subset of proteins recruited to the mitochondria during mitophagy.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Bortezomib, 10-plex tmt, Mouse, Orbitrap fusion lumos tribrid mass spectrometer, Mithocondria

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Marta Isasa

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Cell Biology Department Harvard Medical School


