### Accession
PXD036453

### Title
ECM of proliferative vs dormant HNSCC

### Description
The goal of this project is to characterize the ECM composition of actively proliferative and dormant head and neck squamous cell carcinoma xenografts and identify components of the ECM niche instructing tumor cell dormancy.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for ECM proteomic analysis  Samples used for the ECM proteomic study were as followed: Proliferative (T-HEp3) vs dormant (D-HEp3) HNSCCs: T-HEp3 #1: 100 mg; T- HEp3 #2: 100 mg; T- HEp3 #4: 100 mg. Since D-HEp3 tumors were smaller in size, we combined several tumors to generate three pools: D-HEp3 #1: 43.3 mg; D-HEp3 #2: 49 mg; D-HEp3 #3: 55mg. Despite that, the amount of proteins obtained post-decellularization was still very low and we further combined D-HEp3 #1 and D-HEp3 #3 for the mass spectrometry analysis. Decellularization Samples described above were mechanically disrupted using a Bullet Blender (Next Advance). Tumor lysates were then subjected to incubation in a series of buffer (CNCS Compartmental Protein Extraction Kit, Millipore) resulting in the extraction of soluble and mostly intracellular components and the enrichment for insoluble extracellular proteins (for more details, see Naba et al. Mol. Cell. Prot, 2012 and Naba et al., JoVE, 2015).   Digestion of proteins into peptide ECM-enriched protein samples were resuspended and reduced in a solution of 8M urea containing 10mM DTT (Pierce). Samples were alkylated with 25mM iodoacetamide (Pierce), deglycosylated with PNGaseF (New England BioLabs) and digested with mass-spectrometry-grade endopeptidase Lys-C (Pierce) and trypsin (Pierce) as previously described (for more details, see Naba et al. Mol. Cell. Prot, 2012 and Naba et al., JoVE, 2015). Samples were acidified and desalted according to standard procedure and stored at -80oC prior to proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis of dormant (D-HEp3) vs proliferative (T-HEp3) tumors was performed at Proteomics Core Facility at the Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT as follows: peptides were separated by reverse phase HPLC (Thermo Easy nLC1000) using a pre-column (made in house, 6 cm of 10 µm C18) and a self-pack 5 µm tip analytical column (12 cm of 5 µm C18, New Objective) over a 140-minute gradient before nanoelectrospray using a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% MeCN/0.1% formic acid. The gradient conditions were 2-10% B (0-3 min), 10-30% B (3-107 min), 30-40% B (107-121 min), 40-60% B (121-126 min), 60-100% B (126-127 min), 100% B (127-137 min), 100-0% B (137-138 min), 0% B (138-140 min), and the mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. The parameters for the full scan MS were: resolution of 60,000 across 350-2000 m/z, AGC 3e6, and maximum IT 50 ms. The full MS scan was followed by MS/MS for the top 15 precursor ions in each cycle with an NCE of 28 and dynamic exclusion of 30 s. Raw mass spectral data files (.raw) were searched using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) and Mascot version 2.4.1 (Matrix Science). Since the samples are human/mouse xenografts, the data was searched against both a Mus musculus (Mouse) database (17,032 sequences) and a Homo sapiens (Human) database (20,366 sequences). Mascot search parameters were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 15 mmu for fragment ion mass tolerance; 2 missed cleavages of trypsin; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications were methionine, lysine and proline oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, N-term glutamine to pyroglutamate, carbamylation of N-term, tyrosine, serine and threonine phosphorylation. Only peptides with a Mascot score greater than or equal to 25 and an isolation interference less than or equal to 30 were included in the data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells disseminate and seed in distant organs, where they can remain dormant for many years before forming clinically detectable metastases. Here we studied how disseminated tumor cells sense and remodel the extracellular matrix (ECM) to sustain dormancy. ECM proteomics revealed that dormant cancer cells assemble a type III collagen-enriched ECM niche. Tumor-derived type III collagen is required to sustain tumor dormancy, as its disruption restores tumor cell proliferation through DDR1-mediated STAT1 signaling. Second-harmonic generation two-photon microscopy further revealed that the dormancy-to-reactivation transition is accompanied by changes in type III collagen architecture and abundance. Analysis of clinical samples revealed that type III collagen levels were increased in tumors from patients with lymph node-negative head and neck squamous cell carcinoma compared to patients who were positive for lymph node colonization. Our data support the idea that the manipulation of these mechanisms could serve as a barrier to metastasis through disseminated tumor cell dormancy induction.

### Keywords
Tumor microenvironment, Xenografts, Tumor dormacy, Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago
University of Illinois at Chicago

### Submitter
George Chlipala

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandra Naba
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Illinois at Chicago


