### Accession
PXD006658

### Title
HEp-2 TcdB -  Glucosyltransferase dependent and independent effects of TcdB on the proteome of HEp-2 cells

### Description
Human epithelial cell line HEp-2 was treated with Clostridium difficle toxin A. SILAC labeled samples were analyzed by shotgun LC-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were fractionated by SDS-PAGE. Afterwards lanes were excised into 12 fractions and each fraction was cut into 1 mm3 cubes. Gel cubes were destained and dehydrated with 100 % ACN. ACN was discarded and remaining solvent was removed by vacuum centrifugation. Trypsin solution was added to the gel cubes followed by 1 h incubation on ice. Protein digestion was carried out at 37 °C o/n and was stopped by acidifying with 0.5 % TFA/50 % ACN. Peptides were extracted from gel cubes and supernatants were dried down by vacuum centrifugation and peptides were stored at -20 °C. Prior to LC-MS analysis peptides were dissolved in 30 µL 0.1 % TFA/2 % ACN by shaking (350 rpm) at RT for 30 min and centrifuged for 20 min at 13,000 g. 5 µL of each sample was separated by reversed phase chromatography on a nanoflow system (RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). First, peptides were trapped (3 µm C18 particles, 2 cm, 75 µm ID, Acclaim PepMap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then separated (1.7 µm C18 particles, 25 cm, 75 µm ID, Waters) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min and 45°C column temperature. Peptides were eluted using a multistep gradient with rising concentrations of ACN generated from buffer A: 0.1 % FA and buffer B: 80 % v/v ACN/0.1 % FA (0 – 15 min: 4% B, 15-130 min: 4-25 % B, 130-155 min: 25-50 % B, 155-160 min: 50-90 % B, 160-170 min: 50-90 % B, 170-175 min: 90-4 % B, 175-200 min: 4 % B). Eluting peptides were directly measured with a LTQ orbitrap velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) after ionization via a nano electrospray source with an emitter voltage of 1.3 kV. Survey scans from 300-1600 m/z were recorded in the orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 60.000 at m/z 400 in profile mode. The ten most intense ions with a charge state of +2 or higher were selected for CID fragmentation at 35 % normalized collision energy and an activation time of 10 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap of the mass spectrometer. Peptide ions which were selected for fragmentation were excluded from the following measurements for 70 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.8 including Andromeda search engine for protein identification. The data were searched against the human uniprot/swissprot database (87655 entries) as well as common contaminants with a false discovery rate of 0.01 at protein and peptide level. Other parameters were chosen based on a protocol for SILAC-based quantification (Cox et al., 2009). N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, propionamidation of cysteine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were included as variable modifications. When searching for toxin-specific modification of Rho GTPases glucosylation at threonine was also added as a variable modification. Re-quantify and match between runs options were checked. A minimum ratio count of one unique or razor peptide was required for quantification. Proteins had to be identified in all three replicates to be considered for statistical analysis. Values were considered as significantly changed in abundance when log2 fold change was +/- 0.3 (23 %) and the p-value ≤0.05 (two-sided one-sample student’s t-test).

### Publication Abstract
Toxin B (TcdB) of the nosocomial pathogen C. difficile has been reported to exhibit a glucosyltransferase-dependent and -independent effect on treated HEp-2 cells at toxin concentration above 0.3&#xa0;nM. In order to investigate and further characterize both effects epithelial cells were treated with wild type TcdB and glucosyltransferase-deficient TcdB<sub>NXN</sub> and their proteomes were analyzed by LC-MS. Triplex SILAC labeling was used for quantification. Identification of 5212 and quantification of 4712 protein groups was achieved. Out of these 257 were affected by TcdB treatment, 92 by TcdB<sub>NXN</sub> treatment and 49 by both. TcdB mainly led to changes in proteins that are related to "GTPase mediated signaling" and the "cytoskeleton" while "chromatin" and "cell cycle" related proteins were altered by both, TcdB and TcdB<sub>NXN</sub> . The obtained dataset of HEp-2 cell proteome helps us to better understand glucosyltransferase-dependent and -independent mechanisms of TcdB and TcdB<sub>NXN</sub> , particularly those involved in pyknotic cell death. All proteomics data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with the dataset identifier PXD006658 (https://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD006658).

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Humen, Clostridium difficile toxin b, Ltq-orbitrap velos, Epithelial cell line

### Affiliations
Hannover Medical School
Hannover Medical School Institute of Toxicology Core Unit – Proteomics Hannover, Germany

### Submitter
Johannes Junemann

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pich
Hannover Medical School Institute of Toxicology Core Unit – Proteomics Hannover, Germany


