### Accession
PXD032035

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 ORF8 interactome in the secretory pathway

### Description
The replication machinery of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is closely associated with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in host cells. Activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) is a strategy hijacked by coronavirus to facilitate its replication and suppress host innate immunity. Here, we identified that many protein disulfide isomerase family members are enriched in the ORF8 interactome, and found that ORF8 protein accumulates in the ER and escapes the degradation system by forming mixed disulfide complexes with ER oxidoreductases. ORF8 induces the activation of three UPR pathways through targeting key UPR components, remodels ER morphology and accelerates protein trafficking.

### Sample Protocol
To identify the ORF8 covalently-binding interactome, HEK293T cells were transfected with pcDNA6B-ORF8-FLAG for 24 h, then blocked with 20 mM NEM on ice for 15 min and harvested. Cell lysates were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma) at 4°C overnight. The immunoprecipitates were washed five times with ice-cold PBS. After protein separation by SDS-PAGE under nonreducing conditions, the gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue and the gel lane excised for the first dimensional MS analysis. The gel lane of same samples in another gel was excised and incubated in SDS buffer containing 50 mM DTT for 30 min, and then placed horizontally on the top of the stacking gel for electrophoresis again. the gel was visualized by silver staining and the prominent spots below the diagonal excised for the second dimensional MS analysis.  After destaining, reduction (10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at 56°C) and alkylation (40 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at RT in the dark), the gels plugs were washed twice with 50% acetonitrile, dried using a SpeedVac, and digested with trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C to allow complete digestion. The reaction was terminated by adding formic acid to a 1% final concentration.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using The SEQUEST HT search engine of Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4.1.15) in the Uniprot human protein database (updated 09-2018). The search parameters were set as follows: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.02 Da mass tolerance for product ions; two missed cleavage sites allowed for trypsin digestion; the cysteine carbamidomethylation were specified as fixed modifications; the methionine oxidation was chosen as variable modifications. For ORF8 interactome identification, proteins (unique peptides ≥ 2) were selected and protein interaction was defined as significant if abundance ratio of ORF8-overexpressing group to control group is ≥ 3.

### Publication Abstract
The replication machinery of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is closely associated with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in host cells. Activation of the unfolded protein response (UPR) is a strategy hijacked by coronavirus to facilitate its replication and suppress host innate immunity. Here, we have found that SARS-CoV-2 ORF8 protein accumulates in the ER and escapes the degradation system by forming mixed disulfide complexes with ER oxidoreductases. ORF8 induces the activation of three UPR pathways through targeting key UPR components, remodels ER morphology and accelerates protein trafficking. Moreover, small molecule reducing agents release ORF8 from the mixed disulfide complexes and facilitate its degradation, therefore mitigate ER stress. Our study reveals a unique mechanism by which SARS-CoV-2 ORF8 escapes degradation by host cells and regulates ER reshaping. Targeting ORF8-involved mixed disulfide complexes could be a new strategy to alleviate SARS-CoV-2 induced ER stress and related diseases.

### Keywords
Orf8, 2-d gel, Lc-ms/ms, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
Institute of Biophysics,Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Jifeng Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wang Lei
Institute of Biophysics,Chinese Academy of Sciences


