### Accession
PXD025856

### Title
Magnetic ConA nanoparticles enriched proteins from urine samples of healthy donors and lung cancer patients

### Description
In this project, we used magnetic ConA nanoparticles to purify glycosylated proteins from urine samples of healthy donors and lung cancer patients to discover potential urinary protein biomarker for lung cancer.

### Sample Protocol
The urine samples collected in sterile urine collection tubes were centrifuged at 5,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were collected followed by the addition of protease inhibitor, and then frozen at -80 °C for long-term storage. To concentrate the urine samples, supernatants (6 mL each) were further centrifuged at 5,000 g in Millipore ultracentrifuge tubes with 3 kDa molecular weight cutoff until the retentate reached 200 L. Each retentate was mixed with 800 L of binding buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM MnCl2, and 5 mM CaCl2, pH 7.4) and frozen at -80 °C for long-term storage. ConA was covalently conjugated to the magnetic nanoparticles to obtain ConA-NP. Urine-binding buffer mixture (50 L) was added to 500 L of ConA-NP-binding buffer and rotated for 30 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and discarded. The ConA-NP was further washed with 500 L washing buffer (0.05% tween-20 in binding buffer) for 5 times to remove unbound and non-specific bound proteins. The specific bound proteins were recovered by incubating the ConA-NP with 100, 50, and 50 L elution buffer (500 mM methyl α-D-mannopyranoside in washing buffer) for 30 min each. Protein samples (200 L) were loaded into a 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and separated by electrophoresis. The gel was cut into small pieces (1 mm1 mm). The disulfide bonds in proteins were reduced by dithiothreitol, free thiols were alkylated with chloroacetamide, and proteins were digested according to the in-gel trypsin digestion protocol. The extracted peptides were vacuum-dried, resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, desalted with C18 ZipTip, dried again, and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid.  LC-MS/MS analysis The extracted tryptic peptides were separated by nanoflow liquid chromatography (LC) and analyzed in an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Brieﬂy, samples were separated on a 15-cm column with a 75 μm inner diameter and directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer with solution A (0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The LC gradient was 6% to 44% solvent B for 90 min with a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min. The Orbitrap Elite was operated in a data-dependent mode and the positive ion mode. The MS/MS spectra were collected for the 15 strongest ions in each precursor MS scan. Each precursor ion was analyzed twice in 60 s. The resolution for the precursor ion was set to 120,000 at 400 m/z and the isolation window of the selected precursor ion for MS/MS analysis was set to 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files were searched with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the human UniProt database (www.uniprot.org) with concatenated reverse protein sequence and common contaminants. The mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as the fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-acetylation of protein N termini were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. The minimum required peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Lung cancer has high morbidity and mortality and small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a highly invasive malignant tumor with a very unfavorable survival rate. Early diagnosis and treatment can result in better prognosis for the SCLC patients but current diagnostic methods are either invasive or incapable for large-scale screen. Therefore, discovering biomarkers for early diagnosis of SCLC is of importance. In this work, we covalently coupled Concanavalin A (ConA) to functionalized magnetic nanoparticles to obtain magnetic ConA-nanoparticles (ConA-NPs) for the enrichment of glycosylated proteins. We then purified glycosylated proteins in 36 urine samples from 9 healthy controls, 9 SCLC patients, 9 lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) patients, and 9 lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC) patients. The purified glycosylated proteins were digested and analyzed by LC-MS/MS for identification and quantification. Among the 398 identified proteins, 20, 15, and 1 glycosylated protein(s), respectively, were upregulated in the urine of SCLC, LUAD, and LUSC patients. Immunoblotting experiments further demonstrated that cathepsin C and transferrin were significantly upregulated in the ConA-NP purified urine of SCLC patients. This work suggests that glycosylated cathepsin C and transferrin might be able to serve as potential biomarkers for the noninvasive diagnosis of SCLC patients.

### Keywords
Human; lung cancer; urine; magnetic cona nanoparticles; lc-ms/ms; orbitrap elite

### Affiliations
College of Phamacy, Soochow University
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuropsychiatric Diseases and College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric Diseases, Soochow University, 199 Ren’ai Road, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China.

### Submitter
Honglv Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Guoqiang Xu
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuropsychiatric Diseases and College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric Diseases, Soochow University, 199 Ren’ai Road, Suzhou, Jiangsu 215123, China.


