### Accession
PXD045445

### Title
Metabolic Roadmap to Nephrogenesis

### Description
CKD and hypertension to impact a staggering 1.5 billion individuals within the next decade. Optimal fetal growth and development are outcomes of a delicate interplay between genetic and environmental factors. Nutrition emerges as a pivotal environmental determinant, orchestrating proper organogenesis. Malnutrition disrupts normal embryo development and potentially leads to chronic diseases in later life. Our understanding of the specific metabolic routes and their impact on kidney development is still elusive. Here, we used a multi-omics approach to study the importance of glucose metabolism to proper kidney development. We cultured E13.5 embryonic kidneys in the presence or absence of partial inhibition of glycolysis and submitted it to transcriptomic and proteomic profiling. We found that glycolysis-derived acetyl-CoA is an intracellular pleiotropic agent pivotal for proper kidney development.

### Sample Protocol
Five female CD1 mice were time-paired with Six2GFP+ or GFP- males for E13.5 embryonic kidney harvest (on average 10 embryos per female were collected). E13.5 NPC were isolated by Magnetic Assisted Cell Sorting (MACS) and expanded in Nephron Progenitor Expansion Medium (NPEM). After 2-3 passages, NPCs were cultured in differentiation media either with CHIR99021 (Sigma or YN1 (Sigma, cat# SML0947) or UK5099 (Sigma, Cat# PZ0160). The differentiation media was made with DMEM + 1% KO serum replacement (ThermoFisher, cat# 10828028), 200 ng/mL Fgf2 (R7D systems, cat# 3718-GMP), 3.5 µM CHIR99021 (Tocris, cat #4423) or in differentiation media replacing CHIR with 20 µM YN1 (Sigma SML0947). After 24h treatment, 1 x106 NPCs were washed twice with ice-cold PBS (pH 7.4) harvested with a cell scraper, and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The steps of protein extraction and quantitative proteome profiling by TMT LC-MS were performed at the proteomic facility.

### Data Protocol
The steps of protein extraction and quantitative proteome profiling by TMT LC-MS were performed at the Proteomics Core Facility-LSU School of Medicine. Protein extracts were isolated from NPC treated with vehicle or CHIR or YN1. Next, the protein extracts were reduced, alkylated, and digested overnight. Samples were labeled with the TMT Reagents and then mixed before sample fractionation and clean up.  Labeled samples were analyzed by high-resolution LC-MS/MS on a Thermofisher Fusion Orbitrap.  Data collection was repeated for a total of 3 technical replicates.  Data analysis to identify peptides and quantify reporter ion relative abundance was completed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2.0.388 (Thermofisher Scientific). The MS/MS raw files were processed by the SEQUEST algorithm in which a search was performed against protein FASTA  Database Mus musculus (SwissProt TaxID=10090) Version: 2017-10-25 concatenated with a reverse protein sequence decoy database.  Static modifications included TMT reagents on lysine and N-termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethyl on cysteines (+57.021 Da).  Dynamic Modifications included Oxidation of Methionines (+15.995 Da), Phosphorylations of Serine,Threonine, and Tyrosine (+79.966 Da), and N-Terminal Acetylation (+42.011 Da). Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.6 Da, and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Only high-scoring peptides were considered utilizing a false discovery rate of <1%, and only one unique high-scoring peptide was required for inclusion of a given identified protein in our results. The target-decoy strategy was used to evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide and protein identification. To remove false positive matches and low-quality peptide spectrum matches (PSM) a filter by minimal peptide length (7 amino acid), m/z accuracy (e.g., 5 ppm), and matching scores (J score and deltaCn) was applied. Further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein FDR to below 1%. The proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs. The average of all reporter ions was used to calculate a relative signal between each reporter ion and the average. The relative signals of PSMs were summed for identified proteins. Finally, these relative signals were converted to absolute signals by multiplying the averaged reporter ion intensity of the top 3 PSMs in corresponding proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Diet, Kidney; nephron progenitor cells, Glycolysis; mitochondria, Proteomics, Metabolism

### Affiliations
LSUHSC
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics Tulane University School of Medicine New Orleans, LA  United States

### Submitter
Jennifer Klein

### Lab Head
Dr Giovane G Tortelote
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics Tulane University School of Medicine New Orleans, LA  United States


