### Accession
PXD017193

### Title
Improved discrimination of asymmetric and symmetric protein arginine dimethylation by optimizing the normalized collision energy in LC-MS proteomics

### Description
Here we optimize the HCD Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) in order to generate neutral losses of monomethylamine and dimethylamine which can be lost by symmetric dimethylarginine and asymmetric dimethylarginine, respectively. By testing a range of NCEs across two different methyl enrichment techniques, we identified the optimal NCE as 32 to both generate neutral losses and to improve identifications of dimethyl PSMs. We achieve a 2-to-3 fold increase in the number of unique DMA peptides assigned neutral losses desginating them as ADMA or SDMA. This method will be useful to others interested in analyzing dimethylarginine peptides through mass spectrometry, where ADMA and SDMA have identical masses but differing neutral losses, and differing biological functions.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Lysate Preparation — Cells were washed with PBS, scraped, and lysed in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 8 M urea, 1 mM activated sodium vanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 100 mM sodium phosphate. Protein concentrations were measured by bicinchoninic acid assay. Lysates were sonicated and cleared by high speed centrifugation and then filtered through a 0.22 μm filter. Proteins were reduced, alkylated, and quenched with 5 mM dithiothreitol, 25 mM iodoacetamide, 10 mM dithiothreitol, respectively. Lysates were four-fold diluted in 100 mM Tris pH 8.0 and digested with trypsin at a 1:100 ratio and then quenched with addition of trifluoroacetic acid to pH 2. Peptides were purified using reverse-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted with 30% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and then dried by vacuum. Dried peptides were subjected to high pH strong cation exchange or antibody immunoaffinity purification. High pH Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) — As described previously, 1 mg of digested protein was resuspended in loading buffer (60% acetonitrile, 40% BRUB (5 mM phosphoric acid, 5 mM boric acid, 5 mM acetic acid, pH 2.5) and incubated with high pH SCX beads (Sepax) for 30 minutes, washed with washing buffer (80% acetonitrile, 20% BRUB, pH 9), and eluted into four fractions using elution buffer 1 (60% acetonitrile, 40% BRUB, pH 9), elution buffer 2 (60% acetonitrile, 40% BRUB, pH 10), elution buffer 3 (60% acetonitrile, 40% BRUB, pH 11), and elution buffer 4 (30% acetonitrile, 70% BRUB, pH 12. Eluates were dried, resuspended in 1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted on STAGE tips29 with 2 mg of HLB material (Waters) loaded onto 300 uL tip with a C8 plug (Empore, Sigma). Immunoaffinity Purification (IAP)¬ — 10 mg of digested proteins were dissolved in 1X immunoprecipitation buffer (50 mM MOPS, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl, pH 7.2, Cell Signaling). Modified asymmetric dimethyl arginine peptides were immunoprecipitated by addition of 40 uL of PTMScan Asymmetric Di-Methyl Arginine Motif Kit (13474, Cell Signaling). Lysates were incubated with PTMScan motif kits for 2 hours at 4 oC on a rotator. Beads were centrifuged and washed two times in 1X immunoprecipitation buffer followed by three washes in water, and modified peptides were eluted with 2 x 50 uL of 0.15% TFA and desalted on STAGE tips with C18 cores (Empore, Sigma). Enriched peptides were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma) and subjected to a second digestion with trypsin for 2 hours per the manufacturer’s recommendation, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to pH 2 and desalted on STAGE tips.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometric Analysis — All LC-MS experiments were performed on a nanoscale UHPLC system (EASY-nLC1200, Thermo Scientific) connected to an Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by a reversed-phase analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm X 25 cm) (Thermo Scientific). For high pH SCX fractions the flow rate was set to 300 nl/min at a gradient starting with 0% buffer B (0.1% FA, 80% acetonitrile) to 29% B in 142 minutes, then washed by 90% B in 10 minutes, and held at 90% B for 3. The maximum pressure was set to 1,180 bar and column temperature was constant at 50 oC. For IAP samples the flow rate was set to 300 nl/min at a gradient starting with 0% buffer B to 25% B in 132 minutes, then washed by 90% B in 10 minutes. Dried SCX fractions were resuspended in buffer A and injected as follows, E1: 1.5 µL/60 µL, E2-4: 5 µL/6 µL. IAP samples were resuspended in 7 µL and 6.5 µL was injected. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer. Peptides separated by the column were ionized at 2.0 kV in the positive ion mode. MS1 survey scans for DDA were acquired at resolution of 70k from 350 to 1800 m/z, with maximum injection time of 100 ms and AGC target of 1e6. MS/MS fragmentation of the 10 most abundant ions were analyzed at a resolution of 17.5k, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 120 ms for IAP samples, 240 ms for SCX samples, and normalized collision energies of 26, 30, 32, 34, 38, 42, 46, and 50 were tested. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and ions with charge 1 and >6 were excluded.  Identification and Quantitation of Peptides — MS/MS fragmentation spectra were searched with Proteome Discoverer SEQUEST (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific) against the in-silico tryptic digested Uniprot H. sapiens database with all reviewed with isoforms (release June 2017, 42,140 entries). The maximum missed cleavage rate was set to 5. Trypsin was set to cleave at R and K. Dynamic modifications were set to include mono-methylation of arginine or lysine (R/K, +14.01565), di-methylation of arginine or lysine (R/K, +28.0313), tri-methylation of lysine (K, +42.04695), oxidation on methionine (M, +15.995 Da, and acetylation on protein N-terminus (+42.011 Da). Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (C, +57.021 Da). The maximum parental mass error was set to 10 ppm and the MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Peptides with sequence of seven to fifty amino acids were considered. Methylation site localization was determined by ptm-RS node in Proteome Discoverer, and only sites with localization probability greater or equal to 75% were considered. The False Discovery Rate threshold was set strictly to 0.01 using Percolator node validated by q-value. Methyl False Discovery Estimation – The “Decoy PSMs” export from Proteome Discoverer 2.2 was filtered for decoy methyl PSMs and the decoy q-values from the Percolator node were extracted and compared to the target methyl PSM q-values. Target methyl PSMs were removed until a 1% FDR was achieved as described 30. Neutral Loss Identification in MaxQuant – The modifications SDMA and ADMA were added to MaxQuant’s library with the added mass of dimethyl on arginine and the corresponding neutral loss masses of 31.042 for SDMA and 45.058 for ADMA assigned in the “Neutral Loss” table in Configuration 17. The missed cleavage rate was set to 5 and all other settings were kept unchanged. The “FTMS Dependent Losses” setting was checked. All RAW files were searched with monomethyl(K/R), ADMA, SDMA, and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation was kept as a fixed modification. Neutral losses and their masses were extracted from the msms.txt file using an in-house R script. Only target methyl peptides that passed the 1% Methyl FDR filter were considered for analysis. An Andromeda cutoff score of 56 was also used to filter spectra to reduce the number of incorrect assignments. A custom R script was used to remove neutral losses that did not have the corresponding b/y ion present (e.g., if y6* but not y6 was present, the neutral loss was removed). Peptides that displayed SDMA neutral loss with a corresponding MMA site were further checked to see if the neutral loss could be localized to the dimethyl site. If the SDMA neutral loss was not localizable to the dimethyl site, the peptide was removed. A few spectra were confirmed by manual inspection to ensure the accuracy of the Andromeda search. For identified ADMA / SDMA neutral losses, the Andromeda output was matched to Proteome Discoverer data by MS2 scan number.

### Publication Abstract
Protein arginine methylation regulates diverse biological processes including signaling, metabolism, splicing, and transcription. Despite its important biological roles, arginine dimethylation remains an understudied post-translational modification. Partly, this is because the two forms of arginine dimethylation, asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) and symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA), are isobaric and therefore indistinguishable by traditional mass spectrometry techniques. Thus, there exists a need for methods that can differentiate these two modifications. Recently, it has been shown that the ADMA and SDMA can be distinguished by the characteristic neutral loss (NL) of dimethylamine and methylamine, respectively. However, the utility of this method is limited because the vast majority of dimethylarginine peptides do not generate measurable NL ions. Here, we report that increasing the normalized collision energy (NCE) in a higher-energy collisional dissociation cell increases the generation of the characteristic NLs that distinguish ADMA and SDMA. By analyzing both synthetic and endogenous methyl-peptides, we identify an optimal NCE value that maximizes NL generation and simultaneously improves methyl-peptide identification. Using two orthogonal methyl-peptide enrichment strategies, high pH strong cation-exchange and immunoaffinity purification, we demonstrate that the optimal NCE improves NL-based ADMA and SDMA annotation and dimethyl-peptide identifications by 125% and 17%, respectively, compared to the standard NCE. This simple parameter change will greatly facilitate the identification and annotation of ADMA and SDMA in mass spectrometry-based methyl-proteomics to improve our understanding of how these modifications differentially regulate protein function. All raw data have been deposited in the PRIDE database with accession number PXD017193.

### Keywords
Sdma, Arginine, Proteomics, Adma, Ptm, Hcd, Lcms, Methylation, Mass spectrometry, Neutral loss, Prmt

### Affiliations
Mork Family Dept of Chem Eng and Mat Sci
USC

### Submitter
Nicolas Hartel

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas A. Graham
Mork Family Dept of Chem Eng and Mat Sci


