### Accession
PXD006612

### Title
Proteomic Analyses of Cysteine Redox in High-fat-fed and Fasted Mouse Livers: Implications for Liver Metabolic Homeostasis

### Description
Intensive oxidative stress occurs during high-fat-diet-induced hepatic fat deposition, suggesting a critical role for redox signaling in liver metabolism. Intriguingly, lines of evidence show that fasting could also result in redox profile changes, largely through reduced oxidant and/or increased anti-oxidant levels. However, a comprehensive landscape of redox-modified hepatic substrates is lacking, thus hindering our understanding of liver metabolic homeostasis. In this study, we employed a proteomic approach which combines iodoTMT and nanoLC-MS/MS to quantitatively probe the effects of high-fat-feeding and fasting on in vivo redox-based cysteine modifications. Collectively, we identified 1258 redox cysteine sites in 603 proteins and quantified 846 sites in 403 proteins.

### Sample Protocol
C57BL6 mice aged 8 weeks were divided into three groups. Mice in control group and fasting group were fed normal chow, while other mice in high-fat group were fed high-fat diets instead. After 8-week feeding, fasting group was subjected to fasting protocols for 24 h. Then mice in all of three groups were sacrificed, and livers were immediately collected. All practices were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Guangxi University.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Mascot search engine (v.2.3.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Swissprot Mouse database (16,717 sequences). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, iodo-TMT-6plex on Cys and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to ≤ 1% and peptide ion score was set ≥ 20.

### Publication Abstract
Intensive oxidative stress occurs during high-fat-diet-induced hepatic fat deposition, suggesting a critical role for redox signaling in liver metabolism. Intriguingly, evidence shows that fasting could also result in redox-profile changes largely through reduced oxidant or increased antioxidant levels. However, a comprehensive landscape of redox-modified hepatic substrates is lacking, thereby hindering our understanding of liver metabolic homeostasis. We employed a proteomic approach combining iodoacetyl tandem mass tag and nanoliquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry to quantitatively probe the effects of high-fat feeding and fasting on in vivo redox-based cysteine modifications. Compared with control groups, &#x223c;60% of cysteine residues exhibited downregulated oxidation ratios by fasting, whereas &#x223c;94% of these ratios were upregulated by high-fat feeding. Importantly, in fasted livers, proteins exhibiting diminished cysteine oxidation were annotated in pathways associated with fatty acid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, insulin, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors, and oxidative respiratory chain signaling, suggesting that fasting-induced redox changes targeted major metabolic pathways and consequently resulted in hepatic lipid accumulation.

### Keywords
Proteomic, High-fat-fed

### Affiliations
ptm-biolab
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources, College of Animal Science and Technology, Guangxi University, Nanning, P.R. China

### Submitter
zhou lianqi

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Zhou
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresources, College of Animal Science and Technology, Guangxi University, Nanning, P.R. China


