### Accession
PXD018384

### Title
Distinct proteome profiles of Agrobacterium tumefaciens grown in bioreactors suggests bacterial adaptability and preparedness for plant transformation in molecular farming

### Description
Plants transformed via agroinfiltration using a modified strain of Agrobacterium tumefaciens can produce antibody proteins for purification and application in antibody-based therapeutics. The rising demand for such drugs underscores the expansion of molecular farming and warrants the need to produce transformed plants at an industrial scale, requiring large quantities of A. tumefaciens culture, which is not feasible using traditional growth methods (e.g., shake flask). To overcome this limitation, we investigate the use of a bioreactor growth chamber system to meet production demands through growth optimization and efficient plant transformation. We observe differences in target antibody production associated with different growth conditions and aim to characterize the unique responses through profiling of protein-level changes specific to each condition. Our quantitative proteomic profiling defines growth-specific alterations in protein abundance and highlights the functional roles of these proteins. Moreover, we observe changes in the bacterial proteomes, which may influence bacterial processes important for effective agroinfiltration and transformation. Overall, our study provides insight into fundamental biological processes of A. tumefaciens influenced by growth conditions, which may influence plant transformation efficiency and outcome of antibody-based therapeutic production.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cell pellets were resuspended in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet. Using a probe sonicator (ThermoFisher Scientific), samples were mixed in an ice bath for 3 cycles (30% power, 30 s on/30 s off), and 2% (final) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was added, followed by incubation at 95°C for 10 min with shaking at 800 rpm. The samples were cooled and 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added followed by incubated at room temperature for 20 min in the dark. Next, 100% ice cold acetone (final concentration of 80%) was added prior to storage at -20°C overnight. Samples were collected by centrifugation at 13,500 rpm at 4°C for 10 min, washed twice with 80% acetone, and air dried. Pellets were resolubilized in 8M urea/40 mM HEPES and a bovine serum albumin (BSA) tryptophan assay determined protein concentrations. Samples were diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested overnight with a mixture of LysC and trypsin proteases (Promega, protein:enzyme ratio, 50:1). Digestion was stopped with 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 50 µg of the acidified peptides were loaded onto STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips (consisting of three layers of C18) to desalt and purify according to the standard protocol. Samples were stored as dried peptides at -20°C until measured on the mass spectrometer. For secretome analysis, the culture supernatant was filtered through 0.22 µM syringe filters. For each sample, 500 µl of filtered supernatant was treated with DTT, IAA, followed by digestion using LysC and Trypsin. Digested peptides were desalted and purified as described above.  For analysis of the proteome, samples were eluted from STAGE-tips with 50 µl buffer B (80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5% acetic acid), dried, and resuspended in 12 µl buffer A (0.1% TFA). Six µl of each sample was analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an Ultimate 3000 LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) online coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray flex-ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a 5 mm µ-precolumn (ThermoFisher Scientific) with 300 µm inner diameter filled with 5 µm C18 PepMap100 beads. Peptides were separated on a 15 cm column with 75 µm inner diameter with 2 µm reverse-phase silica beads and directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient from 4% to 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over 45 min at a constant flow of 300 nl/min. The linear gradient was followed by a washout with up to 95% ACN to clean the column followed by an equilibration stage to prepare the column for the next run. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one fill scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the most abundant peaks with a cycle time of 3 s. Full scan MS1s were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 120,000, scan range of 400-1600 m/z. The maximum injection time was set to 50 ms with an automatic gain control target of 4e5. The fragment ion scan was done in the Orbitrap using a Quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 m/z and HCD fragmentation energy of 30 eV. Orbitrap resolution was set to 30,000 with a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms and an automatic gain control target set to 5e4.

### Data Protocol
For proteome data analysis .Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.26.). The derived peak list was searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine against the reference A. tumefaciens (Dec. 16 2019; 5,344 sequences, https://www.uniprot.org/) supplemented with vector-specific sequences (Supp. Table. 1). The parameters were as follows: strict trypsin specificity, allowing up to two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification, N-acetylation of proteins and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. A minimum of two peptides required for protein identification and peptide spectral matches and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. ‘Match between runs’ was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min10. Relative, label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins used the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant using a minimum ratio count of one.  Further analysis of the MaxQuant-processed data (‘proteingroups.txt’ file) was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.2.2). Hits to the reverse database, contaminants, and proteins only identified with modified peptides were eliminated. LFQ intensities were converted to a log scale (log2), and only those proteins present in triplicate within at least one sample set were used for further statistical processing (valid-value filter of three in five replicates in at least one group). Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 standard deviations). A Student’s t-test identified proteins with significant changes in abundance (p-value ≤0.05) with multiple hypothesis testing correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR cutoff at 0.05. A principal component analysis (PCA) was performed, as well as a Pearson correlation with hierarchical clustering by Euclidean distance to determine replicate reproducibility. For 1D annotation enrichment, Student’s t-test (permutation-based FDR = 0.05; S0 = 1) was performed followed by 1D annotation enrichment function in Perseus using the Student’s t-test difference values with an FDR threshold of 0.05 with the Benjamini-Hochberg method. This analysis generates a numerical ‘score’ value, which represents the direction in which the protein LFQ intensities within a given category tend to deviate from the overall distribution of all proteins. Visualization of enrichment by Gene Ontology was performed within the RStudio platform (http://www.R-project.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shake flask, Bioreactor growth chamber, Quantitative proteomics, Agrobacterium tumefaciens, Trastuzumab

### Affiliations
University of Guelph, Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, 50 Stone Rd. E., Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
University of Guelph, Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, 50 Stone Rd. E., Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1


