### Accession
PXD012663

### Title
Unraveling the essential cellulosomal components of the (Pseudo)Bacteroides cellulosolvens by massive proteomic analysis

### Description
Background (Pseudo)Bacteroides cellulosolvens is a cellulolytic bacterium producing the most extensive and intricate cellulosomal system known in nature. Recently, an elaborate architecture of B. cellulosolvens cellulosomal system was revealed from its genome sequence analysis, and first evidence on the interactions between its structural and enzymatic components were detected in vitro. Yet, the cellulolytic potential of the bacterium in carbohydrate deconstruction may reside only within complete high-molecular weight protein complexes, which are secreted from the bacterium.   Results The current proteome-wide work reveals patterns of protein expression of various cellulosomal components, and explores the differential expression signature upon bacterial growth two carbon sources, either cellobiose or microcrystalline cellulose. Mass spectrometry analysis of the bacterial secretome fraction revealed the expression of 24 scaffoldin structural units and 166 dockerin-bearing enzymes, in addition to free enzymatic subunits. All these components comprise cell-free and cell-bound cellulosomes for more efficient carbohydrate degradation. Various glycoside hydrolase (GH) family memebers were represented among 102 carbohydrate-degrading enzymes, including the most abundant GH48 exoglucanase. Specific cellulosomal components were associatred with different carbon sources, in cellulosomal fractions of different molecular weights. Overall, microcrystalline cellulose-derived cellulosomes showed higher expression levels of the structural and enzymatic components, and exhibited the highest degradation activity on five different carbohydrates. The cellulosomal activity of B. cellulosolvens showed high degradation rates that are very promising in biotechnological terms and were compatible with the activity levels exhibited by C. thermocellum purified cellulosomes. Conclusions The current research demonstrates the involvement of key cellulosomal factors participating in the mechanism of carbohydrate degradation by B. cellulosolvens. The powerful ability of the bacterium to exhibit different degradation strategies of various carbon sourcesis revealed.  Thus, a novel components reservoir of degradation machineries that may serve for subsequent cellulosomal research, as a pool for designing new cellulolytic cocktails for biotechnological purposes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis Bacterial growth media was concentrated on a 3 kDa MwCO filter, the buffer exchanged to 8M urea (Sigma-Aldrich, U5128) in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.9, and the protein concentration measured. 50 μg of protein were first reduced by incubation with dithiothreitol (5 mM; Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 h at room temperature, and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark for 45 min. The sample was diluted to 2 M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were then subjected to digestion with trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI) overnight at 37°C (50:1 protein amount:trypsin), followed by a second trypsin digestion for 4 h. The digestions were stopped by the addition of trifluroacetic acid (1%). Following digestion, peptides were desalted on solid-phase extraction columns (Oasis HLB, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and stored in -80˚C until further analysis. Liquid chromatography ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA). The mobile phase was: A: H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B: acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase C18 trapping column (180 μm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 μm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 μm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 μm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 μL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 20%B in 155 min, 20% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 90%B for 5 min and then back to initial conditions. Mass Spectrometry The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data were acquired in DDA mode, using a Top20 method. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 400m/z), and maximum injection time was set to 20 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 60,000 and maximum injection time of 60 msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Maxquant v1.6.0.16. MS/MS spectra were searched using Maxquant’s built-in search engine, Andromeda. Data were searched against the Pseudobacteroides cellulosolvens ATCC 35603 DSM 2993 sequences in UniprotKB (Table S1). Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine.  Protein identifications were filtered such that the global false discovery rate was maximum of 1%. A comparative analysis of LFQ intensities was done in Perseus (v1.6.0.7) to determine fold changes and p-values adjusted with multiple-comparison correction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biotechnology; cohesin; dockerin; cellulolytic bacteria; cbm; cellulases; enzymatic hydrolysis; glycoside hydrolases; scaffoldin

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel

### Submitter
Meital Kupervaser

### Lab Head
Dr Edward A. Bayer
Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel


