### Accession
PXD042250

### Title
E.coli (p) ppGpp regulation.E. coli, ppGpp, growth rate

### Description
These two projects are about the proteome of wild type E. coli K-12 NCM3722 strain (RE198LQ) and its rpoS-null strain (XA00994LQ). Both projects include replicates of two conditions, the normal conditions and (p)ppGpp overproduction conditions via RelA* OE.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic studies, ~30 ml exponential culture of E. coli (OD600~0.3) was transferred into a pre-cooled 50 ml centrifuge tube (Nest Biotech), and collected by centrifuge (4 °C, 8500 rpm for 5 min). The cell pellets were washed twice by PBS and stored at -80 °C freezer prior to proteomic analysis. The proteomics was based on 4D label-free mass spectrometry approach, which was performed by Jingjie PTM Biolabs (Zhou Hang). The experimental procedure of 4D label-free method was described as below: the cell pellets were subject to ultra-sonication in lysis buffer (8 M Urea 8 M urea, 1% Triton X-100, 10 mM DTT, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail and 2 mM EDTA). The cell debris was then removed by centrifuge (4℃, 12000 g) for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred into a new centrifuge tube for protein concentration measurement using BCA kit. Protein samples were next subject to trypsin digestion. For digestion, protein samples were first pelleted by 20% TCA at 4°C for 2 h and then collected with centrifuge (4500 g) for 5 min. The precipitates were washed for twice using pre-cooled acetone and further added with 200 mM TEAB. Trypsin was then added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for digestion overnight. The solution was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column. Solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and Solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) were used for following peptides separation and UPLC procedures. The peptides were dissolved in solvent A and separated by the NanoElute UPLC system. The flow setting of UPLC is as follows: 0-43 min, 6%~22%B; 43-55 min, 22%~30%B; 55-58 min, 30%~80%B; 58-61 min, 80%B; flow rate: 450 nL/min. After the separation by UPLC, the peptide was set into Capillary ionization source for ionization and further analyzed by timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry system. The electrospray voltage applied was set at 1.6 to 1.8 kV. Both the original peptide ion and its secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by high-resolution TOF. The m/z scan range was 100 to 1700 for full scan. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the SwissProt Escherichia_coli_strain_K12_83333_PR_20210624.fasta. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Growth rate, Ppgpp, E. coli

### Affiliations
Central China Normal University
School of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, Hubei province, China

### Submitter
Manlu Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiongfeng Dai & Manlu Zhu
School of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, Hubei province, China


