### Accession
PXD034140

### Title
Non-histone protein methylation in Trypanosoma cruzi epimastigotes

### Description
Trypanosoma cruzi is a protozoan parasite that causes Chagas’ disease in humans and throughout its life cycle faces different environment changes. Protein methylation is an important post-translational modification by which cells respond and adapt to the environment. To understand the importance of protein methylation in T.cruzi biology, we applied mass spectrometry-based proteomics and report the first proteomic analysis of both arginine and lysine methylproteome in T. cruzi.

### Sample Protocol
Trypanosoma cruzi Dm28c epimastigotes in the exponential growth phase were cultured in Liver Infusion Tryptose (LIT) medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and incubated without agitation at 28 °C. Epimastigotes at the exponential growth phase were obtained in four biological replicates in the order of 1.5e9 cells. Cells were washed in PBS, resuspended in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM DTT) (240 μL/3 x 108 cells), vortexed for 30 seconds, heated for 3 min at 95 °C and sonicated for 1 hour at room temperature. To remove debris, samples were then centrifuged at 20,000g for 5 min at 20 °C, and the supernatant was transferred to a clean tube. The samples were quantified using Qubit fluorometer according to the manufacturer's instructions (Invitrogen) and Bradford assay. T. cruzi protein extract (25-30 ug/replicate) was separated by SDS-PAGE (4 - 20% acrylamide) and stained with Coomassie Blue G-250, and destained without organic solvent. Each gel lane was sliced horizontally into 10 fractions covering the different molecular weight ranges, and each fraction was cut into 1 mm3 cubes, which were transferred to a clean microfuge tube and submitted to in-gel digestion as described elsewhere. Briefly, the gel pieces were destained twice with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in 50% ethanol, dehydrated with 100% ethanol, reduced with 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ABC, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC, and digested with 12.5 ng/µL trypsin in 50 mM ABC and incubated for 16h at 37ºC. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. Peptides were extracted twice with 30% acetonitrile (MeCN) in 3% TFA and twice with 100% MeCN, then dried in a Speed Vac and desalted using C18 StageTips prior to nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides of four biological replicates were separated by online reverse phase (RP) nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography (nanoLC) and analyzed by electrospray mass spectrometry in tandem (ESI-MS/MS). The samples were analyzed at the mass spectrometry facility RPT02H at Carlos Chagas Institute/Fiocruz-Parana with an LTQ-Orbitrap XL ETD or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For LTQ-Orbitrap, peptide mixtures were injected in an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher) with a 30 cm analytical column (75 μm inner diameter) in-house packed with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm), eluted from 5 to 40% MeCN in 5% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid in a 120 min gradient. The nanoLC column was heated at 60 °C to improve chromatographic resolution and reproducibility. Peptides were ionized by nanoelectrospray (2.7 kV) and injected into the mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were obtained by Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA), with an initial Orbitrap scan with resolution R = 15,000 followed by MS/MS of the 10 most intense ions in LTQ (Iontrap). These precursor ions were fragmented by Collision-Induced Dissociation (CID) with normalized collision energy = 35%, activation time of 30 ms and activation q = 0.25. Singly charged precursor ions were rejected. Parallel to the MS2, a full scan was conducted in Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 (mass range m/z 300-2000), and selected ions were dynamically excluded for 90 seconds. The lock mass option, in the presence of DMSO peaks, was used in all full scans to improve the mass accuracy of precursor ions. For Orbitrap-Fusion Lumos, peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatograph (Thermo Scientific) with an analytical column of 15 cm with 75 um of internal diameter, containing C18 particles of 3 micrometers in diameter. The gradient elution was 0.1% formic acid (phase A) and 0.1% formic acid, 95% acetonitrile (Phase B). Flow rate 250 nL/min. Linear gradient from 5 to 40% acetonitrile in 60 min. In the ion source, the peptides were ionized by nanoelectrospray (2.3 kV) with ion transfer tube temperature of 175 °C. The MS1 Orbitrap resolution of 120,000. Included precursor ions with 2-7 charge state. Maximum injection time of 50 ms. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 60 seconds. In the MS2, the precursor ions were fragmented by Higher energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) with collision energy = 30%, maximum injection time of 22 ms, with an Orbitrap resolution of 15,000. Raw data of four biological replicates from the LC-MS/MS analysis was analyzed in the MaxQuant platform, version 2.2.0.0. The proteins were identified using a database containing a total of 19,242 protein sequences of T. cruzi CL Brener, downloaded on november 22, 2022, from UniProt (www.uniprot.org). Contaminants (human keratins, BSA, and porcine trypsin) were added to the database, as were their reverse sequences. The search for methylated sites used the following criteria: MS tolerance of 20 ppm (Orbitrap), MS/MS tolerance of 0.5 Da (Iontrap), allowing for two missed cleavages, the peptides length searched for with at least seven amino acids, and trypsin with specific cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was determined as a fixed modification. Monomethylation and dimethylation of lysines/arginines, and trimethylation of lysines were searched as variable modifications, as were methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation. The match between runs algorithm was used. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied to the protein, peptide, and methyl site levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Protein methylation, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
Laboratorio de Biologia Molecular e Sistemica de Tripanossomatideos, Instituto Carlos Chagas, Fiocruz, Parana, Brazil
Fiocruz

### Submitter
Rafael de Almeida

### Lab Head
Dr Lyris Martins Franco de Godoy
Laboratorio de Biologia Molecular e Sistemica de Tripanossomatideos, Instituto Carlos Chagas, Fiocruz, Parana, Brazil


