### Accession
PXD000679

### Title
A Pilot Proteomic Study of Protein Markers in Autism Spectrum Disorder

### Description
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) diagnosis is increasing, with 1/88 children believed to be affected by the disorder, with a most recent survey suggesting numbers as high as 1/50. Treatment and understanding of ASD causes is a pressing health concern. ASD protein biomarkers may provide clues about ASD cause. Protein biomarkers for ASDs could be used for ASD diagnosis, subtyping, treatment monitoring and identifying therapeutic targets. Here we analyzed the sera from 7 children with ASD and 7 matched controls using Tricine gel electrophoresis (Tricine-PAGE) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Overall, we found increased levels of apolipoproteins (Apos) ApoA1 and ApoA4, involved in cholesterol metabolism and of serum paraoxanase/arylesterase 1 (PON1), involved in preventing oxidative damage, in the sera of children with ASD, compared with their matched controls. All three proteins are predicted to interact with each other and are parts of High Density Lipoproteins (HDLs). Further studies are needed to validate these findings in larger subject numbers.

### Sample Protocol
Sera were diluted 1:10 in 10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.0 (Tris buffered saline or TBS) and then solubilized in Tricine-PAGE sample buffer (5 minutes at 95oC), separated by 16% acrylamide, 4.5% bisacrylamide, self-made, large Tricine-PAGE gel, and run according to published procedures. The sera were also separated by 10% self-made SDS-PAGE minigels and further stained by Coomassie blue or used for Western blotting (WB), as described. For WB, the proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare) and then incubated with rabbit anti-human ApoA1 antibodies (Ab)or anti-human ApoA4 Ab and then by goat anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase (HRP) Ab (both Santa Cruz Biotechnology, dilution 1/1000). Proteins were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence reaction using the SuperSignal West Femto maximum Sensitivity Substrate (Thermo Scientific) detection system accordingto the manufacturer’s instructions. The gels were cut in 14 gel pieces from each gel lane. Each gel piece from every serum sample had a correspondent in the sera from all 7 ASD and 7 control children. The gel pieces were then digested according to published protocols. The peptides were extracted and dried in a Speed-vac concentrator and then solubilized in 20 μL of 0.1% FA/2% ACN in HPLC water, placed in UPLC vials and further used for LC-MS/MS analysis. Prior to digestion, the proteins were also reduced and alkylated. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by reversed phase liquid chromatography (LC) and MS (LC-MS/MS) using a NanoAcuity UPLC (Micromass/Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q-TOF Micro MS (Micromass/Waters, Milford, MA), according to published procedures. The peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm x 10 mm nanoAquity BEH130 C18 1.7 μm UPLC column (Waters, Milford, MA) and eluted over a 60 minute gradient of 2-55% organic solvent (ACN containing 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The aqueous solvent was 0.1% FA in HPLC water. The column was coupled to a Picotip Emitter Silicatip nano-electrospray needle (New Objective, Woburn, MA). MS data acquisition involved survey MS scans and automatic data dependent analysis (DDA) of the top three ions with the highest intensity ions with the charge of 2+, 3+ or 4+ ions. The MS/MS was triggered when the MS signal intensity exceeded 10 counts/second. In survey MS scans, the three most intense peaks were selected for collisioninduced dissociation (CID) and fragmented until the total MS/MS ion counts reached 10,000 or for up to 6 seconds each.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data were converted in pkl files using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS, version 2.4) software as previously described. The following parameters were used: background subtraction of polynomial order 5 adaptive with a threshold of 30%, two smoothings with a window of three channels in Savitzky-Golay mode and centroid calculation of top 80% of peaks based on a minimum peak width of 4 channels at half height. The resulting pkl files were submitted for database search and protein identification to the public Mascot database search (www.matrixscience.com, Matrix Science, London, UK) using the following parameters: human databases from NCBI and SwissProt SwissProt_2013_11 database (selected for Homo sapiens, 20279 entries, plus decoy), parent mass error of 1.3 Da, product ion error of 0.8 Da, enzyme used: trypsin, one missed cleavage, and carbamidomethyl-Cysteine as fixed modification and Methionine oxidized as variable modification. Additional database searches were performed using the in-house PLGS database version 2.4 (www.waters.com). The Mascot and PLGS database search provided a list of proteins for each gel band. The Mascot database search results were also exported as .dat files and then uploaded on the in-house, license-based Scaffold software (version Scaffold_4.0.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR), which was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. The .dat files that corresponded to ASD samples were combined in one sample and one category (ASD) and the control .dat files were grouped in one sample and one category (controls). A similar procedure was followed for the second set of samples (SDS-PAGE and LC-MS/MS analysis). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 20.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) diagnosis is increasing, with 1/88 children believed to be affected by the disorder, with a most recent survey suggesting numbers as high as 1/50. Treatment and understanding of ASD causes is a pressing health concern. ASD protein biomarkers may provide clues about ASD cause. Protein biomarkers for ASDs could be used for ASD diagnosis, subtyping, treatment monitoring, and identifying therapeutic targets. Here, we analyzed the sera from seven children with ASD and seven matched controls using Tricine gel electrophoresis (Tricine-PAGE) and LC-MS/MS. Overall, we found increased levels of apolipoproteins ApoA1 and ApoA4, involved in cholesterol metabolism and of serum paraoxanase/arylesterase 1, involved in preventing oxidative damage, in the sera of children with ASD, compared with their matched controls. All three proteins are predicted to interact with each other and are parts of high-density lipoproteins. Further studies are needed to validate these findings in larger subject numbers.

### Keywords
Autism, Oxidative stress, Asd, Biomarkers, Apolipoprotein, Cholesterol

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Biomolecular Science Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY, 13699, Box 5810
Chemsitry & Biomolecular Science

### Submitter
Costel Darie

### Lab Head
Dr Costel C. Darie
Department of Chemistry & Biomolecular Science Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY, 13699, Box 5810


