### Accession
PXD009118

### Title
Secretome of trophoblast organoids

### Description
Characterisation of the secretome of placental organoids using Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry by performing solid phase extraction of the supernatants, followed by tryptic digestion.

### Sample Protocol
Organoid supernatants were acidified and loaded directly onto an Oasis Prime µ-elution 96 well SPE plate and slowly extracted on a positive pressure manifold. The wells were washed with 0.1% formic acid in water and 5% methanol in water with 1% acetic acid (v/v). The proteins were eluted from the cartridge using 60% methanol in water with 10% acetic acid into 96 well protein Lo bind plates. The eluant was evaporated under oxygen free nitrogen at 40 ºC, and reconstituted into 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in water with dithiothreitol. The plate was sealed and incubated at 60 ºC for 60 minutes before the addition of iodoacetamide, and left in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. The plate was removed to the light for 30 minutes prior to the addition of trypsin and incubated at 37 ºC overnight. Prior to nano LC-MS analysis, 1% formic acid in water was added to quench the reaction.   Protein digests were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 nano LC system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 130 minute analysis. Data dependent analysis was performed over a scan range of 400 – 1600 m/z at a resolution of 75,000 before the top 10 ions of each spectrum were selected for MS/MS analysis. Existing ions selected for fragmentation were added to an exclusion list for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The nano LC/MS files obtained from the six different extracts were combined and searched using Peaks 8.5 software (BSI, Waterloo, Canada) against the human Swissprot database (Downloaded on 26-Oct-2017). A tryptic digest setting was used, and precursor and product ion tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. The search parameters included a fixed modification of a carboxyamidomethylation on cysteine residues and variable modifications such as methionine oxidation, N-terminal pyro-glutamate, N-terminal acetylation and C-terminal amidation. A false discovery rate (FDR) value of 1% was used to filter the results, with a minimum of 1 unique peptide also required.

### Publication Abstract
The placenta is the extraembryonic organ that supports the fetus during intrauterine life. Although placental dysfunction results in major disorders of pregnancy with immediate and lifelong consequences for the mother and child, our knowledge of the human placenta is limited owing to a lack of functional experimental models<sup>1</sup>. After implantation, the trophectoderm of the blastocyst rapidly proliferates and generates the trophoblast, the unique cell type of the placenta. In vivo, proliferative villous cytotrophoblast cells differentiate into two main sub-populations: syncytiotrophoblast, the multinucleated epithelium of the villi responsible for nutrient exchange and hormone production, and extravillous trophoblast cells, which anchor the placenta to the maternal decidua and transform the maternal spiral arteries<sup>2</sup>. Here we describe the generation of long-term, genetically stable organoid cultures of trophoblast that can differentiate into both syncytiotrophoblast and extravillous trophoblast. We used human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing to confirm that the organoids were derived from the fetus, and verified their identities against four trophoblast-specific criteria<sup>3</sup>. The cultures organize into villous-like structures, and we detected the secretion of placental-specific peptides and hormones, including human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15)&#xa0;and pregnancy-specific glycoprotein (PSG) by mass spectrometry. The organoids also differentiate into HLA-G<sup>+</sup> extravillous trophoblast cells, which vigorously invade in three-dimensional cultures. Analysis of the methylome reveals that the organoids closely resemble normal first trimester placentas. This organoid model will be transformative for studying human placental development and for investigating trophoblast interactions with the local and systemic maternal environment.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Solid phase extraction, Secretion, Trophoblast organoids

### Affiliations
Division of Immunology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Richard Kay

### Lab Head
Dr Ashley Moffett
Division of Immunology, Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge


