### Accession
PXD017801

### Title
Exploiting Dynamics of Genomic Islands to Edit the Genome of Vibrio cholerae and Identify Novel Interactions Between Core and Acquired Genome

### Description
Horizontally acquired genetic elements (HGEs) plays a major for determination of virulence, antimicrobial resistance, adaptation and evolution in pathogenic bacteria. Conserved integrative mobile genetic elements (MGEs) of  Vibrio cholerae contribute in the disease development, antimicrobial resistance and metabolic functions. To understand the dynamics of integrative MGEs and cross talk between MGEs and core genome, engineered genome of V. cholerae was monitored in the presence and absence of horizontally acquired genetic elements. Deletion of more than 250 revealed that CTX contributes to the essentiality of SOS response master regulator LexA in V. cholerae. Also, he core genome encoded RecA helps CTX to bypass the host immunity and replicate in the host cell in the presence of similar prophage in the host chromosome. Finally, our multiomics data reveal importance of MGEs in modulating the level of cellular proteome and metabolome in V. cholerae. This study for the first time engineered the genome of V. cholerae strains to eliminate all the GIs, ICE and prophages from their genome and revealed new interactions between core and acquired genomes. The engineered strain could be a potential candidate for understanding evolution of cholera pathogen and development of therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight grown V. cholerae strains N16961 and BB1 were used for total protein extraction and trypsin digestion. Protein were extracted using lysis buffer (RIPA) and subsequent sonication. Reduced (10 mm DTT) and alkylated (20 mm IAA) protein sample was trypsin digested for 18 hrs  at 37 °C followed by C18 desalting step for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides from the cell lysate of both the V. cholerae strains were fractionated using an Agilent 1200 HPLC system on high-pH reverse-phase Zorbax 300 Extend-C18 column (Agilent Technology, Santa Clara, CA, USA) to the final 12 fractions. For identification and spectral library building, each fraction were subjected to 90 min gradient LC-MS/MS in data dependent acquisition mode. For quantitative analysis, 4 ug of C18 desalted peptides from each sample were acquired in triplicate in a DIA mode.  Peptides were separated using NanoViper C18 separation column (75 µm x 250 mm, 3 µm, 100 Å: Acclaim Pep Map, Thermo Scientific) at flow rate of 300 nl/min in a 90 min linear gradient of 35% acetonitrile. Using a 54 overlapping (1 Da) variable windows, TOF/MS servery scan (400-1250 m/z) was performed with accumulation time of 250 ms, and fragmentation spectrum was collected with 50 ms (100-1500 m/z).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.6 where was used for peptide and protein identification (1% FDR) against UniProtKB N16961 protein database (3783 entries, Sep 2019). The resulting peptide and protein lists were used to generate the spectral library using Spectronaut (Biognosys) with default settings which were further used for SWATH processing and quantification. Proteins with a ratio >1.5 was considered differentially expressed. In all cases, p < 0.05 (t-test) was considered significant in protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial species are hosts to horizontally acquired mobile genetic elements (MGEs), which encode virulence, toxin, antimicrobial resistance, and other metabolic functions. The bipartite genome of <i>Vibrio cholerae</i> harbors sporadic and conserved MGEs that contribute in the disease development and survival of the pathogens. For a comprehensive understanding of dynamics of MGEs in the bacterial genome, we engineered the genome of <i>V. cholerae</i> and examined in vitro and in vivo stability of genomic islands (GIs), integrative conjugative elements (ICEs), and prophages. Recombinant vectors carrying the integration module of these GIs, ICE and CTX&#x3a6;, helped us to understand the efficiency of integrations of MGEs in the <i>V. cholerae</i> chromosome. We have deleted more than 250 acquired genes from 6 different loci in the <i>V. cholerae</i> chromosome and showed contribution of CTX prophage in the essentiality of SOS response master regulator LexA, which is otherwise not essential for viability in other bacteria, including <i>Escherichia coli</i> In addition, we observed that the core genome-encoded RecA helps CTX&#x3a6; to bypass <i>V. cholerae</i> immunity and allow it to replicate in the host bacterium in the presence of similar prophage in the chromosome. Finally, our proteomics analysis reveals the importance of MGEs in modulating the levels of cellular proteome. This study engineered the genome of <i>V. cholerae</i> to remove all of the GIs, ICEs, and prophages and revealed important interactions between core and acquired genomes.

### Keywords
Vibrio cholerae, Dia, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Regional Centre for Biotechnology, Faridabad, India
Regional Centre for Biotechnology
NCR Biotech Science Cluster
3rd Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon Expressway
P.O. Box No. 3, Faridabad - 121 001
Haryana (NCR Delhi), India

### Submitter
Bhoj Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Tushar Kanti Maiti
Regional Centre for Biotechnology, Faridabad, India


