### Accession
PXD005487

### Title
Proteome of Hypoxic  Glioblastoma Cells

### Description
Tumors are known for hypoxic microenvironment due to decreased hemoglobin oxygen saturation arising from high acidity in tumor tissue, high consumption rates of rapidly proliferating cells, and irregular or even short-time cessation of blood flow in deformed vessels. Consequently, hypoxia promotes tumor to be highly malignant, metastatic, and resistant to therapy. In order to better understand the mechanisms of the correlation between hypoxia and cancer progression, we have studied the proteome of glioblastoma cells grown for five successive days under 1% oxygen via an innovative strategy, which involves quantification of newly synthesized proteins from cells previously labeled with heavy stable-isotope arginine and real-time accurate assessment of cell replication through the arginine light/heavy ratio in histone peptides.  We found that hypoxia affects cancer cells in three sequential stages in vitro: the early inflammatory response stage with highly over-expressed glucose transporter protein GLUT1 and inflammation marker MKP2; the pre-EMT stage with over-expression of literally all enzymes in the glycolysis pathway towards pyruvate, as well as vitamin B12 transporter protein TCN2 which is essential for one-carbon metabolism; and the last EMT stage with distinct morphologic changes and protein expression profiles. Expression of methylation enzymes and the cellular production of their cofactors are either revealed or predicted to be significantly influenced by hypoxia, which demonstrates the importance of a follow-up study on epigenetic reprogramming in hypoxic cells.

### Sample Protocol
U87 cells with stable isotope-labeled arginine (6C134N15-R or 10R) were prepared as described previously to ensure ~98% incorporation of 10R (determined by mass spectrometry analysis of histone peptides) (50). These 10R-enriched cells were stored in a liquid nitrogen tank until use. In this experiment, 10R-enriched U87 cells were first cultured in Thermo Scientific SILAC MEM media minus L-lysine, L-arginine and sera for SILAC. The medium was added with 0.084 g/L 10R and 0.146 g/L L-lysine. The cells were split into 12 dishes when reached confluence. Then, they were grown in regular (with light arginine (0R)) EMEM at 37 °C under either normoxic or hypoxic conditions. 24 hours after the seeding and every 24 hours thereafter, 2 dishes of cells were moved to an incubator equilibrated with 1% O2 and 5% CO2 in N2 until the last 2 dishes were remained in normal atmosphere (20% O2 and 5% CO2) for additional 24 hours, which were treated as normoxic cells and labeled reversely as d0.  The first two dishes taken from the normal incubator chamber to the hypoxia chamber were labeled as d5 since they have been grown in low oxygen for 5 days. During this six-day period, the medium was changed once on day three, and cells in all the dishes grew to fully confluent by day six except the five-day hypoxic cells. Whole-cell lysate preparation and proteomic analysis  The cell pellet was lysed in Radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) lysis buffer (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA) added with 1% Nonidet P40, PMSF (0.2mM), and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, one tablet per 10 mL) additionally. Samples were sonicated by a probe sonicator (Qsonica, model CL-188) under 3 × 30 bursts at 40 Hz amplitudes, and incubated on ice for 2 hours. The protein mixture was centrifuged and the supernatant was transferred into a clean tube. The concentration of the protein in the supernatant was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA assay). Approximately 60 µg of each protein sample was resuspended in 25mM triethylammonium bicarbonate l, pH 7.8. The protein solution was reduced by the addition of 10 mM DTT and incubation at 50 ºC for 30 min, followed by carboxymethylation with 25 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 1 hour. The proteins were precipitated by adding 4 volumes of -20 ºC precooled acetone and stored at -20 ºC for overnight. The protein was pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 minutes and the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was dissolved in 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with trypsin at a protein / trypsin enzyme ratio of 25:1 (by mass) for 10 hours at 37 ºC. The TMT (Tandem Mass Tag) isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) was used to label the peptides following the manufacturer’s recommendations. Each TMT-labeled protein pool was acidified with 0.1% formic acid and fractionated into six fractions with strong cation-exchange (SCX) chromatography using Thermo’s SCX spin-columns. Next, the fractions were dried under vacuum to remove ACN from the chromatographic solvent, reconstituted in 1% formic acid, and then desalted by Thermo spin-columns with HypercarbTM materials. The eluted peptides with 60% acetonitrile were once again vacuum-dried, reconstituted in 30 μL of 0.1% formic acid, and then subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Quantitation was carried out on the Thermo QExactive mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated by online reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) using home-packed C18 capillary columns (15 cm long, 75 μm i.d., 3-μm particle size) with a 250-min gradient (solvent A, 0.1% FA in water; solvent B, 0.1% FA in ACN) from 5–30% solvent B. Approximately 2 μg of peptide sample was injected. The Orbitrap mass analyzer was set to acquire data at 35,000 resolution (FWHM) for the parent full-scan mass spectrum followed by data-dependent high collision-energy dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra for the top 15 most abundant ions acquired at 7500 resolution. Proteins search, pathways analysis, and statistics analysis are described in details in the result section.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified through the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 platform (Thermo) by using Sequest HT (employing the Uniprot Homo Sapiens database (version 3.73, June 2010, containing 89,739 entries). Sequest searching parameters were used as follow: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT-6 modification of peptide N terminus and lysine were set as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine and deamination of asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications, trypsin was the protease selected and up to two missed cleavages was used. Mass tolerance for the precursor ions was 10 ppm and for the MS/MS 0.1 Da. Only peptides with minimal length of four amino acids were considered and peptides were filtered for maximum false discovery rate of 1%. At least one unique peptide with posterior error probability of less than 0.05 was accepted for quantification using the TMT-reporter ions and proteins were grouped.          Multivariate statistics including hierarchical agglomerative clustering analysis, principal component analysis (PCA), and correlation coefficient analysis and their associated presentation graphics were performed in R, version Rx64, 2.5.1 and version Rx64, 3.3.2, as described previously (51) and in the following Result section. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) were performed to identify protein functions/pathways or upstream regulators significantly influenced by hypoxia, specifically for the hypoxic cells d1-d4 prior to EMT.

### Publication Abstract
Rapidly proliferating tumors are exposed to a hypoxic microenvironment because of their density, high metabolic consumption, and interruptions in blood flow because of immature angiogenesis. Cellular responses to hypoxia promote highly malignant and metastatic behavior, as well as a chemotherapy-resistant state. To better understand the complex relationships between hypoxic adaptations and cancer progression, we studied the dynamic proteome responses of glioblastoma cells exposed to hypoxia via an innovative approach: quantification of newly synthesized proteins using heavy stable-isotope arginine labeling combined with accurate assessment of cell replication by quantification of the light/heavy arginine ratio of peptides in histone H4. We found that hypoxia affects cancer cells in multiple intertwined ways: inflammation, typically with over-expressed glucose transporter (GLUT1), DUSP4/MKP2, and RelA proteins; a metabolic adaptation with overexpression of all glycolytic pathway enzymes for pyruvate/lactate synthesis; and the EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transition) and cancer stem cell (CSC) renewal with characteristic morphological changes and mesenchymal/CSC protein expression profiles. For the first time, we identified the vitamin B<sub>12</sub> transporter protein TCN2, which is essential for one-carbon metabolism, as being significantly downregulated. Further, we found, by knockdown and overexpression experiments, that TCN2 plays an important role in controlling cancer cell transformation toward the highly aggressive mesenchymal/CSC stage; low expression of TCN2 has an effect similar to hypoxia, whereas high expression of TCN2 can reverse it. We conclude that hypoxia induces sequential metabolic responses of one-carbon metabolism in tumor cells. Our mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD005487 (TMT-labeling) and PXD007280 (label-free).

### Keywords
Glioblastoma, Hypoxia

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch
University of Texas Medical Branch

### Submitter
Kangling Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Kangling Zhang
Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch


