### Accession
PXD000357

### Title
Identification of ERK1 direct substrates using stable isotope labeled kinase assay linked phosphoproteomics

### Description
Following the kinase assay linked phosphoproteomics strategy (KALIP) (Xue, L et al., 2012), we used extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 (ERK1) to phosphorylate the HEK293 cell lysate under the in vitro kinase assay condition. The phosphorylated proteins were then isolated and identified by mass spectrometry. The in vitro phosphorylated proteins with new phosphates were further overlapped with reported in vivo ERK1-dependent phosphoproteomics data for the identification of bona fide direct substrates of ERK1. In total, we identified 27 direct substrates of ERK1. Data analysis procedure: Raw MS files from the LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 1.3. MS/MS spectra were searched against the IPI-human database (version 3.83) containing both forward and reverse protein sequences by the SEQUEST search engine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 on the peptide level. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was applied for the functional annotation.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Kinase mediated phosphorylation signaling is extensively involved in cellular functions and human diseases, and unraveling phosphorylation networks requires the identification of substrates targeted by kinases, which has remained challenging. We report here a novel proteomic strategy to identify the specificity and direct substrates of kinases by coupling phosphoproteomics with a sensitive stable isotope labeled kinase reaction. A whole cell extract was moderately dephosphorylated and subjected to in vitro kinase reaction under the condition in which (18)O-ATP is the phosphate donor. The phosphorylated proteins are then isolated and identified by mass spectrometry, in which the heavy phosphate (+85.979 Da) labeled phosphopeptides reveal the kinase specificity. The in vitro phosphorylated proteins with heavy phosphates are further overlapped with in vivo kinase-dependent phosphoproteins for the identification of direct substrates with high confidence. The strategy allowed us to identify 46 phosphorylation sites on 38 direct substrates of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1, including multiple known substrates and novel substrates, highlighting the ability of this high throughput method for direct kinase substrate screening.

### Keywords
Erk1, Kinase substrates, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Biochemistry

### Submitter
Liang Xue

### Lab Head


