### Accession
PXD023720

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Analysis in Alveolar Type II Cells Reveals the Different Capacities of RAS and TGF-β to Induce Epithelial–Mesenchymal Transition

### Description
Alveolar type II (ATII) epithelial cells function as stem cells, contributing to alveolar renewal, repair and cancer. Therefore, they are a highly relevant model for studying lung diseases, including acute injury, fibrosis and cancer, in which signals transduced by RAS and transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß play critical roles. To identify downstream molecular events following RAS and/or TGF-ß activation, we performed proteomic analysis using a quantitative label-free approach (LC-HDMSE) to provide in-depth proteome coverage and estimates of protein concentration in absolute amounts. Contact:  pjss@soton.ac.uk

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate containing 1% SDS followed by pulsed sonication. Lysates were then centrifuged at 13,000 x g, for 20 min at 4 °C, supernatant removed and protein concentration measured using a DirectDetect spectrometer (Merck, UK). Methanol/chloroform extraction was then performed on 25μg of protein for each lysate. Samples were prepared in 100μl using lysis buffer (0.1M ammonium Bicarbonate). Samples were reduced with 1mM Dithiothreitol (DTT, Thermo Scientific) at 56°C for 60 min. Samples were subsequently alkylated using 5.5 mM Iodoacetamide (Sigma) and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 min. Samples were digested by addition of 2μg sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) and incubation overnight at 37°C. After digestion, samples were lyophilised in vacuo. Enolase protein digest internal standard (Waters) was spiked into each cellular peptide sample at a concentration of 150 fmol prior to isoelectric focusing by OFFGEL fractionation using a 3-10 pH gradient (Agilent) into 12 peptide fractions. Each fraction was purified using an Empore™ C18 solid phase extraction plate (ThermoScientific Pierce) to remove residual salts, buffers and contaminants before lyophilisation and resuspension in loading buffer (3% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Separations were performed using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Peptide digests were injected onto a Symmetry C18, 180μm x 20mm trapping cartridge (Waters). After 5 min washing of the trap column, peptides were separated using a 75μm i.d. x 500mm, 1.7μm BEH130 C18, column (Waters) using a linear gradient of 5 to 40% B (buffer A = 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 90 min with a wash to 85% B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. All separations were automated, performed on-line and sprayed directly into the nanospray source of the mass spectrometer. All mass spectrometry was performed using a Waters G2-S Synapt HDMS mass spectrometer operating in MSe mode. Data was acquired from 50 to 2000 m/z with ion mobility enabled using alternate low and high collision energy (CE) scans. Low CE was 5V and elevated, ramped from 20-40V. The lock mass Glu-fibrinopeptide, (M+2H)+2, m/z = 785.8426) was infused at 300 nl/min at a concentration of 200 fmol/μl and acquired every 13 seconds.Raw mass spectra were processed using ProteinLynx Global Server Ver 3.0 (Waters, Manchester, UK) enabled using an in-house developed script and the data processed to generate reduced charge state and de-isotoped precursor and associated product ion mass lists. These peak list were searched against the human UniProt protein sequence (downloaded March 2017). A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed for tryptic digestion and the variable modification was set to contain oxidation of methionine and carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with decoy-fusion database searches and were filtered to 1% FDR

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human top-down alveolar type ii epithelial cells

### Affiliations
yz3n18@soton.ac.uk
University of Southampton

### Submitter
Yilu Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Yihua Wang
University of Southampton


