### Accession
PXD019217

### Title
Cross-family small GTPase ubiquitination by the intracellular pathogen Legionella pneumophila

### Description
The intracellular bacterial pathogen Legionella pneumophila (L.p.) manipulates eukaryotic host ubiquitination machinery to form its replicative vacuole. While nearly 10% of L.p.’s ∼330 secreted effector proteins are ubiquitin ligases or deubiquitinases, a comprehensive measure of temporally resolved changes in the endogenous host ubiquitinome during infection has not been undertaken. To elucidate how L.p hijacks host cell ubiquitin signaling, we generated a proteome-wide analysis of changes in protein ubiquitination during infection. We discover that L.p. infection increases ubiquitination of host regulators of subcellular trafficking and membrane dynamics, most notably ∼40% of mammalian Ras superfamily small GTPases. We determine that these small GTPases undergo non-degradative ubiquitination at the Legionella-containing vacuole membrane. Finally, we find that the bacterial effectors SidC/SdcA play a central role in cross-family small GTPase ubiquitination, and that these effectors function upstream of SidE-family ligases in the poly-ubiquitination and retention of GTPases in the LCV membrane. This work highlights the extensive reconfiguration of host ubiquitin signaling by bacterial effectors during infection and establishes simultaneous ubiquitination of small GTPases across the Ras superfamily as a novel consequence of L.p. infection. Our findings position L.p. as a tool to better understand how small GTPases can be regulated by ubiquitination in uninfected contexts.


### Sample Protocol
Global proteomics experiments.  Sample preparation for proteomics analysis Uninfected HEK293 FcγR cells or HEK293 FcγR infected for 1 h or 8 h with the L.p. WT strain or the isogenic ΔdotA mutant were infected at an MOI of 100. Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, collected and the pellet was frozen at -80°C. Cell pellets were lysed by probe sonication in three pulses of 20% amplitude for 15 s in a lysis buffer consisting of:  8 M urea, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8; added per 10 ml of buffer: 1 tablet of Roche mini-complete protease inhibitor EDTA free and 1 tablet of Roche PhosSTOP. In order to remove insoluble precipitate, lysates were centrifuged at 16,100 g at 4˚C for 30 min. A Bradford Assay (Thermo) was performed to measure protein concentration in cell lysate supernatants. 6 mg of each clarified lysate was reduced with 4 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 30 min at room temperature and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Remaining alkylated agent was quenched with 10 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were diluted with three starting volumes of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, to reduce the urea concentration to 2 M. Samples were incubated with 50 μg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) and incubated at room temperature with rotation for 18 hr. The sample pH was reduced to approximately 2.0 by the addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min. Peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters). The columns were activated with 1 ml of 80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA, and equilibrated 3 times with 1 ml of 0.1% TFA. Peptide samples were applied to the columns, and the columns were washed 3 times with 1 ml of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 1.2 ml of 50% ACN, 0.25% formic acid. Peptides were divided for global protein analysis (10 μg), phosphopeptide enrichment (1 mg), or diGly-enrichment (remaining sample), and lyophilized.  Phosphopeptide enrichment by immobilized metal affinity chromatography Iron nitriloacetic acid (NTA) resin was used for enrichment of phosphorylated peptides.  Di-glycine peptide enrichment by immunoprecipitation Peptide samples were subjected to ubiquitin remnant immunoaffinity. 10 uL of PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Antibody Bead Conjugate purification (Cell Signaling. Di-glycine remnant peptides were desalted with UltraMicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group).   Mass spectrometry data acquisition and analysis. Samples were resuspended in 4% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile solution, separated by a reversed-phase gradient over a nanoflow column (360 µm O.D. x 75 µm I.D.) packed with 25 cm of 1.8 µm Reprosil C18 particles with (Dr. Maisch), and directly injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo). Total acquisition times were 120 min for protein abundance, 100 min for phosphorylation, and 70 min for ubiquitylation analyses.   APMS analysis.  Immunoprecipitation.  Cell pellets were immunoprecipitated GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek  After binding on a tube rotator for 2 hours, beads were washed one time with 1 ml Wash Buffer, followed by 2 times with Wash Buffer that was not supplemented with NP40.  Proteins were eluted twice, each time with 50 l 0.1 M Glycine pH 2.5 by gently agitating beads on a vortex mixer at room temperature for 10 minutes.  After removing from beads, eluates were neutralized with 1 M Tris-HCl, pH 9.0 to adjust the soulution pH to 8.0.   Sample Preparation and Mass Spectrometry.  To prepare samples for LC-MS/MS analysis, eluates were reduced by the addition of 1 mM DTT at 60C for 15 minutes, cooled to room temperature, alkylated by the addition of 3 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes in the dark.  Alkylation was quenched by the addition of 3 mM DTT and proteins were digested overnight at 37C with 1 g trypsin (0.5 g/l; Promega).  Following digestion, peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (0.5% final, pH < 2), desalted using UltraMicroSpin Columns (PROTO 300 C18 300Å; The NEST Group) according to manufacturer's specifications, and dried under vacuum centrifugation (CentriVap Concentrator, Labconco).  Samples were resuspended in 4% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile solution, and separated by an 70 minute reversed-phase gradient over a nanoflow column (360 m O.D. x 75 m I.D.) packed with 25 cm of 1.8 m Reprosil C18 particles with (Dr. Maisch).  Peptides were directly injected into an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo), with all MS1 spectra collected in the orbitrap, and MS2 spectra collected in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Global proteomics experiments. .  Raw MS data were searched with MaxQuant against both the human proteome (Uniprot canonical protein sequences downloaded January 11, 2016) and the Legionella Pneumophila Philadelphia proteome (downloaded July 17, 2017).  Peptides, proteins, and PTMs were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant.    APMS analysis. .  Raw MS data were searched with MaxQuant against both the human proteome (Uniprot canonical protein sequences downloaded March 21, 2018) and the Legionella Pneumophila Philadelphia proteome (downloaded July 17, 2017).  Peptides and proteins were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant, and identified proteins were then subjected to protein-protein interaction scoring using SAINTexpress.

### Publication Abstract
The intracellular bacterial pathogen <i>Legionella pneumophila</i> (<i>L.p.</i>) manipulates eukaryotic host ubiquitination machinery to form its replicative vacuole. While nearly 10% of <i>L.p.</i>'s &#x223c;330 secreted effector proteins are ubiquitin ligases or deubiquitinases, a comprehensive measure of temporally resolved changes in the endogenous host ubiquitinome during infection has not been undertaken. To elucidate how <i>L.p.</i> hijacks host cell ubiquitin signaling, we generated a proteome-wide analysis of changes in protein ubiquitination during infection. We discover that <i>L.p.</i> infection increases ubiquitination of host regulators of subcellular trafficking and membrane dynamics, most notably &#x223c;40% of mammalian Ras superfamily small GTPases. We determine that these small GTPases undergo nondegradative ubiquitination at the <i>Legionella</i>-containing vacuole (LCV) membrane. Finally, we find that the bacterial effectors SidC/SdcA play a central role in cross-family small GTPase ubiquitination, and that these effectors function upstream of SidE family ligases in the polyubiquitination and retention of GTPases in the LCV membrane. This work highlights the extensive reconfiguration of host ubiquitin signaling by bacterial effectors during infection and establishes simultaneous ubiquitination of small GTPases across the Ras superfamily as a novel consequence of <i>L.p.</i> infection. Our findings position <i>L.p.</i> as a tool to better understand how small GTPases can be regulated by ubiquitination in uninfected contexts.

### Keywords
Legionella

### Affiliations
University of California San Francisco, USA
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Danielle Swaney
University of California San Francisco, USA


