### Accession
PXD016549

### Title
Extensive Rewiring of the EGFR Network in Colorectal Cancer Cells Expressing Transforming Levels of KRASG13D

### Description
RAW files of full proteome profiling of SILAC labeled HCT 116 and HKE 3 cells

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for protein expression profiling by MS. HCT116 (mtKRASHi) and HKE3 (mtKRASLo) cells were grown in either “light” or “heavy” SILAC DMEM medium. When the cells reached 70-80% confluency, they were serum starved for 12 hours and lysed in 1% NP40, 20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM MgCl2 supplemented with protease inhibitor tablets (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (2mM sodium orthovanadate, 10mM sodium fluoride and 10mM β-glycerophosphate, all Sigma-Aldrich), for 10 minutes at 4°C. Lysates were cleared of debris by centrifugation at 20,000xg at 4°C for 10 minutes. Total protein concentration in supernatants was measured by the Pierce BCA assay as per manufacturer’s instruction. Equal amounts of protein from each cell line were mixed 1:1 and loaded on 10% precast Tris-Glycine SDS-polyacrylamide gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gel was cut in 10 slices, and subjected to in-gel tryptic cleavage

### Data Protocol
MS analysis of protein expression profiles was performed on an Ultimate3000 RSLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a nano-trap column (300μm i.d. × 5mm precolumn, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5μm, 100Å; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in HPLC grade water. After 3 minutes, peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75μm i.d. × 25cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2μm, 100Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) at a flow rate of 300nl/minute over 150 minutes. Remaining peptides were eluted by a short gradient from 30% to 95% buffer B in 10 minutes. MS parameters were as follows: for full MS spectra, the scan range was 335–1,500 with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z=200. MS/MS acquisition was performed in top speed mode with 3 seconds cycle time. The maximum injection time was 50ms. The AGC target was set to 400,000, and the isolation window was 1 m/z. Positive Ions with charge states 2-7 were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 seconds and the lock mass option was activated and set to a background signal with a mass of 445.12002

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein-interaction networks (PPINs) organize fundamental biological processes, but how oncogenic mutations impact these interactions and their functions at a network-level scale is poorly understood. Here, we analyze how a common oncogenic KRAS mutation (KRAS<sup>G13D</sup>) affects PPIN structure and function of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) network in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. Mapping &gt;6000 PPIs shows that this network is extensively rewired in cells expressing transforming levels of KRAS<sup>G13D</sup> (mtKRAS). The factors driving PPIN rewiring are multifactorial including changes in protein expression and phosphorylation. Mathematical modelling also suggests that the binding dynamics of low and high affinity KRAS interactors contribute to rewiring. PPIN rewiring substantially alters the composition of protein complexes, signal flow, transcriptional regulation, and cellular phenotype. These changes are validated by targeted and global experimental analysis. Importantly, genetic alterations in the most extensively rewired PPIN nodes occur frequently in CRC and are prognostic of poor patient outcomes.

### Keywords
Hke-3, Interactomic, Egfr pathway, Ap-ms, Proteins network, Proteomic profiling, Silac, Hct-116

### Affiliations
Core Facility for Medical Bioanalytics Proteomics Platform Tübingen (PxP) Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 7 D-72076 Tuebingen. Germany.
Medical Bioanalytics, University Clinic Tuebingen

### Submitter
Mohamed Ali Jarboui

### Lab Head
Dr Mohamed ali Jarboui
Core Facility for Medical Bioanalytics Proteomics Platform Tübingen (PxP) Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 7 D-72076 Tuebingen. Germany.


