### Accession
PXD014123

### Title
An integrated approach to profile lung tumor endothelial cell heterogeneity across species and models and to identify angiogenic candidates

### Description
Heterogeneity of lung tumor endothelial cell (TEC) phenotypes across patients, species (human/mouse) and models (in vivo/vitro) remains poorly inventoried at the single-cell-level. We single-cell RNA-sequenced 56,771 ECs from human/mouse (peri)-tumoral lung and cultured human lung TECs, detected 17 known and discovered 16 novel phenotypes, including TECs presumably regulating immune surveillance. We resolved the canonical tip TECs into a known migratory tip and a novel basement-membrane remodeling breach phenotype. Tip-TEC signatures correlated with patient-survival, and tip/breach TECs were most sensitive to VEGF-blockade. By similarity analysis, only tip-TECs were congruent across species/models and shared conserved markers. Integrated analysis of the scRNA-seq data with orthogonal multi-omics and meta-analysis data across different human tumors, validated by functional analysis, identified collagen-modification as angiogenic candidate pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Human TEC and NEC were isolated from patients and cultured until passage 1, at which point 37,500 cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS and scraped in 300 μl of a 50:30:20 (methanol: acetonitrile: 20 mM Tris, pH 9.3) extraction buffer. Samples were then centrifuged for 5 min at 15,000 rcf at 4°C and the supernatant was discarded. The resulting protein pellet was re-dissolved in 50 µl 8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and proteins were reduced by addition of 15 mM DTT and incubation for 30 min at 55 °C. Proteins were then alkylated by addition of 30 mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 15 min at RT in the dark. The samples were diluted by addition of 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to reach a final urea concentration of 4 M; then, the proteins were digested with 0.125 μg endoLysC (Wako 1/250, w/w) for 4 h at RT. Next, all samples were further diluted by addition of 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M and the proteins were digested with 0.125 μg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were then purified on OMIX C18 tips (Agilent), dried completely by vacuum drying and stored at -20°C until  LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides from each sample were re-dissolved in 20 μl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98 : 2, v/v)) of which 10 μl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in solvent A on a home-made 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm trapping column (5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr Maisch) and peptides were separated on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr Maisch). The peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2% to 56% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2 : 8, v/v)) over 140 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min. The column temperature was kept constant at 50 °C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375 to 1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200 to 2,000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyzer. The S-lens RF level was set at 55, and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on peptide spectrum match (PSM), peptide and protein level. The spectra were searched against the human proteins in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of September 2017 containing 20,237 human protein entries, downloaded from www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as carboxy-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine–proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein amino-termini. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained for identification, while a minimum ratio count of two was required for quantification. Matching between runs was enabled, with a matching time window of 2 min and an alignment time window of 20 min.  Further data analysis was performed in R after loading the proteinGroups results files from MaxQuant. Proteins with less than 20% valid values were removed, and missing values were imputed using minimum values. Differentially expressed proteins and their false discovery rate (FDR) corrected p values were identified by the Limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015). We used the UpsetR package to visualize proteins consistently upregulated across tumor types (Conway et al., 2017). The subset of 288 proteins that were upregulated in all four tumor types were further ranked using Fisher’s combined probability test (as implemented in the metap R-package) to obtain a combined p values across datasets. This ranked list was used for gene ontology analysis using the GOrilla web tool using default settings (Eden et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
Heterogeneity of lung tumor endothelial cell (TEC) phenotypes across patients, species (human/mouse), and models (in&#xa0;vivo/in&#xa0;vitro) remains poorly inventoried at the single-cell level. We single-cell RNA (scRNA)-sequenced 56,771 endothelial cells from human/mouse (peri)-tumoral lung and cultured human lung TECs, and detected 17 known and 16 previously unrecognized phenotypes, including TECs putatively regulating immune surveillance. We resolved the canonical tip TECs into a known migratory tip and a putative basement-membrane remodeling breach phenotype. Tip TEC signatures correlated with patient survival, and tip/breach TECs were most sensitive to vascular endothelial growth factor blockade. Only tip TECs were congruent across species/models and shared conserved markers. Integrated analysis of the scRNA-sequenced data with orthogonal multi-omics and meta-analysis data across different human tumors, validated by functional analysis, identified collagen modification as a candidate angiogenic pathway.

### Keywords
Endothelial cells; endothelial heterogeneity; cancer; single cell rna-sequencing; multi-omics; angiogenesis; anti-angiogenic therapy

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, VIB Center for Cancer Biology (CCB), VIB, Leuven, Belgium.  Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, Department of Oncology and Leuven Cancer Institute (LKI), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Carmeliet
Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, VIB Center for Cancer Biology (CCB), VIB, Leuven, Belgium.  Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, Department of Oncology and Leuven Cancer Institute (LKI), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.


