### Accession
PXD018506

### Title
Site-specific N-glycosylation Characterization of Recombinant SARS-CoV-2 Spike Proteins using High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry

### Description
The global pandemic of severe acute pneumonia syndrome (COVID-19) caused by SARS-CoV-2 urgently calls for prevention and intervention strategies. The densely glycosylated spike (S) protein highly exposed on the viral surface is a determinant for virus binding and invasion into host cells as well as elicitation of a protective host immune response. Herein, we characterized the site-specific N-glycosylation of SARS-CoV-2 S protein using stepped collision energy (SCE) mass spectrometry (MS). Following digestion with two complementary proteases to cover all potential N-glycosylation sequons and integrated N-glycoproteomics analysis, we revealed the N-glycosylation profile of SARS-CoV-2 S proteins at the levels of intact N-glycopeptides and glycosites, along with the glycan composition and site-specific number of glycans. All 22 potential canonical N-glycosites were identified in S protein protomer. Of those, 18 N-glycosites were conserved between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 S proteins. Nearly all glycosites were preserved among the 753 SARS-CoV-2 genome sequences available in the public influenza database Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data. By comparison, insect cell-expressed SARS-CoV-2 S protein contained 38 N-glycans, which were primarily assigned to the high-mannose type N-glycans, whereas the human cell-produced protein possessed up to 140 N-glycans largely belonging to the complex type. In particular, two N-glycosites located in the structurally exposed receptor-binding domain of S protein exhibited a relatively conserved N-glycan composition in human cells. This N-glycosylation profiling and determination of differences between distinct expression systems could shed light on the infection mechanism and promote development of vaccines and targeted drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion The recombinant S proteins were proteolyzed using an in-solution protease digestion protocol. In brief, 50 μg of protein in a tube was denatured for 10 min at 95 °C. After reduction by DTT (20 mM) for 45 min at 56 °C and alkylating with IAA (50 mM) for 1 h at 25 °C in the dark, 2 μg of protease (trypsin or/and Glu-C) was added to the tube and incubated for 16 h at 37 °C. After desalting using a pipette tip packed with a C18 membrane, the peptide concentration was determined using a peptide assay kit based on the absorbance measured at 480 nm. The peptide mixtures (intact N-glycopeptides before enrichment) were freeze-dried for further analysis.  Selective enrichment of intact N-glycopeptides Intact N-glycopeptides were enriched with Zic-HILIC materials (Fresh Bioscience, Shanghai, China). Specifically, 20 μg of peptides was resuspended in 100 μL of 80% ACN/0.2% TFA solution, and 2 mg of processed Zic-HILIC was added to the peptide solution and rotated for 2 h at 37 °C. Finally, the mixture was transferred to a 200-μL pipette tip packed with the C8 membrane and washed twice with 80% ACN/0.2% TFA. After enrichment, intact N-glycopeptides were eluted three times with 70 μL of 0.1% TFA and dried using SpeedVac for further analysis.  Deglycosylation Enriched intact N-glycopeptides were digested using 1 U PNGase F dissolved in 50 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 2 h at 37 °C. The reaction was terminated by the addition of 0.1% FA. The deglycosylated peptides were dried using SpeedVac for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis The raw data files were searched against the SARS-CoV-2 S protein sequence using Byonic software (version 3.6.0, Protein Metrics, Inc.)17 with the mass tolerance for precursors and fragment ions set at ±10 ppm and ±20 ppm, respectively. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed for trypsin or/and Glu-C digestion. The fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications included oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), and deamidation (N). In addition, 38 insect N-glycans or 182 human N-glycans were specified as N-glycan modifications for intact N-glycopeptides before or after enrichment. We then checked the protein database options, including the decoy database. All other parameters were set at the default values, and protein groups were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate based on the number of hits obtained for searches against these databases. Stricter quality control methods for intact N-glycopeptides and peptide identification were implemented, requiring a score of no less than 200 and at least 6 amino acids to be identified. Furthermore, all of these peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and glycopeptide-spectrum matches (GPSMs) were examined manually and filtered using the following standard criteria: PSMs were accepted if there were at least 3 b/y ions in the peptide backbone, and GPSMs were accepted if there were at least two glycan oxonium ions and at least 3 b/y ions in the peptide backbone. N-glycosite conservation analysis was performed using R software packages. Model building based on the Cryo-EM structure (PDB: 6VSB) of SARS-CoV-2 S protein was performed using PyMOL.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2; spike protein; n-glycosylation; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
West China Hospital,Sichuan University
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
West China Hospital,Sichuan University


