### Accession
PXD038757

### Title
Transcriptome-wide Identification of Single-stranded RNA Binding Proteins

### Description
sinle-stranded RNA binding proteins were identified using DIA MS with the asist of RNA seconderay structure specific probe

### Sample Protocol
RNA binding proteins were cross-linked to RNA by 254 nm UV irradiation, the proteins were isolated with poly(A)-RNA by oligo(dT) magnetic beads. proteins were realeased using RNase and digested with trypsin after denaturation, disulfide bond reduction, and cysteine-SH alkylation. Peptides were desalted and suffered LC-MS/MS.LC-MS/MS raw data was acquired in a data-independent-acquisition (DIA) mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed using DIA-NN software  (V1.8).5 Briefly, UniProt database (March 17, 2021) containing 20,381 Swiss-Prot/reviewed human protein sequences were downloaded to generate human proteome database. A spectral library was predicted using deep learning algorithms in DIA-NN. And another spectral library was generated from raw DIA data employing MBR function. The protein quantitation information was acquired using these two spectral libraries.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-protein interactions are precisely regulated by RNA secondary structures in various biological processes. Large-scale identification of proteins that interact with particular RNA structure is important to the RBPome. Herein, a kethoxal assisted single-stranded RNA interactome capture (KASRIC) strategy was developed to globally identify single-stranded RNA binding proteins (ssRBPs). This approach combines RNA secondary structure probing technology with the conventional method of RNA-binding proteins profiling, realizing the transcriptome-wide identification of ssRBPs. Applying KASRIC, we identified 3180 candidate RBPs and 244 candidate ssRBPs in HeLa cells. Importantly, the 244 candidate ssRBPs contained 55 previously reported ssRBPs and 189 novel ssRBPs. Function analysis of the candidate ssRBPs exhibited enrichment in cellular processes related to RNA splicing and RNA degradation. The KASRIC strategy will facilitate the investigation of RNA-protein interactions.

### Keywords
Transcriptome-wide, Rna, Dia

### Affiliations
Wuhan university
College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University

### Submitter
瑞奇 赵

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaocheng Weng
College of Chemistry and Molecular Sciences, Wuhan University


