### Accession
PXD023261

### Title
Hepatic proteomic analysis of selenoprotein T knockout mice by TMT: Implications for the role of selenoprotein T in glucose and lipid metabolism

### Description
Selenoprotein T (SELENOT, SelT), a thioredoxin-like enzyme, exerts an essential oxidoreductase activity in the endoplasmic reticulum. However, its precise function remains unknown. To gain more understanding of SELENOT function, a conventional SELENOT knockout (KO) mouse model was constructed for the first time by CRISPR/Cas9 technique. TMT proteomics analysis was conducted to explore the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the liver, revealing 60 up-regulated and 94 down-regulated DEPs in KO mice. The results of proteomics were validated by western blot of 3 selected DEPs (Gys2, DIO1, Gsta2). Furthermore, the bioinformatics analysis showed that SELENOT KO-induced DEPs were mainly related to lipid metabolism, cancer and PPAR signaling pathway. Overall, these findings provide a holistic perspective into SELENOT KO-induced DEPs in the liver and novel insights into the role of SELENOT in glucose and lipid metabolism, and thus enhance our understanding of SELENOT function.

### Sample Protocol
SDT (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT, pH7.6) buffer was used for sample lysis and protein extraction. Then, proteins were digested with trypsin according to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. Next, TMTsixplex reagent was employed to label the peptide mixture (100 μg) of each sample according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific). Labeled peptides were fractionated by High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to EASY nLC 1000 UPLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60/90 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data for each sample were RAW files, and the softwares Mascot 2.2 and Proteome Discoverer 1.4 were employed for library identification and quantitative analysis. Relevant parameters and explanations are as follows: Enzyme was set as Trypsin; Max Missed Cleavages were 2; Peptide Mass Tolerance was ± 20 ppm; Fragment Mass Tolerance was 0.1 Da; Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT 6plex (N-term and K), and variable modifications were methionine oxidation and TMT 6plex (Y); Database was Swissprot_mouse_17042_20200217.fasta; Database pattern for calculating FDR (false discovery rate) was Decoy; Peptide and protein FDR was ≤0.01. As for protein quantification, the protein ratios were calculated as the median of only unique peptides of the protein. As for experimental bias, all peptide ratios were normalized by the median protein ratio. Firstly, the quantitative information of the target protein set was normalized to the interval (-1,1). Next, the Complexheatmap R package (R Version 3.4) was used to categorize the sample and protein expression in two dimensions (Euclidean distance algorithm and Average linkage clustering algorithm), and the hierarchical clustering heatmap was generated.

### Publication Abstract
Selenoprotein T (SELENOT, SelT), a thioredoxin-like enzyme, exerts an essential oxidoreductase activity in the endoplasmic reticulum. However, its precise function remains unknown. To gain more understanding of SELENOT function, a conventional global <i>Selenot</i> knockout (KO) mouse model was constructed for the first time using the CRISPR/Cas9 technique. Deletion of SELENOT caused male sterility, reduced size/body weight, lower fed and/or fasting blood glucose levels and lower fasting serum insulin levels, and improved blood lipid profile. Tandem mass tag (TMT) proteomics analysis was conducted to explore the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the liver of male mice, revealing 60 up-regulated and 94 down-regulated DEPs in KO mice. The proteomic results were validated by western blot of three selected DEPs. The elevated expression of Glycogen [starch] synthase, liver (Gys2) is consistent with the hypoglycemic phenotype in KO mice. Furthermore, the bioinformatics analysis showed that <i>Selenot</i>-KO-induced DEPs were mainly related to lipid metabolism, cancer, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) signaling pathway, complement and coagulation cascades, and protein digestion and absorption. Overall, these findings provide a holistic perspective into SELENOT function and novel insights into the role of SELENOT in glucose and lipid metabolism, and thus, enhance our understanding of SELENOT function.

### Keywords
Selenoprotein t; knockout; proteomics; tmt; glucose and lipid metabolism

### Affiliations
Hubei Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic Chemistry & Materia Medica, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Ke Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Zhou
Hubei Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic Chemistry & Materia Medica, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China


