### Accession
PXD016399

### Title
Aubergine protein interactors in 0-2 hour-Drosophila embryos

### Description
To identify Aub function in mRNA regulation in the Drosophila embryo, we have performed mass spectrometry analysis of Aub interactors, following immunoprecipitation of GFP-Aub in 0-2 hour-embryos. Immunoprecipitation of GFP alone was used as negative control. Because Aub accumulates at high levels in the germ plasm, GFP-Aub immunoprecipitation was also performed in oskar mutant embryos that do not assemble the germ plasm. Proteins coprecipitating with GFP-Aub were similar in wild-type and oskar mutant embryos. Translation factors were enriched among proteins coprecipitating with Aub.

### Sample Protocol
0.5 g of 0-2 hour-dechorionated embryos were crushed in DXB buffer (25mM Hepes, 250mM Sucrose, 1mM MgCl2, 1mM DTT, 150mM NaCl, Protease inhibitor) with 0.1% Triton X-100 and RNasin and incubated on ice for 20 minutes. Lysates were centrifuged for 10 minutes and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Lysates were incubated on equilibrated GFP-trap beads (Chromotek), overnight at 4°C, on a wheel. Beads were washed seven times in DXB buffer complemented with 1% Triton X-100 and RNasin. Beads were suspended in NuPAGE Blue 2X and incubated for 10 minutes at 95°C. Total protein elution were loaded on 10% SDS-PAGE gels (Mini-Protean TGX Precast gels, Bio-Rad). For each sample, one band was cut after stacking migration. Gel pieces were destained with three washes in 50% ACN and 50 mM TEAB. After protein reduction (10 mM DTT in 50 mM TEABC at 60°C 30 min) and alkylation (55 mM IAA in TEABC at room temperature in the dark for 30 min), proteins were in-gel digested with Trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) overnight. Digested products were dehydrated in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were analyzed with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS date was performed unsing MaxQuant software package (v1.5.5.1) with default parameters. Tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were searched by the Andromeda search engine with label-free quantification (LFQ). The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Individual LFQ values per detected peptides were first quantile normalized given the experimental condition by using the ProStar (prostar-proteomics.org) software with the default parameter set. After normalisation an imputation step was applied in cases where only one value was missing in each condition group by replacing the missing data by the mean of the observed value for this peptide in their respective experimental condition.  Then, each individual experiment was combined into one data matrix. To account for batch effects, combat from the R package sva was used. After quality controls, differential expression analysis was done using Reproducibility-Optimized Test Statistic (ROTS) for each different comparison. P-values and FDR were extracted and plotted using self-written R scripts. Significant proteins were annotated using the FlyMine database.

### Publication Abstract
Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) and PIWI proteins are essential in germ cells to repress transposons and regulate mRNAs. In Drosophila, piRNAs bound to the PIWI protein Aubergine (Aub) are transferred maternally to the embryo and regulate maternal mRNA stability through two opposite roles. They target mRNAs by incomplete base pairing, leading to their destabilization in the soma and stabilization in the germ plasm. Here, we report a function of Aub in translation. Aub is required for translational activation of nanos mRNA, a key determinant of the germ plasm. Aub physically interacts with the poly(A)-binding protein (PABP) and the translation initiation factor eIF3. Polysome gradient profiling reveals the role of Aub at the initiation step of translation. In the germ plasm, PABP and eIF3d assemble in foci that surround Aub-containing germ granules, and Aub acts with eIF3d to promote nanos translation. These results identify translational activation as a new mode of mRNA regulation by Aub, highlighting the versatility of PIWI proteins in mRNA regulation.

### Keywords
Aub; piwi protein; translation; drosophila; embryos

### Affiliations
FPP CNRS
mRNA Regulation and Development, Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS-Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France

### Submitter
Oana Vigy

### Lab Head
Dr Martine Simonelig
mRNA Regulation and Development, Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS-Univ Montpellier, Montpellier, France


