### Accession
PXD001861

### Title
platelet hyperreactivity project

### Description
The aim of this study is to identify candidate genes modulating platelet reactivity in aspirin-treated cardiovascular patients using an integrative network-based approach. Platelet reactivity was assessed in 110 cardiovascular patients treated with aspirin 100mg/d by aggregometry using several agonists. Patients with extreme high or low PR were selected for further analysis. Data derived from quantitative proteomic of platelets and platelet sub-cellular fractions, as well as from transcriptomic analysis were integrated with a network biology approach.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics isobaric quantification by Tandem-Mass-Tag was performed on cardiovascular patients wih an extreme high or low platelet reactivity (PR) using 3 proteomic preparations: whole platelet, platelet releasate and platelet granule-enriched fractions. This latter preparation was performed in 10 out of the 12 patients (1 patients missing in each group for technical reason). Platelets were isolated from venous blood by sequential centrifugation procedures. Releasate samples were prepared based on a previous report and using thrombin as the platelet agonist. Briefly, washed platelets were resuspended in tyrode’s and stimulated with 1 unit/ml of thrombin. Platelet aggregation was monitored on a light transmission aggregometer. Platelet aggregates were then removed by centrifugation at 1000g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was ultracentrifugated to remove microparticles. Platelets granules were prepared by subcellular fractionation based on sucrose gradient in order to obtain fractions enriched in secretory granules. Fractions of interest were precipitated to get rid of sucrose. Finally, samples were stored at -80°C until tandem-mass-tag derivatization, separation by Off-gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry analysis. Each sample was analyzed 3 times (3 technical replicates), except secretory granules which were analyzed twice due to sample limitation.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated from raw data using the embedded software from the instrument vendor (extract_MSN.exe). After peak list generation, the CID and HCD spectra were merged for simultaneous identification and quantification (http://www.expasy.org/tools/HCD_CID_merger.html). The monoisotopic masses of the selected precursor ions were corrected using an in-house written Perl script. The corrected mgf files, combined from the analyzed off-gel fractions, were searched against UniProt database (2011_02 of 08-Feb-2011) using EasyProt. Homo Sapiens taxonomy was specified for database searching. The parent ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Variable amino acid modifications were oxidized methionine. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with two potential missed cleavages, and the normal cleavage mode was used. Only one search round was used with selection of “turbo” scoring. The peptide p value was 1 E-2 for LTQ-OT data. False-positive ratios were estimated using a reverse decoy database. All datasets where searched once in the forward and once in the reverse database. Separate searches were used to keep the database size constant. Protein and peptide score were then set up to maintain the false positive peptide ratio below 1%. Briefly, intensities of reporter tags of the peptides were corrected in term of isotopic distribution of each tag and normalized according to the total signal of each tag to correct any difference in the amount of each tagged sample. Finally, relative intensity of each reporter was calculated by dividing it by each peptide tags sum. Indeed, the different peptides of a single protein show variable intensities depending on the physic-chemical properties. This normalization allows thus making comparable all the peptides of a given protein each other. Peptides matching more than one protein were removed prior to the quantitative analysis

### Publication Abstract
Platelet reactivity (PR) is variable between individuals and modulates clinical outcome in cardiovascular (CV) patients treated with antiplatelet drugs. Although several data point to a genetic control of platelet reactivity, the genes contributing to the modulation of this phenotype are not clearly identified. Integration of data derived from high-throughput technologies may yield novel insights into the molecular mechanisms that govern platelet reactivity. The aim of this study is to identify candidate genes modulating platelet reactivity in aspirin-treated CV patients using an integrative network-based approach. Patients with extreme high (n = 6) or low PR (n = 6) were selected and data derived from quantitative proteomic of platelets and platelet sub-cellular fractions, as well as from transcriptomic analysis were integrated with a network biology approach. Two modules within the network containing 123 and 182 genes were identified. We then specifically assessed the level of miRNAs in these two groups of patients. Among the 12 miRNAs differentially expressed, 2 (miR-135a-5p and miR-204-5p) correlated with PR. The predicted targets of these miRNAs were mapped onto the network, allowing the identification of seven overlapping genes (THBS1, CDC42, CORO1C, SPTBN1, TPM3, GTPBP2, and MAPRE2), suggesting a synergistic effect of these two miRNAs on these predicted targets. Integration of several omics data sets allowed the identification of 2 candidate miRNAs and 7 candidate genes regulating platelet reactivity in aspirin-treated CV patients.

### Keywords
Network biology, Aspirin, High platelet reactivity, Cardiovascular patients, Secretory granules, Platelets, Releasate

### Affiliations
Angiology and Heamostasis
Pierre Fontana, MD, PhD Division of Angiology and Heamostasis University Hospitals of Geneva Rue Gabrielle-Perret-Gentil 4 1205 Geneva Switzerland +41 22 372 97 49

### Submitter
Pierre Fontana

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Fontana
Pierre Fontana, MD, PhD Division of Angiology and Heamostasis University Hospitals of Geneva Rue Gabrielle-Perret-Gentil 4 1205 Geneva Switzerland +41 22 372 97 49


