### Accession
PXD033044

### Title
Spatiotemporal proximity labeling tools to track GlcNAc-modified functional protein hubs during cellular signaling

### Description
A fundamental mechanism that all eukaryotic cells use to adapt to their environment is dynamic protein modification with monosaccharide sugars. In humans, O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is rapidly added and removed on diverse protein sites as a response to fluctuating nutrient levels, stressors, and signaling cues. Two aspects elude methods to track O-GlcNAc response functions with chemical strategies: spatial control over subcellular locations and time control during labeling reactions. The objective of this study was to create intracellular proximity labeling tools to identify functional changes of O-GlcNAc patterns with spatiotemporal control. We developed a labeling strategy based on TurboID system for rapid protein biotin conjugation that was directed to O-GlcNAc protein modifications inside cells, a set of tools we call “GlycoID.” Localized variants to the nucleus and cytosol, nuc-GlycoID and cyt-GlycoID, label O-GlcNAc proteins and their interactomes in subcellular space. Labeling during insulin as well as serum stimulation revealed functional changes in O-GlcNAc proteins in as soon as 30 minutes of signaling. We demonstrate that the GlycoID strategy can capture O-GlcNAcylated “activity hubs” consisting of O-GlcNAc proteins and their associated protein-protein interactions. The ability to follow changes in O-GlcNAc hubs during physiological events like insulin stimulation poises these tools to be used for determining mechanisms of glycobiological cell regulation. Our datasets in HeLa cells will be a useful functional resource for O-GlcNAc-associated physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Mammalian cells were transfected with proximity labeling tools for 48 h using transient lipofectamine-based transfection. At this time, cells were equilibrated into labeling conditions, generally in growth media with or without serum. At 72 h post-transfection, biotin was added as species in the methods paper to induce labeling. At this time, insulin or serum were added to stimulate cells during labeling. Once labeling was complete, lysates were incubated with streptavidin-coated magnetic beads to enrich biotinylated proteins. On-bead reduction, alkylation, and digestion with Lys-C and trypsin afforded peptides, which were concentrated and quantified prior to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS .raw files were mapped to the human proteome in MaxQuant using fixed modifications for cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications for methionine oxidation, serine or threonine HexNAc, and phosphorylation. All standard filters were applied. The data was further processed for the analysis presented in the manuscript using Perseus version 1.6.2.1.

### Publication Abstract
A fundamental mechanism that all eukaryotic cells use to adapt to their environment is dynamic protein modification with monosaccharide sugars. In humans, O-linked <i>N</i>-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) is rapidly added to and removed from diverse protein sites as a response to fluctuating nutrient levels, stressors, and signaling cues. Two aspects remain challenging for tracking functional O-GlcNAc events with chemical strategies: spatial control over subcellular locations and time control during labeling. The objective of this study was to create intracellular proximity labeling tools to identify functional changes in O-GlcNAc patterns with spatiotemporal control. We developed a labeling strategy based on the TurboID proximity labeling system for rapid protein biotin conjugation directed to O-GlcNAc protein modifications inside cells, a set of tools called "GlycoID." Localized variants to the nucleus and cytosol, nuc-GlycoID and cyt-GlycoID, labeled O-GlcNAc proteins and their interactomes in subcellular space. Labeling during insulin and serum stimulation revealed functional changes in O-GlcNAc proteins as soon as 30 min following signal initiation. We demonstrated using proteomic analysis that the GlycoID strategy captured O-GlcNAcylated "activity hubs" consisting of O-GlcNAc proteins and their associated protein-protein interactions. The ability to follow changes in O-GlcNAc hubs during physiological events such as insulin signaling allows these tools to determine the mechanisms of glycobiological cell regulation. Our functional O-GlcNAc data sets in human cells will be a valuable resource for O-GlcNAc-driven mechanisms.

### Keywords
Nucleocytoplasmic, O-glcnac, Glycosylation, Insulin signaling, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Wayne State University Chemistry
Chemistry Department, Wayne State University, US

### Submitter
Charlie Fehl

### Lab Head
Dr Charlie Fehl
Chemistry Department, Wayne State University, US


