### Accession
PXD016100

### Title
proteome analysis of molecular mechanism in response to salt stress during seed germination in hulless barley

### Description
Seeds germination is seriously sensitive to salt stress. The mechanism in response to salt stress during seed germination is still little known. In this study, two genotypes of hulless barley lk621 and lk53 were selected to investigate the molecular mechanism of seeds salinity response during germination stage through RNA-seq and iTRAQ technologies

### Sample Protocol
Samples for protein extraction were prepared as for RNA-seq. Each sample of 1 g seeds was milled to a power in a mortar with liquid nitrogen. The powder was mixed with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 8 M Urea and 0.2% SDS).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed against the Hordeum_vulgare_Customer. Fasta database containing 81279 sequences (http://webblast.ipk-gatersleben.de/barley_ibsc/).

### Publication Abstract
Hulless barley (<i>Hordeum vulgare</i> L. var. <i>nudum</i>) is one of the most important crops in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. Soil salinity seriously affects its cultivation. To investigate the mechanism of salt stress response during seed germination, two contrasting hulless barley genotypes were selected to first investigate the molecular mechanism of seed salinity response during the germination stage using RNA-sequencing and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation technologies. Compared to the salt-sensitive landrace lk621, the salt-tolerant one lk573 germinated normally under salt stress. The changes in hormone contents also differed between lk621 and lk573. In lk573, 1597 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and 171 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were specifically detected at 4 h after salt stress, and correspondingly, 2748 and 328 specifically detected at 16 h. Most specific DEGs in lk573 were involved in response to oxidative stress, biosynthetic process, protein localization, and vesicle-mediated transport, and most specific DEPs were assigned to an oxidation-reduction process, carbohydrate metabolic process, and protein phosphorylation. There were 96 genes specifically differentially expressed at both transcriptomic and proteomic levels in lk573. These results revealed the molecular mechanism of salt tolerance and provided candidate genes for further study and salt-tolerant improvement in hulless barley.

### Keywords
Barley itraq lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
College of Forestry, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, China

### Submitter
Yong Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Lai
College of Forestry, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, China


