### Accession
PXD041005

### Title
Proteomic-based computational stratification of intermediate-risk prostate cancer patients.

### Description
Gleason grading is an important prognostic indicator for prostate adenocarcinoma and is crucial for patient treatment decisions. However, intermediate-risk patients diagnosed in Gleason Grade Groups (GG) 2 and GG3 can harbour either aggressive or non-aggressive disease, resulting in under- or over-treatment of a significant number of patients. Here, we performed proteomic, differential expression, machine learning, and survival analyses for 1,348 matched tumour and benign samples from 278 patients. Three proteins (F5, TMEM126B and EARS2) were identified as candidate biomarkers in patients with biochemical recurrence. Multivariate Cox regression yielded 18 proteins, from which a risk score was constructed to dichotomise prostate cancer patients into low- and high-risk groups. This 18-protein signature is prognostic for the risk of biochemical recurrence and completely independent of the intermediate GG. Our results suggest that markers generated by computational proteomic profiling have the potential for clinical applications including integration into prostate cancer management.

### Sample Protocol
An Eksigent nanoLC 425 HPLC operating in microflow mode, coupled online to a 6600 Triple TOF (SCIEX) was used for the analyses. The peptide digests (2 µg) were injected onto a C18 trap column (SGE TRAPCOL C18 G 300 µm x 100 mm) and desalted for 5 min at 8 µL/min with solvent A (0.1% [v/v] formic acid). For SWATH acquisition peptide spectra were analysed using the Triple TOF 6600 system (SCIEX) equipped with a DuoSpray source and 50 µm internal diameter electrode and controlled by Analyst 1.7.1 software.  For further details, please see the methods in manuscript.

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS data in wiff file format were collected for 1,475 runs and were processed using DIA-NN (version 1.8). DIA-NN was implemented using RT-dependent normalization. Data were then filtered to retain only precursors from proteotypic peptides with Global.Q.Value ≤ 0.01. Proteins were then quantified using maxLFQ, with default parameters and implemented using the DIA-NN R Package (https://github.com/vdemichev/diann-rpackage). For further details, please see the methods in manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Survival analysis, Data analysis, Gleason grading, Mass spectrometry, Swath-ms, Prostate adenocarcinoma

### Affiliations
ProCan, Children's Medical Research Institute, University of Sydney
ProCan, Children's Medical Research Institute, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia

### Submitter
Zainab Noor

### Lab Head
Dr Qing Zhong
ProCan, Children's Medical Research Institute, University of Sydney


