### Accession
PXD043906

### Title
Proteomic profiling of centrosomes across multiple cell and tissue types by a new affinity capture method

### Description
Centrosomes are the major microtubule-organising centers in animals and play fundamental roles in many cellular processes. Understanding how their composition varies across diverse cell types and how it is altered in disease aremajor unresolved questions, yet currently available centrosome isolation protocols are cumbersome, time-consuming and lack scalability. Here, we report the development of centrosome affinity capture (CAPture)-mass spectrometry (MS), a powerful one-step method to obtain high-resolution centrosome proteomes from untransformed and primary cell lines. Utilising a synthetic peptide derived from CCDC61 protein, CAPture specifically isolates intact centrosomes. Importantly, as a bead-based affinity method, it enables rapid sample processing and multiplexing unlike conventional approaches. Our study demonstrates the power of CAPture-MS to elucidate cell typedependent heterogeneity in centrosome composition, dissect hierarchical interactions and identify novel components. Overall, CAPture-MS represents a transformative tool to unveil temporal, regulatory, cell type- and tissue-specific changes in centrosome proteomes in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
For RPE1 samples, LC-MS/MS analyses of peptide mixtures were done using Vanquish Neo UHPLC system connected to Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were  online concentrated and desalted using a trapping column (300 μm × 5 mm, μPrecolumn, 5μm particles, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at room temperature. After washing of trapping column with 0.1 % formic acid (FA), the peptides were eluted flow rate – 0.25 nl/min) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (EASY spray column, Acclaim Pepmap100 C18, 2µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 45 ºC by a 120 min linear  gradient program (2-40 % of mobile phase B; mobile phase A: 0.1 % FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1 % FA in 80 % ACN). Equilibration of the trapping column and the analytical column was done prior to sample injection to the sample  loop. The analytical column with the emitter was directly connected to the ion source. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy. The survey scan range was set to m/z 350-2000 with the resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200)  with a target value of 3×106 ions and maximum injection time of 50 ms. HCD MS/MS (30% normalized fragmentation energy) spectra were acquired for maximum injection time of 54 ms and resolution of 30 000 (at m/z 200). Dynamic  exclusion was enabled for 60 s. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
HCD tandem mass spectra were processed with SequestHT on Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software. The node for SequestHT included the following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20ppm, Maximum Missed Cleavages sites 2, Fragment  Mass Tolerance 0.02Da and Dynamic Modifications were Oxidation of M (+15.995 Da) and Deamidation of N, Q (+0.984 Da). The Minora Feature Detector nodewas used for label-free quantification and the consensus workflow included  the Feature Mapper and the Precursor Ion Quantifier nodes using intensity for the precursor quantification. For peptide confidence, 1% FDR was applied and peptides uniquely matched to a protein were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome, Appendages, Centriole, Centrosome

### Affiliations
Univeristy of Leeds
Mass Spectrometry Research Facility Manager

### Submitter
Ranjani Ganji

### Lab Head
Dr James Ault
Mass Spectrometry Research Facility Manager


