### Accession
PXD008873

### Title
Molecular subtypes of malignant peritoneal mesothelioma

### Description
Malignant Peritoneal Mesothelioma (PeM) is a rare but frequently fatal cancer that originates from the peritoneal lining of the abdomen. Standard treatment of PeM is limited to cytoreductive surgery and/or chemotherapy, and no targeted therapies for PeM yet exist. This study performs comprehensive integrative analysis of genome, transcriptome, and proteome of treatment-naïve PeM tumors with the aim of identifying mesothelioma-related molecular alterations and potentially identifying novel treatment strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh frozen samples from tumor and adjacent normal were lysed in 50mM of HEPES pH 8.5, 1% SDS, and the chromatin content was degraded with benzonase. The tumor lysates were sonicated (Bioruptor Pico, Diagenode, New Jersey, USA), and disulfide bonds were reduced with DTT and capped with iodoacetamide. Proteins were cleaned up using SP3 method (PMID: 25358341), and digested overnight with trypsin in HEPES pH 8. A pooled internal standard control was generated comprising of equal volumes of every sample (10𝜇l of each of the 100𝜇l total digests) split into 3 equal aliquots. The reactions were run on three TMT 10-plex panels, and then desalted and fractionated into 48 fractions by reverse phase HPLC. The 48 fractions were concatenated into 12 and injected onto the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with reverse phase nanoLC system.

### Data Protocol
Qualitative and quantitative proteomics analysis were done using ProteomeDiscoverer 2.1.1.21 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  For MS signals, the precursor selection was set to 350-5000 Da. Sequest HT 1.3 was used for peptide-spectra-match (PSMs), and its parameters were specified as trypsin enzyme, two missed cleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. In addition to using Carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, we also allowed up to 4 variable modifications per peptide: Acetylation at protein terminus, Oxidation, and TMT label of 229 Da at N-terminal arginine/lysine residues and the side chains of lysine residues.  Peptide identification results were filtered using q-value cut off of 0.05 determined by Percolator, and identified peptides from both high and medium-confidence level after FDR-calibrations were included to provide protein identification and quantification results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Tmt 10-plex isobaic mass tag, Ffpe, Pem, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Vancouver Prostate Centre

### Submitter
Raunak Shrestha

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Stephane Le Bihan
Vancouver Prostate Centre


