### Accession
PXD035954

### Title
Design and evaluation of a cyclobutane diazirine alkyne tag for photoaffinity labeling in cells

### Description
Alkyl diazirines are frequently used in photoaffinity labeling to trap and identify small molecule–protein interactions. How-ever, the alkyl diazirine can preferentially label acidic amino acids and acidic protein surfaces in a pH-dependent manner, presumably via a long-lived alkyl diazo intermediate. To alter this reactivity preference, we developed PALBOX, a novel cyclobutane diazirine photoaffinity tag with reduced pH-dependent reactivity. We show that PALBOX is readily derivatized and attached to small molecules to profile their binding interactions in cells. Systematic experiments with biological sub-strates show that the cyclobutane diazirine scaffold does not exhibit reactivity characteristic of unconstrained alkyl diazo in-termediates. Using a set of small molecule fragments and ligands, we show that photoaffinity probes equipped with PALBOX can label known protein targets in cells with higher specificity. Finally, we demonstrate that ligands equipped with PALBOX can accurately map small molecule–protein binding sites. Thus, PALBOX is a versatile diazirine-based pho-toaffinity tag for use in the development of chemical probes for photoaffinity labeling experiments, including the study of small molecule–protein interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry procedures. The desalted samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid/water (20 μL). The sample (10.0 μL) was loaded onto a C18 trap column (3 cm, 3 µm particle size C10 Dr. Maisch 150 µm I.D) and then separated on an analytical column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 µm particle size, 250 mm length, 75 µm internal diameter) at 150 nL/min with a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 system connected in line to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid. The column temperature was maintained at 50 ˚C. The tryptic peptides were separated via a step-wise gradient from 5% to 98% of 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile over 120 min (0–1 min, 0–5%; 1–91 min, 5–27%; 91–115 min, 27–98%; 115–120 min, 98%–0%).  The CULT cleavage peptides were separated a water/acetonitrile gradient (buffer A = 0.1% formic acid/water, buffer B = 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile; flow rate 200 nL/min; gradient: hold at 2% B for 5 min, increase to 6% B over 1 min, increase to 35% B over 29 min, increase to 95% B over 5 min, hold at 95% B for 20 min). Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed at 120K FWHM resolution (m/z = 200).  Tandem MS was performed on the most abundant precursors exhibiting a charge state from 2 to 6 at a resolving power settings of 50K. HCD fragmentation was applied with 35% collision energy and resulting fragments accumulated for up to 100 ms. Structural proteomics mass spectrometry procedures. The sample was loaded onto a microcapillary trapping column (C18 Reprosil resin, Dr. Maisch, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 30 mm length, 100 μm internal diameter) and then separated on an analytical column (50 cm μPACTM column, PharmaFluidics) at 200 nL/min. The column temperature was maintained at 40̊C. Peptides were eluted with a water/acetonitrile gradient (buffer A = 0.1% formic acid/water, buffer B = 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile; flow rate 200 nL/min; gradient: hold at 2% B for 5 min, increase to 6% B over 1 min, increase to 35% B over 29 min, increase to 95% B over 5 min, hold at 95% B for 20 min). Electrospray ionization was enabled through applying a voltage of 1.8 kV using a home- made electrode junction at the end of the microcapillary column and sprayed from stainless- steel needle (PepSep, Denmark). The Lumos Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent mode and survey scans of peptide precursors were performed at 120K FWHM resolution over a m/z range of 400-1800, an AGC setting of 1,000,000, and the maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms. Tandem MS was performed on the 10 most abundant precursors with an AGC setting of 10,000 and fragmentation energy of 35% for CID, at 15K FWHM resolution, an AGC setting of 10,000 and fragmentation energy of 37% for HCD. An isolation window of 3 m/z used to ensure capture of isotopically coded species. With a mass tolerance of 10 ppm, selected precursors were excluded from further fragmentation for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Quantitative analysis of photolabeled HEK293T proteome. Analysis was performed in Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer version 2.3. HCD spectra with a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 1.5 were searched against a database containing the Uniprot 2016 annotated human proteome (Swissprot) and contaminant proteins using Sequest HT with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions with specific trypsin digestion, 2 missed cleavages, variable oxidation on methionine residues (+15.995 Da), static carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da), and static TMT labeling at lysine residues and N-termini. Assignments were validated using Percolator. The resulting peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to include only high confidence matches, and TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier. The PSM data were further processed according to the methods of Huber and coworkers.13 PSMs were filtered based on if a PSM is in only one protein group with an Isolation Interference under 70%. Empty abundances were filled in with minimum noise level computed by taking the minimum for each channel in Control and minimum for each channel in Treatment. 2000 centroids were generated at random from the absolute max in Control and Treatment and the absolute min in Control and Treatment, and a minimum noise level was generated using a K-means clustering method. If one abundance was missing, then the instance was filled with the geometric mean of the PSM for Control or Treatment. If all abundances were missing for Control and Treatment or the variance between existing abundances was above 30%, the PSM was removed. Any empty abundance missing completely at random, missing not at random, or missing at random any valid instances were filled with the appropriate method described above. P-values for enrichment ratios were calculated using the t-test (background) method. The code used for data analysis is available on GitHub:  https://github.com/harvardinformatics/quantproteomics/tree/master/PEA Structural proteomics data analysis procedures. The raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15. Assignment of MS/MS spectra was performed using the Sequest HT algorithm by searching the data against a protein sequence database of CULT and common contaminant proteins. Search parameters included: mass tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor, 0.02 Da for HCD fragment ions, 0.6 Da for CID fragment ions, semi-specific digestion, 2 missed cleavages, static modification of carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (+57.0214 Da), a dynamic oxidation on methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), a dynamic deamidation on asparagine and glutamine residues (+0.9847 Da) and a dynamic modification of the compounds on any amino acid residues (LenBox: +600.2445 Da). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were validated with the Target Decoy PSM Validator. Spectra assigned as LenBox-conjugated peptides were manually validated by evaluating the isotopic coding embedded in the MS1 precursor.

### Publication Abstract
Alkyl diazirines are frequently used in photoaffinity labeling to map small molecule-protein interactions in target identification studies. However, the alkyl diazirines can preferentially label acidic amino acids and acidic protein surfaces in a pH-dependent manner, presumably via a reactive alkyl diazo intermediate. Here, we explore the use of ring strain to alter these reactivity preferences and report the development of a cyclobutane diazirine photoaffinity tag with reduced pH-dependent reactivity, termed PALBOX. We show that PALBOX possesses differential reactivity profiles as compared to other diazirine tags in vitro and is readily incorporated into small molecules to profile their binding interactions in cells. Using a set of small molecule fragments and ligands, we show that photoaffinity probes equipped with PALBOX can label the known protein targets in cells with reduced labeling of known alkyl diazirine off-targets. Finally, we demonstrate that ligands equipped with PALBOX can accurately map small molecule-protein binding sites. Thus, PALBOX is a versatile diazirine-based photoaffinity tag for use in the development of chemical probes for photoaffinity labeling experiments, including the study of small molecule-protein interactions.

### Keywords
Binding site mapping, Photoaffinity labeling, Cereblon, Diazirine, Thalidomide

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge MA, 02138
Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina M. Woo
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge MA, 02138


