### Accession
PXD038505

### Title
Epilepsy-linked kinase CDKL5 phosphorylates voltage-gated calcium channel Cav2.3, altering inactivation kinetics and neuronal excitability

### Description
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) are a group of rare childhood disorders characterized by severe epilepsy and cognitive deficits. Numerous DEE genes have been discovered thanks to advances in genomic diagnosis, yet putative molecular links between these disorders are unknown. CDKL5 deficiency disorder (CDD, DEE2), one of the most common genetic epilepsies, is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the brain-enriched kinase CDKL5. To elucidate CDKL5 function, we looked for CDKL5 substrates using a SILAC-based phosphoproteomic screen. We identified the voltage-gated Ca2+ channel Cav2.3 (encoded by CACNA1E) as a novel physiological target of CDKL5 in mice and humans. Recombinant channel electrophysiology and interdisciplinary characterization of Cav2.3 phosphomutant mice revealed that loss of Cav2.3 phosphorylation leads to channel gain-of-function via slower inactivation and enhanced cholinergic stimulation, resulting in increased neuronal excitability. Our results thus show that CDD is partly a channelopathy. The properties of unphosphorylated Cav2.3 closely resemble those described for CACNA1E gain-of-function mutations causing DEE69, a disorder sharing clinical features with CDD. We show that these two single-gene diseases are mechanistically related and could be ameliorated with Cav2.3 inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse cortical neurons were cultured from individual male E16.5 embryos from a heterozygous Cdkl5 female. Cdkl5 +/Y (WT) or -/Y (KO) genotype of embryos was determined afterwards. Neurons were plated at a density of 8x10^6 cells per 10 cm dish coated with 60 μg/ml poly-D-lysine (Sigma) and 2.5 μg/ml laminin (Sigma). Based on methods to achieve accurate SILAC ratios in non-dialyzed serum 101, 102, cells were grown in neurobasal media free of L-Arginine and L-Lysine (Invitrogen) supplemented with either L-Lysine-8 (U-13C6, U-15N2) and L-Arginine-10 (U-13C6, U-15N4) or L-Lysine-4 (4, 4, 5, 5-D4) and L-Arginine-6 (U-13C6)(Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). L-Proline (200mg/ml) was supplemented to prevent Arginine to Proline conversion. Each sample was checked for adequate SILAC label incorporation (>90%) and minimal Arginine to Proline conversion (<10%). At DIV4, 1 μM Ara-C was supplemented to inhibit glia growth. For every embryo, one dish of cortical neurons was labeled with K8R10 (heavy) and one dish was labeled with K4R6 (light) amino acids to provide technical replicates. At DIV12, SILAC labeled primary neurons from 3 Cdkl5 WT and 3 Cdkl5 KO animals were lysed in lysis buffer containing 20 mM Tris pH7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.25% IGEPAL NP40, 0.5 mM DTT, 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 1 uM Okadaic Acid. 
Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry as previously described in 103. In brief, protein lysates were mixed in a 1:1 ratio to obtain 3x heavy WT/light KO and 3x heavy KO/light WT samples containing 1 mg total protein. Mixed samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide and quenched with 7.5 M DTT prior to o/n digestion trypsin at 37C. Peptides were desalted using 50 mg Sep-Pak C18 Cartridges (Waters) and vacuum dried completely before further digestion at 37C using Lys-C for 2 hrs, followed by o/n trypsin digestion. Peptides were desalted and dried again. Mixing and digestion checks were performed after each digestion step. Samples were enriched for phosphopeptides according to an in-house protocol using 5 mg of Titansphere titanium dioxide beads (GL Sciences) incubated for 10 min with peptides resuspended in loading buffer (80% acetonitrile, 5% trifluoroacetic acid, 1M glycolic acid). TiO2 beads were subsequently washed with loading buffer, wash buffer 1 (80% ACN 1% TFA) and wash buffer 2 (10% acetonitrile, 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid), and peptides were finally eluted using 1% ammonium hydroxide and 5% ammonium hydroxide subsequently. Combined phosphopeptide eluates were vacuum dried completely and desalted using C18 Stage Tips and vacuum dried completely. Samples were stored at -80C until required for analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed by online nanoflow LC-MS/MS using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Scientific). Resolubilised sample (10 μL per injection in 1% aqueous trifluoroacetic acid, TFA) was loaded via autosampler into a 20 μL sample loop and pre-concentrated onto a cartridge trap column 300 μm I.D. x 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100Å using the loading buffer, 2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.05% v/v trifluoroacetic acid, 97.95% water (Optima grade, Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 20 μL/min for 2 min in the column oven held at 40 °C.  Peptides were backflushed and gradient eluted onto a PepMap RSLC C18 75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, 100Å pore size, reversed phase EASY-Spray analytical column (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min and with the column temperature held at 40 °C, and a spray voltage of 2 kV using the EASY-Spray Source (Thermo Scientific). Gradient elution buffers were A 0.1% v/v Formic Acid, 5% v/v DMSO, 94.9% v/v water and B 0.1% v/v Formic Acid, 5% v/v DMSO, 20% v/v water, 74.9% v/v acetonitrile (all Optima grade, Fisher Scientific aside from DMSO, Honeywell Research Chemicals).  The gradient elution profile was 2% B to 30% B over 143 minutes, then 30% B to 50% B over a further 20 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition mode with the top 10 most abundant peptides selected for MS/MS by either collision-induced dissociation, multi-stage activation or higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation techniques.  The three instrument methods used a capillary temperature of 275 °C, an MS1 Orbitrap scan resolution of 60,000 FWHM at m/z 400, mass range 300-2000 m/z, S-Lens RF level 60%, FTMS Full AGC target 1e6, maximum injection time 500 ms and spectra were acquired in profile. Only precursors with charge state >2 were permitted for selection for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was enabled to exclude after n=1 times within 20 s for 20 s.  Fragmentation was subsequently performed on all selected precursor masses and the MS2 scan data was acquired in centroid mode. For the method with CID activation MS2 scans were acquired in the linear ion trap following CID fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30%, Ion Trap MSn AGC target 1e4 and maximum injection time 100 ms. For the method with CID activation and multi-stage activation enabled parameters were as for CID but with normalized collision energy of 35% and a neutral loss mass list (32.70, 49, 98).  For the method with HCD activation MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 7500 FWHM at m/z 400, following HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 45%. The parameters used for the HCD MS2 scan were fixed first mass 100 m/z, FTMS MSn AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 500 ms.
The acquired raw mass spectrometric data was processed in MaxQuant 104 (version 1.3.0.5) for peptide and protein identification, the database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine against the Mus Musculus canonical sequences downloaded from UniProtKB (August 2012, 77938 sequences). Default search settings were used including an FDR of 1% on the phosphosite, peptide and protein level and matching between runs for peptide identification. K4R6 and K8R10 were set as labels with a maximum of 3 labeled AAs. Phosphorylation at serine, threonine or tyrosine residues, oxidation (Met) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of Cys-residues was set as a fixed modification.
Data was further processed in Perseus v.1.6.15.0. Phospho (STY) sites from the six experimental samples in the MaxQuant search were loaded and site tables expanded. Potential contaminants and reversed hits were removed. Normalized H/L ratios were log2 transformed and filtered for rows containing at least three valid values. Potential CDKL5 substrates were annotated using the R-P-X-pS/pT motif. A one-sample t-test was performed comparing the normalized ratios to the null hypothesis and visualized as a volcano plot.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE 105 partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD038505.

### Publication Abstract
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) are a group of rare childhood disorders characterized by severe epilepsy and cognitive deficits. Numerous DEE genes have been discovered thanks to advances in genomic diagnosis, yet putative molecular links between these disorders are unknown. CDKL5 deficiency disorder (CDD, DEE2), one of the most common genetic epilepsies, is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the brain-enriched kinase CDKL5. To elucidate CDKL5 function, we looked for CDKL5 substrates using a SILAC-based phosphoproteomic screen. We identified the voltage-gated Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel Cav2.3 (encoded by CACNA1E) as a physiological target of CDKL5 in mice and humans. Recombinant channel electrophysiology and interdisciplinary characterization of Cav2.3 phosphomutant mice revealed that loss of Cav2.3 phosphorylation leads to channel gain-of-function via slower inactivation and enhanced cholinergic stimulation, resulting in increased neuronal excitability. Our results thus show that CDD is partly a channelopathy. The properties of unphosphorylated Cav2.3 closely resemble those described for CACNA1E gain-of-function mutations causing DEE69, a disorder sharing clinical features with CDD. We show that these two single-gene diseases are mechanistically related and could be ameliorated with Cav2.3 inhibitors.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Kinase, Epilepsy, Cdkl5

### Affiliations
VIB - KU Leuven
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Lucas Baltussen

### Lab Head
Dr Sila Ultanir
The Francis Crick Institute


