### Accession
PXD020417

### Title
Zinc finger protein ZNF384 is an adaptor of KU to DNA during classical non-homologous end-joining

### Description
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are among the most deleterious types of DNA damages as they can lead to mutations and chromosomal rearrangements, which underlie cancer development and progression. Non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) is the dominant pathway for the repair of DSBs in human cells, which involves the DNA binding proteins Ku70/Ku80. Other DNA binding proteins such as Zinc Finger (ZnF) domain-containing proteins have also been implicated in DNA repair. However, their role in NHEJ has remained elusive. Here we show that ZNF384, which is a member of the C2H2 family of ZnF proteins that binds DNA in vitro, is recruited to DSBs in vivo. ZNF384 recruitment requires the PARP/PAR-dependent expansion of damaged chromatin followed by binding of ZNF384 to the exposed DNA via its unique C2H2 motifs. Mass-spectrometry-based experiments revealed that ZNF384 interacts with the Ku70/Ku80 NHEJ complex via its N-terminus. This interaction promotes the assembly of Ku70/Ku80 at DBSs as revealed by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy. By regulating Ku70/80 dynamics, ZNF384 facilitates the assembly of several downstream NHEJ factors (e.g. APLF and XRCC4) and repair by cNHEJ at DSBs. Altogether, our data suggest that ZNF384 acts as a ‘Ku-adaptor’ that binds to DSBs and Ku70/80 to facilitate their binding and the subsequent  build-up of a functional cNHEJ repairosome at these lesions, high-lighting a role for ZNF384 in DSB repair and genome maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry U2OS Flp-In/T-Rex cells expressing GFP-NLS and GFP-ZNF384WT were treated with 0.5 mM Phleomycin for 1hr or left untreated and cell pellets were lysed in EBC-1 buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 2 mM MgCl2, protease inhibitor cocktail tablets) with 500 units benzonase. Samples were incubated for 1 hour at 4ºC under constant mixing followed by high speed centrifugation for 10 minutes at 4ºC. From the clear lysates protein concentration was measured by Qubit, equalized and transferred to tubes containing GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek). After 90 minutes of incubation at 4ºC under rotating condition, the beads were washed 4 times with EBC-2 buffer (50mM Tris pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, and protease inhibitor cocktail tablets) and 3 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by overnight digestion using 2.5 μg trypsin at 37°C under constant shaking. Digestion was terminated with 1% Trifluoroacetic acid and centrifuges for 5 minutes at high speed to precipitate insoluble fractions. Consequently, C18 cartridges were prepared by washing 2 times with Acetonitrile followed by 2 times with 0,1% Acetic acid. Peptides were loaded on the cartridge, bound peptides were washed 2 times with 0,1% Acetic acid and eluted with 1 ml 80% Acetonitrile / 0,1% Acetic acid and lyophilized.  Mass spectrometry was performed essentially as previously described (Kumar, Gonzalez-Prieto et al. 2017). Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany) coupled to an EASY-nanoLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Digested peptides were separated using a 15 cm fused silica capillary (ID: 75 μm, OD: 375 μm, Polymicro Technologies,California, US) in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerburch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using a gradient from 2% to 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl/min for 65 mins. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ion mode at 2.8 kV with the capillary heated to 250°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode with a top 7 method. Full scan MS spectra were obtained with a resolution of 70,000, a target value of 3x106 and a scan range from 400 to 2,000 m/z. Maximum Injection Time (IT) was set to 20 ms. Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded with a resolution of 35,000, a maximum IT of 120 ms, a target value of 1x105 and a normalized collision energy of 25%. The precursor ion masses selected for MS/MS analysis were subsequently dynamically excluded from MS/MS analysis for 60 sec. Precursor ions with a charge state of 1 and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS/MS events. Three replicates were included per condition with two technical repeats each.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were analysed with MaxQuant software (v1.5.3.30 According to (Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016)) with the following modifications from default settings: the maximum number of mis-cleveages by trypsin/p was set to 3, Label Free Quantification (LFQ) was enabled disabling the Fast LFQ feature. Match-between-runs feature was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens (8th JJune 2020)

### Publication Abstract
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are among the most deleterious types of DNA damage as they can lead to mutations and chromosomal rearrangements, which underlie cancer development. Classical non-homologous end-joining (cNHEJ) is the dominant pathway for DSB repair in human cells, involving the DNA-binding proteins XRCC6 (Ku70) and XRCC5 (Ku80). Other DNA-binding proteins such as Zinc Finger (ZnF) domain-containing proteins have also been implicated in DNA repair, but their role in cNHEJ remained elusive. Here we show that ZNF384, a member of the C2H2 family of ZnF proteins, binds DNA ends in vitro and is recruited to DSBs in vivo. ZNF384 recruitment requires the poly(ADP-ribosyl) polymerase 1 (PARP1)-dependent expansion of damaged chromatin, followed by binding of its C2H2 motifs to the exposed DNA. Moreover, ZNF384 interacts with Ku70/Ku80 via its N-terminus, thereby promoting Ku70/Ku80 assembly and the accrual of downstream cNHEJ factors, including APLF and XRCC4/LIG4, for efficient repair at DSBs. Altogether, our data suggest that ZNF384 acts as a 'Ku-adaptor' that binds damaged DNA and Ku70/Ku80 to facilitate the build-up of a cNHEJ repairosome, highlighting a role for ZNF384 in DSB repair and genome maintenance.

### Keywords
Non homologous end joining; double strand break repair;

### Affiliations
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center The Netherlands
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred CO Vertegaal
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center The Netherlands


