### Accession
PXD005913

### Title
Nuclear poly(A)-binding protein 1 is an ATM target and essential for DNA double-strand break rep

### Description
The DNA damage response (DDR) is an extensive signaling network that is robustly mobilized by DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). The primary transducer of the DSB response is the protein kinase, ataxia-telangiectasia, mutated (ATM). Here, we establish nuclear poly(A)-binding protein 1 (PABPN1) as a novel target of ATM and a crucial player in the DSB response. PABPN1 usually functions in regulation of RNA processing and stability. We establish that PABPN1 is recruited to the DDR as a critical regulator of DSB repair. A portion of PABPN1 relocalizes to DSB sites and is phosphorylated on Ser95 in an ATM-dependent manner. PABPN1 depletion sensitizes cells to DSBinducing agents and prolongs the DSB-induced G2/M cell-cycle arrest, and DSB repair is hampered by PABPN1 depletion or elimination of its phosphorylation site. PABPN1 is required for optimal DSB repair via both nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination repair (HRR), and specifically is essential for efficient DNAend resection, an initial, key step in HRR. Using mass spectrometry analysis, we capture DNA damage-induced interactions of phospho-PABPN1, including well-established DDR players as well as other RNA metabolizing proteins. Our results uncover a novel ATM-dependent axis in the rapidly growing interface between RNA metabolism and the DDR.

### Sample Protocol
U2-OS cells were transfected with siLuciferase or siPABPN1 (as control), treated 72 hr later with 50 ng/ml NCS for 30 min, harvested and kept at -80◦C. Cell pellets were thawed on ice, resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer (1% IGEPALCA- 630 (NP-40), 1mM MgCl2, 1x Protease inhibitors, EDTA-free, 1% Benzonase, 150 mM NaCl 50 mM, Tris-HCl (pH 7.5)) for 30 minutes at room temperature and centrifuged at 13.000xg at 4°C for 15min. Supernatants were transferred to new tubes and incubated at 4 with pPABPN1 or total PABPN1 antibodies overnight at 4°C while rotating. Protein-A sepharose beads were washed 4 times and centrifuged between each time (5000 RPM, 2 min, 4°C) and incubated with the immune complexes for 1h while rotating at 4°C. The immunoprecipitated complexes were washed 3 times with buffer I (0.05% IGEPAL-CA-630 (NP-40), 150 mM NaCl ,50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5)) followed by 3 times with buffer II (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5)). The complexes were trypsin-digested and eluted with 100 μl elution buffer I (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl -pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT and 0.4 μg sequencing grade trypsin) at room temperature for 2 h. The supernatants were transferred to new tubes and eluted with 100 μl elution buffer II (2M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl -pH 7.5 and 5 mM iodoacetamide). The proteins were digested overnight, and the digestion was terminated by 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptides were desalted, concentrated on C18 stage tips, eluted using 80% acetonitrile, vacuumconcentrated and diluted in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid). The eluted peptides were loaded onto a 50 cm long EASYspray reverse phase column coupled on line to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using a 240-min linear gradient of water and acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (52) software (version; 1.5.2.10), with an - FDR threshold of 0.01 on the peptide and protein identification. Bioinformatics and statistical analyses were performed using the Perseus program. Protein-protein interaction network for phospho and total PABPN1 were performed in Cytoscape (3.2.1).

### Publication Abstract
The DNA damage response (DDR) is an extensive signaling network that is robustly mobilized by DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). The primary transducer of the DSB response is the protein kinase, ataxia-telangiectasia, mutated (ATM). Here, we establish nuclear poly(A)-binding protein 1 (PABPN1) as a novel target of ATM and a crucial player in the DSB response. PABPN1 usually functions in regulation of RNA processing and stability. We establish that PABPN1 is recruited to the DDR as a critical regulator of DSB repair. A portion of PABPN1 relocalizes to DSB sites and is phosphorylated on Ser95 in an ATM-dependent manner. PABPN1 depletion sensitizes cells to DSB-inducing agents and prolongs the DSB-induced G2/M cell-cycle arrest, and DSB repair is hampered by PABPN1 depletion or elimination of its phosphorylation site. PABPN1 is required for optimal DSB repair via both nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination repair (HRR), and specifically is essential for efficient DNA-end resection, an initial, key step in HRR. Using mass spectrometry analysis, we capture DNA damage-induced interactions of phospho-PABPN1, including well-established DDR players as well as other RNA metabolizing proteins. Our results uncover a novel ATM-dependent axis in the rapidly growing interface between RNA metabolism and the DDR.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Pabpn1, Mass spectrometry, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University Israel
Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University Israel


