### Accession
PXD037926

### Title
Endothelial OTUD1 promotes Ang II-induced vascular remodeling by deubiquitinating SMAD3

### Description
Understanding the molecular mechanisms of pathological vascular remodeling is important for treating cardiovascular diseases and complications. Recent studies have highlighted a role of deubiquitinases in vascular pathophysiology. In this study, we investigated the role of a deubiquitinase, OTUD1, in angiotensin II (Ang II)-induced vascular remodeling. We identified upregulated OTUD1 in the vascular endothelium of Ang II-challenged mice and showed OTUD1 deletion attenuated vascular remodeling, collagen deposition, and EndMT. Conversely, OTUD1 overexpression aggravated these pathological changes both in vivo and in vitro. Mechanistically, SMAD3 was identified as a substrate of OTUD1 using co-immunoprecipitation followed with LC-MS/MS. We found OTUD1 stabilizes SMAD3 and facilitates SMAD3/SMAD4 complex formation and subsequent nuclear translocation through both K48- and K63-linked deubiquitination. OTUD1-mediated SMAD3 activation regulate the transcription of genes involved in vascular EndMT and remodeling in HUVECs. Finally, SMAD3 inhibition reversed OTUD1-promoted vascular remodeling. Our findings demonstrate endothelial OTUD1 promoted Ang II-induced vascular remodeling by deubiquitinating SMAD3. This study identified SMAD3 as a target of OTUD1 and indicates OTUD1 as a potential therapeutic target for the diseases related to vascular remodeling.

### Sample Protocol
Anti-Flag antibody was added to the lysate of HUVECs transfected with Flag-OTUD1 for co-immunoprecipitation and IgG was used as a negative control.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out by PTM Bio Co., Ltd (Zhejiang, China). We screened out the substrate proteins that may bind to OTUD1 according to the score and Flag/IgG ratio of the detected proteins in the mass spectrometry data.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the molecular mechanisms of pathological vascular remodeling is important for treating cardiovascular diseases and complications. Recent studies have highlighted a role of deubiquitinases in vascular pathophysiology. Here, we investigate the role of a deubiquitinase, OTUD1, in angiotensin II (Ang II)-induced vascular remodeling. We detect upregulated OTUD1 in the vascular endothelium of Ang II-challenged mice and show that OTUD1 deletion attenuates vascular remodeling, collagen deposition, and EndMT. Conversely, OTUD1 overexpression aggravates these pathological changes both in&#xa0;vivo and in&#xa0;vitro. Mechanistically, SMAD3 is identified as a substrate of OTUD1 using co-immunoprecipitation followed by LC-MS/MS. We find that OTUD1 stabilizes SMAD3 and facilitates SMAD3/SMAD4 complex formation and subsequent nuclear translocation through both K48- and K63-linked deubiquitination. OTUD1-mediated SMAD3 activation regulates transcription of genes involved in vascular EndMT and remodeling in HUVECs. Finally, SMAD3 inhibition reverses OTUD1-promoted vascular remodeling. Our findings demonstrate that endothelial OTUD1 promotes Ang II-induced vascular remodeling by deubiquitinating SMAD3. We identify SMAD3 as a target of OTUD1 and propose OTUD1 as a potential therapeutic target for diseases related to vascular remodeling.

### Keywords
Huvec; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Wenzhou Medical University
Department of Cardiology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325035, China

### Submitter
zhuqi huang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhuqi Huang
Department of Cardiology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325035, China


