### Accession
PXD035589

### Title
Structural surfaceomics of Nomo-1 using DSSO cross-linker with MS3 approach

### Description
The project aimed to profile the cell surface proteins of Nomo-1 (AML cell line) using structural surfaceomics for identification of protein conformation-based cancer antigens thereby expanding the toolkit for cancer target discovery for immunotherapeutic targeting. To achieve the goal, cell surface capture (CSC) was integrated with cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS). DSSO was used as a cross-linker to freeze the structural conformations of protein in three-dimensional space, followed by biotinylation of cell surface proteins to enable enrichment of cell surface proteins to allow focused XL-MS analysis of those enriched proteins. DSSO being MS cleavable cross-linker, allowed higher order MS3 approach for analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were harvested and washed thrice with PBS followed by cross-linking with DSSO. The cells were then washed again and treated with 1.6 mM sodium metaperiodate for 20 minutes at 4C for oxidation of the N-linked sugar residues. The cells were again washed twice with PBS and treated with 10 mM aniline and 1 mM biocytin hydrazide (for 90 minutes at 4 C, for installation of biotin on the oxidized sugar residues which happens to be mostly cell surface proteins. The cells were then washed thrice to get rid of the excess of biotinylating reagents and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 C until further processing. All the incubation steps were carried out in end-to-end rotor for gentle mixing during the reactions. The frozen cell pellets were thawed in ice and were resuspended in 1 ml RIPA lysis buffer with Halt protease inhibitor.  The cell suspension was then sonicated for cell lysis followed by pulldown with Neutravidin beads for enrichment of the biotinylated cell surface proteins. The beads bound with biotinylated cell surface proteins were subjected to on-bead trypsin digestion for overnight at RT with simultaneous reduction and alkylation of cysteines residues. The peptides were then desalted using SOLA HRP Column and eluted with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) + 0.1% formic acid (FA). Finally, the peptides were dried down in vacuum concentrator. Size exclusion chromatography of the peptides was performed to partially enrich for cross-linked peptide.  The SEC fractions 13 and 14 being rich in rich in cross-linked peptides, were further fractionated by high pH reverse-phase tip (HpHt). Briefly, the HpHt column was sequentially washed with a series of 3 different solvents/solutions namely methanol, ACN and ammonia water (pH 10), 90 µl each. Then, each SEC fraction was loaded onto the HpHt column, which was centrifuged at 1,200 PRM for 5 min. The bound peptides were washed with 90 µL of ammonia water (pH 10) followed by elution with a series of ammonia water containing increasing concentration of ACN (6%, 9%, 12%, 15%, 18%, 21%, 25%, 30%, 35%, and 50%). The fractions with 25%, 30%, 35% and 50% of ACN were combined with fractions containing 6%, 9%, 12% and 21% of ACN, respectively. The resultant 6 fractions were the dried and stored at -80 C for LC-MS3 analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peaklists were extracted from the LC MS3 raw files using the in-house software PAVA (UCSF) and the extracted MS3 spectra were searched against a SwissProt database (2021.10.02 version). concatenated with its randomized decoy sequences using Protein Prospector (v.6.3.5). The mass tolerances allowed were ±20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. The database search was performed with trypsin as a protease with a maximum of three allowed missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as the fixed modification. The variable modifications included N-terminal protein acetylation, methionine oxidation, and N-terminal conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid. Additionally, three specific modifications resulting from DSSO were included in the search: thiol (C3H2SO, +86 Da), alkene (C3H2O, +54 Da), and sulfenic acid (C3H4O2S, +104 Da)23. The in-house software XL-Tools was used to automatically identify, summarize and validate cross-linked peptides based on Protein Prospector database search results and MSn data. No decoy hits were found after the integration of MS1, MS2 and MS3 data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aml, Cell surfaceome, Xl-ms, Dsso, Ms3, Nomo-1

### Affiliations
Dept. of Laboratory Medicine University of California, San Francisco, USA
University of California, San Francisco

### Submitter
Kamal Mandal

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Arun P. Wiita
Dept. of Laboratory Medicine University of California, San Francisco, USA


