### Accession
PXD002367

### Title
The human spermatozoa proteome

### Description
The human spermatozoa proteome was in depth characterized using shotgun iterative GeLC-MS/MS method with peptide exclusion lists.

### Sample Protocol
Spermatozoa were isolated from normal sperm (WHO2010) before proteins extraction. Sperm protein extracts from 5 sperm samples were pooled, separated by SDS-PAGE and stained by Coomassie Blue. Each lane was cut into 21 bands which were in-gel trypsin digested after reduction and alkylation. The extracted peptides were analyzed using a nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Dionex, LC Packings Ultimate 3000) connected to a hybrid LTQ-OrbiTrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (New Objective). The MS instrument was operated in its data-dependent mode by automatically switching between full survey scan MS and consecutive MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (mass range 400–2000) were acquired in the OrbiTrap section of the instrument with a resolution of r = 60,000 at m/z 400. The ten most intense peptide ions in each survey scan with intensity above 2000 counts and a charge state ≥2 were sequentially fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision induced dissociation. This LC-MS/MS analysis was repeated twice by digested band using an identified peptide exclusion list, generated by Proteome Discoverer, from the previous LC-MS/MS runs of the same sample.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was performed with the Proteome Discoverer 1.2 software supported by Mascot (Matrixscience) search engine for peptide and protein identification. MS/MS spectra of the 63 .raw files were searched together against the UniProt human reference proteome (Proteome ID UP000005640, release 02/10/2014; number of sequences: 67084) with an automatic decoy database search. Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Dalton, respectively. The enzyme selectivity was set to trypsin with one miss cleavage allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable oxidation of methionine, variable acetylation of lysine, variable protein N-terminal acetylation and variable deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. Identified rank 1 peptides were filtered according to these parameters: FDR ≥ 1%, Mascot score ≥ 30, peptides length ≥ 7 and expected value ≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) aims at cataloguing the proteins as gene products encoded by the human genome in a chromosome-centric manner. The existence of products of about 82% of the genes has been confirmed at the protein level. However, the number of so-called "missing proteins" remains significant. It was recently suggested that the expression of proteins that have been systematically missed might be restricted to particular organs or cell types, for example, the testis. Testicular function, and spermatogenesis in particular, is conditioned by the successive activation or repression of thousands of genes and proteins including numerous germ cell- and testis-specific products. Both the testis and postmeiotic germ cells are thus promising sites at which to search for missing proteins, and ejaculated spermatozoa are a potential source of proteins whose expression is restricted to the germ cell lineage. A trans-chromosome-based data analysis was performed to catalog missing proteins in total protein extracts from isolated human spermatozoa. We have identified and manually validated peptide matches to 89 missing proteins in human spermatozoa. In addition, we carefully validated three proteins that were scored as uncertain in the latest neXtProt release (09.19.2014). A focus was then given to the 12 missing proteins encoded on chromosomes 2 and 14, some of which may putatively play roles in ciliation and flagellum mechanistics. The expression pattern of C2orf57 and TEX37 was confirmed in the adult testis by immunohistochemistry. On the basis of transcript expression during human spermatogenesis, we further consider the potential for discovering additional missing proteins in the testicular postmeiotic germ cell lineage and in ejaculated spermatozoa. This project was conducted as part of the C-HPP initiatives on chromosomes 14 (France) and 2 (Switzerland). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited with the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the data set identifier PXD002367.

### Keywords
Human, Spermatozoa, Gelc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Life Sciences
Protim - Campus de Beaulieu - 35042 Rennes Cedex - France

### Submitter
Melanie Lagarrigue

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim - Campus de Beaulieu - 35042 Rennes Cedex - France


