### Accession
PXD011180

### Title
Proteomic profiling of RNase III-dependent asRNA regulation in E. coli

### Description
In an effort to determine if the RNase III-dependent asRNA regulation had an effect on protein production in E. coli we conducted two TMT 6-plex experiments comparing cultures of wildtype E. coli, rnc-14, rnc-38, hfq in the stationary and exponential phase.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were lysed in PBS with HALT proteases using a bead beater.  The protein concentration was determined using Pierce BCA protein assay reagent.  Each cell line was prepared in biological triplicate and 80 ug of protein of each sample was reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 1 hour then alkylated using 50 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 1 hour in the dark.  The samples were then digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade (1:50) trypsin.  The samples were acidified with formic acid (FA) and dried down using a SpeedVac.  The samples were re-suspended in 30 ul 500 mM TEAB.  TMT was brought to room temp and re-suspended in 70 uL acetonitrile (ACN).  The TMT reagent was transferred into the respective sample vial.  The vials were kept at room temperature for 1 hour and the reaction was stopped with 10% hydroxylamine.  Samples from all 6 channels were combined and cleaned up using the Oasis HLB elution plate 30 uM.  The samples were dried in a SpeedVac and reconstituted in 20 uL of 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 2% acetonitrile.  All samples were then fractionated using a high pH fraction method as previously described1.  The peptides were fractionated into 12 fractions using a Dionex HPLC and 2.1 x 50 mm Xterra column.  The samples were lyophilized and stored at -20°C until mass spectrometer analysis.  The tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 10 uL FA 2% ACN 0.2% FA.  The sample was first loaded at 5 uL/min onto a u-Precolumn 300 um i.d. x 5 mm C18 PepMap100 , 5 um, 100Å trap column.  Digested samples (2 uL) were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled to a data dependent mass spectrometer (LC/MS-MS) using  the Eksigent nano-LC  coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap- Velo mass spectrometer.  A 75 um id Picotip emitter with a 15 um diameter tip was hand packed using Magic C18 100Å 3 um resin to a length of 13 cm.  Tryptic peptides were eluted over a 68 min gradient at a flow rate of 400 nL/min using a water/acetonitrile (ACN) gradient (Mobile Phase A:  100% water 0.2% FA; Mobile Phase B: 100% ACN 0.2% FA).  The gradient was ramped from min 2% B over 68 min to 40% B, then ramped to 95% B over 8 min,  held for 2 min at 95% B, ramped to 5% B in 2 min and then ramped to 2% for 5 minutes. The Velos system was operated in the standard -scan mode with positive ionization.  The electro spray voltage was 2.75 kV and the ion transfer tube was 300°C.  Full MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the 350-2000 m/z range with mass resolution at 60,000 (at 400 m/z) the target values was 2.00E+05.  The 10 most intense peaks with a charge state greater than or equal to 2 were fragmented in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 40%.  The tandem mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with mass resolution of 120,000 with a target value of 1.00E+05.  Ion selection threshold was 500 counts and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 100 ms for full scans.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, a repeat duration of 15 s, an exclusion list of 500 and exclusion duration of 15 s.  All samples were analyzed in biological triplicate and subjected to duplicate LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein sequences from Escherichia coli (strain K12) were obtained from www.uniprot.org on May 21 2013, appended with its own reversed sequences and with common mass spectrometry contaminant protein sequences and used for peptide and protein identification (9658 sequences; 3093176 residues).  Raw data from the LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos were processed with Mascot (vs 2.2) using default parameters.  The data was searched using trypsin as the enzyme and allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages.  The search criteria included peptide mass tolerance (± 15 ppm), fragment mass tolerance (± 0.05 Da), fixed modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Phospho (ST), Phospho (Y), TMT6plex (K) and TMT6plex (N-term).  Mass values are monoisotopic and protein mass is unrestricted.  Mascot results for sample fractions were aggregated and submitted to the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms for peptide and protein validation, respectively (ISB/SPC Trans Proteomic Pipeline TPP v4.3 JETSTREAM rev 1, Build 200909091257 (MinGW)).  Protein results were then filtered using a false discovery rate of less than 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Antisense transcription is widespread in bacteria. By base pairing with overlapping sense RNAs, antisense RNAs (asRNA) can form double-stranded RNAs (dsRNA), which are cleaved by RNase III, a dsRNA endoribonuclease. The ectopic expression of plant <i>Tombusvirus</i> p19 in <i>Escherichia coli</i> stabilizes &#x223c;21-nucleotide (nt) dsRNA RNase III decay intermediates, which enabled us to characterize otherwise highly unstable asRNA by deep sequencing of p19-captured dsRNA. RNase III-produced small dsRNA were formed at most bacterial genes in the bacterial genome and in a plasmid. We classified the types of asRNA in genomic clusters producing the most abundant p19-captured dsRNA and confirmed RNase III regulation of asRNA and sense RNA decay at three type I toxin-antitoxin loci and at a coding gene, <i>rsd</i> Furthermore, we provide potential evidence for the RNase III-dependent regulation of CspD protein by asRNA. The analysis of p19-captured dsRNA revealed an RNase III sequence preference for AU-rich sequences 3 nucleotides on either side of the cleavage sites and for GC-rich sequences in the 2-nt overhangs. Unexpectedly, GC-rich sequences were enriched in the middle section of p19-captured dsRNA, suggesting some unexpected sequence bias in p19 protein binding. Nonetheless, the ectopic expression of p19 is a sensitive method for identifying antisense transcripts and RNase III cleavage sites in dsRNA formed by overlapping sense and antisense transcripts in bacteria.

### Keywords
Antisense rnas, Rnase iii, E. coli

### Affiliations
Novartis Institute of Biomedical Research
Novartis

### Submitter
Nancy Finkel

### Lab Head
Dr Nancy Finkel
Novartis Institute of Biomedical Research


