### Accession
PXD031612

### Title
Gene editing reverses arrhythmia susceptibility in humanized PLN-R14del mice: modeling a European cardiomyopathy with global impact

### Description
Aims: A mutation in the phospholamban (PLN) gene, leading to deletion of Arg14 (R14del), has been associated with malignant arrhythmias and ventricular dilation. Identifying pre-symptomatic carriers with vulnerable myocardium is crucial because arrhythmia can result in sudden cardiac death, especially in young adults with PLN-R14del mutation.  This study aimed at assessing the efficiency and efficacy of in vivo genome editing, using CRISPR/Cas9 and a cardiotropic adeno-associated virus (AAV9), in improving cardiac function in young adult mice expressing the human PLN-R14del. Methods and Results: Humanized mice were generated expressing human wild-type (hPLN-WT) or mutant (hPLN-R14del) PLN in the heterozygous state, mimicking human carriers. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging at 12 weeks of age showed bi-ventricular dilation and increased stroke volume in mutant vs. WT mice, with no deficit in ejection fraction or cardiac output. Challenge of ex vivo hearts with isoproterenol and rapid pacing unmasked higher propensity for sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) in hPLN-R14del relative to hPLN-WT. Specifically, the VT threshold was significantly reduced (20.3±1.2 Hz in hPLN-R14del vs. 25.7±1.3 Hz in WT, p<0.01) reflecting higher arrhythmia burden. To inactivate the R14del allele, mice were tail-vein-injected with AAV9.CRISPR/Cas9/gRNA or AAV9 empty capsid (controls). CRISPR-Cas9 efficiency was evaluated by droplet digital PCR and NGS-based amplicon sequencing. In vivo gene editing significantly reduced end diastolic and stroke volumes in hPLN-R14del CRISPR-treated mice compared to controls. Susceptibility to VT was also reduced, as the VT threshold was significantly increased relative to controls (30.9±2.3 Hz vs. 21.3±1.5 Hz; p<0.01).  Conclusions: This study is the first to show that disruption of hPLN-R14del allele by AAV9- CRISPR/Cas9 improves cardiac function and reduces VT susceptibility in humanized PLN-R14del mice, offering preclinical evidence for translatable approaches to therapeutically suppress the arrhythmogenic phenotype in human patients with PLN-R14del disease.

### Sample Protocol
Murine heart tissues were diced and washed 4 times using ice-cold PBS supplemented with a broad-spectrum protein inhibitors and phosphate inhibitors. Cleaned tissues were homogenized with Lysing Matrix D in 300l of lysis buffer (25mM Tris, 113mM NaCl, 2mM EGTA, 5mM EDTA, 1% Triton and 0.1% SDS at pH 7.4, with protein and phosphatase inhibitors) using FastPrep homogenizer (MP Biomedicals). After 20min of centrifugation at 4°C at 16,000g, protein extracts were transferred to new tubes and protein concentration was measured using BCA protein assay. From each sample, 30ug of proteins were precipitated with pre-chilled acetone at -20°C overnight. After centrifugation at 16,000 g for 40min at 4°C, supernatants were carefully removed, and protein pellets were dried using a SpeedVac (ThermoFisher Scientific, Savant SPD131DDA). Pellet was resuspended in water and successively denatured by 6M urea, 2M thiourea and reduced by 10mM DTT followed by incubation at 37°C for 1h, shaking at 240rpm. The samples were then alkylated by 50mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 1h at room temperature. Pre-chilled acetone was used to precipitate the samples overnight at -20°C. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 25min at 4°C and the supernatant was discarded. Protein pellets were dried and resuspended in 0.1M TEAB, pH 8.2, containing trypsin (trypsin:protein ratio = 1:50) and digested overnight at 37°C, 240rpm. The digested samples were labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. A pooled sample labelled with TMT-126 was used as internal standard. TMT labelled samples were combined, dried and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. Samples were fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 8 fractions were collected for each sample. Samples were dried and resuspended in LC solution (2% ACN, 0.05% TFA). Samples were separated by a nanoflow HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on an EASY-Spray column (C18, 75um x 50cm, 2um) using 2 hour LC gradient method: 0-10min, 4%-10%B; 10-75min, 10%-30%B; 75-80min, 30%-40%B; 80-85min, 40%-99%B; 85-90min, 99%B; 90-120min, 4%B; A=0.1% FA in H2O and B= 0.1% FA, 80% ACN in H2O. The flow rate is 250nL/min and column temperature was set at 45°C. The separated peptides were directly injected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analysed using synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-based MS3 method for TMT-labelled samples. Full MS spectra were collected on an Orbitrap with resolution 120,000 and scan range 375-1500 m/z. The most abundant ions were fragmented using CID and MS2 spectra were collected on a linear ion trap, with dynamic exclusion enabled. The 5 most abundant ions from every MS2 spectrum were selected and fragmented at the same time using HCD with collision energy 65%. The MS3 spectra were collected on the Orbitrap with resolution 60,000 and scan range 100-500m/z to measure the TMT reporter ions. The cycle time is set at 3 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The 8 fractions of each TMT samples were loaded and analysed together. Each TMT tag was assigned to the correct samples and groups. Data were searched against mouse UniProt/SwissProt database (version 2018_05, 16970 protein entries). Trypsin was used as enzyme and maximum 2 missed cleavage was allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.8 Da. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine and TMT 6plex on N-terminal and lysine were used as static modifications. Oxidation on methionine, proline and lysine were used as dynamic modifications. Reporter ions S/N were used for quantification. The quantification values were normalized to total peptide amount and scaled on controls (pool sample labelled with TMT-126) average. The scaled abundance was exported for further analysis The dataset was first imputed to replace missing relative quantities to zeros when these were consistent among any of the examined phenotypes. In specific, when the percent of missing values in one examined phenotype (e.g. left ventricle - wild type) exceeded 90% and the percentage of missing value for the other phenotypes was below 10% then the missing values of the examined phenotype were imputed to zeros. The relative quantities of the proteins where then scaled using log2 transformation. Next, dataset was filtered to keep only proteins with less than 30% missing values, without considering the previously imputed missing values as missing. The remaining missing values were imputed using KNN-Impute method with k equal to 3. The limma package was used to compare between different phenotypes using the Ebayes algorithm and correcting for selected covariates. The initial p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using Benjamini-Hockberg method and a threshold of 0.05 was used for the adjusted p-values to infer statistically significant changes. Volcano plots for the visualization of differentially expressed proteins were generated in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cardiomyopathy, Lc-ms/ms, Phospholamban, Mouse model, Tmt, R14del

### Affiliations
King's British Heart Foundation Centre, King's College London, UK
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's British Heart Foundation Centre, King's College London, UK


