### Accession
PXD003912

### Title
New alterations of the platelet proteome in type I Glanzmann thrombasthenia

### Description
The project contains raw and result files of a proteomics analysis of two patients with type 1 Glanzmann thrombasthenia (Patient1 and 2) caused by homozygous ITGA2b delG mutations and from family (heterozygous: Father1, Mother1, Sister1, healthy: Sister2) and unrelated controls. A label-free analysis has been conducted in duplicates using Progenesis (NonLinear Dynamics) demonstrating that less than 5% of glycoprotein IIb and 5-7% fibrinogen is expressed compared to healthy controls. Heterozygous familiy members from one of the controls expressed 50-60% of GPIIb sufficient for normal GPIIb/IIIa-dependant platelet function. In a subsequent targeted LC-MS/MS analysis we quantified 14 protein identified as potentially regulated in preliminary iTRAQ experiments. We observed diminished expession of factor XIIIB chain (P05160), plasminogen (P00747) and carboxypeptidase 2B (Q96IY4) in thrombasthenic platelets as well as a 2.5-fold increased expression of FcgRIIA (P12318/P31995) and laminin alpha4 (Q16363).

### Sample Protocol
Citrated whole blood was supplemented with 0.4 mM EGTA and platelet-rich plasma was prepared by centrifugation at 200xg for 10 minutes at room temperature. Obtained PRP was diluted 1:1 with CGS buffer (120 mM NaCl, 12.9 mM trisodium citrate, 30 mM D-glucose, pH 6.5) and centrifuged at 70xg for 10 minutes at RT to pellet leukocytes. The platelet-rich supernatant was centrifuged at 400xg for 10 minutes at RT to pellet platelets. The platelet pellet was resuspended in CGS buffer and centrifuged again at 400xg for 10 minutes at RT to deplete plasma proteins. The platelet pellet was finally diluted in HEPES buffer (145 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 10 mM Hepes, 10 mM D-glucose, pH 7.4) and incubated for 15 min at 37 °C.  Platelets were lysed by adding 4x lysis buffer to a final concentration of 1% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 1 tablet PhosStop per 10 mL, pH 7.8 and immediately shock frozen and stored at -80° C. Protein concentration was determined and equal amounts were processed in parallel. Disulfide bonds were reduced and alkylated and samples were digested by filter-aided sample preparation.   Shotgun LC-MS label-free analysis was conducted for quality control and assessment of reproducibility of samples. Platelet key-marker expression levels were stable, wherease expression changes of GPIIb/IIIa were readily observed. All samples were analyzed in duplicates by nano-LC-MS/MS using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro in data-dependent acquisition mode.  NanoLC-MS/MS for targeted parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) was conducted using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Inclusion lists were generated containing the precursor m/z of at least two different unique peptides of the following 14 proteins: Coagulation factor XIII B chain (F13B, P05160); Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI1, P05121); Heat shock protein beta-1 (HSPB1, P04792); Catalase (CATA, P04040); Plasminogen (PLMN, P00747); cAMP-dependent protein kinase type II-beta regulatory subunit (PRKAR2B, P31323); C-X-C motif chemokine 5 (CXCL5, P42830); Protein disulfide-isomerase A5 (PDIA5, Q14554); Laminin subunit alpha-4 (LAMA4, Q16363); Fermitin family homolog 2 (FERMT2, Q96AC1); Carboxypeptidase B2 (CPB2, Q96IY4); Heparanase (HPSE, Q9Y251); Low affinity immunoglobulin gamma Fc region receptor II-a / Low affinity immunoglobulin gamma Fc region receptor II-c (FCGR2A/FCGR2C, P12318/P31995); and Tropomyosin beta chain (TPM2, P07951). All samples were analyzed in triplicates.

### Data Protocol
Label-free data were processed with Progenesis (NonLinear Dynamics). Peak lists of feature MS/MS spectra were exported and searched against Uniprot taxonomy human. Mascot search result files were imported to Peptide Shaker 0.28.0 for calculating a 1% false discovery rate. After re-import of the search results into Progenesis, normalized protein abundances as calculated by the software were used for relative protein quantification.   For targeted quantification raw-files were imported into Skyline 2.6.0 and areas (of each transition) were exported as csv-file. Areas of peptide transitions were summed using in-house-build R v.3.0.3 scripts and exported for further processing into Excel. We only considered proteins which could be quantified by at least two proteotypic peptides in each of the samples.

### Publication Abstract
Glanzmann thrombasthenia (GT) is one of the best characterised inherited platelet function disorders but global platelet proteome has not been determined in these patients. We investigated the proteome and function of platelets from two patients with type I GT, caused by different homozygous ITGA2b mutations, from family members and unrelated controls. The global proteome of highly purified washed platelets was quantified by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) and targeted MS-methods. Platelet function was analysed by flow cytometry, light transmission aggregometry and flow-based assays. Platelets from GT patients showed less than 5&#x2009;% relative levels of the integrin subunit &#x3b1;<sub>IIb</sub> and 5-9&#x2009;% fibrinogen compared to controls. These patients demonstrated loss of &#x3b1;<sub>IIb</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>3</sub>-dependent platelet function, but normal platelet granule secretion induced by physiological agonists. Platelets from heterozygous family members of a patient expressed 50-60&#x2009;% of control &#x3b1;<sub>IIb</sub> levels which were sufficient for normal &#x3b1;<sub>IIb</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>3</sub>-dependent platelet function. Studying type I GT as model disease we established quantitative LC-MS to detect and clearly distinguish normal platelets, platelets from GT heterozygotes and platelets from GT patients. Diminished levels of factor XIIIB chain, plasminogen and carboxypeptidase 2B were identified in thrombasthenic platelets. Additionally, GT platelets showed up to 2.5-fold increased levels of Fc&#x3b3;RIIA and laminin-&#x3b1;4 chain. Elevated levels of platelet Fc&#x3b3;RIIA was associated with increased CD63-surface expression after Fc&#x3b3;RIIA-crosslinking in one GT-patient which might present a compensatory mechanism of platelet activation in GT. We demonstrate that quantitative LC-MS based proteomics is suitable to validate known but also to identify previously unknown protein level changes of dysfunctional platelets.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Proteomics, Glanzmann thrombasthenia, Platelets

### Affiliations
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften, Otto-Hahn-Straße 6b, 44227 Dortmund
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V. Otto-Hahn-Strasse 6b 44227 Dortmund Germany

### Submitter
Stefan Loroch

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V. Otto-Hahn-Strasse 6b 44227 Dortmund Germany


