### Accession
PXD005346

### Title
Incorporation of photo-amino acids in HeLa cells

### Description
In order to assess the efficiency of photo-labeling, total HeLa cell lysates treated with photo-amino acids were subjected to proteome analysis.

### Sample Protocol
After incorporation of photo-methionine (photo-Met) and photo-leucine (photo-Leu) HeLa cell suspension samples were mixed with an equal volume of solubilization buffer (100 mM HEPES, 4% (w/v) SDS, 5% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol), and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. Subsequently, the samples were homogenized by ultrasonication applying one stroke (2 s) at a power amplitude of 40% and centrifuged at 16,000 × g (4 °C, 30 min) followed by acetone precipitation of the supernatant fractions. Precipitated proteins were sedimented by centrifugation at 16,000 × g (4 °C, 20 min), resuspended in denaturation solution (8 M urea, 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and homogenized in an ultrasonication bath for 10 min. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad). The samples were adjusted to a protein concentration of 1 µg/µl and subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin. Peptide solutions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex nano-ESI ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a RP C8 precolumn (Acclaim PepMap, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min. After washing on the precolumn with 0.1% (v/v) TFA for 15 min at 30 µl/min, peptides were eluted and separated on a C18 separation column (Acclaim PepMap, 75 μM × 250 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) that had been equilibrated with solvent A (0.1% (v/v) FA). Elution of peptides from the separation column was performed with a gradient from 0-35% solvent B (ACN, 0.08% (v/v) FA) within 300 min at 300 nl/min. Peptides were directly transferred to the nano-ESI ion source and analyzed in data-dependent MS/MS acquisition mode: High-resolution precursor ion scans (m/z 300-1500, R = 120,000 at m/z 200, AGC target value = 4.0e5, max. injection time = 50 ms) in the Orbitrap analyzer were acquired every 5 s. Within these 5 sec the most abundant signals (charge states 2-8, intensity threshold = 3000 counts) were selected for MS/MS experiments using HCD with a normalized collision energy of 27% and an isolation window of 2 Th. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (R = 15,000 at m/z 200, AGC target value = 5.0e4, max. injection time = 200 ms). Fragmented precursor ions were dynamically excluded from HCD for 60 s if targeted two times within 30 s (mass tolerance window 2 ppm). Data acquisition and inspection of raw data were conducted via the Xcalibur software (version 3.0.63, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8). Protein identification was performed with the Andromeda search engine using the reviewed human reference proteome downloaded from the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org, FASTA file; date: 2015-02-10; 20 222 entries) and an integrated database of common contaminants (245 entries). Database searches were conducted with standard settings for Orbitrap precursor and fragment ion analysis allowing maximum mass differences of 20 ppm (first search) / 4.5 ppm (main search) and 20 ppm. Trypsin was set as specific proteolytic enzyme, allowing up to three missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Additionally, the substitution of methionine and leucine with their photo-reactive counterparts was specified as variable modifications including the intact variant and alcohol and alkene formation products. Protein identifications were filtered using a target decoy database (reversed sequence order) allowing a maximum false discovery rate of 1%.  For evaluation of photo-Met and photo-Leu incorporation the MaxQuant “evidence” output file containing information of all identified peptides was processed with Perseus (version 1.5.1.6).

### Publication Abstract
We present a novel approach that relies on the affinity capture of protein interaction partners from a complex mixture, followed by their covalent fixation via UV-induced activation of incorporated diazirine photoreactive amino acids (photo-methionine and photo-leucine). The captured protein complexes are enzymatically digested and interacting proteins are identified and quantified by label-free LC/MS analysis. Using HeLa cell lysates with photo-methionine and photo-leucine-labeled proteins, we were able to capture and preserve protein interactions that are otherwise elusive in conventional pull-down experiments. Our approach is exemplified for mapping the protein interaction network of protein kinase D2, but has the potential to be applied to any protein system. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD005346 (photo amino acid incorporation) and PXD005349 (enrichment experiments).

### Keywords
Incorporation, Photo-methionine, Hela cells, Photo-leucine, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and BioanalyticsInstitute of Pharmacy Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg Wolfgang-Langenbeck-St. 4 D-06120 Halle (Saale), Germany
Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg

### Submitter
Björn Häupl

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Sinz
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and BioanalyticsInstitute of Pharmacy Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg Wolfgang-Langenbeck-St. 4 D-06120 Halle (Saale), Germany


