### Accession
PXD020366

### Title
Identifying candidate markers of domoic acid toxicosis in undepleted plasma from California sea lions (Zalophus californianus)

### Description
This data is a re-analysis of samples used in a prior study (doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0123295) evaluating plasma candidate biomarkers of chronic domoic acid toxicosis (DAT) in California sea lions (Zalophus californianus). The previous study used 2D-gel electrophoresis to analyze plasma from a training (n = 32; 12 DAT and 20 non-DAT) and validation set (n = 20; 7 DAT and 13 non-DAT). Using spot intensity followed by in-gel digestion and LC-MS/MS, decreased ApoE was identified and qualified as a classifier of chronic DAT. The current analysis is from 31 of these samples (14 DAT and 17 non-DAT), since some samples were no longer available or had been through too many freeze/thaw cycles and were no longer suitable for robust analysis. This subset of 31 undepleted plasma samples was analyzed using shotgun proteomics with a tribrid mass spectrometer, and searching was performed with the recently completed California sea lion genome (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/annotation_euk/Zalophus_californianus/100/). Using MS1-based label-free methods we were able to identify candidate markers of chronic DAT, such as decreasing ApoE, ApoC-III and ApoB-100. We expect other analytical pipelines could be used to analyze this data, and we deliberately collected the MS1 and MS2 at high resolution to enable spectral library creation for approaches such as data-independent acquisition, which may be used in follow-up studies.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to analysis, the sample set was randomized and assigned an experimental key to avoid bias and minimize batch effects. The 31 sea lion plasma samples were thawed and centrifuged at 13 000 x gn for 8 min at 4 °C. Based on prior work with California sea lion and other mammalian plasma, we assume a protein concentration of approximately 50 μg/μL (this value can vary but assuming at least 50 μg/μLwas used for estimating enzyme for the digest). Therefore, 2 μL (approximately 100 μg protein) of each sample was added to 78 μL 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate buffer in Lo-Bind microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf). A pool was generated using aliquots from the samples, which was digested in parallel to experimental samples and later used as a technical replicate during the LC-MS/MS analysis. Proteins were reduced with 9 μL of 90 mmol/L DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT; final concentration of 9 mM) at 60 °C for 30 min, then cooled and alkylated with 9 μL of 200 mmol/L 2-chloroacetamide (CAA; final concentration of 18 mM) at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. An additional 100 μL 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate was added prior to enzymatic digestion. First, LysC (Thermo Scientific) was added at a 1:100 mass ratio (LysC:total protein) ratio using 2 μL of 0.5 μg/μL and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Next, trypsin (Pierce) was added at a 1:20 mass ratio (trypsin:total protein) using 5 μL of 1 μg/μL. Samples were incubated at 37 °C for 4 h, after which the reaction was halted by adding 5 μL of 4 % formic acid (volume fraction). Peptide samples were purified for LC-MS/MS by using Pierce C18 spin columns (8 mg C18 resin) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, 0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid (volume fraction) in 5 % acetonitrile (volume fraction) was used for wash steps, while 60 μL 70 % acetonitrile (volume fraction) was used for elution. The samples were reduced to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge at low heat and stored at -20 °C. Samples were reconstituted with 100 μL 0.1 %  formic acid (volume fraction) and vortexed for 10 min, and the Pierce quantitative fluorometric peptide assay was used to determine sample peptide concentrations with a BioTek Synergy HT plate reader.  Peptide mixtures in 0.1% formic acid (volume fraction) were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC coupled to a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using the original sample randomization yielded a randomized sample order and injection volumes were determined for 1 μg loading (between 2.8 and 7.7 μL). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm id x 2 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 3 µL/min for 10 min with 2 % acetonitrile (volume fraction) and 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (volume fraction) followed by separation on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 2 µm C18 column (75µm id x 25 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 °C. Peptides were separated along a 65 min two-step gradient of 5 % to 30 % mobile phase B (80 % acetonitrile volume fraction, 0.08 % formic acid volume fraction) over 50 min followed by a ramp to 45 % mobile phase B over 10 min and lastly to 95% mobile phase B over 5 min, and held at 95 % mobile phase B for 5 min, all at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Fusion Lumos was operated in positive polarity with 30 % RF lens, data-dependent mode (topN, 3 sec cycle time) with a dynamic exclusion of 60 s (with 10 ppm error). Full scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 60 000, the mass range was m/z 375 to 1500. Full scan ion target value was 4.0e5 allowing a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic peak determination was used, specifying peptides and an intensity threshold of 2.5e4 was used for precursor selection, including charge states 2 to 6. Data-dependent fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 32 with quadrupole isolation at m/z 1.3 width. The fragment scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 15 000, m/z 100 as the first mass, ion target value of 2.0e5 and 30 ms maximum injection time. The MS1 data was collected as profile data, the MS2 data was collected as centroid data and inject all ions for parallelizable time was not used.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to peak lists in the mgf format using Proteome Discoverer (v2.2.0.388) via the spectrum recalibration feature. These data were searched using the Mascot algorithm (v2.6.2; Matrix Science). The following databases were specified within Mascot: NCBI RefSeq Release 100, GCF_900631625.1_zalCal2.2 (59 174 sequences), and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database (cRAP; 2012.01.01; the Global Proteome Machine; 107 sequences). These fasta are included in the PRIDE dataset. The following search parameters were used: semitrypsin was specified as the enzyme allowing for two mis-cleavages; carbamidomethyl (C) was fixed and deamidated (NQ) pyro-Glu (n-term Q), and oxidation (M) were variable modifications; 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 10 ppm fragment ion tolerance; instrument type was specified as ESI-FTICR; the decoy setting was used within Mascot to provide local FDR. Note that Proteome Discoverer (v2.2.0.388) was used for the final published analysis to take advantage of the minora feature detection along with Mascot searching. All the same settings were used except 0.02 Da for the fragment ion mass tolerance, as ppm-based fragment ion tolerance are not used in Proteome Discoverer v2.2. The Proteome Discoverer project files are included as an archive.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasma, California sea lion, Lc-msms, Domoic acid

### Affiliations
NIST Charleston
National Institute of Standards and Technology

### Submitter
Benjamin Neely

### Lab Head
Dr Iliana M. Claudio, Jackson S. Eberwein, Alison M. Bland, Michael G. Janech, Benjamin A. Neely
NIST Charleston


