### Accession
PXD023402

### Title
Inline Liquid Chromatography-Fast Photochemical Oxidation of Proteins Allows for Targeted Structural Analysis of Conformationally Heterogeneous Mixtures

### Description
The size exclusion was used to separate the mixture of holomyoglobin and apomyoglobin as well as native and aggregated adalimumab, just before laser irrdiation for FPOP. The footprint of the individual proteins were determined.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were reduced and digested with trypsin. The CID was used for teh fragmentation of the peptides.

### Data Protocol
Byonic was used for the determination of protein sequence coverage. Peptide oxidations were calculated manually using Xcalibur.

### Publication Abstract
Structural analysis of proteins in a conformationally heterogeneous mixture has long been a difficult problem in structural biology. In structural analysis by covalent labeling mass spectrometry, conformational heterogeneity results in data reflecting a weighted average of all conformers, complicating data analysis and potentially causing misinterpretation of results. Here, we describe a method coupling size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) with hydroxyl radical protein footprinting using inline fast photochemical oxidation of proteins (FPOP). Using a controlled synthetic mixture of holomyoglobin and apomyoglobin, we validate that we can achieve accurate footprints of each conformer using LC-FPOP when compared to offline FPOP of each pure conformer. We then applied LC-FPOP to analyze the adalimumab heat-shock aggregation process. We found that the LC-FPOP footprint of unaggregated adalimumab was consistent with a previously published footprint of the native IgG. The LC-FPOP footprint of the aggregation product indicated that heat-shock aggregation primarily protected the hinge region, suggesting that this region is involved with the heat-shock aggregation process of this molecule. LC-FPOP offers a new method to probe dynamic conformationally heterogeneous mixtures that can be separated by SEC such as biopharmaceutical aggregates and to obtain accurate information on the topography of each conformer.

### Keywords
Hrpf, Inline fpop, Higher order structure, Biosimilar

### Affiliations
University of Mississippi
Department of Biomolecular Sciences University of Mississippi

### Submitter
Sandeep Misra

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua S. Sharp
Department of Biomolecular Sciences University of Mississippi


