### Accession
PXD012546

### Title
A Simple Cross-Linking/Mass Spectrometry Workflow to Study System-Wide Protein Interactions in Drosophila Embryos

### Description
We provide a cross-linking/MS workflow that can be applied to complex systems. The software tool MeroX 2.0 can be used to identify cross-linked peptide on a proteome-wide level. We applied the workflow to extracts of Drosophila embryos and identified 5,129 unique cross-linked residue pairs in biological triplicates.

### Sample Protocol
Drosophila embryo extracts were prepared as described in Götze et al. 2017. Extracts (40%) were used in cross-linking reactions with 26 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 81 mM potassium acetate, 1.6 mM magnesium acetate, 1.3 mM ATP. DSBU (stock of 50 mM in DMSO) was added to a final concentration of 1 mM and incubated for 60 minutes at room temperature. Cross linked samples were flash-frozen and stored at -80°C.  150 µl of cross-linked sample (~3 mg of total protein) were digested by SMART Digest Trypsin Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), by adding 450 µL of SMART Digest buffer containing 50 µg of beads at 70°C for 4 h. The sample was cooled to room temperature and trypsin beads were removed by quick centrifugation. For reduction of cysteines, 4 mM of DTT was added and incubated for 30 min at 56°C. 8 mM iodoacetamide was added and incubated 20 min at room temperature in the dark. To prevent over-alkylation, 4 mM of DTT were added. 600 µL of digested cross-linked sample were separated on an ÄKTA Pure system (GE Healthcare) using a Superdex 30 Increase 10/300 GL size exclusion chromatography column. The column was equilibrated and operated with 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA. 18 fractions (500 µL each) were collected from 8 to 20 mL into 96 deep-well plates. SEC fractions were analyzed by LC/MS/MS on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on reversed phase C18 columns (precolumn: Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5μm, 100 Å (Thermo Fisher Scientific); separation column: packed Picofrit nanospray C18 column, 75 μM × 250 mm, 1.8 μm, 80 Å, tip ID 10 µm (New Objective)). After washing the precolumn for 30 minutes with water containing 0.1 % (v/v) TFA at a flow rate 50 μl/min and a pre-column temperature 50°C, peptides were eluted and separated using a linear gradient from 3% to 42% B (with solvent B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 85% (v/v) acetonitrile) with a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min over 360 min, 42% to 99% B (5 min) and 99% B (5 min). The separation column is kept at 45°C using an external column heater (Phoenix S&T).  Data were acquired in data-dependent MS/MS mode with stepped higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and normalized collision energies of 27%, 30%, and 33%. Each high-resolution full scan (m/z 299 to 1799, R = 140,000 at m/z 200) in the orbitrap was followed by 10 high-resolution product ion scans (R = 35,000), starting with the most intense signal in the full-scan mass spectrum (isolation window 2 Th); the target value of the automated gain control was set to 3,000,000 (MS) and 250,000 (MS/MS) and maximum accumulation times were set to 100 ms (MS) and 250 ms (MS/MS). Precursor ions with charge states <3+ and >7+ or <3+ and >5+ were excluded from fragmentation of SEC fractions 1-3 and 4-18, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (duration 60 seconds, window 2 ppm).

### Data Protocol
All proteins present in the samples were identified using the MaxQuant software with the Drosophila proteome as database (DP.fasta from uniprot.org). Based on this analysis, a fasta file containing all identified proteins, including isoforms was downloaded from uniprot.org (ID.fasta). For cross-linking analysis, mass spectrometric *.raw files were converted to mzML using MSConvertGUI 3.0.19011. MeroX analysis was performed with the following settings: Proteolytic cleavage: C-terminal at Lys and Arg with 3 missed cleavages and blocked by C-terminal Pro residue, peptide length: 5 to 40, static modification: alkylation of Cys by IAA, variable modification: oxidation of Met, cross-linker: DSBU with specificity towards Lys and N-termini, precursor mass accuracy: 5 ppm, product ion mass accuracy: 15 ppm (performing mass recalibration, average of deviations for each replicate), signal-to-noise ratio: 1.5, precursor mass correction activated with maximum 6 isotopic shifts, prescore cut-off at 10% intensity, FDR cut-off: 1%, and minimum score cut-off: 50.

### Publication Abstract
We present a cross-linking/mass spectrometry workflow for performing proteome-wide cross-linking analyses within 1 week. The workflow is based on the commercially available mass spectrometry-cleavable cross-linker disuccinimidyl dibutyric urea and can be employed by every lab having access to a mass spectrometer with tandem mass spectrometry capabilities. We provide an updated version 2.0 of the freeware software tool MeroX, available at www.StavroX.com , that allows us to conduct fully automated and reliable studies delivering insights into protein-protein interaction networks and protein conformations at the proteome level. We exemplify our optimized workflow for mapping protein-protein interaction networks in <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> embryos on a system-wide level. From cross-linked <i>Drosophila</i> embryo extracts, we detected 29931 cross-link spectrum matches corresponding to 7436 unique cross-linked residues in biological triplicate experiments at a 1% false discovery rate. Among these, 1611 interprotein cross-linking sites were identified and yielded valuable information about protein-protein interactions. The 5825 remaining intraprotein cross-links yield information about the conformational landscape of proteins in their cellular environment.

### Keywords
Xlms, Cross-linking, Drosophila, Cxms, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry & Bioanalytics, Institute of Pharmacy, Charles Tanford Protein Center, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Kurt-Mothes-Str. 3a, D-06120 Halle (Saale), Germany
Department of Biology

### Submitter
Michael Götze

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Sinz
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry & Bioanalytics, Institute of Pharmacy, Charles Tanford Protein Center, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Kurt-Mothes-Str. 3a, D-06120 Halle (Saale), Germany


