### Accession
PXD003813

### Title
Human HeLa cell lince SILAC -  The arginylation branch of the N-end rule pathway positively regulates cellular autophagic flux and clearance of proteotoxic proteins

### Description
The arginylation branch of the N-end rule pathway positively regulates cellular autophagic flux and clearance of proteotoxic protein

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, conducted FASP(filter aided sample preparation) method for tryptic digestion. Digested sample fractionated to decrease biological complexity using off gel.

### Data Protocol
Produced raw files went through search process. Raw files were searched by algorithm ‘Andromeda’ packaged program ‘MaxQuant’(v1.5.2.8) with database homo sapiens sequence acquired from Uniprot. The parameters which used in search process were as following : maximum missed cleavages were 2, oxidation on Met(+16 Da) was variable modification, and carbamidomethylation in Cys(+57 Da) was fixed modification. Arginine +6 Da and Lysine +6 Da labels were designated as heavy label for quantification. First search peptide tolerance and main search tolerance were 20 and 4.5 ppm respectively, isotope match tolerance was 2 ppm. Searched data went through statistical process using program ‘Perseus’(v1.5.1.6). Data was normalized and removed contaminant and razor peptide, then enriched differentially expressed proteins as standard of fold change < 1.5 or > 1.5(p-value < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
The N-terminal amino acid of a protein is an essential determinant of ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation in the N-end rule pathway. Using para-chloroamphetamine (PCA), a specific inhibitor of the arginylation branch of the pathway (Arg/N-end rule pathway), we identified that blocking the Arg/N-end rule pathway significantly impaired the fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes. Under ER stress, ATE1-encoded Arg-tRNA-protein transferases carry out the N-terminal arginylation of the ER heat shock protein HSPA5 that initially targets cargo proteins, along with SQSTM1, to the autophagosome. At the late stage of autophagy, however, proteasomal degradation of arginylated HSPA5 might function as a critical checkpoint for the proper progression of autophagic flux in the cells. Consistently, the inhibition of the Arg/N-end rule pathway with PCA significantly elevated levels of MAPT and huntingtin aggregates, accompanied by increased numbers of LC3 and SQSTM1 puncta. Cells treated with the Arg/N-end rule inhibitor became more sensitized to proteotoxic stress-induced cytotoxicity. SILAC-based quantitative proteomics also revealed that PCA significantly alters various biological pathways, including cellular responses to stress, nutrient, and DNA damage, which are also closely involved in modulation of autophagic responses. Thus, our results indicate that the Arg/N-end rule pathway may function to actively protect cells from detrimental effects of cellular stresses, including proteotoxic protein accumulation, by positively regulating autophagic flux.

### Keywords
Autophage, N-end rule, Pca

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Republic of Korea
KHU

### Submitter
Joon won Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Min Jae Lee
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Republic of Korea


