### Accession
PXD022372

### Title
A ciliopathy complex restrains centriolar length and builds distal appendages to initiate ciliogenesis.

### Description
Mitosis segregates into each daughter cell two centrioles, the older of which is uniquely capable of generating a cilium. How this older centriole, called the mother centriole, initiates ciliogenesis remains poorly understood. We have identified an evolutionarily conserved complex comprised of CEP90, OFD1, MNR and FOPNL. Human mutations in CEP90, MNR and OFD1 cause ciliopathies. Super-resolution microscopy revealed that this complex forms a ring at the distal centriole. Centrioles of cells lacking MNR or CEP90 failed to assemble distal appendages and cannot generate cilia. In addition to the centrioles, complex members localized to centriolar satellites, proteinaceous granules surrounding the centrioles. Disruption of satellites did not affect distal appendage assembly, indicating that the centriolar pool is required for ciliogenesis. Consistent with an essential role in ciliogenesis, mice lacking MNR or CEP90 did not assemble cilia, did not survive beyond embryonic day 9.5, and did not transduce Hedgehog signals. In addition to ciliogenesis, MNR, but not CEP90, restrained centriolar length. MNR recruited both OFD1, required for centriolar length control, and CEP90, which recruits CEP83 to root distal appendages. Thus, an evolutionarily conserved ciliopathy-associated complex functions at the distal centriole to control centriole length and assemble distal appendages.

### Sample Protocol
Cells grown in 10 cm petri dishes were washed twice with ice-cold dPBS and lysed for 30 minutes on ice with frequent pipetting. Lysis buffer used was 10 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5 % Nonidet P40 substitute supplemented with 1x protease inhibitor (Roche cOmplete mini, EDTA free; catalog 4693159001) and 1x phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Fisher PhosStop; catalog 4906845001) cocktails. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 17,000 g for 10 minutes at 4 ºC. GFP-trap magnetic agarose were used for enrichemnt of GFP tagged proteins and elution was acheived by glycine. Eluates were reduced by the addition of 1 mM DTT at 60C for 15 minutes, cooled to room temperature, alkylated by the addition of 3 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes in the dark.  Alkylation was quenched by the addition of 3 mM DTT and proteins were digested overnight at 37C with 1 g trypsin (0.5 g/l; Promega).  Following digestion, peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (0.5% final, pH < 2), desalted using UltraMicroSpin Columns (PROTO 300 C18 300Å; The NEST Group) according to manufacturer's specifications, and dried under vacuum centrifugation. Samples were resuspended in 4% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile solution, and separated by an reversed-phase gradient over a nanoflow column (360 m O.D. x 75 m I.D.) packed with 25 cm of 1.8 m Reprosil C18 particles with (Dr. Maisch). The HPLC buffers were 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile on 0.1% formic acid for buffer A and B respectively.  The  gradient was operated at 400 nL/min from 0 to 28% buffer B over 40min, followed by a column wash at 95% B, with a total acquisition time of 50 min. Eluting peptides were analyzed in on a Bruke timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry system equipped with a Bruker nanoElute high-pressure liquid chromatography system interfaced via a captiveSpray source. A data-dependent PASEF acquisition method was used for data acquisition using the following parameters:  100-1700 m/z range, 0.85-1.30 V*s/cm2 trapped ion mobility range, 1600V spray voltage, intensities of 200,000 were repeated for in PASEF 0 times, intensities of 100,000 to 200,000 were repeated for in PASEF 5 times, intensities of less than 100,000 were repeated for in PASEF 10 times, 4 PASEF MS/MS scans with a total cycle time of 0.53 s, and active exclusion for 0.4 min.

### Data Protocol
Data was search against the human proteome database (canonical sequences downloaded from Uniprot 3/21/2018) using MaxQuant. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% false-discovery rate at the peptide and protein level, and protein-protein interaction analysis was performed using SAINTexpress.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Gfp, Apms

### Affiliations
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
UCSF


