### Accession
PXD028945

### Title
GFI1 tethers the NuRD complex to open and transcriptionally active chromatin in myeloid progenitors

### Description
GFI is a DNA binding transcriptional repressor that regulates myeloid differentiation. Here, we show that GFI1 interacts with the chromodomain helicase CHD4 and other components of the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex. Our data demonstrated that GFI1 and GFI1/CHD4 complexes occupy sites of open chromatin enriched for histone marks associated with active transcription or different sets of genes that are either enriched for IRF1 or SPI-1 consensus binding sites. In addition, our study provided evidence that GFI1 affects the chromatin remodeling activity of the NuRD complex. Overall, our results indicate that GFI1/CHD4 complexes control chromatin openness and histone modifications differentially to regulate target genes, which govern the immune response, nucleosome organization, or metabolic processes.

### Sample Protocol
Flp-In T-REx HEK293 cell lines from 15-cm plates expressing GFI1WT-BirA*-Flag (OF_20181019_MOR_01_HB and OF_20181019_MOR_02_HB), GFI1ΔSNAG-BirA*-Flag (OF_20181019_MOR_03_HB and OF_20181019_MOR_04_HB) or BirA*-Flag controls (published in a previous study) in a tetracycline-inducible manner were treated with 50µM biotin and 1µg/ml tetracycline for 24 hours. The following day, the medium was discarded and cells were washed three times with cold PBS. Cell pellets were lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with inhibitors. 250 U benzonase was added to each sample before sonication at 30% amplitude for 30 sec at 4˚C. After centrifugation for 30 min at 4˚C at maximum speed, cleared cell lysates were incubated with 70µl of pre-washed streptavidin-sepharose beads on a rotator for 3h at 4˚C. Beads were then washed with 1ml RIPA buffer, transferred to a fresh Eppendorf, and washed two times with 1 ml RIPA buffer. Beads were then washed three times in 1ml of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Samples were then subjected to reduction/alkylation with TCEP and iodoacetamide, and then trypsin digestion by the IRCM proteomics core facility. Trypsin-digested samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile before mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) at the IRCM proteomics core facility.

### Data Protocol
The BioID-MS data were processed using the ProHits software. Peptide searches and protein identification analyses for GFI1 WT-BirA*-Flag or GFI1 ΔSNAG-BirA*-Flag samples were performed using the Mascot search engine through the iProphet pipeline integrated with ProHits and the Human RefSeq database(v.57). The Proteowizard4 tool was used to convert RAW files to .mzXML files. Peptide search and identification were performed by using Human RefSeq version 57 and the iProphet tool integrated with ProHits.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chromatin, Gfi1, Nurd complex, Myeloid differentiation

### Affiliations
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montreal, Montreal, QC, H2W 1R7, Canada
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Halil Bagci

### Lab Head
Dr Tarik Moroy
Institut de recherches cliniques de Montreal, Montreal, QC, H2W 1R7, Canada


