### Accession
PXD004583

### Title
Serial co-immunoprecipitation to expand the protein interactome of the outer mitosomal membrane in Giardia lamblia

### Description
Giardia lamblia's outer mitosomal membrane protein repertoire was investigated using a series of co-immunoprecipitations which led to the discovery of novel associated components. This was assembled into a Giardia mitosomal protein interactome which expands beyond the organelle, reaching out to other subcellular compartments.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were crosslinked with 2.25% formaldehyde, lysed and epitope-tagged bait proteins were immunoprecipitated, along with any complexed associated proteins using a highly specific anti-HA antibody. Complexes were then eluted, analysed on reducing and denaturing SDS-PAGE gels. Protein bands were extracted from gel pieces, trypsinized and then measured on a Q-exactive mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoAcquity UPLC.

### Data Protocol
Following peptide data acquisition, database searches were performed using the MASCOT search program against the G. lamblia database (http://tinyurl.com/37z5zqp) with a concatenated decoy database supplemented with commonly observed contaminants and the Swissprot database to increase database size. The identified hits were then loaded onto the Scaffold Viewer version 4 (Proteome Software, Portland, US) and filtered based on high stringency parameters (minimal mascot score of 95% for peptide probability, a protein probability of 95%, and a minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein (95_2_95) or on slightly relaxed stringency parameters (95_2_50).

### Publication Abstract
Protozoan parasites of the genus Giardia are highly prevalent globally, and infect a wide range of vertebrate hosts including humans, with proliferation and pathology restricted to the small intestine. This narrow ecological specialization entailed extensive structural and functional adaptations during host-parasite co-evolution. An example is the streamlined mitosomal proteome with iron-sulphur protein maturation as the only biochemical pathway clearly associated with this organelle. Here, we applied techniques in microscopy and protein biochemistry to investigate the mitosomal membrane proteome in association to mitosome homeostasis. Live cell imaging revealed a highly immobilized array of 30-40 physically distinct mitosome organelles in trophozoites. We provide direct evidence for the single giardial dynamin-related protein as a contributor to mitosomal morphogenesis and homeostasis. To overcome inherent limitations that have hitherto severely hampered the characterization of these unique organelles we applied a novel interaction-based proteome discovery strategy using forward and reverse protein co-immunoprecipitation. This allowed generation of organelle proteome data strictly in a protein-protein interaction context. We built an initial Tom40-centered outer membrane interactome by co-immunoprecipitation experiments, identifying small GTPases, factors with dual mitosome and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) distribution, as well as novel matrix proteins. Through iterative expansion of this protein-protein interaction network, we were able to i) significantly extend this interaction-based mitosomal proteome to include other membrane-associated proteins with possible roles in mitosome morphogenesis and connection to other subcellular compartments, and ii) identify novel matrix proteins which may shed light on mitosome-associated metabolic functions other than Fe-S cluster biogenesis. Functional analysis also revealed conceptual conservation of protein translocation despite the massive divergence and reduction of protein import machinery in Giardia mitosomes.

### Keywords
Protein discovery, Crosslinking

### Affiliations
University of Bern
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zürich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Carmen Faso

### Lab Head
Dr Adrian B. Hehl
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zürich, Switzerland


