### Accession
PXD007096

### Title
A Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) proteomic analysis during the early phase of experimental pancreatitis

### Description
We performed in a rat pancreatitic model a quantitative shotgun proteomic profiling of the soluble and whole membrane fractions from the pancreas during the early phase of cerulein (Cer)-induced AP compared to controls. Three control and three pancreatitic samples from both the soluble and the whole membrane fractions were analysed in two independent TMT6plex experiments. After trypsin digestion and TMT labelling, the peptide mixtures were fractionated into 12 fractions by off-gel electrophoresis. ESI LTQ-OT MS was performed on a LTQ Orbitrap velos equipped with a NanoAcquity system from Waters. MS data were analysed for protein identifications using EasyProt (v2.3) and peak lists were generated into .mgf format with EasyProtConv (CID/HCD merging was used to improve peptide identification and quantification). Searches were conducted against UniProt Swiss-Prot database (UniProtKB release 2014_10 of Oct, 29, 2014), specifying Rattus norvegicus taxonomy. Only proteins with at least two unique peptide sequences and a false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 1 % were selected for further quantification. Proteins were clustered based on shared peptides indistinguishable by MS. Quantification was conducted using Isobar R package (v.1.9.3.2). We identified 997 proteins, of which 353 were significantly differentially expressed (22, 256 or 55 in both, the soluble or the membrane fractions, respectively).

### Sample Protocol
The rat pancreata, which were used immediately for experiments, were rapidly dissected out from the surrounding fat tissue and lymph nodes, and their wet weights rapidly measured. A small portion of the tissue was used for histological studies. The remaining parts of the pancreata were homogenized individually with a Potter Elvehjem device in 4 ml of homogenization buffer (5 mM imidazole buffer, pH 7.4 containing 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 100 µg/ml trypsin inhibitor, 100 µM TPCK and TLCK, 2 µg/ml Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 1 mM NaF and 1 mM Na3VO4. Homogenization buffer was then added to reach a ratio of 10 volumes (w/v), mixed well and the total homogenate was centrifuged at 150g for 15 min. The pellet was discarded and the postnuclear homogenate of each pancreas was finally centrifuged at 150,000g for 60 min to obtain the soluble and the whole membrane fractions. The surface of the pellet corresponding to this latter fraction was gently washed once with homogenization buffer in a view to minimize contamination with the soluble fraction. Both fractions were independently used for the proteomic analysis. Serum amylase was measured with a Gernon Star Modular Analyzer, as reported previously. Protein concentrations were assayed by the method of Bradford using BSA as standard. Special care was taken with this assay in order to minimize deviations in the amount of proteins loaded in each lane of the SDS-PAGE gels. Quality control of the assays was ensured by repeating them at least three times with five different volumes of three-to-five different sample dilutions.  Sample preparation and TMT-6 plex labeling: Three control and three pancreatitic samples from both the soluble and the whole membrane fractions were randomly selected to perform independent TMT6plex experiments.Fifty μg of proteins from each of the six samples were dried under vacuum, dissolved in 0.1 M TEAB,0.1% RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters, Milford, USA) and spiked with 0.5 µg  of of bovine β-lactoglobulin (LACB) as an internal standard for later correction of experimental bias. The protein samples were reduced TCEP, alkylated in IAA and then digested using trypsin, (trypsin/protein ratio 1:20). The resulting peptide mixtures were labeled with one of the TMT reagents from the sixplex version (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Control samples C1, C2, C3 were tagged with TMTs 126.1, 127.1 and 128.1 and AP samples AP1, AP2, AP3 with TMTs 129.1, 130.1 and 131.1, respectively. After labeling, the six samples from each TMT6 experiment were combined and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to hydrolize the RapiGest surfactant. RapiGest was then removed according to manufacturer’s instructions and the supernatants dried on a SpeedVac.  Off-gel peptide fractionation: The labeled peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 Macro Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus). After peptide elution, samples were dried under vacuum. Peptides were then fractionated by off-gel electrophoresis (OGE) according to their pI on an Agilent 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) following the manufacturer’s manual. Isoelectricfocusing was performed on a commercial 13 cm IPG pH 3−10 linear dry strip (GE Healthcare Biosciences AB, Uppsala, Sweden) with a 12 wells frame set. After focusing, the 12 fractions were recovered individually and cleaned using C18 microspin columns (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA). Eluted peptides were finally evaporated and stored at −20 °C prior MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis: Each peptidic fraction was reconstituted in 5 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA. ESI LTQ-OT MS was performed on a LTQ Orbitrap velos from Thermo Electron (San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with a NanoAcquity system from Waters. Peptides were trapped on a home-made 5 µm 200 Å Magic C18 AQ (Michrom) 0.1 × 20 mm pre-column and separated on a home-made 5 µm 100 Å Magic C18 AQ (Michrom) 0.75 × 150 mm column. The analytical separation was run for 65 min using a gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent B). For MS survey scans, the OT resolution was set to 60000 and the ion population was set to 5 × 105 with an m/z window from 400 to 2000. Maximum of 3 precursors were selected for both collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the LTQ and high-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with analysis in the OT. For MS/MS in the LTQ, the ion population was set to 7E3 for velos while for MS/MS detection in the OT, it was set to 2 × 10E5 , with resolution of 7500, first mass at m/z = 100, and maximum injection time of 750 ms. The normalized collision energies were set to 35% for CID and 60% for HCD.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analysed for protein identifications using EasyProt V2.3. A total of 12 raw files were obtained. Peak lists were generated into .mgf format with EasyProtConv, and CID/HCD merging was used to improve peptide identification and quantification. The resulting 12 .mgf files were merged into a single .mgf file that was search against UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (UniProtKB release 2014_10 of Oct, 29, 2014), selecting the following parameters: a) Rattus norvegicus taxonomy; b) instrument type was set to ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap with CID_LTQ_scan_LTQ as the scoring model; c) trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme, with one missed cleavage allowed and the normal cleavage mode; d) TMT6 amino-terminus, TMT6 lysine and cysteine carbamidomethylations as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionine as variable; e) precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm; f) minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids; g) minimum peptide z-score was set to 4. The technical efficiency of the TMT6 experiments was assessed by the peptide labeling rate and the peptide relative intensity distribution of LACB among the 6 tags. Only proteins with at least two unique peptide sequences and a false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 1 % were selected for further quantification. Proteins were clustered based on shared peptides indistinguishable by MS. Quantification was conducted using Isobar R package v.1.9.3.2. Isotopic purity correction (according to the developer’s algorithm) and Isobar default normalisation were applied for each TMT6 reporter ion intensity. For both TMT6 experiments, the protein ratio AP/C was computed as 129+130+131 over 126+127+128. Differentially protein expression was considered whenever both ratio p-value (an estimator of ratio accuracy) and sample p-value (an estimator of biological variability and significance) were lower than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tmt (tandem mass tags), Acute pancreatitis, Rat pancreas, Cerulein, Subcellular fractions

### Affiliations
University of Salamanca. IBSAL.
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Salamanca (Salamanca, Spain). Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca (IBSAL) (Salamanca, Spain).

### Submitter
Violeta García-Hernández

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús Sánchez-Yagüe
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Salamanca (Salamanca, Spain). Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca (IBSAL) (Salamanca, Spain).


