### Accession
PXD005738

### Title
Membrane proteins of Planctopirus limnophila

### Description
Bacteria of the phylum Planctomycetes have been postulated to be the ‘missing link’ between prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Although phylogenetically the Planctomycetes were grouped into  Gram-negative bacteria, it has been reported that they have no outer membrane. Here we present 1D-gel-LC/MS/MS based proteomics data of Planctopirus limnophila membraneswhich in combination with  super resolution light microscopy, cryo electron tomography and bioinformatics suggest  an altered Gram-negative cell plan for Planctopirus limnophila.

### Sample Protocol
500 ml of a P. limnophila culture, cultivated for 3 days at 28 °C and 90 rpm was harvested by centrifugation (5000 x g for 15 min). The pellet was resuspended in 30 ml ice cold 20 mM MOPS buffer pH 8, 200 mM NaCl containing one dissolved EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablet (Roche).The cells were disrupted by cell homogenization (3x 30s 6.0m/s; MP Biomedicals). Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation (5000 x g for 20 min).  Membranes were separated from the soluble proteins by centrifugation (160000 x g, 1 h, 4°C). To isolate crude membrane fractions containing both cytoplasmic and outer membranes, cell extracts were subjected to isopycnic sucrose gradient centrifugation (1 M, 1.5 M, 2 M, and 2.5 M, 200000 x g, 24 h, 12 °C). Afterwards, membranes were treated with carbonate buffer to remove membrane associated and cytosolic proteins followed by a Wessels-Flügge-precipitation to enrich the membrane proteins. Precipitated proteins were washed in 400 μL of icecold methanol and pelleted by centrifugation (13,000 × g, 15 min,4 °C). The pellet was initially dried in a Speedvac (Eppendorf concentrator571 plus) for 8 min, air-dried in an extractor hood and finally dissolved in 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea. Aliquots of 12 to 30 μg protein were separated via one dimensional SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. In gel digestion of proteins was carried out by dividing each lane into eight subsamples with similar protein amounts which were densitometrically determined using AIDA software (Raytest Isotopenmeßgeräte GmbH). Extraction and desalting of the resulting peptides was done according to Lassek et al. 2015. For liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis a nanoAQUITY Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography System (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) was coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc). Peptides from each gel piece were solved in 3 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid, centrifuged for 20 min at 109,000 x g and loaded onto a BEH C18 column, 130 Å, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm at a flow rate of 0.35 μl min-1 (Waters Corporation). Elution of peptides from the column was performed using a 176 min gradient starting with 3.7 % buffer B (80 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid) and 96.3 % buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in Ultra-LC-MS-water): 0-30 min 3.7 % B; 30-51 min 3.7 %-22,1 % B; 51-61 min 22.1 %- 27.0 % B; 585 61-127 min 27 %- 48.3 % B; 127-150 min 48.3- 62.5 % B; 150- 163 min 62.5- 99 % B; 163- 166 min 99 % B; 166- 171 min 99 %- 3.7 % B, 171- 176 min 3.7 % B. Primary MS scans were performed in the Fourier transformation mode scanning an m/z of 400-2000 with a resolution (full width at half maximum at m/z 400) of 60,000 and a lock mass of 445.12003. Primary ions were fragmented in a data-dependent collision induced dissociation mode for the 20 most abundant precursor ions with an exclusion time of 12 s and analysed by the LTQ ion trap. The following ionization parameters were applied: normalized collision energy: 35, activation Q: 0.25, activation time: 10 ms, isolation width: 2 m/z, charge state: +2 to +4. The signal to noise threshold was set to 2000.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analysed using MaxQuant (Max Plack Institute of Biochemistry, www.maxquant.org, version 1.4.1.2) and the following parameters: peptide tolerance 5 ppm; a tolerance for fragment ions of 0.6 Da; variable modification: methionine oxidation, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation; a maximum of three modifications per peptide was allowed; a minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein; fixed false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 %.  All samples were searched against a database containing all protein sequences of P. limnophila DSM 3776 extracted from NCBI at 07/21/2015 with a decoy mode of reverted sequences and common contaminants supplied by MaxQuant.  A protein was considerably reliable identified when it was identified in two biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria of the phylum Planctomycetes have been previously reported to possess several features that are typical of eukaryotes, such as cytosolic compartmentalization and endocytosis-like macromolecule uptake. However, recent evidence points towards a Gram-negative cell plan for Planctomycetes, although in-depth experimental analysis has been hampered by insufficient genetic tools. Here we develop methods for expression of fluorescent proteins and for gene deletion in a model planctomycete, Planctopirus limnophila, to analyse its cell organization in detail. Super-resolution light microscopy of mutants, cryo-electron tomography, bioinformatic predictions and proteomic analyses support an altered Gram-negative cell plan for Planctomycetes, including a defined outer membrane, a periplasmic space that can be greatly enlarged and convoluted, and an energized cytoplasmic membrane. These conclusions are further supported by experiments performed with two other Planctomycetes, Gemmata obscuriglobus and Rhodopirellula baltica. We also provide experimental evidence that is inconsistent with endocytosis-like macromolecule uptake; instead, extracellular macromolecules can be taken up and accumulate in the periplasmic space through unclear mechanisms.

### Keywords
Planctomycetes, 1d-gel-lc-ms/ms, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Professor Dr. Susanne Engelmann, TU Braunschweig, Institut für Mikrobiologie, c/o Helmholtzzentrum für Infektionsforschung, Mikrobielle Proteomik (MPRO), Inhoffenstrasse 7, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany
TU Braunschweig
Institut für Mikrobiologie
Spielmannstr. 7
Germany

### Submitter
Martin Kucklick

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Engelmann
Professor Dr. Susanne Engelmann, TU Braunschweig, Institut für Mikrobiologie, c/o Helmholtzzentrum für Infektionsforschung, Mikrobielle Proteomik (MPRO), Inhoffenstrasse 7, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany


