### Accession
PXD035351

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of Siberian sturgeon seminal plasma

### Description
The biology and physiology of Siberian sturgeon reproduction differ substantially from teleost fish. Seminal plasma support and protect the viability, motility and fertilizing capacity of spermatozoa by creating the optimal environment for the storage. The present study for the first time described in-depth proteomic characterization of Siberian sturgeon seminal plasma using gel based and gel-free proteomic approaches: LC-MS/MS, 2DE and 2D blue native (BN)/SDS-PAGE. LC-MS/MS allowed to identify 657 proteins, which were classified according to their functions and pathways. 2DE visualized 339 spots corresponding to 76 unique proteins (almost 60% were present in various proteoforms). For the first time we demonstrated interactions between seminal proteins; four (C1-C4) multiprotein complexes were identified after 2D BN/SDS-PAGE; composed of (C1) serotransferrin-2 (TF) and fish-egg lectin (FEL); (C2) serum albumin 2 (ALB) and retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4); (C3) ALB and TF (C3) and (C4) apolipoprotein A-I (APOA1), riboflavin-binding protein (RfBP) and myoglobin (MB). BN-SDS-PAGE also revealed that immunoglobulin and TF formed homomultimeric (dimer, trimer, tetramer and pentamer) complexes in seminal plasma. ALB, TF, Beta-Ala-His dipeptidase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, IGH, APOA1, hemopexin, type-4 ice-structuring protein, FEL, RfBP and glycogen phosphorylase, liver form-like were selected as major seminal plasma proteins. The functional analysis of identified proteins indicated their involvement mainly in immune system process and response to stimulus, metabolism, vesicle-mediated transport, proteolysis, and catherin binding involved in cell-cell adhesion. Moreover, 67 proteins were associated with reproductive processes, including spermatogenesis, fertilization, acrosomal reaction and sperm motility. Comparative proteomic analysis of sturgeon seminal plasma showed common proteins with fish and human and 150 proteins specific for sturgeon which may reflect the specificity of sturgeon reproduction. To conclude, this integrative proteomic view lead to deeper insight into physiological function of seminal plasma and processes occurred in sturgeon reproductive tract.

### Sample Protocol
Mature male Acipenser baerii used in this study were cultured in Department of Sturgeon Fish Breeding Inland Fisheries Institute in Pieczarki, Poland. Twenty-four hours before semen collection, males (six individuals) were injected using Luteinizing Hormone Releasing Hormone (LH-RH), Sigma-Aldrich; 0.3 mg/BW). After 36 hrs the milt was collected in the spawning season (February, March and May 2021) by using the catheter, taking care not to pollute them with urine or blood. Semen samples (n=6) were double centrifuged for 10 min at 4 °C (8000×g and then10000×g) to obtain seminal plasma. After centrifugation, seminal plasma was concentrated using spin concentrators (cut off 3kDa). 100 ug of protein mixture from each semen plasma sample was dried using Speedvac and resuspended in 100 ul 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer by 30 min sonication. Cysteine residues were reduced with 10 mM tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine through 1 h incubation at 60 oC followed by the cysteine modification with 20 mM s-methylmethanethiosulfonate. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Promega) in 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio. Tryptic peptides were subjected to desalting using 10 mg Oasis HLB columns (Waters). Samples were loaded and washed with 1 ml of 0.1 % formic acid (FA). Peptides were eluted from columns with 400 µl of 0.1 % FA and 80 % acetonitrile (ACN). Eluates were dried and resuspended in 80 µl 0.1 % FA. Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific) was used to measure peptide concentrations. 2 µg of each sample mixture was analysed using LC-MS system composed of Evosep One (Evosep Biosystems) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto disposable Evotips C18 trap columns (Evosep Biosystems) according to manufacturer protocol with minor modifications. Briefly, Evotips were activated with 25 µl of Evosep solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) by 1 min centrifugation at 600 g followed by 2 min incubation in 2-propanol. After washing with 25 µl of solvent A, 10 µl of each sample solution was loaded onto the C18 tip. Peptides were washed 3 times with 50 µl and covered with 300 µl of solvent A to prevent drying. For each sample a total of four raw files were acquired in data-dependent mode using the following MS1 scan ranges: 350-600, 600-800, 800-1400 and 350-1400 m/z. The remaining LC-MS parameters were the same for all measurements. Chromatography was performed at a flow rate 250 nl/min using the 88 min (15 samples per day) gradient on EV1106 analytical column (Dr Maisch C18 AQ, 1.9 µm beads, 150 µm ID, 15 cm long, Evosep Biosystems). MS1 resolution was set at 60 000 with a normalized AGC target 300% and Auto maximum inject time For MS2, resolution was set at 15 000 with a Standard normalized AGC target, Auto maximum inject time and top 40 precursors within an isolation window of 1.6 m/z considered for MS/MS analysis. Dynamic exclusion was set at 20 s with allowed mass tolerance of ±10 ppm and the precursor intensity threshold at 5e3. Precursors were fragmented in HCD mode with normalized collision energy of 30%. Spray voltage was set to 2.1 kV, funnel RF level at 40, and heated capillary temperature at 275 °C.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were pre-processed with Mascot Distiller [version 2.7, Matrixscience, London, UK] software. Resulting peaklists were searched with Mascot Server (version 2.7, Matriscience, London, UK) against the Acipenser proteins derived from NCBI database (version 20210726, 93,060 sequences; 56,935,290 residues). Following parameters were used:  enzyme – Trypsin, fixed modification – Methylthio(C), variable modification – Oxidation(M), missed cleavages – 1, instrument – HCD. Fragment and parent ion mass tolerances were adjusted for each file after an offline mass recalibration with in-house MScan software (http://proteom.ibb.waw.pl/mscan/), with average parent tolerance arounf 5ppm and 0.01 Da for fragments. FDR was controlled using target-decoy strategy and kept below 1%. Sector runs for each sample were merged and analysed together with the full m/z range runs. Subset proteins and single-peptide proteins were excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Electrophoresis, Fish, Proteome, Seminal plasma, Acipenser baerii, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
Gamete and Embryo Biology Department, Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences in Olsztyn

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Mariola Dietrich
Gamete and Embryo Biology Department, Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of Sciences in Olsztyn


