### Accession
PXD039212

### Title
Proteomic Characterization of human small airway epithelial cells (hSAECs) in the context of respiratory syncytial virus infection and BRD4 inhibition.

### Description
Bromodomain-containing Protein 4 (BRD4) is a transcriptional regulator associated with cancer biology, inflammation, and fibrosis. In airway viral infection, non-toxic BRD4-specific inhibitors (BRD4i) block the release of pro- inflammatory cytokines and prevent downstream remodeling. Although the chromatin modifying functions of BRD4 in inducible gene expression have been extensively investigated, its roles in post-transcriptional regulation are not as well understood. Based on its interaction with transcriptional elongation complex and spiceosome, we hypothesize that BRD4 is a functional regulator of RNA processing. To address this question, we combine data-independent analysis - parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (diaPASEF) with RNA-sequencing to achieve deep coverage of the proteomic and transcriptomic landscape of human small airway epithelial cells exposed to viral challenge and treated with BRD4i. The transcript-level data was further interrogated for alternative splicing analysis, and the resulting data sets were correlated to identify pathways subject to post-transcriptional regulation. We discover that BRD4 regulates alternative splicing of key genes, including Interferon-related Developmental Regulator 1 (IFRD1) and X-Box Binding Protein 1 (XBP1), related to the innate immune response and the unfolded protein response, respectively. These findings extend the actions of BRD4 in control of post-transcriptional RNA processing.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in a buffer containing 0.2% Azo, 25mM Ammonium Bicarbonate, 10 mM L-Methionine, 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), 1x HALT Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor (Thermofisher, Waltham, MA, USA, Cat. # 78440), before transfer to microcentrifuge tubes and boiling at 95 °C for 5 minutes. Samples were diluted to 0.1% Azo, and standardized to 0.5 mg/ml by Bradford Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA, Cat. # 5000006), prior to chemical reduction using 30 mM DTT for 60 minutes at 37 °C. Freshly prepared iodoacetamide solution (200 mM) was added to a final concentration of 20 mM, and the samples were incubated in the dark for 30 min. Protein was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio overnight at 37 °C with agitation at 1000 rpm. Digestion was quenched by addition of formic acid to a final concentration of 1%, and irradiated at 305 nM for 5 minutes to photocleave the Azo surfactant. Samples were centrifuged at 15,000xg, and supernatents were desalted using Pierce C18 tips (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide pellets were resuspended in 0.2% Formic Acid immediately prior to LC-MS analysis. Desalted peptides (200 ng) were loaded and separated on an IonOptiks Aurora UHPLC column with CSI fitting (Melbourne, Australia) at a flow rate of 0.4 μL/min and a linear gradient increasing from 0% to 17% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) (mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid in water) over 60 min; 17% to 25% from 60 to 90 min; 25% to 37% B from 90 to 100 min; 37% to 85% B from 100 min to 110 min; and a 10 min hold at 85% B before washing and returning to low organic conditions. The column directly integrated a nanoESI source for delivery of the samples to the mass spectrometer. MS spectra were captured with a Bruker timsTOF Pro quadrupole-time of flight (Q-TOF) mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA) operating in diaPASEF mode, using 32 windows ranging from m/z 400 to 1200 and 1/K0 0.6 to 1.42.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS data was quantified using DIA - Neural Network (DIANN) version 1.8, using the following parameters: 1% FDR, Library-free search enabled, Minimum fragment m/z: 200, Maximum fragment m/z: 1800, Minimum precursor m/z: 400, Maximum precursor m/z: 1200, Minimum precursor charge: 2, Maximum precursor charge: 4, Minimum peptide length: 7, maximum peptide length: 30, Enzyme: Trypsin, N-terminal methionine cleavage enabled, cysteine carbamidomethylation enabled, Maximum missed cleavages: 1, MS1/MS2 mass accuracy: 10 ppm, Quantification strategy: Robust LC (High Precision), Neural network classifier: Double-pass mode. All other settings were left at default values. Data was searched against a fasta-formatted text file containing 20,404 reviewed human protein sequences (Taxon ID: 9606) and 6 sequences from the RSV Long-strain (Taxon ID: 11260).  Protein-level quantification data was filtered using the "DAPAR" package for R version 4.1.0 to include all proteins quantified in 2 of 3 runs in at least one sample group. Values were then median normalized and missing values were imputed via ssla for partially observed values within a condition, or~set to the 2.5\% quantile of observed intensities for observations that were missing entirely within a condition. The "DEP" R package was used to perform a Limma test between all specified contrasts, and the "IHW" R package was used to adjust all p-values, using the number of quantified peptides per protein as a covariate. An adjusted p-value threshold of 0.05 and a Log2 Fold Change threshold of 0.6 were set to identify significant changes to protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Diapasef, Airway, Epithelial

### Affiliations
Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, University of Wisconsin - Madison
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Morgan Mann

### Lab Head
Dr Allan R. Brasier
Institute for Clinical and Translational Research, University of Wisconsin - Madison


