### Accession
PXD010469

### Title
Human Urinary Proteome in Vesicoureteral Reflux

### Description
Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) is a common pediatric condition that predisposes children to renal damage after urinary tract infection (UTI).  We profiled the urinary proteome of VUR patients with recurrent UTI and renal scarring to identify potential biomarkers characterizing this condition. Urine was obtained from 22 age-matched controls and 22 patients with low grade VUR (1-3 out of 5), renal scarring, and history of recurrent UTI. Proteins extracted from these samples were analyzed by mass spectrometry for protein identification and quantitation for comparison.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analyzed by urinalysis using a Siemens CLINITEK® status automated analyzer (Siemens, Tarrytown, NY) to confirm there was no potential blood contamination or evidence of proteinuria. All samples were centrifuged at 4,500 × g for 20 minutes to remove cellular debris, aliquoted, and frozen at -80°C prior to protein purification compliant with downstream MS analysis. Urine aliquots were subsequently thawed, desalted, and concentrated on 10 kDa MW cutoff filters. Samples were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and alkylated in 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma Aldrich). Extracted urinary proteins were quantified by micro BCA assay following manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).   

### Data Protocol
Extracted urinary proteins from each individual were processed separately via solid-phase reversible sample-preparation (SRS) beads. Incubation was performed in a benchtop thermomixer (ThermoMixer C; Eppendorf, Germany) simultaneously shaking at 1,400 rpm with collection of supernatants after centrifugation at 5,000 rpm for 30 seconds (Minispin; Eppendorf).  Briefly, 10 mg of dry SRS beads (~25 μL) was incubated with 0.01 M NaOH (150 μL) for 3 minutes at room temperature (RT) and then rinsed twice with 150 μL phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Urinary proteins (80 μg) were dissolved in 100 μL of 0.5% SDS in PBS and incubated with the washed beads in 85% acentonitrile (ACN, Thermo Fischer Scientific) in PBS for 30 minutes at RT. Samples were centrifuged to remove unbound proteins, and 8 M urea in PBS (150 μL) was added. Excess reagent was removed by 8 M urea in PBS (150 μL) and 80% ACN in PBS (150 μL) (3 washes each). Samples were washed twice with 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, Sigma Aldrich) in heavy water (H218O) to label the glycosites for separate future study. The beads were then placed in 150 μL of 0.1 M ABC in H218O for N-deglycosylation.

### Publication Abstract
Recurrent urinary tract infections (UTIs) pose a significant burden on the health care system. Underlying mechanisms predisposing children to UTIs and associated changes in the urinary proteome are not well understood. We aimed to investigate the urinary proteome of a subset of children who have vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) and recurrent UTIs because of their risk of developing infection-related renal damage. Improving diagnostic modalities to identify UTI risk factors would significantly alter the clinical management of children with VUR. We profiled the urinary proteomes of 22 VUR patients with low grade VUR (1-3 out of 5), a history of recurrent UTIs, and renal scarring, comparing them to those obtained from 22 age-matched controls. Urinary proteins were analyzed by mass spectrometry followed by protein quantitation based on spectral counting. Of the 2,551 proteins identified across both cohorts, 964 were robustly quantified, as defined by meeting criteria with spectral count (SC) &#x2265;2 in at least 7 patients in either VUR or control cohort. Eighty proteins had differential expression between the two cohorts, with 44 proteins significantly up-regulated and 36 downregulated (q &lt;0.075, FC &#x2265;1.2). Urinary proteins involved in inflammation, acute phase response (APR), modulation of extracellular matrix (ECM), and carbohydrate metabolism were altered among the study cohort.

### Keywords
Urine, Urinary tract infection, Vesicoureteral reflux, Kidney damage

### Affiliations
University of Massachusetts Medical School
Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Patricia Cho

### Lab Head
Dr Richard S. Lee
Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School


