### Accession
PXD041642

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of maize seedling leaf bases

### Description
1 g samples of maize seedling leaf bases were collected from the wild-type (Zheng58) plants and the mutants (bzu3-2). we undertook glycoproteomics analyses of the N-glycans. Based on the libraries of maize protein group and plant N-glycosylation modification in the Uniprot database, we identified 2,194 intact N-glycopeptides, and quantified 181 differentially expressed intact N-glycopeptides (DEGPs)

### Sample Protocol
1 g samples of maize seedling leaf bases were collected from the wild-type plants and the mutants. The fresh tissues were ground in liquid nitrogen and then were dissolved in 2 mL 8 M urea followed by protein alkylation and digestion. The enriched intact N-glycopeptides were then isotopically labeled with diethyl. The samples of each group were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and analyzed online by C18-RPLC-MS/MS. The enriched N-glycome samples were injected into the C18 precolumn (Agilent ZORBAX 300SB, 360 μm o.d. × 200 μm i.d., 7 cm long) for sample loading. Chromatographic separation was performed on a 75 cm-long analytical column (360 μm o.d. × 75 μm i.d.) packed with the same C18 precolumn; Buffer information: buffer A contains 99.9% H2O and 0.1% FA, and buffer B contains of 99.9% ACN and 0.1% FA. The flow rate of the mobile phase was 0.2 mL/min with a multi-step gradient: 1% B 10 min, 1−25% B 20 min, 25−60% B 190 min, 60−95% B 10 min, 95−95% B 10 min, and 95−1% B 5 min. MS spectra were detected as follows: m/z range 500−2500, mass resolution 35 k, automatic gain control (AGC) target 5 × 105, max ion injection time 200 ms. MS/MS spectra were obtained at the Top20 datadependent mode with the following settings: mass resolution 17.5 k, AGC target 1 × 105, max ion injection time 200 ms, dynamic exclusion 50 s, HCD normalized collision energy 10%, isolation window 3 Th. The ESI conditions were as follows: spray voltage 2.8 kV, capillary temperature 250 ℃, and S-lens RF level 75.

### Data Protocol
Based on the libraries of the Corn protein group and of the plant N-glycosylation modifications in the Uniprot database, we identified 2,194 intact N-glycopeptides in qualitative analysis and quantified 181 differentially expressed intact N-glycopeptides (DEGPs) (two out of three technical replicates, ≥ 1.5-fold change and p-value < 0.05). Gene ontology enrichment analysis was conducted using the online tool ShinyGO (http://bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/go/) with a FDR adjusted P-value cutoff of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The unique dumbbell-shape of grass guard cells (GCs) is controlled by their cell walls which enable their rapid responses to the environment. The molecular mechanisms regulating the synthesis and assembly of GC walls are as yet unknown. Here we have identified BZU3, a maize gene encoding UDP-glucose 4-epimerase that regulates the supply of UDP-glucose during GC wall synthesis. The BZU3 mutation leads to significant decreases in cellular UDP-glucose levels. Immunofluorescence intensities reporting levels of cellulose and mixed-linkage glucans are reduced in the GCs, resulting in impaired local wall thickening. BZU3 also catalyzes the epimerization of UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine to UDP-N-acetylglucosamine, and the BZU3 mutation affects N-glycosylation of proteins that may be involved in cell wall synthesis and signaling. Our results suggest that the spatiotemporal modulation of BZU3 plays a dual role in controlling cell wall synthesis and glycosylation via controlling UDP-glucose/N-acetylglucosamine homeostasis during stomatal morphogenesis. These findings provide insights into the mechanisms controlling formation of the unique morphology of grass stomata.

### Keywords
N-glycopeptides, Lc-ms/ms, Maize

### Affiliations
the State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Adaptation and Improvement, Key Laboratory of Plant Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, Henan University, Kaifeng 475001, China
Henan University

### Submitter
Wen-Qiang Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Chun-Peng Song
the State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Adaptation and Improvement, Key Laboratory of Plant Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, Henan University, Kaifeng 475001, China


