### Accession
PXD007790

### Title
NAD Salvage Supports Serine Biosynthesis

### Description
Maintenance of NAD+ levels by mitochondrial complex I, the NAD+ salvage pathway, and other routes is an important factor in of neurodegenerative disease and cancer. Both the production of NAD+ and the metabolic enzymes that require it as a redox cofactor or substrate differ widely in abundance across cell types and conditions. Disruption in the NAD+ supply thus exerts different effects depending on the cellular NAD+ requirements existing in the cell. Pharmacological depletion of NAD+ is actively being pursued in cancer and other diseases but these effects are not fully understood. Here, we combine quantitative proteomics and metabolomics to understand the consequences of disrupting cellular NAD+ levels and find that inhibiting the NAD+ salvage pathway depletes serine biosynthesis from glucose by impeding the NAD+-dependent protein 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH). Importantly, breast cancers that depend on PHGDH are exquisitely sensitive to blocking the NAD+ salvage pathway. PHGDH, and the rate-limiting enzyme of NAD+ salvage are also correlated in public tumor proteome and transcript datasets. These findings are immediately translatable to the pharmacological inhibition of NAMPT in PHGDH-dependent cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Each basic reverse phase fraction was resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed on a Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with online chromatography using a Thermo Fisher EASY nLC. Peptides were separated on a 75 μm x 30 cm column packed with 0.5 cm of Magic C4 resin (Microm Bioresources #PM5/64100/00) and 28 cm of Maccel C18 Accucore resin (Thermo Fisher #16126-000). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient of 8-26% acetonitrile (0.125% formic acid over 120 min followed by 10 min at 100% acetonitrile. Spectra were acquired using a synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 method on the mass spectrometer (McAlister et al., 2014). In this method, MS1 scans were acquired over 400-1400 m/z, 120 000 resolution, 2e5 AGC target, 100 msec maximum injection time. The 10 most abundant MS1 ions from charge states 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation window of 0.5 Th, CID activation at 35% energy, rapid scan rate, 4000 AGC target, 30 s dynamic exclusion, and 150 msec maximum injection time. MS3 scans were acquired using SPS of 10 isolation notches, 100-1000 m/z, 60 000 resolution, 5e4 AGC, HCD activation at 55% energy, 250 msec injection time.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data files were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReadW.exe. MS2 spectra were searched against the human Uniprot database (downloaded August, 2011) using Sequest (Ver28) (Eng et al., 1994) with TMT as a fixed modification (+229.162932) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation (15.99492) as a fixed modification on cysteine. The allowable precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ion mass tolerance was 1 Da. False positive rates were controlled using the target-decoy approach (Elias and Gygi, 2007) with a concatenated reversed database employing linear discriminant analysis to distinguish correct and incorrect peptide identifications based on XCorr, ΔCN, peptide length, and charge state. Peptides were grouped into proteins and their multiplied linear discriminant analysis probabilities were used to sort proteins and filter to a 1% maximum false discovery rate. The sum of all reporter ion S/N values for peptides matching each protein was used for protein quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
NAD<sup>+</sup> is a key metabolic redox cofactor that is regenerated from nicotinamide through the NAD<sup>+</sup> salvage pathway. Here, we find that inhibiting the NAD<sup>+</sup> salvage pathway depletes serine biosynthesis from&#xa0;glucose by impeding the NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent protein, 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH). Importantly, we find that PHGDH<sup>high</sup> breast cancer cell lines are exquisitely sensitive to inhibition of the NAD<sup>+</sup> salvage pathway. Further, we find that PHGDH protein levels and those of the rate-limiting enzyme of NAD<sup>+</sup> salvage, NAMPT, correlate in ER-negative, basal-like breast cancers. Although NAD<sup>+</sup> salvage pathway inhibitors are actively being pursued in cancer treatment, their efficacy has been poor, and our findings suggest that they may be effective for PHGDH-dependent cancers.

### Keywords
Nad, Serine, Fk866, Complex i

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry
Dalhousie University

### Submitter
Patrick Murphy

### Lab Head
Dr Shashi Gujar
Dalhousie University


