### Accession
PXD023711

### Title
α-Catenin Levels Determine Direction of YAP/TAZ Response to Autophagy Perturbation

### Description
The factors regulating cellular identity are critical for understanding the transition from health to disease and responses to therapies. Cell identity is generally assigned based on static phenotypes, like “omics” profiles. However, how such static features translate into dynamic responses to perturbations that determine cellular function is often unclear. We found that autophagy perturbation in different cell types can have opposite responses in growth-promoting oncogenic YAP/TAZ transcriptional signalling. These apparently contradictory responses can be resolved by a feedback loop where autophagy negatively regulates the levels of α-catenins LC3-interacting proteins, which inhibit YAP/TAZ, which, in turn, positively regulate autophagy. High basal levels of α-catenins enable autophagy induction to positively regulate YAP/TAZ, while low α-catenins cause YAP/TAZ activation upon autophagy inhibition. These data reveal how feedback loops enable post-transcriptional determination of cell identity and how levels of a single intermediary protein can dictate the direction of response to external or internal perturbations.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were grown in SILAC DMEM medium (88364, ThermoFisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% dialyzed fetal calf serum (FCS) (26400, ThermoFisher Scientific), 100 U/ml penicillin-streptomycin (P0781, Sigma-Aldrich). Media was supplemented with either light (Arg 0, Lys 0, Sigma-Aldrich), medium (Arg 6, Lys 4, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Andover, MA) or heavy (Arg 10, Lys 8, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Andover, MA) amino acids at 50 mg/L and l-proline at 280 mg/L. The cells were kept in culture for 6 days before treatment with BafA1 (200nM, 24 h). The cells were then washed twice in PBS, collected in LoBind microcentrifuge tubes (0030122356, Eppendorf) and lysed in 200 µl of lysis buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 1x Roche protease inhibitor cocktail) for 5 min at RT. The samples were sonicated 10 x 10 s bursts of medium-high power (on a Diagenode Bioruptor) to shear DNA, centrifuged at 16000xg for 5 min and equal amount of either M/L (DMSO/ BafA1) or H/M (DMSO/ BafA1) cell lysates were combined to proceed to protein extraction and digestion, off-line peptide fractionation by high-pH reverse-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography (HpRP-HPLC) and mass-spectrometry analysis, following the protocol described in Greenwood EJD et al, eLife 2016,and Greenwood EJD et al, Cell reports 2019. Data for SILAC samples were generated using an Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an RSLCnano3000 (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant 1.3 and data were searched against a human Uniprot database (downloaded 03/06/14, 20,176 entries).

### Publication Abstract
The factors regulating cellular identity are critical for understanding the transition from health to disease and responses to therapies. Recent literature suggests that autophagy compromise may cause opposite effects in different contexts by either activating or inhibiting YAP/TAZ co-transcriptional regulators of the Hippo pathway via unrelated mechanisms. Here, we confirm that autophagy perturbation in different cell types can cause opposite responses in growth-promoting oncogenic YAP/TAZ transcriptional signalling. These apparently contradictory responses can be resolved by a feedback loop where autophagy negatively regulates the levels of &#x3b1;-catenins, LC3-interacting proteins that inhibit YAP/TAZ, which, in turn, positively regulate autophagy. High basal levels of &#x3b1;-catenins enable autophagy induction to positively regulate YAP/TAZ, while low &#x3b1;-catenins cause YAP/TAZ activation upon autophagy inhibition. These data reveal how feedback loops enable post-transcriptional determination of cell identity and how levels of a single intermediary protein can dictate the direction of response to external or internal perturbations.

### Keywords
Yap/taz, Autophagy, Α-catenin

### Affiliations
Cambridge Insitute for Medical Resarch, University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Jack Houghton

### Lab Head
Dr David Rubinsztein
Cambridge Insitute for Medical Resarch, University of Cambridge


