### Accession
PXD019020

### Title
Systematic analysis of IL-17 receptor signalosome reveals a robust regulatory feedback loop

### Description
IL-17 mediates immune protection from fungi and bacteria as well as it promotes autoimmune pathologies. However, the regulation of the signal transduction from the IL-17 receptor (IL-17R) remained elusive. We developed a novel mass spectrometry-based approach to identify components of the IL-17R complex followed by analysis of their roles using reverse genetics. Besides the identification of LUBAC as an important signal transducing component of IL-17R, we established that IL-17 signaling is regulated by a robust negative feedback loop mediated by TBK1 and IKKε. These kinases terminate IL-17 signaling by phosphorylating the adaptor ACT1 leading to the release of the essential ubiquitin ligase TRAF6 from the complex. NEMO recruits both kinases to the IL-17R complex, documenting that NEMO has an unprecedented negative function in IL-17 signaling, distinct from its role in NF-κB activation. Our study provides a comprehensive view of the molecular events of the IL-17 signal transduction and its regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem affinity purification of IL-17RSC For each experimental condition, ST2 cells were grown on 6 x 15 cm dishes. Prior to stimulation, cells were washed and incubated in serum free DMEM for 30-60 min. Cells were activated with murine SF-IL-17 (500 ng/ml) for 15 min or left untreated. Subsequently, cells on each dish were solubilized in 1.5 ml of 1% DDM containing lysis buffer, collected and incubated for 30 min on ice. In total, for each experimental condition 9 ml of lysates were obtained. Samples were cleared by centrifugation (21 130 g, 30 min, 2 °C). In the control samples, 3 µg of SF-IL-17 was added post lysis.  The first immunoprecipitation step was carried out by overnight incubation of samples with 50 µl of anti-FLAG M2 affinity agarose gel (Sigma). Subsequently, the beads were washed 3x 0.1% DDM containing lysis buffer and isolated proteins were eluted by incubation of the beads in 250 μl of 1% DDM containing lysis buffer supplemented with 100 µg/ml of 3xFlag peptide (Sigma) overnight. The supernatant was collected and the elution step was repeated once again for 8 hours. The second purification step was carried upon incubation of the samples with 50 µl of Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA Lifesciences) overnight. The samples were subsequently washed 3x with 0.1% DDM containing lysis buffer and 1x with lysis buffer alone. Bound proteins were eluted upon incubation of the beads with 220 µl of MS Elution buffer (2% sodium deoxycholate in 50 mM Tris pH 8.5).  Protein Digestion The eluted protein samples (200 µl) were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine at 60 °C for 60 min and alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate at room temperature for 10 min. Proteins were cleaved overnight with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. In order to remove sodium deoxycholate, samples were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid, mixed with equal volume of ethyl acetate, centrifuged (15 700 g, 2 min) and aqueous phase containing peptides was collected (Masuda, Tomita et al., 2008). This step was repeated for two more times. Peptides were desalted using in-house made stage tips packed with C18 disks (Empore) (Rappsilber, Mann et al., 2007) and resuspended in 20 µl of 2% acetonitrile with 1% trifluoroacetic acid. nLC-MS/MS  analysis The digested protein samples (12 µl) were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm) using 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 15 μl/min for 4 min. Subsequently, peptides were separated on Nano Reversed phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm internal diameter, packed with PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) using linear gradient from 4% to 35% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 60 minutes. Ionized peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution settings with a 4 × 105 ion count target. Four different types of tandem MS were performed according to precursor intensity. First three types were detected in Ion trap in rapid mode, and last one was detected in Orbitrap with 15000 resolution settings: 1) For precursors with intensity between 1x103 to 7x103 with CID fragmentation (35% collision energy ) and 250ms of ion injection time. 2) For ions with intensity in range from 7x103 to 9x104 with CID fragmentation (35% collision energy ) and 100ms of ion injection time. 3) For ions with intensity in range from  9x104 to 5x106 with HCD fragmentation (30% collision energy ) and 100ms of ion injection time. 4) For intensities 5x106 and more with HCD fragmentation (30% collision energy )  and 35ms  of ion injection time. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis All MS data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.5.0) (Cox, Hein et al., 2014). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and minimum length was specified as seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the murine Swiss-Prot database (downloaded from Uniprot on June 2019). Trypsin specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing the cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages.  β-methylthiolation, N-terminal protein acetylation, carbamidomethylation, Met oxidation, and eventually Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation, were included as variable modifications. Label-free quantification was performed using Intensity Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ) algorithm, which divides the sum of all precursor-peptide intensities by the number of theoretically observable peptides (Schwanhausser et al., 2011). Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.5.2.4 software (Tyanova, Temu et al., 2016).  Complex stoichiometry was estimated based on iBAQ Intensity ratio between individual components of the complex and IL-17RC. The PCAs and heat maps were constructed in programming language R.  As source data, we used relative iBAQ values normalized to IL-17RC with addition of pseudocount 0.001. These values were log-transformed prior to the analysis. The PCA was calculated using prcomp function. The heat map was constructed using heatmap.2 function available in gplots v3.0.1.1 package. The analysis of ACT1 sequence to estimate the intrinsic disorder was performed using programs SPOT disorder (Hanson et al., 2017), MFDp2 (Mizianty et al., 2013), and IUPred2A (Meszaros et al., 2018).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tbk1, Traf6, Il-17, Lubac  , Ikkε

### Affiliations
Charles University
Laboratory of Immunity & Cell Communication, BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Draber
Laboratory of Immunity & Cell Communication, BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Vestec, Czech Republic


