### Accession
PXD004880

### Title
Proteome dysregulation in Down syndrome reveals organelle specific aberrations

### Description
Human Trisomy 21 (T21), which causes Down Syndrome (DS), is the most common known cause of intellectual disability. However, the molecular basis for DS phenotypic variability remains poorly understood. Here we used SWATH mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) to quantify protein abundance and protein turnover in fibroblasts from a monozygotic twin pair discordant for T21, and to profile protein expression in 11 unrelated DS individuals and age-matched controls. The integration of the steady state and turnover proteomic data sets with transcript profiles indicated that protein-specific degradation of members of stoichiometric complexes presents a major determinant of T21 gene dosage outcome, a primary effect that was not apparent from genomic data. The data also reveal that T21 results in extensive proteome remodeling similarly affecting proteins encoded by all chromosomes. Finally, we found broad, organelle-specific posttranscriptional effects such as significant down-regulation of the mitochondrial proteome contributing DS hallmarks and variability.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture  All primary fibroblasts were grown in DMEM GlutaMAX (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Life Technologies) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin/fungizone mix (Amimed, BioConcept) at 37 °C in a 5% CO2.  Pulsed SILAC experiment The three replicates of T1DS and T2N samples were used. The identical fibroblast cell aliquots were firstly split and grown in the light SILAC medium. At time point zero (t0=0hr) the medium were switched into heavy SILAC medium upon the gentle washing of three times by pre-warmed PBS, and totally six time points were included (0hr, 1hr, 4hr, 8hr, 14hr, and 24hr) to configure the pSILAC course. At each time point, the cells were collected as snap frozen pellets after three times of pre-cold PBS washing. The cell pellets were stored in-80 °C for proteomic analysis.  Protein extraction and in-solution digestion The cell pellets were suspended in 10M Urea lysis buffer and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), ultrasonically lysed by sonication at 4°C for 2 minutes using a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology), and then centrifuged at 18,000 g for 1 hour to remove the insoluble material. The supernatant protein mixtures were reduced by 10mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP) for 1 hour at 37°C and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 45 minutes at room temperature. All the samples were further diluted by 1:6 (v/v) with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and were digested with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:25 overnight at 37°C. The amount of the purified peptides was determined using Nanodrop ND-1000 (Thermo Scientific) and 1 μg peptides were injected in each LC-MS run.  Shotgun proteomics on TripleTOF  The peptides digested from cell lysate derived from normal cell culture and lysate and  t0 samples in pSILAC experiment were measured on an SCIEX 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer operated in DDA mode. The mass spectrometer was interfaced with an Eksigent NanoLC Ultra 2D Plus HPLC system. Peptides were directly injected onto a 20-cm PicoFrit emitter (New Objective, self-packed to 20 cm with Magic C18 AQ 3-μm 200-Å material), and then separated using a 120-min gradient from 2–35% (buffer A 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, buffer B 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 90% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS1 spectra were collected in the range 360–1,460 m/z with 500ms per scan. The 20 most intense precursors with charge state 2–5 which exceeded 250 counts per second were selected for fragmentation, and MS2 spectra were collected in the range 50–2,000 m/z for 100 ms. The precursor ions were dynamically excluded from reselection for 20 s.  Shotgun proteomics on Oribtrap Elite The pSILAC samples were also measured on Oribtrap-Elite (Thermo Scientific) for the comparison between the conventional method and the new SWATH-MS-pSILAC pipeline. Briefly 1 μg of sample was separated on a Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system using a 15 cm long, 75 μm diameter ID PepMap column (Thermo, particle size 2 μm) with a 3 hour gradient from 5% B to 30% B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Solvents were A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water; B: 2% water, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. MS/MS spectra were acquired using ion trap-CID at 35% normalized collision energy (NCE) by sequencing the top 15 most abundant precursors per cycle. Resolution settings were: MS1 = 120,000 and MS2 = normal resolution for trap-CID. Precursors of charge state +1 and precursors of unknown charge state were excluded from fragmentation. Precursor isolation width was 2 m/z in all cases and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s. MS1 scans were set to a maximum of 1,000,000 counts and a maximum fill time of 200 ms. MS2 trap scans were set to a maximum of 10,000 counts and a maximum fill time of 100 ms.    SWATH mass spectrometry Steady proteome and pSILAC samples were both measured by SWATH-MS. The same LC-MS/MS systems used for DDA measurements on SCIEX 5600 TripleTOF was also used for SWATH analysis. For pSILAC samples a 90-min LC gradient was used. Specifically, in the present SWATH-MS mode, the SCIEX 5600 plus TripleTOF instrument was specifically tuned to optimize the quadrupole settings for the selection of 64 variable wide precursor ion selection windows. The 64-variable window schema was optimized based on a normal human cell lysate sample, covering the precursor mass range of 400–1,200 m/z. SWATH MS2 spectra were collected from 50 to 2,000 m/z. The collision energy (CE) was optimized for each window according to the calculation for a charge 2+ ion centered upon the window with a spread of 15 eV. An accumulation time  (dwell time) of 50 ms was used for all fragment-ion scans in high-sensitivity mode and for each SWATH-MS cycle a survey scan in high-resolution mode was also acquired for 250 ms, resulting in a duty cycle of ~3.45 s.

### Data Protocol
SWATH-MS data analysis: protein expression data For analyzing the steady-state proteomes of twin samples and unrelated samples, the SWATH-MS identification was performed by OpenSWATH software searching against a previously established SWATH assay library which contains mass spectrometric assays for 10,000 human proteins(28). OpenSWATH firstly identified the peak groups from all individual SWATH maps at a target FDR=1% (at least one run with q-value below 0.0236% for any given peak group) and then aligned between SWATH maps with extension FDR=5% using a novel TRIC (TRansfer of Identification Confidence) algorithm that was specifically developed for targeted proteomic data analysis. The requantification feature in OpenSWATH was enabled, but only those peptide groups identified in more than 33% of the samples were proceeded for requantification.  SWATH-MS data analysis: pSILAC data  All the shotgun runs of  the “Light” samples (those from steady proteome as well as t0 samples in pSILAC experiment) were firstly searched against human Swissprot database using iPortal pipeline. Profile-mode .wiff files from shotgun data acquisition were centroided and converted to mzML format using the AB Sciex Data Converter v.1.3 and converted to mzXML format using MSConvert v.3.04.238. iPortal utilized iProphet schema to integrate the search results from X!Tandem, Omessa, Myrimatch, and Comet at peptide level FDR =1%. Xinteract option was “-dDECOY_ -OAPdlIw”. Specially, peptide tolerances at MS and MS/MS level were set to be 75 ppm and 0.1 Da respectively. Up to two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Oxidation at methionine was set as variable modification whereas carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as fixed modification. The light version of  raw spectral library was generated from all valid peptide spectrum matches and then refined into the non redundant consensus libraries using SpectraST. Using the spectrast2tsv.py function in OpenSWATH we then generated the light and heavy MS assays as the final library constructed from top 3-6 most intense fragments with Q3 range from 400 to 1200 m/z excluding those falling in the precursor SWATH window were used for targeted data analysis of SWATH maps.  Dimethylation labeling based quantitative proteomics The raw files were searched against human Swissprot database using Maxquant. The “DimthLys0” and “DimethNter0” labels were enabled for the Light labels and the “DimethLys4” and “DimethNter4” were enabled for Heavy labels. Oxidation at Methionine was set as variable modification whereas carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as the fixed modification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The peptide tolerances were set as 6 ppm and 20 ppm at MS and MS/MS levels. The feature of “match between runs” and re-quantification were enabled with a match window of 0.7 min. Other parameters are kept as Default in Maxquant.  Both peptide- and protein- level results were accepted at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Trisomy 21, Swath, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Yansheng Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


