### Accession
PXD008119

### Title
A Comprehensive Proteomics Study on Platelet Concentrates: Platelet Proteome, Storage Time and Mirasol Pathogen Reduction Technology

### Description
Platelet concentrates (PCs) represent a blood transfusion product with a major concern for safety as their storage temperature (20-24ºC) allows bacterial growth, and their maximum storage time period (less than a week) precludes complete microbiological testing. Pathogen inactivation technologies (PITs) provide an additional layer of safety to the blood transfusion products from known and unknown pathogens (such as bacteria, viruses and parasites). In this context, PITs (such as Mirasol Pathogen Reduction Technology -PRT-) have been developed and are implemented in many countries. However, several studies have shown in vitro that Mirasol PRT induces a certain level of platelet shape change, hyperactivation, basal degranulation and increased oxidative damage during storage. It has been suggested that Mirasol PRT might accelerate what has been described as the platelet storage lesion (PSL), but supportive molecular signatures have not been obtained. We aimed at dissecting the influence of both variables, i.e. Mirasol PRT and storage time, at the proteome level. We present comprehensive proteomics data analysis of Control PCs and PCs treated with Mirasol PRT at storage days 2, 6 and 8. Our workflow was set to perform proteomics analysis using a gel-free and label-free quantification (LFQ) approach. Semi-quantification was based on LFQ signal intensities of identified proteins using MaxQuant/Perseus software platform. We identified marginal differences between Mirasol PRT and control PCs during storage. However, those significant changes at the proteome level were specifically related to the functional aspects previously described to affect platelets upon Mirasol PRT, and in addition, the effect of Mirasol PRT on the platelet proteome appeared not to be exclusively due to an accelerated or enhanced PSL. In summary, semi-quantitative proteomics allows to discern between proteome changes due to Mirasol PRT or PSL, and proves to be a methodology suitable to phenotype platelets in an unbiased manner, in various physiological contexts.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental Design: Six buffy coat derived platelet concentrates (PCs) were pooled at day 1 after blood donation and processing, and split back in six equal units. Three of these units were left untreated while the other three were treated with Mirasol PRT (Terumo BCT, Zaventem, Belgium). The detailed preparation method of PCs and Mirasol PRT has been described previously [Zeddies et al, Transfusion, 2014]. We collected platelets from a single Control and a single Mirasol PRT unit to prepare protein extracts and to perform functional tests at day 2, 6 and 8 of storage. The experiment was replicated 3-4 times. Additionally, we obtained freshly isolated platelets by differential centrifugation and washing from citrate-anticoagulated blood sampled from three independent donors to prepare protein extracts. All blood products were produced and stored at the Dutch Blood Bank Sanquin according to national standards. Healthy donors participated after giving informed consent. The study was approved by our institute medical ethics committee in accordance with the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki. Protein extraction and processing for mass spectrometry acquisition: Platelets were lysed in 8M urea (Life technologies, Carlsbad, California, USA) in 100mM TRIS-HCl pH 8 (Life technologies). Lysate processing was performed in solution with 5 μg protein. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10mM DTT (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) 60 minutes at 20°C, alkylated with 55mM iodocetamide (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 45 minutes at 20°C. Samples were digested 16 hours at 20°C with MSgrade trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, Wisconsin, United States) in a ratio of 1:20 trypsin:protein. Tryptic peptides were desalted and concentrated using 3M Empore-C18 StageTips (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) that were made following a described procedure [Yu et al, Protocol Exchange, 2014] and eluted with 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid (Sigma Aldrich), 80% (v/v) acetonitrile (acetonitrile and water are from Biosolve Chimie, Dieuze, France). Sample volume was reduced by SpeedVac and supplemented with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a final volume of 5 μl, of which 3 μl was injected for MS analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis: Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse phase chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific), following standard procedures and settings. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1 using default settings and Label Free Quantification (LFQ). The peptides were identified searching against the UniProt KB human taxonomy database [Cox et al, Nat Biotechnol, 2008]. The output Protein Groups table generated by MaxQuant was used as input for Perseus software version 1.5.5.3 for further analysis. Reverse hits and potential contaminants were removed. A generalized logarithm transformation [log2(x)] was applied to all LFQ intensity values to stabilize the variance across the full intensity range. Data was filtered so that at least 1 group had at least 3 valid values. Missing values in the data were imputed using normal distribution. Subsequently, data was grouped to compare Control or Mirasol treatment groups at day 2, 6 and 8 of storage by applying T-test, with multiple testing correction, setting FDR at 5% and S0 = 0 [Tusher et al, PNAS, 2001]. Multiple-sample test across treatment groups (Control, Mirasol) and storage time points (day 2, 6, 8) was done setting FDR at 5% and S0 = 0. Soft clustering of proteins was done using K-means on Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Platelet concentrates (PCs) represent a blood transfusion product with a major concern for safety as their storage temperature (20-24&#xb0;C) allows bacterial growth, and their maximum storage time period (less than a week) precludes complete microbiological testing. Pathogen inactivation technologies (PITs) provide an additional layer of safety to the blood transfusion products from known and unknown pathogens such as bacteria, viruses, and parasites. In this context, PITs, such as Mirasol Pathogen Reduction Technology (PRT), have been developed and are implemented in many countries. However, several studies have shown in vitro that Mirasol PRT induces a certain level of platelet shape change, hyperactivation, basal degranulation, and increased oxidative damage during storage. It has been suggested that Mirasol PRT might accelerate what has been described as the platelet storage lesion (PSL), but supportive molecular signatures have not been obtained. We aimed at dissecting the influence of both variables, that is, Mirasol PRT and storage time, at the proteome level. We present comprehensive proteomics data analysis of Control PCs and PCs treated with Mirasol PRT at storage days 1, 2, 6, and 8. Our workflow was set to perform proteomics analysis using a gel-free and label-free quantification (LFQ) approach. Semi-quantification was based on LFQ signal intensities of identified proteins using MaxQuant/Perseus software platform. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008119. We identified marginal differences between Mirasol PRT and Control PCs during storage. However, those significant changes at the proteome level were specifically related to the functional aspects previously described to affect platelets upon Mirasol PRT. In addition, the effect of Mirasol PRT on the platelet proteome appeared not to be exclusively due to an accelerated or enhanced PSL. In summary, semi-quantitative proteomics allows to discern between proteome changes due to Mirasol PRT or PSL, and proves to be a methodology suitable to phenotype platelets in an unbiased manner, in various physiological contexts.

### Keywords
Storage time, Blood safety, Proteomics, Platelet transfusion, Platelet function tests, Pathogen inactivation technologies

### Affiliations
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA)
Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria San Carlos (IdISSC), Dept. Hematology, Megakaryopoiesis and Platelets Group, Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Laura Gutiérrez

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Gutiérrez
Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria San Carlos (IdISSC), Dept. Hematology, Megakaryopoiesis and Platelets Group, Madrid, Spain


