### Accession
PXD035010

### Title
Low dose rate radiation induced secretion of TGF-β3 together 2 with an activator in small extracellular vesicles modifies low 3 dose hyper-radiosensitivity through ALK1 binding

### Description
Hyper-radiosensitivity (HRS) is the increased sensitivity to low doses of ionizing radiation 12 observed in most cell lines. We previously demonstrated that HRS is permanently abolished in cells irradiated at a low dose rate (LDR), in a mechanism dependent on transforming growth factor β3 (TGF-β3). In this study, we aimed to elucidate the activation and receptor binding of TGF-β3 in this mechanism. T-47D cells were pre-treated with inhibitors of potential receptors and activators of TGF-β3, along with addition of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) from LDR primed cells, before their radiosensitivity was assessed by the clonogenic assay. The protein content of sEVs from LDR primed cells was analyzed with mass spectrometry. Our results show that sEVs contain TGF-β3 regardless of priming status, but only sEVs from LDR primed cells remove HRS in reporter cells. Inhibition of the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family prevents removal of HRS, suggesting an MMP-dependent activation of TGF-β3 in the LDR primed cells. We demonstrate a functional interaction between TGF-β3 and activin receptor like kinase 1 (ALK1), by showing that TGF-β3 removes HRS through ALK1 binding, independent of ALK5 and TGF-βRII. These results are an important contribution to a more comprehensive understanding of the mechanism behind TGF-β3 mediated removal of HRS.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed in two separate experiments, where sEVs were isolated from LDR primed and unirradiated control T-47D cells. There were three samples per group. Each Coomassie G-250 stained SDS-PAGE gel lane was cut into 12 slices and each of them in-gel digested using 0.1 µg of trypsin in 25 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8. After micropurification using µ-C18 ZipTips (Millipore, Oslo, Norway), the pep-tides were dried in a SpeedVac and dissolved in 10 µl 1% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile in water. Half of the volume was injected into an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale CA, USA) connected to a linear quadrupole ion trap-orbitrap (LTQ-Orbitrap XL) mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelec-trospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label free MS1 quantification was performed using PEAKS® Xpro(Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.).

### Publication Abstract
Hyper-radiosensitivity (HRS) is the increased sensitivity to low doses of ionizing radiation observed in most cell lines. We previously demonstrated that HRS is permanently abolished in cells irradiated at a low dose rate (LDR), in a mechanism dependent on transforming growth factor &#x3b2;3 (TGF-&#x3b2;3). In this study, we aimed to elucidate the activation and receptor binding of TGF-&#x3b2;3 in this mechanism. T-47D cells were pretreated with inhibitors of potential receptors and activators of TGF-&#x3b2;3, along with addition of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) from LDR primed cells, before their radiosensitivity was assessed by the clonogenic assay. The protein content of sEVs from LDR primed cells was analyzed with mass spectrometry. Our results show that sEVs contain TGF-&#x3b2;3 regardless of priming status, but only sEVs from LDR primed cells remove HRS in reporter cells. Inhibition of the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) family prevents removal of HRS, suggesting an MMP-dependent activation of TGF-&#x3b2;3 in the LDR primed cells. We demonstrate a functional interaction between TGF-&#x3b2;3 and activin receptor like kinase 1 (ALK1) by showing that TGF-&#x3b2;3 removes HRS through ALK1 binding, independent of ALK5 and TGF-&#x3b2;RII. These results are an important contribution to a more comprehensive understanding of the mechanism behind TGF-&#x3b2;3 mediated removal of HRS.

### Keywords
Adam; adaptive response; alk1; alk5; bystander effects; hyper-radiosensi-27 tive response; low-dose radiation; low dose rate; mmp; tgf-β3

### Affiliations
University of Oslo, Department of Physics
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Bernd Thiede

### Lab Head
Dr Ingunn Hanson
University of Oslo, Department of Physics


