### Accession
PXD014741

### Title
Loss of ZBTB24, a novel non-homologous end-joining protein, impairs class-switch recombination in ICF syndrome

### Description
The autosomal recessive immunodeficiency, centromeric instability and facial anomalies (ICF) syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Despite recent successes in the identification of the underlying gene defects, it is currently unclear how mutations in any of the four known ICF genes cause a primary immunodeficiency. Here we demonstrate that loss of ZBTB24 in B cells from ICF2 patients impairs non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) during immunoglobulin class-switch recombination and consequently impairs immunoglobulin production and subtype balance. Mechanistically, we found that ZBTB24 associates with poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) and stimulates auto-poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of this enzyme. The zinc finger in ZBTB24 binds PARP1-associated poly(ADP-ribose) chains and mediates the PARP1-dependent recruitment of ZBTB24 to DNA breaks. Moreover, by binding to poly(ADP-ribose) chains ZBTB24 protects these moieties from degradation by poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG). This enhances the poly(ADP-ribose)-dependent interaction between PARP1 and the LIG4/XRCC4 NHEJ complex and promotes NHEJ by facilitating the assembly of this repair complex at DNA breaks. Thus, we uncover ZBTB24 as a regulator of PARP1-dependent NHEJ and class-switch recombination, providing a molecular basis for the immunodeficiency in ICF syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
For stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) labeling, U2OS cells were cultured for 14 days in media containing ‘heavy’ (H) and ‘light’ (L) labeled forms of the amino acids arginine and lysine respectively. SILAC-labeled cells were transiently transfected with GFP-ZBTB24  (H) or empty GFP vector (L) and equal amounts of H- and L-labelled cells were lysed in EBC buffer as described above. GFP-ZBTB24 (H) or empty GFP vector control (L) lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation using GFP Trap beads as described above . The beads were subsequently washed 2 times with EBC buffer and 2 times with 50mM (NH4)2CO3 followed by overnight digestion using 2.5μg trypsin at 37°C under constant shaking. Peptides of the H and L precipitates were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and desalted using a Sep-Pak tC18 cartridge by washing with 0.1 % acetic acid. Finally, peptides were eluted with 0.1% acetic acid / 60% acetonitrile and lyophilized. A similar experiment was performed for GFP-PARP1.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry was performed as described previously (Schimmel et al., 2014). The sample was analyzed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nanoLC 1000 system (Proxeon). Digested peptides were separated using a 13cm fused silica capillary (ID: 75μm, OD: 375μm, Polymicro Technologies, California, US) in-house packed with 1.8μm C18 beads (ReprospherDE, Pur, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using a gradient from 2% to 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl/min for 2 hours. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ion mode at 2.2 kV with the capillary heated to 200°C. Data-dependent acquisition mode was used to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS scans, employing a top 10 method. Full scan MS spectra were obtained with a resolution of 70,000, a target value of 3,000,000 and a scan range from 400 to 2,000 m/z. Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded with a resolution of 17,500, a target value of 100,000 and a normalized collision energy of 25%. The precursor ion masses selected for MS/MS analysis were subsequently dynamically excluded from MS/MS analysis for 60 sec. Precursor ions with a charge state of 1 and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS/MS events. Raw MS files were analyzed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.4.1.2; Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Parp1, Zbtb24

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center the Netherlands

### Submitter
Alfred Vertegaal

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred C.O. Vertegaal
Cell and Chemical Biology Leiden University Medical Center the Netherlands


