### Accession
PXD009955

### Title
Deconstruction of the GalNAc-Type O-Glycosylation Capacity of Human HEK293 Cells

### Description
Most proteins trafficking the secretory pathway of metazoan cells will acquire GalNAc-type O-glycosylation. GalNAc-type O-glycosylation is differentially regulated in cells by the expression of a repertoire of up to twenty genes encoding polypeptide GalNAc-transferase isoforms (GalNAc-Ts) that initiate O-glycosylation by catalyzing the attachment of GalNAc residues to select Ser and Thr residues. These GalNAc-Ts orchestrate the positions and patterns of O-glycans on proteins in poorly understood coordinated ways guided partly by the kinetic properties and substrate specificities of their catalytic domains and modulatory effects of their unique GalNAc-binding lectin domains. Here, we provide the hereto most comprehensive characterization of the non-redundant contributions of individual GalNAc-T isoforms to the O-glycoproteome of the human HEK293 cell line using quantitative differential O-glycoproteomics on a panel of isogenic HEK293 cell lines with knockout of GalNAc-T genes (GALNT1, T2, T3, T7, T10, or T11). We confirm that a major part of the O-glycoproteome is covered by redundancy, while distinct subsets of O-glycosites are covered by non-redundant GalNAc-T isoform-specific functions. We demonstrate that GalNAc-T7 and T10 as predicted from in vitro studies function in completion of high density O-glycosylated regions, while GalNAc-T11 selectively controls the site-specific O-glycosylation of low-density lipoprotein-related receptors in the linker regions between the ligand-binding LDLR class A repeats.

### Sample Protocol
Generation of GALNT gene knockout cell lines - Gene targeting using Zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) were performed in HEK293 wildtype (WT) and HEK293 COSMC KO (HEK293SC) cell lines. Cells were maintained in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% glutamine and 1% NEAA. ZFN GFP/Crimson fusion constructs were transfected by electroporation using Amaxa Nucleofector 2B system (Lonza, Switzerland), and GFP/Crimson double positive cells were enriched by FACS sorting. After 1-2 week culture bulk sorted cell populations were further single cell sorted for GFP/Crimson negative population. KO clones with frame shift mutations were identified by Indel Detection Amplification Assay (IDAA).   Immunocytology – HEK293 cells were grown on sterile cover slides and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. Fixed cells were incubated with monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) to GalNAc-T1 (4D8), T2 (4C4), T3 (2D10) or T11 (1B2) overnight at 4˚C, followed by FITC-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse IgG (Dako) for 45 min, and mounted with ProLong Gold antifade reagent (DAPI) (Invitrogen). Fluorescence microscopy was performed using a Zeiss Axioskop 2 plus with an AxioCam MR3.   Dimethyl labeling and Lectin Weak Affinity Chromatography –Packed cell pellets (0.5 mL) were lysed with 0.1% RapiGest (Waters) or 200 mL cell culture supernatant were applied to a 1 mL Viscia Villosa lectin (VVA) lectin agarose (Vectorlabs) column and bound glycoproteins were eluted by heating a slurry of the agarose in 0.02% RapiGest. Cleared lysates and Secretome samples were heated for 10 min at 80C, followed by reduction (5 mM DTT, 60C, 0.5 h), alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide, RT, 30 min), and digestion with Trypsin (25 µg/sample) (Roche) (37C, ON). Cleared acidified digests were loaded onto equilibrated SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) followed by 0.1% TFA wash and labeled on-column by adding 30 mM NaBH3CN and 0.2% formaldehyde (light-labeling, L) or 30 mM NaBH3CN and 0.2% D-formaldehyde (medium-labeling, M). Columns were washed using 0.1% FA and eluted with 50% MeOH in 0.1% FA. Labeled GalNAc-glycopeptides were separated from non-glycosylated peptides using a long VVA-agarose LWAC.   Quantitative O-glycoproteomic Strategy - The glycopeptide quantification based on M/L isotope labeled doublet ratios was evaluated to estimate a meaningful cut-off ratio for substantial changes. The labeled glycopeptides produced doublets with varying ratios of the isotopic ions as well as a significant number of single precursor ions without evidence of ion pairs. Labeled samples from HEK293SC and HEK293SC with KO of individual GALNT genes were mixed 1:1 and subjected to LWAC separation. The distribution of labeled peptides from the LWAC flow-through showed that the quantitated peptide M/L ratios were normally distributed with 99% falling within +/-1 (Log10). We selected doublet with less/more than -1/+1 (Log10) value and singlets as candidates for isoform-specific O-glycosylation events.  Isoelectric focusing LWAC fractions from total cell lysate digests were screened by preliminary LC-MS for glycopeptide content, and fractions most enriched in glycopeptides were pooled together, dried by vacuum centrifugation, reconstituted in IPG rehydration buffer, and submitted to IEF fractionation (22). Isoelectric focusing was performed by a 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent) using pH 3-10 strips (GE Healthcare) 12 fractions were collected and desalted by custom Stage Tips (C18 sorbent from Empore 3 M) and submitted to LC-MS and HCD/ETD-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Scientific) using Sequest HT node. All spectra were initially searched with full cleavage specificity, filtered according to the confidence level (medium, low and unassigned) and further searched with the semi-specific enzymatic cleavage. In all cases the precursor mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 50 mmu. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was used as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and HexNAc attachment to serine, threonine and tyrosine were used as variable modifications for ETD MS2. All HCD MS2 were pre-processed as described (23) and searched under the same conditions mentioned above using only methionine oxidation as variable modification. All spectra were searched against a concatenated forward/reverse human-specific database (UniProt, January 2013, containing 20,232 canonical entries and another 251 common contaminants) using a target false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 %. FDR was calculated using target decoy PSM validator node, a part of the Proteome Discoverer workflow. The resulting list was filtered to include only peptides with glycosylation as a modification. This resulted in a final glycoprotein list identified by at least one unique glycopeptide. ETD MS2 data were used for unambiguous site assignment. HCD MS2 data were used for unambiguous site assignment only if the number of GalNAc residues was equal to the number of potential sites on the peptide. Glycopeptide M/L ratios were determined using dimethyl 2plex method. The M/L ratio of the detected precursor ions doublet was calculated using sequentially the Event Detector Node and the Precursor Ion Node of the Proteome Discoverer Workflow. The Event Detector node was used for peak area quantification clustering isotopes of precursor ions that elute during the same retention time. Isotopically labeled ions were finally quantified using Precursor Ions Quantifier Node. Manual validation of the precursor ions without reported quantitative values (singlets) within a selected pool of data has revealed that to be able to distinguish the substantial up/down regulations within the chemical noise the minimum required threshold level has to be at least 5E5. We have inspected all of such cases manually by calculating XIC of the assigned precursor ions and the respective potential dimethyl pair in raw data and reported them as outliers (“singlets”).

### Publication Abstract
Most proteins trafficking the secretory pathway of metazoan cells will acquire GalNAc-type O-glycosylation. GalNAc-type O-glycosylation is differentially regulated in cells by the expression of a repertoire of up to twenty genes encoding polypeptide GalNAc-transferase isoforms (GalNAc-Ts) that initiate O-glycosylation. These GalNAc-Ts orchestrate the positions and patterns of O-glycans on proteins in coordinated, but poorly understood ways - guided partly by the kinetic properties and substrate specificities of their catalytic domains, as well as by modulatory effects of their unique GalNAc-binding lectin domains. Here, we provide the hereto most comprehensive characterization of nonredundant contributions of individual GalNAc-T isoforms to the O-glycoproteome of the human HEK293 cell using quantitative differential O-glycoproteomics on a panel of isogenic HEK293 cells with knockout of GalNAc-T genes (<i>GALNT1</i>, <i>T2</i>, <i>T3</i>, <i>T7</i>, <i>T10</i>, or <i>T11</i>). We confirm that a major part of the O-glycoproteome is covered by redundancy, whereas distinct O-glycosite subsets are covered by nonredundant GalNAc-T isoform-specific functions. We demonstrate that the GalNAc-T7 and T10 isoforms function in follow-up of high-density O-glycosylated regions, and that GalNAc-T11 has highly restricted functions and essentially only serves the low-density lipoprotein-related receptors in linker regions (C<sup>6</sup>XXXTC<sup>1</sup>) between the ligand-binding repeats.

### Keywords
Simplecell, Lc-ms, Etd, Glycproteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
Associate Professor Glyco MS Group Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG) Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine (24.6.36) University of Copenahgen Blegdamsvej 3 2200 Copenhagen N Denmark

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Y. Vakhrushev
Associate Professor Glyco MS Group Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG) Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine (24.6.36) University of Copenahgen Blegdamsvej 3 2200 Copenhagen N Denmark


