### Accession
PXD028379

### Title
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 regulate mitochondrial dynamics

### Description
Mitochondrial dynamics provides cells with the flexibility required to adapt and respond to mitochondrial toxins, yet the mechanisms underpinning the regulation of mitochondrial dynamics machinery by these stimuli is poorly understood. Here we show that pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4) is required for cells to undergo rapid mitochondrial fragmentation when challenged with toxins. Moreover, PDK4 overexpression was sufficient to promote mitochondrial fission even in the absence of stress. Phosphoproteomic screen for PDK4 substrates identified cytoplasmic GTPase, Septin 2 (SEPT2), as the key effector molecule that acts as a receptor for DRP1 to promote mitochondrial fission. PDK4-mediated mitochondrial reshaping limits mitochondrial bioenergetics, supports cancer cell growth and revealed PDK4-SEPT2-DRP1 axis as a regulator of mitochondrial dynamics at the interface between cellular bioenergetics and mitochondrial dynamics

### Sample Protocol
TiO2 based enriched tryptic digests were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Eazy nano LC 1200 UHPLC equipped with an autosampler using a reversed-phase peptide trap Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length) and a reversed-phase analytical column PepMapTM RSLC C18 (75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length, 3 μm particle size), both from Thermo Scientific, followed by electrospray ionization at a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Samples were eluted using a split gradient of 3-50% solution B (80% ACN with 0.1% FA) in 60 min and 50-80% solution B in 10 min followed column wash at 100% solution B for 10 min. The chromatography system was coupled in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with the 120,000 resolution MS1 scan (375-1500 m/z), AGC target of 5e5 and max injection time of 50ms. Peptides above threshold 5e3 and charges 2-7 were selected for fragmentation with dynamic exclusion after 1 time for 15 s and 10 ppm tolerance. Spectra were searched against the uniprot-mouse DB using the Proteome Dsciverer Sorcerer 2.1 with SEQUEST-based search algorithm, and comparative analysis of proteins identified in this study was performed using Scaffold 4 Q+S.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (XCorr Only) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 2.1.1.21). Sequest (XCorr Only) was set up to search uniprot-proteome_mus.fasta (50282 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Sequest (XCorr Only) was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine, label:13C(6) of lysine, label:13C(6)15N(4) of arginine, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of lysine and the n-terminus and phospho of serine were specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) as variable modifications.Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony

### Publication Abstract
Dynamic regulation of mitochondrial morphology provides cells with the flexibility required to adapt and respond to electron transport chain (ETC) toxins and mitochondrial DNA-linked disease mutations, yet the mechanisms underpinning the regulation of mitochondrial dynamics machinery by these stimuli is poorly understood. Here, we show that pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4) is genetically required for cells to undergo rapid mitochondrial fragmentation when challenged with ETC toxins. Moreover, PDK4 overexpression was sufficient to promote mitochondrial fission even in the absence of mitochondrial stress. Importantly, we observed that the PDK4-mediated regulation of mitochondrial fission was independent of its canonical function, i.e., inhibitory phosphorylation of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC). Phosphoproteomic screen for PDK4 substrates, followed by nonphosphorylatable and phosphomimetic mutations of the PDK4 site revealed cytoplasmic GTPase, Septin 2 (SEPT2), as the key effector molecule that acts as a receptor for DRP1 in the outer mitochondrial membrane to promote mitochondrial fission. Conversely, inhibition of the PDK4-SEPT2 axis could restore the balance in mitochondrial dynamics and reinvigorates cellular respiration in mitochondrial fusion factor, mitofusin 2-deficient cells. Furthermore, PDK4-mediated mitochondrial reshaping limits mitochondrial bioenergetics and supports cancer cell growth. Our results identify the PDK4-SEPT2-DRP1 axis as a regulator of mitochondrial function at the interface between cellular bioenergetics and mitochondrial dynamics.

### Keywords
Mitochondrial dynamics, Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4, Silac, Drp1

### Affiliations
Center for genomic integrity (CGI), Institute of basic science (IBS), UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea
Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Kyungpook National University Hospital, Daegu, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Byung-gyu kim

### Lab Head
Dr In-Kyu Lee
Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Kyungpook National University Hospital, Daegu, Republic of Korea


