### Accession
PXD022055

### Title
Proteomic analysis of NCP's in rat bones

### Description
The project analyses non-collagenous proteins (NCP's) present in rat bones of various age and sex to determine the various changes that take place in the NCP's with regard to age and sex

### Sample Protocol
Rat tibia and fibula were defatted using a chloroform/methanol mixture and dried. Following defatting, the bones were demineralized using 0.5 M EDTA for 18 hours at 4°C, following which 6M GuHCl solution was added to the insoluble pellet and incubated for 18 hours at 4°C to extract the EDTA-insoluble fraction. The insoluble fraction was ultrafiltered using 10 kDa MWCO vivaspin ultrafilters (12400 RPM), and the retentate was further ultrafiltered using 50 mM ammonium acetate solution (twice). The retentate was then redissolved using ammonium acetate, reduced using 1M dithiothreitol for 10 minutes at 60°C, alkylated using iodoacetamide for 45 minutes in darkness, and the alkylation subsequently quenched using dithiothreitol. The reduced and alkylated proteins were digested using trypsin (18 h), trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) added to stop the digestion and make the solution to 0.1% TFA, purified using C18 ZipTips and eluted using 50%ACN+0.1% TFA. The eluted peptided were dried and analysed using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The proteomic data was converted to .mgf files and searched against the Rattus genus in SwissProt database, with carbamidomethylation (C-term) as the fixed modification, deamidation (NQ), and oxidation (K/M/P) as the variable modifications. Peptide tolerance was set at 5 ppm and MS/MS tolerance at 0.5 Da with a decoy search carried out.

### Publication Abstract
One of the key questions in forensic cases relates to some form of age inference, whether this is how old a crime scene is, when in time a particular crime was committed, or how old the victim was at the time of the crime. These age-related estimations are currently achieved through morphological methods with varying degrees of accuracy. As a result, biomolecular approaches are considered of great interest, with the relative abundances of several protein markers already recognized for their potential forensic significance; however, one of the greatest advantages of proteomic investigations over genomics ones is the wide range of post-translational modifications (PTMs) that make for a complex but highly dynamic resource of information. Here, we explore the abundance of several PTMs including the glycosylation, deamidation, and oxidation of several key proteins (collagen, fetuin A, biglycan, serum albumin, fibronectin and osteopontin) as being of potential value to the development of an age estimation tool worthy of further evaluation in forensic contexts. We find that glycosylations lowered into adulthood but deamidation and oxidation increased in the same age range.

### Keywords
Non-collagenous proteions, Age estimation, Shotgun proteomics, Rat proteome

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, The University of Manchester

### Submitter
Manasij Pal Chowdhury

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Michael Buckley
Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, The University of Manchester


