### Accession
PXD003304

### Title
Deamidation and phosphorylation sites on SrfH-treated ERK2 kinase

### Description
This project has the aim of identifying possible post-translational modifications induced by the Salmonella effector SrfH on the host kinase ERK2.

### Sample Protocol
Purified ERK2 (Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO) and SrfH (produced in-house) were combined (ERK2:SrfH, m:m ratio) at 1:1, 1:10, and 1:100 in 20 mM Tris-HCl, 10mM MgCl2, and 1 mM EDTA. The mixture was incubated at 37 °C with shaking overnight. The reaction was stopped by addition of 4x LDS sample loading buffer and 5 mM TCEP before heating at 95 °C for 10 minutes. After cooling, the samples were separated on a 4-12% bis-tris polyacrylamide gel, and stained with GelCode Blue (Pierce). Bands corresponding to the molecular weight of ERK2 were excised and cut into pieces < 1mm3. Gel pieces were destained with 50% acetonitrile and 50%-50mM NH4HCO3 until clear and then fully dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. Gel pieces were dried in a SpeedVac, before rehydrating with endoproteinase GluC (Staphylococcus aureus Protease V8) diluted 1:10 (m/m) the buffer provided by the manufacturer (New England BioLabs, Ipswith, MA) and incubated overnight at 37 °C with shaking. The peptides were recovered by extracting the gel pieces 3x with 5% formic acid / 50% ACN for 20 minutes at room temperature. The solution was then dried to completeness in a SpeedVac and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were loaded into capillary columns (75 µm x 65 cm, Polymicro) packed with C18 beads (3 µm particles, Phenomenex) connected to a custom-made 4-column LC system. The elution was performed in an exponential gradient from 0-100% B solvent (solvent A: 0.1% FA; solvent B: 90% ACN/0.1% FA) in 100 min with a constant pressure of 10,000 psi and flow rate of approximately 400 nl/min. Eluting peptides were directly analyzed either on a linear ion-trap (LTQ XL, Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) (fractionated samples) or an orbitrap (LTQ Orbitrap XL, Thermo Scientific) (unfractionated samples) mass spectrometer using chemically etched nanospray emitters 26. Full scan were collected at 400-2000 m/z range (60K resolution at 400 m/z for Orbitrap scans) and the top ten most intense ions were subjected to low-resolution CID fragmentation once (35% normalized collision energy), before being dynamically excluded for 60s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS runs were processed with MaxQuant v1.5.2.8. Peptide identification was done by searching tandem mass spectra against the E. coli K12 appended to the recombinant ERK2 sequence. Search parameters included semispecific endoproteinase GluC with missed cleaved sites allowed, and the following variable modifications: protein N-terminal acetylation, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, methionine oxidation and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine. The mass tolerance for peptide identification and feature detection were set as default by the software. For quantification, identified peptides were aligned and matched between runs with 3 min matching window and 20 min alignment window.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Phosphorylation, Bacterial effector, Deamidation

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Ernesto Nakayasu

### Lab Head
Dr Ernesto S. Nakayasu
Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


