### Accession
PXD015638

### Title
Phenotypic adaptation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa by hacking siderophores produced by other microorganisms

### Description
This study aims at investigating the ability of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to detect the presence of exosiderophores in an epithelial cell infection assay. We show that the presence of exosiderophores induces the transcription and expression of their corresponding transporters, and that bacteria sense the presence of the chelators in their environment and adapt their phenotype to access iron via the exosiderophore present

### Sample Protocol
Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC equipment (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany)

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained were converted into “.mfg” files with MSConvert software (ProteomeWizard, version 3.0.6090). Peaks were assigned with Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.6.2) against an in-house database containing human entries from SwissProt database (17 March 2017, 20194 entries) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 entries from UniProtKB database (17 March 2017, 5677 entries). Common contaminant proteins such human keratins and trypsin were added to the database and concatenated with the reverse copies of all sequences. Trypsin was selected as enzyme, one missed cleavage was allowed. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 5 ppm, and at 0.07 Da for fragment ions. Mascot .dat results files were loaded into Proline software (Proline Studio Release, version 2.0).PSM were validated on pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both PSM (adjusted e-value) and protein sets (Protein Set score) levels. For quantification purpose, the “.raw” files were converted into “.mzDB” files with MS Angel software (version 1.6.2). XIC quantification was performed using 5 ppm as m/z tolerance for the peptides abundance extraction. Loess smoothing was performed for the LC-MS runs alignments. Cross assignments of peptide ions was performed using 5 ppm as m/z tolerance and 60 s as retention time tolerance. Only proteins identified with at least one unique peptide were considered and only specific peptides were keep for the sum of proteins abundances. The contaminants were excluded from the protein list prior to statistical analysis

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria secrete siderophores to access iron, a key nutrient poorly bioavailable and the source of strong competition between microorganisms in most biotopes. Many bacteria also use siderophores produced by other microorganisms (exosiderophores) in a piracy strategy. <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>, an opportunistic pathogen, produces two siderophores, pyoverdine and pyochelin, and is also able to use a panel of exosiderophores. We first investigated expression of the various iron-uptake pathways of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> in three different growth media using proteomic and RT-qPCR approaches and observed three different phenotypic patterns, indicating complex phenotypic plasticity in the expression of the various iron-uptake pathways. We then investigated the phenotypic plasticity of iron-uptake pathway expression in the presence of various exosiderophores (present individually or as a mixture) under planktonic growth conditions, as well as in an epithelial cell infection assay. In all growth conditions tested, catechol-type exosiderophores were clearly more efficient in inducing the expression of their corresponding transporters than the others, showing that bacteria opt for the use of catechol siderophores to access iron when they are present in the environment. In parallel, expression of the proteins of the pyochelin pathway was significantly repressed under most conditions tested, as well as that of proteins of the pyoverdine pathway, but to a lesser extent. There was no effect on the expression of the heme and ferrous uptake pathways. Overall, these data provide precise insights on how <i>P. aeruginosa</i> adjusts the expression of its various iron-uptake pathways (phenotypic plasticity and switching) to match varying levels of iron and competition.

### Keywords
Exosiderophores, Nanolc-ms/ms, Label-free analysis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
IPHC (LSMBO-Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique), UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS
IPHC (LSMBO-Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Bio-Organique), IMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS

### Submitter
Paola Cantero

### Lab Head
Dr Laurence SABATIER
IPHC (LSMBO-Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Bio-Organique), IMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS


