### Accession
PXD045734

### Title
Dehydroalanine and Dehydrobutyrine in Aging and Cataractous Lenses

### Description
Protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) have been associated with aging and age-related diseases. PTMs are particularly impactful in long-lived proteins, such as those found in the ocular lens, because they accumulate with age. Two post-translational modifications that lead to protein-protein crosslinks in aged and cataractous lenses are dehydroalanine (DHA) and dehydrobutyrine (DHB); formed from cysteine/serine and threonine residues, respectively. The purpose of this study was to quantitate DHA and DHB in human lens proteins as a function of age and cataract status. Human lenses of various ages were divided into five donor groups: transparent lenses (18–22-year-old, 48–64-year-old, and 70–93-year-old) and cataractous human lenses of two age groups (48–64-year-old lenses, and 70–93-year-old lenses) and were subjected to proteomic analysis. Relative DHA and DHB peptide levels were quantified and compared to their non-modified peptide counterparts. For most lens proteins containing DHA or DHB, higher amounts of DHA- and DHB-modified peptides were detected in aged and cataractous lenses. DHA-containing peptides were classified into three groups based on abundance changes with age and cataract: those that (1) increased only in age-related nuclear cataract (ARNC), (2) increased in aged and cataractous lenses, and (3) decreased in aged lenses and ARNC. There was no indication that DHA or DHB levels were dependent on lens region. In most donor groups, proteins with DHA and DHB were more likely to be found among urea-insoluble proteins rather than among water- or urea-soluble proteins. DHA and DHB formation may induce structural effects that make proteins less soluble in water that leads to age-related protein insolubility and possibly aggregation and light scattering.

### Sample Protocol
Lens tissue was manually homogenized in homogenization buffer comprised of 25 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, and 5 mM EDTA and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 30 minutes. The supernatant was isolated and defined as the water-soluble fraction (WSF). The pellet was solubilized in 8M urea, 25 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, and 5 mM EDTA and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 30 minutes. The supernatant was isolated, and this fraction was defined as the urea-soluble fraction (USF). The remaining pellet was suspended in water and proteins from this fraction were defined as the urea-insoluble fraction (UIF). Proteins from each region and fraction (WSF-IN, WSF-ON, WSF-C, USF-IN, USF-ON, USF105 C, UIF-IN, UIF-ON, and UIF-C) were quantified via a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. 50 µg from each region and fraction were aliquoted for proteomic analysis. Sample proteins were reduced via incubation in 10 mM DTT at 56 degree celsius for one hour. Proteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide, added to a final concentration of 55 mM, and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 45 mins. WSF and USF fractions were precipitated by methanol-chloroform. UIF fractions in water were spun down at 20,000 g for 20 minutes in 4 degree celsius and the supernatant was removed. Precipitated WSF, USF, and pelleted UIF fractions of each region were suspended in 10 µL acetonitrile and diluted with 90 µL of 50 mM Tris. Proteins were digested by the addition of trypsin at a 1:50 trypsin to protein ratio. Samples were dried via SpeedVac and re-solubilized in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were cleaned with stop and go extraction (STAGE) tips and analyzed with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Tryptic peptides corresponding to 0.5 µg of total protein were separated on a one-dimensional fused silica capillary column (200 mm x 100 µm). This column was packed with C18 Phenomenex Jupiter resin (3 µm mean particle size, 300 Å pore size) and coupled with an Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). A 90-minute gradient was performed, consisting of: 1-68 minutes at 2-38% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% formic acid, 68-74 minutes at 38-95% ACN in 0.1% formic acid, 74-75 minutes at 95% ACN in 0.1% formic acid, 76-76 minutes at 95-2% ACN in 0.1%formic acid and 76-85 at 2% ACN in 0.1% formic acid. The mobile phase was balanced with 0.1% formic acid. The eluate was directly infused into a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ionization source. The data-dependent acquisition method consisted of MS1 acquisition (R=70,000) using an MS AGC target value of 3e6, followed by up to 15 MS/MS scans (R=17,500) of the most abundant ions detected in the preceding MS scan. The MS2 AGC target value was set to 1e5, with a maximum ion time of 100 milliseconds, and intensity threshold of 3e4. HCD collision energy was set to 27 NCE, and dynamic exclusion was set to 10 seconds, and peptide match and isotope exclusion were enabled.

### Data Protocol
For identification of DHA and DHB modification sites, the raw data were processed and searched against a concatenated forward and reversed (decoy) human Swissprot (Oct 2022) database. The data were searched with MaxQuant version 2.1.4.0. The false discovery date (FDR) was set to 1%. Differential modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, Gln conversion to pyro Glu, DHA modifications on cysteine (-33.9877 Da) and serine (-18.0106 Da), and DHB modification on threonine (-18.0106 Da). All modified peptides sequences were manually verified by inspection of peptide tandem mass spectra with 5 ppm mass accuracy for parent masses and 10 ppm for product ions. Selected ion chromatograms of modified and non-modified peptides were extracted using the Qual Browser in Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) using a 10 ppm mass tolerance. Peak areas of DHA modified peptides and non-modified peptides were calculated for all charge states and the most intense three isotopes were summed. The relative level of modification was defined as the ratio of the peak area of modified peptide to the peak area of the non-modified summed with the modified peptide and multiplied by 100. The results are presented as mean +/- standard deviation of each modified peptide abundance in each solubility fraction and each region of four different lenses in each group. Student T-test was used for identifying statistical significance among lens regions, fractions, or normal verse cataract lenses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cataracts, Dehydroalanine, Dehydrobutyrine, Aging, Lens

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Zhen Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Kevin Schey
Vanderbilt University


