### Accession
PXD013932

### Title
Proteomics approaches for decoding Plasmodium yoelii biology

### Description
Plasmodium yoelii is a rodent parasite commonly used as a model to study liver-stage development in host system during malaria infection. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics approaches helps in understanding the proteomic profiling of parasite and provided opportunities to explore the mechanisms controlling parasite functions. It will further help in identifying new targets for therapeutic interventions, identification of Plasmodium associated virulence in the host.  It will also help in the extensive refinement of parasite genome, and understanding of Post-translational modifications (PTM) in Plasmodium yoelii biology. In the present study, we performed a proteomic shotgun analysis of the Plasmodium yoelii 17XNL strain.

### Sample Protocol
Animals were kept in cabin type isolators at standard environmental conditions (22-25°C, 40–70% humidity and 12:12 hour dark/light photoperiod). All animal experiments were performed according to the protocols (IAEC 5/2015) approved by the Institutional Animal Ethics Committees (IAEC) of Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology. A frozen stock of P. yoelii 17XNL was injected intraperitoneally into 3-6 weeks old BALB/c mice and infection was monitored regularly by observing Giemsa stained blood smears of the tail snips. The mice were euthanized at 30% parasitemia and blood was collected in Alsevier’s solution by cardiac puncture. Parasites were purified by saponin lysis method, and parasite pellets were lysed in SDS in 50mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) resuspended in twice the volume of lysis buffer homogenized, sonicated and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and protein concentration was estimated by Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) was used to estimate the concentration of proteins.  In-solution digestion was carried out as previously described (Harsha et al., 2008). Briefly, 250 µg of protein was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), respectively. The lysate was further subjected to acetone precipitation to remove SDS and pelleted.  The protein pellet was dissolved in 50 mM TEABC, and digested with trypsin (1:20) (modified sequencing grade; Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C for 16 hours. The reaction was stopped by adding 0.1% formic acid.  The peptides were lyophilized and stored at -800C until further use.  The peptides from bRPLC fractionation were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to Easy-nLC-1200 nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Scientific, 75 µm X 2 cm, nanoViper, 3 µm, 100Å  filled with C18 material, at a flow rate of 4 µL/min. Peptides were separated using a 15 cm analytical column (EASY-SPRAY RSLC C18 2 µm 15X50 µm; Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The solvent gradients were set as the linear gradient of 5-35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) over 90 min and total run time of  120 min. MS analysis was carried out at a scan range of 400-1600 m/z mass range (120,000 mass resolution at 200 m/z) in a data-dependent mode using an Orbitrap mass analyzer. The maximum injection time was 10 ms. For MS/MS analysis, data were acquired at top speed mode with 3s cycles and subjected to higher collision energy dissociation (HCD) with 32% normalized collision energy. MS/MS scans were carried out at a range of 100-1600 m/z using Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z. Maximum injection time was 200ms.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry-derived data were searched against the reference protein database Plasmodium yoelii 17XNL (consisting of 7,724 protein entries along with common contaminants) from PlasmoDB 39, and Mus musculus RefSeq 89 (composed of 29,938 protein entries along with common contaminants). The mass spectrometry data was analyzed with SEQUEST-HT and Mascot (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London,United Kingdom)search algorithms in Proteome Discoverer software suite, version 2.2 (PD 2.2) (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The search parameters used were; a) trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme (with up to one missed cleavage); b) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da); c) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; d) oxidation of methionine as a variable modification; e) carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied while identifying the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs).  The unassigned spectra were extracted from the previous search and searched for PTM's such as phosphorylation, and glutarylation on PD 2.2. The spectral quality of MS/ MS spectra of these PTM's was manually verified to ensure the correct peptide assignments.

### Publication Abstract
Malaria is a vector-borne disease. It is caused by <i>Plasmodium</i> parasites. <i>Plasmodium yoelii</i> is a rodent model parasite, primarily used for studying parasite development in liver cells and vectors. To better understand parasite biology, we carried out a high-throughput-based proteomic analysis of <i>P. yoelii</i>. From the same mass spectrometry (MS)/MS data set, we also captured several post-translational modified peptides by following a bioinformatics analysis without any prior enrichment. Further, we carried out a proteogenomic analysis, which resulted in improvements to some of the existing gene models along with the identification of several novel genes. Analysis of proteome and post-translational modifications (PTMs) together resulted in the identification of 3124 proteins. The identified PTMs were found to be enriched in mitochondrial metabolic pathways. Subsequent bioinformatics analysis provided an insight into proteins associated with metabolic regulatory mechanisms. Among these, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and the isoprenoid synthesis pathway are found to be essential for parasite survival and drug resistance. The proteogenomic analysis discovered 43 novel protein-coding genes. The availability of an in-depth proteomic landscape of a malaria pathogen model will likely facilitate further molecular-level investigations on pre-erythrocytic stages of malaria.

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Proteomics, Plasmodium yoelii

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine,  Yenepoya Research Centre, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University),  Mangalore, India

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine,  Yenepoya Research Centre, Yenepoya (Deemed to be University),  Mangalore, India


