### Accession
PXD002517

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of Shigella flexneri and Shigella sonnei Generalized Modules for Membrane Antigens (GMMA) reveals highly pure preparations.

### Description
Shigella flexneri 2a and Shigella sonnei were genetically modified to shed large quantities of outer membrane blebs. The blebs, called Generalized Modules for Membrane Antigens (GMMA), were purified and the protein content was estimated using the label-free iBAQ procedure. There were 2308 proteins identified, 660 in GMMA and 2239 in bacteria, of which 288 (GMMA) and 1695 (bacteria) were common to both S. flexneri 2a and S. sonnei. Protein abundances were classified according to the predicted localization. Predicted outer membrane or periplasmic proteins constituted 95.7% and 98.7% of the protein mass of S. flexneri 2a and S. sonnei GMMA, respectively.  Among the remaining proteins, small quantities of ribosomal proteins collectively accounted for more than half of the predicted cytoplasmic protein impurities in the GMMA. In GMMA, the outer membrane and periplasmic proteins were enriched 13.3-fold (S. flexneri 2a) and 8.3-fold (S. sonnei) compared to their abundance in the parent bacteria. Both periplasmic and outer membrane proteins were enriched similarly, suggesting that GMMA have a similar surface to volume ratio as the surface to periplasmic volume ratio in these mutant bacteria. Results in S. flexneri 2a and S. sonnei showed high reproducibility indicating a robust GMMA-producing process.

### Sample Protocol
SHIGELLA STRAINS Shigella sonnei 53G (Ss) and Shigella flexneri 2a 2457T (Sf2a)   Gel 13 µg of GMMA and 26 μg of cell lysates were mixed with NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) containing 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride solution (TCEP, Sigma), boiled for 10 min, and iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) was then added to a final concentration of 10 mM. Following 30 min incubation at room temperature (in the dark), the samples were loaded into NuPAGER 12% Bis-Tris gels using SeeBlue Plus 2 Pre-Stained Standard (Invitrogen) as molecular weight marker and MOPS as running buffer (Invitrogen).   IN GEL PROTEIN DIGESTION Each lane of the gel was excised in 15-16 slices. The gel pieces were digested with 0.15 µg/well of trypsin and 50 fmol/well of enolase as internal standard reference for the label-free quantification.   LC-MS/MS The samples were analyzed with on-line nano LC-MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Dionex) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher) hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source. Peptides were separated on a 75 µm id x 50 cm PepMap RSLC column (2 µm, Dionex) over a 120 min linear gradient of 4–32% CH3CN/0.1% FA. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was operated in the “top 10” data-dependant acquisition mode.  The 10 most abundant multiply-charged precursor ions in the MS survey scan in the Orbitrap (m/z 400 – 1500, with the lock mass at 445.120025), with a minimal signal above 2000 counts, were dynamically selected for CID fragmentation (MS/MS) in the LTQ Velos ion trap. The preview mode of FT master scan was disabled. The Orbitrap resolution was set at 60,000 at m/z 400. The isolation width for the precursor ion was set at 2 Th. The normalized collision energy was set at 35% with activation Q at 0.250 and activation time for 10 msec. The dynamic exclusion mass width was set at ±20ppm and a duration for 45 seconds.  To achieve high mass accuracy, the AGC (Automatic Gain Control) were set at 1x106 for the full MS survey in the Orbitrap, and 5000 for the MS/MS in the LTQ Velos, both with a maximum injection time at 200 msec.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant software, version 1.2.2.5 for both protein identification and protein quantification. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra using the following parameters: trypsin/P with maximum 3 missed cleavage sites; peptide mass tolerance at first search was set at 20ppm; MS/MS fragment mass tolerance at 0.50 Da, top 6 MS/MS peaks per 100 Da, and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids. Fixed modification for carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications for acetylation of protein N-termini, deamidation of asparagines and glutamines and oxidation of methionines were used. Identified peptides were searched against the available protein sequences from Shigella flexneri (SHIFL and SHIF8 protein databases) and Shigella sonnei (SHISS and SHISO databases) downloaded from UniProt (www.uniprot.org). False discovery rates were estimated based on the target-decoy approach (Balgley et al., 2007) using matches to reversed sequences in a concatenated database. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for proteins and peptides. Protein groups with a posterior error probability value over 0.01 or groups containing entries from the decoy database or contaminants were discarded. Since multiple databases were used, the software occasionally assigned homologs into different protein groups, e.g. where one detected peptide spanned a polymorphic region. To group genuine homologs and identify the protein group duplications, peptide IDs for each protein were matched with the peptide ID for all other proteins. The protein sequences of the members of the matching protein groups were then aligned to ensure that these were indeed genuine homologs and all members combined in a single protein group. This process identified 50 such protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
Outer membrane blebs are naturally shed by Gram-negative bacteria and are candidates of interest for vaccines development. Genetic modification of bacteria to induce hyperblebbing greatly increases the yield of blebs, called Generalized Modules for Membrane Antigens (GMMA). The composition of the GMMA from hyperblebbing mutants of Shigella flexneri 2a and Shigella sonnei were quantitatively analyzed using high-sensitivity mass spectrometry with the label-free iBAQ procedure and compared to the composition of the solubilized cells of the GMMA-producing strains. There were 2306 proteins identified, 659 in GMMA and 2239 in bacteria, of which 290 (GMMA) and 1696 (bacteria) were common to both S. flexneri 2a and S. sonnei. Predicted outer membrane and periplasmic proteins constituted 95.7% and 98.7% of the protein mass of S. flexneri 2a and S. sonnei GMMA, respectively. Among the remaining proteins, small quantities of ribosomal proteins collectively accounted for more than half of the predicted cytoplasmic protein impurities in the GMMA. In GMMA, the outer membrane and periplasmic proteins were enriched 13.3-fold (S. flexneri 2a) and 8.3-fold (S. sonnei) compared to their abundance in the parent bacteria. Both periplasmic and outer membrane proteins were enriched similarly, suggesting that GMMA have a similar surface to volume ratio as the surface to periplasmic volume ratio in these mutant bacteria. Results in S. flexneri 2a and S. sonnei showed high reproducibility indicating a robust GMMA-producing process and the low contamination by cytoplasmic proteins support the use of GMMA for vaccines. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002517.

### Keywords
Shigella flexneri, Shigella sonnei. lc-ms/ms, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK, CB10 1SA
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK, CB10 1SA


