### Accession
PXD001838

### Title
Proteomics of EBV-infected lytic and refractory cells

### Description
Most humans are infected with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a cancer-causing virus. While EBV generally persists silently in B lymphocytes, periodic lytic (re-)activation of latent virus is central to its life cycle and to most EBV-related diseases. However, a substantial fraction of EBV-infected B cells and tumor cells in a population is refractory to lytic activation. This resistance to lytic activation directly and profoundly impacts viral persistence and effectiveness of oncolytic therapy for EBV+ cancers. To identify the mechanisms that underlie susceptibility to EBV-lytic activation, we used host protein-expression profiling of separated-lytic and -refractory cells.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling of cells for proteomic analysis. HH514-16 cells were metabolically labeled with 13C6 Lysine and 13C6 Arginine (Catalog # 88210; Pierce) using the SILAC (Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture) method following manufacturer’s instructions (Catalog # 1860971; Pierce). Compared to unlabeled cells, 99% of proteins in labeled cells had incorporated ‘heavy’ amino acids after 48 hours in culture. Labeled cells were treated with NaBfor 24 hours and sorted into lytic and refractory populations by FACS. One million each of lytic and refractory cells were obtained from each sort. Pooling of cells from 2 independent sorting experiments yielded 60 microgram of total protein from each population; these were subjected to mass spectrometry.  Multidimensional Protein Identification Technology (MudPIT) and tandem mass spectrometry. After trypsin digestion, peptide mixtures were subjected to MudPIT using a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-LC electrospray ionization source (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA). Full MS spectra were recorded on the peptides over a 400 to 2000 m/z range by the Orbitrap, followed by five tandem mass (MS/MS) events sequentially generated by LTQ in a data-dependent manner on the first, second, third, and fourth most intense ions selected from the full MS spectrum (at 35% collision energy). Mass spectrometer scan functions and HPLC solvent gradients were controlled by the Xcalibur data system (ThermoFinnigan).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from raw files, and low quality MS/MS spectra were removed based on an empirical classifier. The remaining spectra were searched against Uniprot human protein database (released on February, 2011). To calculate confidence levels and false positive rates, we used a decoy database containing the reverse sequences of annotated protein sequences, and the SEQUEST algorithm to find the best matching sequences using the Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2, Integrated Proteomics Inc., CA).The peptide mass search tolerance was set to 50ppm. No differential modifications were considered. At least half tryptic status was imposed on the database search, so the search space included all candidate peptides whose theoretical mass fell within the 50ppm mass tolerance window. The validity of peptide/spectrum matches was assessed in DTASelect2 using SEQUEST-defined parameters, the cross-correlation score (XCorr) and normalized difference in cross-correlation scores (DeltaCN). The search results were grouped by charge state (+1, +2, and +3) and tryptic status (fully tryptic, half-tryptic, and non-tryptic), resulting in 9 distinct sub-groups. For each one sub-group, the distribution of XCorr and DeltaCN values for (a) direct and (b) decoy database hits was obtained, and the two subsets were separated by quadratic discriminant analysis. Outlier points in the two distributions (for example, matches with very low Xcorr but very high DeltaCN) were discarded. The discriminant score was set such that a false positive rate of 1% was determined based on the number of accepted decoy database peptides. In addition, a minimum sequence length of 7 amino acid residues was required, and each protein on the final list was supported by at least two independent peptide identifications unless specified. After this last filtering step, the false identification rate was reduced to below 1%. SILAC ratios were derived using CenSus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epstein-barr virus, Lytic activation, Proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Pediatric Infectious Diseases Molecular Genetics and Microbiology Stony Brook University Life Sciences Building, Rm. 158 Stony Brook, NY 11794-5222 U.S.A.
Stony Brook University

### Submitter
Jizu Zhi

### Lab Head
Dr Sumita Bhaduri-McIntosh
Pediatric Infectious Diseases Molecular Genetics and Microbiology Stony Brook University Life Sciences Building, Rm. 158 Stony Brook, NY 11794-5222 U.S.A.


