### Accession
PXD036478

### Title
Adenosine-rich extract of Ganoderma lucidum: a safe and effective lipid-lowering substance via regulating expression and modulation of PPAR signaling pathway

### Description
Ganoderma lucidum is a traditional Chinese medicine with a variety of active compounds and possessing adequate lipid-lowering and anti-atherosclerotic effects. However, its main active components and potential mechanisms still remain unclear. Here, we evaluated the anti-hyperlipidemic effect of the adenosine extract from Ganoderma lucidum (AEGL) in high-fat-diet (HFD)-induced hyperlipidemic ApoE-/- mice and explored the underlying biological mechanism by multi-omics analysis. Treatment with AEGL for 8 weeks significantly decreased the serum levels of total cholesterol (TC), triglyceride (TG), and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c) by 45.59%, 41.22%, and 39.02%, respectively, as well as reduced liver TC and TG by 44.15% and 76.23%, compared with the HFD-only group. We also observed significant amelioration of hepatic steatosis without liver and kidney damage after AEGL treatment. Regulating the expression and acetylation/crotonylation of proteins involved in the PPAR signaling pathway may be one of the potential mechanisms involved in the observed lipid-lowering effects of AEGL.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics Analysis Extraction of protein: Frozen liver tissue was pulverized in liquid nitrogen and ultrasonic cleavage with 4 times lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM).  The resulting homogenate was then centrifuged at 12,000g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was collected for quantification using a BCA Protein Quantification Kit (Vazyme, China).   Trypsin enzymolysis: An equal amount of proteins were adjusted to the same volume with lysate, and slowly added to 20% TCA and mixed. The sample mixture was precipitated at 4°C for 2h and then centrifuged at 4,500 g for 5 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate was washed 2 to 3 times with pre-cooled acetone.  After drying the precipitate, TEAB with a final concentration of 200 mM was added and then sonicated. The protein suspension was enzymolyzed with trypsin at a 1:50 ratio (protease: protein, m / m) overnight. Disulfur threitol (DTT) was added to gain a final concentration of 5 mM and reduced by 56℃ for 30 min. Finally, iodiacetamide (IAA) was added to gain a final concentration of 11 mM and the suspension was incubated for 15 min at room temperature under darkness. HPLC-MS/MS analysis: Peptides were resolved by mobile phase A, separated using an HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC 1000; Waltham, MA, USA) with a flow rate of 450 nL/min, and identified using a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The separation system comprised mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile). Mobile phase B was used to separate the peptides over a 1.5 h separation time. From 0 min to 70 min, the linear gradient of mobile phase B was 6% to 24%; from 70 min to 84 min, the gradient of mobile phase B was 24% to 32%; and from 84 min to 87 min, the gradient of mobile phase B was 32% to 80%. Thereafter, mobile phase B remained at 80% from 87 min to 90 min. Our MS analysis was set to positive ion detection mode. The ion source voltage was set to 1.6 kV, and the scanning range for the secondary mass spectrometry was 100-1700 m/z.  Additionally, the data acquisition used a parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. A secondary spectrogram with the number of parent ion charges in the range 0 to 5 after 10 PASEF mode acquisition after primary mass spectrometry as well as the dynamic exclusion time of tandem MS scans were set to 30s seconds to avoid repeat scans of the parent ion. Acetylation and Lysine Crotonylation Analysis Modification enrichment: Peptides were dissolved in IP buffer solution (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0), and the supernatant was transferred to prewashed anti-acetyllysine antibody resin (PTM-104, Hangzhou Jingjie Biotechnology Co., Ltd., PTM Bio) and anti-crotonyllysine antibody resin (PTM-503, Hangzhou Jingjie Biotechnology Co., Ltd., PTM Bio) and placed in a rotary shaker at 4°C, which was gently shaking and incubated overnight. After incubation, the resin was washed sequentially with IP buffer solution 4 times and with deionized water twice. Finally, the resin-bound peptide was eluted 3 times using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and the eluate was collected and vacuum freeze-drained. The salt was removed according to C18 ZipTips instructions and vacuum freeze-drained for HPLC-MS/MS analysis. HPLC-MS/MS analysis: Peptides were resolved by mobile phase A and separated using the NanoElute UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC 1000; Waltham, MA, USA) with a flow rate of 450 nL/min and identified using a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The separation system comprised mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile). Mobile phase B was used to separate the peptides over a 1.5 h separation time. From 0 min to 43 min, the linear gradient of mobile phase B was 6% to22%; from 43 min to 56 min, the gradient of mobile phase B was 22% to30%; and from 56 min to 58 min, the gradient of mobile phase B was 30% to80%. Thereafter, mobile phase B remained at 80% from 56 min to 80 min. Our MS analysis was set to positive ion detection mode. The ion source voltage was set to 1.8 kV, and the scanning range of the secondary mass spectrometry was 100-1700 m/z. The data acquisition mode used a parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode.  A secondary spectrogram with the number of parent ion charges in the range 0-5 after 10 PASEF mode acquisition after primary mass spectrometry and the dynamic exclusion time of tandem MS scans were set to 30s seconds to avoid repeat scans of the parention.

### Data Protocol
All data were transformed to mean ± standard error of the mean (S.E.M.), and Sangerbox 3.0 (http://vip.sangerbox.com/home.html) was used to preform functional annotation and pathway enriched analysis based on Gene Ontology (GO) and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). MetaboAnalyst (https://www.metaboanalyst.ca/) was used for lipidomics analysis. To test the statistical significance of differences between groups, we used t-tests, and we used one-way ANOVA to analyze the differences between multiple groups. GraphPad Prism 8.0.1 was used for all analysis, and we consider a test result to be statistically significant if its two-sided p-value is less than 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Ganoderma lucidum</i> is a traditional Chinese medicine with a variety of active compounds and possesses adequate lipid-lowering and anti-atherosclerotic effects. However, its main active components and potential mechanisms still remain unclear. Here, we evaluated the anti-hyperlipidemic effect of the adenosine extract from <i>Ganoderma lucidum</i> (AEGL) in high-fat-diet (HFD)-induced hyperlipidemic ApoE<sup>-/-</sup> mice and explored the underlying biological mechanism by multi-omics analysis. Treatment with AEGL for 8&#xa0;weeks significantly decreased the serum levels of total cholesterol (TC), triglyceride (TG), and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c) by 45.59%, 41.22%, and 39.02%, respectively, as well as reduced liver TC and TG by 44.15% and 76.23%, compared with the HFD-only group. We also observed significant amelioration of hepatic steatosis without liver and kidney damage after AEGL treatment. Regulating the expression and acetylation/crotonylation of proteins involved in the PPAR signaling pathway may be one of the potential mechanisms involved in the observed lipid-lowering effects of AEGL.

### Keywords
Hyperlipidemia; adenosine extract of ganoderma lucidum (aegl); protein post-translational modifications; proteomics; lipidomics

### Affiliations
Corresponding author
Dongzhimen Hospital, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Wu shengxian

### Lab Head
Dr Shengxian Wu
Dongzhimen Hospital, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine


