### Accession
PXD030366

### Title
ANR DeepProt : A structural analysis of heated Ovalbumin by crosslink proteomics

### Description
In the present study, we mobilized the latest methodologies in tandem mass spectrometry and cross-link proteomics to decipher the heat-induced structural changes of OVA in the presence or absence of sugar. Our objective was to better understand how these structural changes could lead to a modulation of the allergenicity of OVA, depending on the process it has undergone.

### Sample Protocol
OVA purified from egg white with a purity of approximately 87% was kindly provided by INRAE, UMR 1253 “Science et Technologie du Lait et de l’Œuf” (STLO, Rennes, France) (Croguennec et al., 2000). To obtain glycated but not aggregated OVA, OVA solutions were prepared at 20 mg/mL in 0.03 M NaCl, pH 9 in the presence or absence of 20 mg/mL of glucose. After lyophilization, the samples were heated for the indicated times at 55°C in a 65% humidity-controlled environment using a saturated potassium iodide solution. These samples are referred to as OVA-D-H-55-24h (heated, 24h), OVA-D-HG-55-24h (heated, glycated, 24h), OVA-D-H-55-72h (heated, 72h) and OVA-D-HG-55-72h (heated, glycated, 72h). To obtain aggregated and glycated OVA, OVA solutions were prepared at 20 mg/mL in 0.03 M NaCl, pH 9 in the presence or absence of 20 mg/mL of glucose and were heated for 6 h at 80 °C in a temperature-controlled water bath to form aggregates (Nyemb et al., 2014). The aggregated samples were diluted with 2 M NaCl or ddH20 to adjust the solution to pH 7.6, 0.15 M NaCl. These samples are referred to as OVA-W-H-80-6h (aggregated) and OVA-W-HG-80-6h (aggregated, glycated). A non-aggregated OVA solution (OVA-N) was prepared by solubilizing at 20 mg/mL in 0.15 M NaCl, pH 7.6. Aliquots were stored at −20 °C until further use. Prior to digestion, all non-reduced samples were diluted in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (50 mM, pH 8) at a concentration of 1 mg/mL. Then, 50 µL of each diluted sample was collected and added to 10 µL of tryspin (200 ng/µL) and 138 µL of ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM, pH 8 to reach a final protease-to-protein ratio of 1:25. In order to increase the release of tryptic peptides, 2 µL of 1% (v/v) ProteaseMAX (Promega, Madison, WI) was added to reach a final concentration of 0.01 % (v/v). Samples were then incubated at 37 °C for three hours and digestion was stopped by cooling samples at -20 °C. Prior to MS analysis, all digested samples were filtered on an EMPORE C8 disk (3M, Fischer Scientific, F67403 Illkirch Cedex, France) in order to remove residual salts or large polypeptides and undigested proteins. b. Mass spectrometry analysis Four µL of tryptic digests of each non-reduced sample was injected on the nanoLC-MS/MS system composed of a hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo-Fisher Scientific ™, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a nanoscale LC system (Ultimate U3000 RSLC system, Thermo-Fisher Scientific ™, Bremen, Germany). Tryptic peptides were separated on a reversed-phase capillary column (Acclaim PepMap ™ C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 25 cm long, Thermo-Fisher Scientific ™, Bremen, Germany) using a linear gradient of : (A) 99.9% water, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and (B) 90% ACN, 9.92% water and 0.08% formic acid,. After 15 minutes of column equilibration at 4% of B, the gradient consisted of a linear increase from 4% to 50% of B in 45 min, followed by a rapid increase to 90% of B within three minutes, which was maintained for two minutes and then decreased to 4% of B for re-equilibration of the column during 10 minutes. Peptides were eluted at a flowrate of 0,3 µL/min and ionized in nanoESI positive mode. Acquisitions were done using a data-dependent acquisition method. Full MS scans (m/z 400-2000) were acquired at 60K resolution and the fifteen most intense ions (with charges of 2-6) were fragmented in the HCD cell (NCE = 26). Fragments were analyzed in the Orbitrap analyzer at 30K resolution. Each sample was injected twice and after each run a wash program was engaged to reduce peptide carry-over on the column.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS raw data were processed into mgf and mzXML format using SeeMS (https://proteowizard.sourceforge.io/tools/msconvert.html) prior to several databanks search. They are accessible at :   i. Unmodified peptide identification Identification of peptides without modifications (except the oxidation of methionine Δm = +15.99) was done against a databank restricted to proteins belonging to Taxon 9031 (Gallus_gallus) contained in SwissProt (2,297 entries, updated on 2021/02/02) by using X!Tandem pipeline (version 0.4.34) (Langella et al., 2017). Methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification and trypsin enzymatic cleavage was specified for the search. Mass tolerance for precursors and fragments mass was set at +/-5 ppm or 5 ppm, respectively. The MS/MS results obtained for the peptide identification were validated by filtering the peptides with an e-value below 10-3. Proteins were identified using at least two specific peptides and an e-value score of 10-4. More details of the parameters used are available in Supplemental Figure 2A.  ii. Glycated peptides identifications and glycations localizations Glycated peptides (and residues) were identified (and localized) using PTMProphet which is included in the TransProteomicPipeline (v6.0.0-rc15 Noctilucent). Databank search was done against a databank using X!Tandem restricted to proteins belonging to Taxon 9031 (Gallus_gallus) contained in SwissProt (2,297 entries, updated on 2021/02/02). Five types of adducts targeting Lys (K) and Arg (R) were searched. Names, structures, targeted residues and mass delta induced by these adducts are listed in Supplemental Figure 2B. This first step allowed identifying peptides with a correct mass shift (depending on the type of glycation) and with a fragmentation profile sufficiently informative to confirm the peptide sequence. After identification, subsets of spectra attributed to a glycated OVA peptide were manually curated to confirm the presence and precisely localize the residue bearing the modification. To be considered as valid, a MS/MS spectrum needed to present at least one signature fragment of the glycation position (e.g. a b- or y-ion containing the glycated residue). An example of curated and annotated glycated peptide spectrum is shown in Supplemental Figure 4A.  iii. Linked peptides identification Cross-linked and loop-linked peptide identifications were done against a databank containing only the sequence of ovalbumin from Swissprot (P01012, OVAL_CHICK) using two dedicated databank search algorithms: pLink (v2.3.9) (Z. L. Chen et al., 2019) and Merox (v2.0.1.4) (Götze et al., 2015). Briefly, mass tolerances for precursors and fragments were set at 3 ppm. Inbuilt FDR evaluation was used to filter identified peptides under a threshold of 1%. More detailed information about search parameters and linkers are available in Supplemental Figure 2C. A manual examination of identified MS/MS spectra was performed on all peptide sequences identified by the two software, and only unambiguous spectra (for linker positions on sequences) were conserved after this step. To be considered as unambiguous, a MS/MS spectrum needed to present at least one signature fragment of the cross-link position on both peptides (e.g. presence of several b- or y-ion containing the residues implicated in bridge). An example of a curated and annotated cross-linked peptide spectrum is shown in Supplemental Figure 4B.

### Publication Abstract
Ovalbumin (OVA) is a food allergen whose allergenicity is modulated by heating. We aimed to establish a molecular connection between heat-induced structural modifications and the modulation of the IgE binding capacity of OVA. For this, we used model samples of heat-modified OVA with increasing complexity; glycated, aggregated, or glycated and aggregated. Using sera from egg-allergic individuals, we show that both aggregation and glycation strongly impacted IgE binding capacity, despite limited structural changes for glycated OVA. A molecular exploration at the amino acid level using high-resolution mass spectrometry&#xa0;revealed extensive cross-linking, mostly through disulfide and dehydroprotein bridges, and moderate but significant glycation. Structural modifications affected residues located within or at a few amino acids distance of known human linear IgE epitopes, such as C121, K123, S169, K190, K207, H332 and C368. We thus unveil key amino residues implicated in the changes in IgE binding of OVA induced by heating.

### Keywords
Aggregation, Crosslink proteomics, Ova, Glycation

### Affiliations
INRAE, UR1268, F-44316 Nantes, France
INRAE, UR1268 BIA, F-44316 Nantes, France

### Submitter
Mehdi CHERKAOUI

### Lab Head
Dr Hélène ROGNIAUX
INRAE, UR1268 BIA, F-44316 Nantes, France


