### Accession
PXD036997

### Title
MiPRISMA: Interactome profiling of small peptides and young microproteins translated from human short open reading frames

### Description
All species continuously evolve small open reading frames (sORFs) that can be templated for protein synthesis and may provide raw material for evolutionary adaptation. We analyzed the evolutionary origins of 7,264 recently cataloged human sORFs and found that most were evolutionary young and emerged de novo. We additionally discovered 221 yet uncataloged peptides smaller than 16 amino acids, for which we found evidence of translation in human and rodent tissues. To investigate the potential bioactivity of microproteins and peptides translated from young and very small ORFs we established MiPRISMA: a mass spectrometry-based interactome screen with sequence motif resolution. We assessed 266 candidates and implicated several in essential cellular processes including splicing, translational regulation, and endocytosis, a subset of which we validate in cellular assays. MiPRISMA provides a scalable platform to characterize small and evolutionarily young proteins, shedding light on a largely unexplored territory of the putative human proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Heart tissue and cell line material was lyses in SDC buffer and proteins were digested with trypsin or LysC. Peptides were separated on a High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system (ThermoScientific) using a 98 min gradient of increasing Buffer B concentration (from 2% to 60%, 250 nl/min flow rate)and directly injected into an Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Instrument parameter were set to 30,000 resolution with 2e5 AGC target value, 100 ms maximum ion injection time, 30 min retention time window and adjusted NCE values for each target.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed with Skyline software package  v3.6101 with the following settings: precursor charge state 2 to 4; ion charge state 1 and 2; ion types y, p, b, a, z; auto-selection of matching transitions enabled; ion match tolerance = 0.05 m/z; method match tolerance = 0.055 m/z.

### Publication Abstract
All species continuously evolve short open reading frames (sORFs) that can be templated for protein synthesis and may provide raw materials for evolutionary adaptation. We analyzed the evolutionary origins of 7,264 recently cataloged human sORFs and found that most were evolutionarily young and had emerged de&#xa0;novo. We additionally identified 221 previously missed sORFs potentially translated into peptides of up to 15&#xa0;amino acids-all of which are smaller than the smallest human microprotein annotated to date. To investigate the bioactivity of sORF-encoded small peptides and young microproteins, we subjected 266 candidates to a mass-spectrometry-based interactome screen with motif resolution. Based on these interactomes and additional cellular assays, we can associate several candidates with mRNA splicing, translational regulation, and endocytosis. Our work provides insights into the evolutionary origins and interaction potential of young and small proteins, thereby helping to elucidate this underexplored territory of the human proteome.

### Keywords
Human, Microproteins, Small peptides, Prm

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite
Berlin Institute of Health at Charite, Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Core Facility Proteomics, Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Berlin Institute of Health at Charite, Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Core Facility Proteomics, Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), Berlin, Germany


