### Accession
PXD000583

### Title
2D-LC/MS/MS analysis of Escherichia coli under optimal growth condition

### Description
2D-LC/MS/MS analysis was used to examine the proteome of E. coli O157:H7 strain Sakai during exponential growth under optimal condition (i.e., from 35°C aw 0.993).  MS/MS data obtained from each protein sample were processed by the Computational Proteomics Analysis System (CPAS), a web-based system built on the LabKey Server (v9.1, released 02.04.2009). The experimental mass spectra produced were subjected to a semi-tryptic search against the combined databases of E. coli O157:H7 Sakai (5,318 entries in total) downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, downloaded 25.11.2008) using X!Tandem v2007.07.01. These databases included the E. coli O157:H7 Sakai database (5230 entries, NC_002695.fasta) and two E. coli O157:H7 Sakai plasmid databases, plasmid pO157 (85 entries, NC_002128.fasta) and plasmid pOSAK1 (three entries, NC_002127.fasta). The parameters for the database search were as follows: mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions: 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively; fixed modification: cysteine cabamidomethylation (+57 Da); and no variable modifications. The search results were then analyzed using the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms from the Trans Proteomic Pipeline v3.4.2. All peptide and protein identifications were accepted at PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet of ≥0.9, corresponding to a theoretical error rate of ≤2%.

### Sample Protocol
In a separate set of hyperosmotic shift experiments, a rapid downshift of E. coli cultures from aw 0.993 to aw 0.967 was carried out as described above to prepare samples for cDNA microarray and 2D-LC/MS/MS analysis. An appropriate volume of cell cultures was harvested before osmotic upshift (i.e., control culture or non osmotically-treated cells), and at 0 (i.e., immediately after the shift), 30, 80, and 310 min after the shift. Independent samples were then subjected to extraction of RNA, and both soluble and membrane proteins, according to the methods of Kocharunchitt et al. [9]. It also should be noted that the current proteomic study used the same control samples (i.e., at 35°C aw 0.993) as in the companion study.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data obtained from each protein sample of membrane and soluble fractions were processed by the Computational Proteomics Analysis System (CPAS), a web-based system built on the LabKey Server (v9.1, released 02.04.2009) [19]. The experimental mass spectra produced were subjected to a semi-tryptic search against the combined databases of E. coli O157∶H7 Sakai (5,318 entries in total) downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, downloaded 25.11.2008) using X!Tandem v2007.07.01 [20]. These databases included the E. coli O157∶H7 Sakai database (5230 entries, NC_002695.fasta) and two E. coli O157∶H7 Sakai plasmid databases, plasmid pO157 (85 entries, NC_002128.fasta) and plasmid pOSAK1 (three entries, NC_002127.fasta). The parameters for the database search were as follows: mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions: 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively; fixed modification: cysteine cabamidomethylation (+57 Da); and no variable modifications. The search results were then analyzed using the PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet algorithms from the Trans Proteomic Pipeline v3.4.2 [21], [22]. All peptide and protein identifications were accepted at PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet of ≥0.9, corresponding to a theoretical error rate of ≤2% [21]. To assess a false-positive discovery rate for each dataset, the MS/MS spectra were searched against the target-reversed (decoy) database using the same search criteria as described above. The false-positive discovery rate of peptide identifications was then estimated by dividing the number of spectra matching decoy peptides with the total number of spectra, and appeared to be less than 5% for all datasets.

### Publication Abstract
The present study was undertaken to investigate growth kinetics and time-dependent change in global expression of Escherichia coli O157&#x2236;H7 Sakai upon an abrupt downshift in water activity (aw). Based on viable count data, shifting E. coli from aw 0.993 to aw 0.985 or less caused an apparent loss, then recovery, of culturability. Exponential growth then resumed at a rate characteristic for the aw imposed. To understand the responses of this pathogen to abrupt osmotic stress, we employed an integrated genomic and proteomic approach to characterize its cellular response during exposure to a rapid downshift but still within the growth range from aw 0.993 to aw 0.967. Of particular interest, genes and proteins with cell envelope-related functions were induced during the initial loss and subsequent recovery of culturability. This implies that cells undergo remodeling of their envelope composition, enabling them to adapt to osmotic stress. Growth at low aw, however, involved up-regulating additional genes and proteins, which are involved in the biosynthesis of specific amino acids, and carbohydrate catabolism and energy generation. This suggests their important role in facilitating growth under such stress. Finally, we highlighted the ability of E. coli to activate multiple stress responses by transiently inducing the RpoE and RpoH regulons to control protein misfolding, while simultaneously activating the master stress regulator RpoS to mediate long-term adaptation to hyperosmolality. This investigation extends our understanding of the potential mechanisms used by pathogenic E. coli to adapt, survive and grow under osmotic stress, which could potentially be exploited to aid the selection and/or development of novel strategies to inactivate this pathogen.

### Keywords
2d-lc/ms/ms, Optimal growth condition, Physiology, E. coli

### Affiliations
Food Safety Centre, Tasmanian Institute of Agriculture, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia
Food Safety Centre

### Submitter
Chawalit Kocharunchitt

### Lab Head
Dr Tom Ross
Food Safety Centre, Tasmanian Institute of Agriculture, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia


