### Accession
PXD039380

### Title
Data and Information collection on 3 normal rat kidney epithelial cells treated with staurosporine

### Description
3 normal rat kidney epithelial cells treated with staurosporine,LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
NRK-52E cells were treated with staurosporine(0.1μM, cat: 569397, Millipore) for 1 hour. The cells were resuspended in RIPA buffer in the presence of protease inhibitors. Preclear lysate by adding appropriate control IgG (normal mouse IgG, cat: sc-2025, Santa), together with Protein G/A PLUS-Agarose (cat: sc-2003, Santa), incubated at 4 °C for 1 hour. After centrifuging, supernatant was transferred to a fresh microcentrifuge tube. PKM2 (cat: 60268-1-Ig, Proteintech) or DRP1 (cat: ab14647, CST) antibody were incubated at 4 °C overnight. Then, Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose was added and incubated at 4 °C for 4 hours, collected immunoprecipitants by centrifugation and discarded the supernatant. Wash pellet 4 times with PBS buffer, bound proteins were eluted by boiling in SDS sample buffer, resolved by SDS-PAGE, and then subjected to western blot analysis.Co-immunoprecipitation of PKM2 binding proteins were used as the follow-up experiment as indicated. The proteolysis peptide solution was desalted, freeze-drained, and separated by Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC. The peptides obtained in the liquid phase separation system were ionized and then analyzed in a series mass spectrometer. The length distribution of the peptide and the reliability of the characterization peptide identification were tested. Bioinformatics analysis was performed on the results of mass spectrometry, and mapping was performed with related software.

### Data Protocol
The protein identification uses experimental MS/MS data and aligns them with theoretical MS/MS data from database to obtain results. The whole process starts from converting raw MS data into a peak list and then searching matches in the database. The search results are subject to strict filtering and quality control, and possible protein identifications are produced. Finally, from the final protein identification list, functional annotation analysis such as GO, COG/KOG, and Pathway analysis are performed.

### Publication Abstract
An important pathophysiological process of acute kidney injury (AKI) is mitochondrial fragmentation in renal tubular epithelial cells, which leads to cell death. Pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) is an active protein with various biological functions that participates in regulating glycolysis and plays a key role in regulating cell survival. However, the role and mechanism of PKM2 in regulating cell survival during AKI remain unclear. Here, we found that the phosphorylation of PKM2 contributed to the formation of the PKM2 dimer and translocation of PKM2 into the mitochondria after treatment with staurosporine or cisplatin. Mitochondrial PKM2 binds myosin heavy chain 9 (MYH9) to promote dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1)-mediated mitochondrial fragmentation. Both in vivo and in vitro, PKM2-specific loss or regulation PKM2 activity partially limits mitochondrial fragmentation, alleviating renal tubular injury and cell death, including apoptosis, necroptosis, and ferroptosis. Moreover, staurosporine or cisplatin-induced mitochondrial fragmentation and cell death were reversed in cultured cells by inhibiting MYH9 activity. Taken together, our results indicate that the regulation of PKM2 abundance and activity to inhibit mitochondrial translocation may maintain mitochondrial integrity and provide a new therapeutic strategy for treating AKI.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Normal rat kidney epithelial cells

### Affiliations
Center for Kidney Disease, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China
second Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 

### Submitter
Lei Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Junwei Yang
Center for Kidney Disease, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China


