### Accession
PXD023508

### Title
Human plasma LC-MSMS for identified protein biomarker for BRCA1/2 positive ovarian cancer

### Description
Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy, attributed by late diagnosis. Genetic alteration of BRCA1/2 was well known risk factors in people who does not occur ovarian cancer. There is a need for convenient and continuous diagnosis of ovarian cancer after genetic testing, and we intend to apply a blood biomarker-based liquid biopsy. In a retrospective study, 20 OC patients and 20 normal controls were used for plasma samples, and BRCA1/2 carriers accounted for half in each group. We applied the bottom-up proteomics approach to depleted plasma samples with a nano-flow LC-MS and analyzed protein data quantitatively.

### Sample Protocol
1. Plasma protein sample preparation and enzymatic digestion in-solution Plasma samples were sequentially prepared by high abundant plasma protein depletion and trypsin/Lys-C digestion steps. First, 40 uL of plasma was injected into MARS14 depletion column (Agilent, CA, USA) in which the top fourteen abundant proteins (albumin, IgA, IgG, IgM, a1-antitrypsin, a1-acid glycoprotein, apolipoprotein A1, apolipoprotein A2, complement C3, transferrin, a2-marcoglobulin, transthyretin, haptoglobin and fibrinogen) were depleted. For this, the mixture was 4-fold diluted with a proprietary “Buffer A” and loaded onto MARS14 column on a Shimadzu HPLC system. Unbound fraction was buffer-exchanged into 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 8) and concentrated through ultrafiltration using Vivaspin 500 3 kDa cutoff filter (Sartorius, Japan) to approximately 50 L and transfer a new filter unit (Nanosep, 30 kDa, Pall cooperation). Add in 200 uL of 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 8.5) and centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 15 min repeated twice. Discard the flow-through form the collection tube. Add 100 µl IAA solution and mix at 600 rpm in a thermo-mixer for 1 min and incubate without mixing for 20 min. Centrifuge the filter units at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Add 100 µl of UA to the filter unit and centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 15 min. Repeat this step twice. Add 100 µl of ABC to the filter unit and centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Repeat this step twice. Add 40 µl ABC with Lys-C/trypsin (2.5ug) and mix at 600 rpm in thermo-mixer for 1 min.  Incubate the units in a wet chamber at 37°C for 12h. Transfer the filter units to new collection tubes. Centrifuge the filter units at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Add 40 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and centrifuge the filter units at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Formic acid was then added to a final concentration of 0.3% to stop the digestion reaction. The peptide mixture was then desalted with a Sep Pak C-18 cartridge (Waters, USA), lyophilized with a cold trap (CentriVap Cold Traps, LABCONCO), and stored at -80 °C until use.    2. Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis    Digested peptides were separated using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides from the bead column were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and separated on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 column (500 mm75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å) equipped with a C18 Pepmap trap column (20 mm100 μm i.d., 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, USA)  over 200 min (350 nl/min) using a 0–48% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO for 150 min at 50°C. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer with a nano-ESI source. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode with an automatic switch between a full scan and ten data-dependent MS/MS scans. The target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The ion target value for MS/MS was set to 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. Repeated peptides were dynamically excluded for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched using the SequestHT on Proteome discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) against the SwissProt human database (May 2017) 12. The search parameters were set as default including cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications with 2 miscleavages. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 10 ppm, and the allowed fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm. And label free quantitation (LFQ) was performed using peak intensity for unique and razor peptide of each protein.

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy and in-time diagnosis is limited because of the absence of effective biomarkers. Germline <i>BRCA1/2</i> genetic alterations are risk factors for hereditary OC; risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) is pursued for disease prevention. However, not all healthy carriers develop the disease. Therefore, identifying predictive markers in the <i>BRCA1/2</i> carrier population could help improve the identification of candidates for preventive RRSO. In this study, plasma samples from 20 OC patients (10 patients with <i>BRCA1/2</i> wild type (<sub>wt</sub>) and 10 with the <i>BRCA1/2</i> variant (<sub>var</sub>)) and 20 normal subjects (10 subjects with <i>BRCA1/2</i><sub>wt</sub> and 10 with <i>BRCA1/2</i><sub>var</sub>) were analyzed for potential biomarkers of hereditary OC. We applied a bottom-up proteomics approach, using nano-flow LC-MS to analyze depleted plasma proteome quantitatively, and potential plasma protein markers specific to the <i>BRCA1/2</i> variant were identified from a comparative statistical analysis of the four groups. We obtained 1505 protein candidates from the 40 subjects, and SPARC and THBS1 were verified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Plasma SPARC and THBS1 concentrations in healthy <i>BRCA1/2</i> carriers were found to be lower than in OC patients with <i>BRCA1/2</i><sub>var</sub>. If plasma SPARC concentrations increase over 337.35 ng/mL or plasma THBS1 concentrations increase over 65.28 &#x3bc;g/mL in a healthy <i>BRCA1/2</i> carrier, oophorectomy may be suggested.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Lc-msms, Brca carrier, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.
Asan Medical Center

### Submitter
Kyunggon Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Kyunggon Kim
Department of Convergence Medicine, Convergence Medicine Research Center/Biomedical Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea.


