### Accession
PXD036262

### Title
Proximity labeling via MLF2-APEX2 fusion

### Description
Proximity labeling approach to identify protein inside nuclear envelope blebs arising in Torsin-deficient HeLa cells. WT and TorsinKO cells were engineered to express MLF2-APEX2 fusion. APEX reaction was carried out via 1 mM H2O2 for 1 minute in the presence of biotin phenol. Biotinylated protein were captured via streptavidin beads. Each APEX reaction was accompanied by an untreated (no H2O2) control.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted protein were digested in gel via trypsin. Protein Digests are analyzed using LC MS/MS on a Thermo Scientific LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. This system are equipped with Waters nanoACQUITY ultra high pressure liquid chromatographs (UPLC) for peptide separation.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra are searched in-house using the Mascot algorithm for un-interpreted MS/MS spectra after using the Mascot Distiller program to generate Mascot compatible files. The Mascot Distiller program combines sequential MS/MS scans from profile data that have the same precursor ion. A charge state of +2 and +3 are preferentially located with a signal to noise ratio of 1.2 or greater and a peak list is generated for database searching. Either the NCBInr, a species specific, or a custom database (in FASTA format) are used for searching.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Torsin, Apex, Nuclear envelope, Mlf2

### Affiliations
Yale University, Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry
Yale University

### Submitter
Sarah Prophet

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Schlieker
Yale University, Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry


