### Accession
PXD012607

### Title
Comparative transcriptomic and proteomic analyses provide insights into functional genes for hypoxic adaptation in embryos of Tibetan chickens

### Description
Tibetan chickens, a unique plateau breed, have good performances to adapt to high-altitude hypoxic environments. A number of positively selected genes have been reported in Tibetan chickens; however, the mechanisms of gene expression for hypoxia adaptation are not fully understood. In the present study, eggs from Tibetan (TC) and Chahua (CH) chickens were incubated under hypoxic and normoxic conditions, and vascularization in the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) of embryos was observed. We found that the vessel density index (VDI) in CAM of TCs was lower than in CHs under hypoxia incubation.Proteomic analyses of CAM tissues were performed in TC and CH embryos under hypoxic incubation using iTRAQ. We obtained 387 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) that were mainly enriched in angiogenesis, vasculature development, blood vessel morphogenesis, blood circulation, renin-angiotensin system, and HIF-1 and VEGF signaling pathways. Twenty-six genes involved in angiogenesis and blood circulation, two genes involved in ion transport, and six genes that regulated energy metabolism were identified as candidate functional genes in regulating hypoxic adaption of chicken embryos. Therefore, this research provided insights into the molecular mechanism of hypoxia adaptation in Tibetan chickens.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from CAM tissues, and the protein concentrations were determined with the BCA protein assay reagent (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, Shanghai, China). The proteins were digested to peptides with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μL DS buffer overnight at 37 °C and collected as a filtrate. For labeling, the peptides were dried using vacuum-centrifugation, reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB (Applied Biosystems, Milan, Italy), and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plex iTRAQ Reagent kit. In the labeling reaction, samples were incubated for 2 h at room temperature, pooled, and dried using vacuum-centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis,For peptide identification and quantification, MS/MS data were searched against the “uniprot_Gallusgallus_32644_20170116.fasta” file using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA.).

### Publication Abstract
The Tibetan chicken is a unique breed that has adapted to the high-altitude hypoxic conditions of the Tibetan plateau. A number of positively selected genes have been reported in these chickens; however, the mechanisms of gene expression for hypoxia adaptation are not fully understood. In the present study, eggs from Tibetan and Chahua chickens were incubated under hypoxic and normoxic conditions, and vascularization in the chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) of embryos was observed. We found that the vessel density index in the CAM of Tibetan chickens was lower than in Chahua chickens under hypoxia conditions. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of CAM tissues were performed in Tibetan and Chahua chicken embryos under hypoxic incubation using RNA-Seq and iTRAQ. We obtained 160 differentially expressed genes and 387 differentially expressed proteins that were mainly enriched in angiogenesis, vasculature development, blood vessel morphogenesis, blood circulation, renin-angiotensin system, and HIF-1 and VEGF signaling pathways. Twenty-six genes involved in angiogenesis and blood circulation, two genes involved in ion transport, and six genes that regulated energy metabolism were identified as candidate functional genes in regulating hypoxic adaptation of chicken embryos. This research provided insights into the molecular mechanism of hypoxia adaptation in Tibetan chickens.

### Keywords
Tibetan chicken, Hypoxic adaption, Transcriptome, Proteome, Cam

### Affiliations
China Agricutrual University
National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, Beijing Key Laboratory for Animal Genetic Improvement, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China

### Submitter
Ying Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Hao Zhang
National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, Beijing Key Laboratory for Animal Genetic Improvement, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China


