### Accession
PXD006080

### Title
Ncd regulation reveals a new mechanism for targeting proteins to the meiotic spindle in oocytes

### Description
The meiotic spindle in oocytes is formed without centrosomes.  How a bipolar spindle is assembled and maintained around chromosomes in oocytes remains to be established.  Multiple kinases are known to regulate the meiotic spindle, but how they execute their function is poorly understood.  We found that the phospho-docking protein 14-3-3ε, together with the other isoform ζ, stabilises spindle bipolarity in Drosophila oocytes.  A critical 14-3-3 target is the minus-end directed motor Ncd (human HSET; kinesin-14) which has well documented roles in stabilising a bipolar spindle in oocytes.  Phospho-docking by 14-3-3 inhibits the microtubule binding activity of the non-motor Ncd tail.  Further phosphorylation by Aurora B kinase can release Ncd from this inhibitory effect of 14-3-3.  As Aurora B localises to chromosomes and spindles, 14-3-3 facilitates specific association of Ncd with spindle microtubules by preventing Ncd from binding to non-spindle microtubules in oocytes.  Therefore, 14-3-3 translates a spatial cue provided by Aurora B to target Ncd selectively to the spindle within the large volume of oocytes.  

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were run on gel (NuPAGE Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, Life Technologies, UK), in NuPAGE buffer (MES) and visualised using Imperial™ Protein Stain (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK). The stained gel lanes were excised and de-stained and proteins were digested with trypsin, as previously described (Shevchenko et al, 1996). Briefly, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 12.5 ng μL-1 trypsin (Pierce, UK).  Following digestion, samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al (2003). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 2 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). Samples were then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting them to 5 μL with 0.1% TFA. MS-analyses were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled on-line, to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). The analytical column with a self-assembled particle frit (Ishihama et al 2002) and C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm; Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Germany) was packed into a spray emitter (75-μm ID, 8-μm opening, 300-mm length; New Objective) using an air-pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.5 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 66 min, then to 95% in 5 min. FTMS spectra were recorded at 60,000 resolution (scan range 300-1700 m/z) and the twenty most intense peaks with charge ≥ 2 of the MS scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Thomson in the ion trap for MS2 (normal scan, wideband activation, filling 5.0E5 ions for MS scan, 1.0E4 ions for MS2, maximum fill time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion for 60 s).

### Data Protocol
Searches were conducted using the MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science) against the complete Drosophila melanogaster database (Uniprot, September 2014). MS accuracy was set to 6 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to ±0.6 Da. Trypsin was used as an enzyme allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were chosen as fixed and variable modifications respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The meiotic spindle is formed without centrosomes in a large volume of oocytes. Local activation of crucial spindle proteins around chromosomes is important for formation and maintenance of a bipolar spindle in oocytes. We found that phosphodocking 14-3-3 proteins stabilize spindle bipolarity in <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> oocytes. A critical 14-3-3 target is the minus end-directed motor Ncd (human HSET; kinesin-14), which has well-documented roles in stabilizing a bipolar spindle in oocytes. Phospho docking by 14-3-3 inhibits the microtubule binding activity of the nonmotor Ncd tail. Further phosphorylation by Aurora B kinase can release Ncd from this inhibitory effect of 14-3-3. As Aurora B localizes to chromosomes and spindles, 14-3-3 facilitates specific association of Ncd with spindle microtubules by preventing Ncd from binding to nonspindle microtubules in oocytes. Therefore, 14-3-3 translates a spatial cue provided by Aurora B to target Ncd selectively to the spindle within the large volume of oocytes.

### Keywords
Ncd regulation, Drosophila, Meiosis, Shotgun proteomics, Meiotic spindle, Oocytes

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
Wellcome Centre for Cell biology, University of Edinburgh, UK

### Submitter
Robin Beaven

### Lab Head
Dr Hiro Ohkura
Wellcome Centre for Cell biology, University of Edinburgh, UK


