### Accession
PXD014691

### Title
IFITM3-mediated regulation of cell membrane dynamics is essential for malignant B-cell transformation

### Description
B cell receptor (BCR) signaling and oncogenic tyrosine kinases that mimic BCR-signaling in B-lineage leukemia and lymphoma depend on assembly of membrane proximal signaling complexes. Signalosomes in normal BCR- and oncogene (e.g. BCR-ABL1, RAS-pathway lesions) signal transduction are recruited to phospholipid anchors in lipid rafts. The robustness of these complexes depends on cholesterol accumulation in lipid rafts. Here we identified the interferon-induced transmembrane protein IFITM3 as a central regulator of cholesterol in lipid rafts.

### Sample Protocol
Cell surface proteins were labeled with biotin using the N-linked glycosylation-site biotin labeling method (Wollscheid et al., 2009). Briefly, 3 x 107 live cells were washed twice and resuspended in 1ml of ice-cold PBS, and treated with 1.6mM sodium metaperiodate (VWR, 13798-22) at 4C for 20 minutes to oxidize the vicinal diols of sugar residues linked to surface proteins. The cells were then washed twice in PBS in order to remove excess sodium metaperiodate. Cells were resuspended in 1ml of ice-cold PBS and treated with 1mM biocytin hydrazide (Biotium, 90060) and 10mM Aniline (Sigma-Aldrich, 242284) at 4C for 90 minutes with gentle mixing in order to biotinylate free aldehydes exposed on the sugar residues. After labeling, cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS to removed excess biotin, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80C until further processing for mass spectrometry. All experiments were performed in biological triplicate with replicates harvested from consecutive passages. Frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice in 1ml of RIPA buffer (Millipore, 20-188) with the addition of 1X HALT protease inhibitors (Pierce, 78442). After incubation on ice for 10 minutes, cells were disrupted by sonication and the lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 17,000 rcf at 4C for 10 minutes. Clarified lysate was mixed with 500uls of neutravidin agarose resin (Thermo, 29200) and incubated at 4C for 2 hours with end-over-end mixing. Neutravidin beads with captured biotinylated surface proteins were washed extensively by gravity flow to remove unbound proteins using 50mls of 1X RIPA + 1mM EDTA, followed by 50mls of PBS + 1M NaCl, and finally 50mls of 50mM ABC + 2M Urea buffer. Washed beads were resuspended in digestion buffer (50mM Tris pH 8.5, 10mM TCEP, 20mM 2-Iodoacetamide, 1.6M Urea) with 10ugs of added Trypsin protease (Pierce, 90057) to perform simultaneous disulfide reduction, alkylation, and on-bead peptide digestion at room temperature overnight (16-20 hours). After digestion, the pH was dropped to ~2 with neat trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma, T6508-10AMP) and the peptide mixture was desalted using a SOLA-HRP column (Thermo, 60109-001) on a vacuum manifold. Desalted peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile (ACN, Sigma, 34998-4L) and 50% water with 0.1% TFA and dried down completely in a speedvac. Dried peptides were resuspended in LC/MS grade water (Fisher, W64) with 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA, Honeywell, 94318-250ML-F). Peptide concentration was measured using 280 nm absorbance on a Nanodrop (Thermo), and the peptide concentration was adjusted to 0.2ug/ul for mass spec runs. For each replicate, 1ug of peptide was injected onto a Dionex Ultimate 3000 NanoRSLC instrument with a 15-cm Acclaim PEPMAP C18 (Thermo, 164534) reverse phase column. The samples were separated on a 3.5-hour non-linear gradient using a mixture of Buffer A (0.1% FA) and B (80% ACN/0.1% FA), from 2.4% ACN to 32% ACN. Eluted peptides were analyzed with a Thermo Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. The MS survey scan was performed over a mass range of 350-1500 m/z with a resolution of 70,000, with a maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms. We performed a data-dependent MS2 acquisition at a resolution of 17,500, AGC of 5e4, and IT of 150 ms. The 15 most intense precursor ions were fragmented in the HCD at a normalized collision energy of 27. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds to avoid over-sampling of highly abundant species.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data was analyzed using MaxQuant v1.5.1.2 (Tyanova et al., 2016a) to identify and quantify peptide abundance and searched against the human Swiss-Prot annotated human proteome from Uniprot (downloaded with 20,303 entries). The “match-between-runs” option was selected to increase peptide identifications while the “fast LFQ” option was selected to calculate label-free quantification values (LFQ) of identified proteins. All other settings were left to the default MaxQuant values. The MaxQuant output data was analyzed using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016b) and the R program (version 3.4.0). Proteins annotated as “reverse”, “only identified by site”, and “potential contaminant” were filtered out as well as proteins that were quantified in less than 2 out of 3 biological replicates in at least one experimental group. Missing values were imputed based on the normal distribution of the dataset as implemented by Perseus. Volcano plots were generated using output from a two-sample T-test comparing the log-2 transformed LFQ protein abundance values from different cell lines with a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Interferon-induced transmembrane protein&#xa0;3 (IFITM3) has previously been identified as an endosomal protein that blocks viral infection<sup>1-3</sup>. Here we studied clinical cohorts of patients with B&#xa0;cell leukaemia and lymphoma, and identified IFITM3 as a strong predictor of poor outcome. In normal resting B&#xa0;cells, IFITM3 was minimally expressed and mainly localized in endosomes. However, engagement of the B&#xa0;cell receptor (BCR) induced both expression of IFITM3 and phosphorylation of this protein at Tyr20, which resulted in the accumulation of IFITM3 at the cell surface. In B&#xa0;cell leukaemia, oncogenic kinases phosphorylate IFITM3 at Tyr20, which causes constitutive localization of this protein at the plasma membrane. In a mouse model, Ifitm3<sup>-/-</sup> naive B&#xa0;cells developed in normal numbers; however, the formation of germinal centres and the production of antigen-specific antibodies were compromised. Oncogenes that induce the development of leukaemia and lymphoma did not transform Ifitm3<sup>-/-</sup> B&#xa0;cells. Conversely, the phosphomimetic IFITM3(Y20E) mutant induced oncogenic PI3K signalling and initiated the transformation of premalignant B&#xa0;cells. Mechanistic experiments revealed that IFITM3 functions as a PIP3&#xa0;scaffold and central amplifier of PI3K signalling. The amplification of PI3K signals depends on IFITM3 using two lysine residues (Lys83 and Lys104) in its conserved intracellular loop as a scaffold for the accumulation of PIP3. In Ifitm3<sup>-/-</sup> B&#xa0;cells, lipid rafts were depleted of PIP3, which resulted in the defective expression of over 60&#xa0;lipid-raft-associated surface receptors, and impaired BCR signalling and cellular adhesion. We conclude that the phosphorylation of IFITM3 that occurs after B&#xa0;cells encounter antigen induces a dynamic switch from antiviral effector functions in endosomes to a PI3K amplification loop at the cell surface. IFITM3-dependent amplification of PI3K signalling, which in part acts downstream of the BCR, is critical for the rapid expansion of B&#xa0;cells with high affinity to antigen. In addition, multiple oncogenes depend on IFITM3 to assemble PIP3-dependent signalling complexes and amplify PI3K signalling for malignant transformation.

### Keywords
Bcr signaling, Leukemia, Lipid rafts, Cell surface

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Laboratory Medicine, UCSF

### Submitter
Matthew Nix

### Lab Head
Dr Arun Wiita
Department of Laboratory Medicine, UCSF


