### Accession
PXD013858

### Title
Proteomics analysis of Volvariella volvacea after cold treatment

### Description
The three independently grown mycelia of V. volvacea V23 or VH3 after chilling stress for 0h and 4h were used for Proteomics analysis. After tryptic digestion and iTRAQ labeling, the samples are separated into 20 components by one-dimensional chromatography, and then the NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis is performed on each component using Triple TOF 6600 tandem mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
The three independently grown mycelia of V. volvacea V23 or VH3 after CST for 0h and 4h were transferred into low protein binding tubes (1.5ml Eppendorf) and lysed with 300 µL lysis buffer supplemented with 1mM PMSF, respectively. Then samples were further lysed with sonication. The parameters were set as 1s/1s intervals, 3min time, and 80W power. After sonication, the samples were centrifuged at 15000 g for 15 min to remove insoluble particles, repeat once to exclude precipitation further. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay and aliquoted to store at -80°C. The 15μg proteins of each sample were acquired and separated by 12% SDS-PAGE gel. Then separation gel was stained by CBB according to Candiano’s protocol. After staining, the gel was washed with water until the bands were visualized. Finally, the stained gel was scanned by ImageScanner (GE Healthcare, USA) at the resolution of 300dpi.  100 μg extracted protein was based on FASP methods for tryptic digestion. For iTRAQ labeling, the lyophilized samples were resuspended in 100 μL 200 mM TEAB, and 40 μL of each sample was transferred into new tubes for labeling. Two hundred microliter isopropanol was added to iTRAQ reagent vial at room temperature. The centrifuged reagents were dissolved for 5 min and mixed for centrifugation and repeat this step once. Then 100 μL of the iTRAQ label reagent was added to each sample for mixing. The tubes were incubated at room temperature for 2 h. Finally, 200 µL of HPLC water was added to each sample and incubated for 30 min to terminate the reaction. The labeling peptides solutions were lyophilized and stored at -80°C. Peptide separation was performed on an 1100 HPLC System (Agilent) using an Agilent Zorbax Extend RP column (5 μm, 150 mm × 2.1 mm). Mobile phases A (2% acetonitrile in HPLC water) and B (98% acetonitrile in HPLC water) were used for RP gradient. The solvent gradient was set as follows: 0~8min, 98% A; 8.00~8.01min, 98%~95%A; 8.01~38 min, 95%~75% A; 38~50 min, 75~60% A; 50~50.01min, 60~10% A; 50.01~60 min, 10% A; 60~60.01 min, 10~98% A; 60.01~65 min, 98%A. Tryptic peptides were separated at a fluent flow rate of 300μL/min and monitored at 210 and 280 nm. Dried samples were harvested from 8min to 50min, and elution buffer was collected in every minute and numbered from 1-20 with the pipeline. The separated peptides were lyophilized for MS detection. The lyophilized peptide fractions were re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid, and 4μL aliquots of which was loaded into a ChromXP C18 (3 μm, 150 Å) trap column. The online Chromatography separation was performed on the Ekspert nanoLC 415 system (SCIEX, Concord, ON). The trapping, the desalting procedure was carried out at a flow rate of 4μL/min for 5 min with 100% solvent A (water/acetonitrile/formic acid= 98/2/0.1% (v/v/v). Composition of solvent B was water/acetonitrile/formic acid = 5/95/0.1% (v/v/v). Then, an elution gradient of 5-85% solvent B over 67 min (followed by 95% A over 3 min) was used on an analytical column (75 μm x 15 cm C18- 3μm 120 Å, ChromXP, Eksigent). IDA (information-dependent acquisition) mass spectrum techniques were used to acquire tandem MS data on a Triple TOF 6600 tandem mass spectrometer (Sciex, Concord, Ontario, Canada) fitted with a Nanospray III ion source.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed for protein identification and quantification using ProteinPilot Software v.5.0 (Sciex Inc., USA). The local FDR was estimated with the integrated PSPEP tool in the ProteinPilot Software to be 1.0% after searching against a transcriptome database of V. volvacea (9542). The following settings were selected: Sample type: Identification; Cys Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF 6600; Special Factors: Urea denaturation; Species: None; Search effort: Thorough ID. Only proteins identified at global FDR ≤ 1% and unique peptides ≥ 1 were considered for protein lists and further downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Volvariella volvacea mycelium lc-msms

### Affiliations
Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Institute of Edible Fungi, Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences, China

### Submitter
Ming Gong

### Lab Head
Dr Ming Gong
Institute of Edible Fungi, Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences, China


