### Accession
PXD022721

### Title
: Robust and reproducible large-scale label-free deep quantitative profiling of the MOLM-14 surfaceome using three mass spectrometry platforms over multiple years

### Description
Surface proteins are one of the most important and common matrices for clinical chemistry and proteomic analyses. With the rapid developments in mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics methods, label-free quantitative proteomics has become an increasingly popular tool for profiling global protein abundances. Here, we evaluate the performance of three mass spectrometers, namely Orbitrap Elite (Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap), Q Exactive HF (Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap) and Orbitrap Fusion (Tribrid Quadrupole-Ion Trap-Orbitrap), in label-free semiquantitative analysis of cell surface proteins spanning a four-year period. Sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation was used for surfaceome enrichment, following gel separation for in-depth protein identification. With the established workflow, we identify 2335 cell surface proteins in MOLM-14, a human acute myeloid leukemia cell line, with a high degree of reproducibility across three MS platforms over multiple years.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free, non-affinity-purified enrichment of cell surface proteins was performed as previously described. In brief, fifty or 100 x 106 MOLM-14 cells were resuspended in 10 mL homogenization buffer (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA and 1x protease inhibitors) and passed three times through an 18-gauge 1.5-inch needle and then three times through a 22-gauge 1.5-inch needle. The cell suspension was transferred to a Dounce homogenizer and further homogenized with 40 strokes. All steps were performed on ice. The complete ULTRA protease inhibitor cocktail was purchased from Roche. Next, the cell homogenate was transferred to a 15 mL conical tube and centrifuged at 1,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The resulting supernatant, containing the post-nuclear cytosol, was layered onto a 2 mL 60% sucrose cushion in an ultracentrifuge tube and centrifuged at 100,000g for one hour at 4°C to enrich the crude plasma membrane (CPM) fraction. The CPM, concentrated at the phase border, was recovered with a pipette tip. To isolate the enriched plasma membrane (EPM) fraction, the CPM fraction was transferred to an ultracentrifuge tube and sucrose step gradients containing 42.8%, 42.3%, 41.8%, 41%, 39%, and 37% sucrose were carefully layered on top. The sample was centrifuged at 100,000g for 18 hours at 4°C. The following day, the EPM fraction was recovered from the top of the 37% sucrose gradient and transferred to another ultracentrifuge tube. The tube was filled with HEPES buffer (115 mM NaCl, 1.2 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM MgCl2, 2.4 mM K2HPO4 and 20 mM HEPES) pH 7.4, and the sample was centrifuged at 150,000g for an hour at 4°C. The pelleted plasma membrane fraction was finally dissolved in 300 µL ammonium bicarbonate buffer (100 mM NH4HCO3, 1% sodium deoxycholate). Following the isolation of the plasma membrane fraction, a 10 µL aliquot was removed and run on a precast 10% Bis-Tris sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel (SDS-PAGE) for protein concentration determination as described elsewhere (Glisovic-Aplenc et al., 2017). The intensity of the sample relative to the standard was used as an estimate of protein concentration in the sample. The enriched plasma membrane fraction was acetone precipitated with 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone (Fisher Scientific) overnight at -20°C. The pellet was solubilized into 20 µL of 1x reducing NuPAGE LDS (Fisher Scientific) and run into a precast 10% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE (Fisher Scientific) at 100 V in 1xMOPS buffer (Fisher Scientific) for 25 minutes. After fixing the gel for 20 minutes in fixing solution (25% ethanol, 7% acetic acid) the gel was stained with colloidal Coomassie blue dye for 30 minutes. Finally, the gel was destained in 7% acetic acid overnight. The following day, each sample was excised from the gel in 8 (2 x 9mm) slices and each cut into 1 mm3 cubes (A. Shevchenko et al., 1996; Shevchenko, Wilm, Vorm, & Mann, 1996)(Shevchenko et al., 1996a; Shevchenko et al., 1996b)(A. Shevchenko et al., 1996; Shevchenko, Wilm, Vorm, & Mann, 1996)(Shevchenko, Jensen et al. 1996, Shevchenko, Wilm et al. 1996)(A. Shevchenko et al., 1996; Shevchenko, Wilm, Vorm, & Mann, 1996) . The gel pieces were destained in a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature, for 10 minutes with shaking. The destaining step was repeated until all Coomassie dye had been removed from the gel pieces. After a quick spindown of the samples, the supernatant was removed, and the gel pieces were dehydrated with 100 µL 100% acetonitrile at room temperature for 10 minutes with shaking. The samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT (Fisher Scientific) and alkylated with 25 mM IAA, and then dehydrated with acetonitrile (Fisher Scientific). Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) (50ng/µL in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to the dehydrated gel pieces and proteolysis proceeded overnight at 37°C. Gel pieces were subsequently washed with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. After a quick spindown, the supernatant was transferred to a separate microcentrifuge tube. The remaining tryptic peptides were extracted with acetonitrile and combined with the peptides recovered from the wash step. Finally, the peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Tryptic peptides were separated with a home-packed column (70 µm *25 cm, 2.4 µm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ) using a nanoLC system (Eksigent or UltiMate 3000). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B of 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The HPLC run comprised a 90-minute gradient from 3-35% B with minor modifications between batches. Samples were analyzed using three Orbitrap mass spectrometers; Orbitrap Elite (Elite), Q Exactive HF (QEHF) and Orbitrap Fusion (Fusion) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Detailed MS/MS parameters are listed in Figure S1. Data was acquired under data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with dynamic exclusion and a repeat count of 1. One microscan was set to both MS1 and MS2.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant (V1.6.7.0) against the UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot Human Proteome database excluding protein isoforms, retrieved on October 15, 2019. Additionally, the common contaminants database was used for first search. All other parameters used default settings with label-free quantification. Proteins marked as ‘Only identified by site’, ‘Reverse’ or ‘Contaminant’ were excluded from further analysis. A list of nine GO terms was used to define putative cell surface proteins. Surface protein intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values were first log2 transformed, then normalized using ‘width adjustment’ in Perseus. Proteins or peptides with ‘0’ intensities were considered ‘not detected’. Data analyses including correlation analysis and statistical analysis were done in Excel.

### Publication Abstract
With the rapid developments in mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics methods, label-free semiquantitative proteomics has become an increasingly popular tool for profiling global protein abundances in an unbiased manner. However, the reproducibility of these data across time and LC-MS platforms is not well characterized. Here, we evaluate the performance of three LC-MS platforms (Orbitrap Elite, Q Exactive HF, and Orbitrap Fusion) in label-free semiquantitative analysis of cell surface proteins over a six-year period. Sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation was used for surfaceome enrichment, following gel separation for in-depth protein identification. With our established workflow, we consistently detected and reproducibly quantified &gt;2300 putative cell surface proteins in a human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line on all three platforms. To our knowledge this is the first study reporting highly reproducible semiquantitative proteomic data collection of biological replicates across multiple years and LC-MS platforms. These data provide experimental justification for semiquantitative proteomic study designs that are executed over multiyear time intervals and on different platforms. Multiyear and multiplatform experimental designs will likely enable larger scale proteomic studies and facilitate longitudinal proteomic studies by investigators lacking access to high throughput MS facilities. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022721.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Reproducibility, Large-scale, Surfaceome, Mass spectrometry, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
Children's Hospital of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Richard Aplenc

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Aplenc
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia


### SDRF

