### Accession
PXD028698

### Title
Regulation of Plant Phototropic Growth by NPH3/RPT2-like Substrate Phosphorylation and 14-3-3 Binding

### Description
Polarity underlies all directional growth responses in plants including growth towards the light (phototropism). The plasma-membrane associated protein, NON-PHOTOTROPIC HYPOCOTYL 3 (NPH3) is a key determinant of phototropic growth which is regulated by phototropin (phot) AGC kinases. Here we demonstrate that NPH3 is directly phosphorylated by phot1 within a conserved C-terminal consensus sequence (RxS) that is necessary to promote phototropism and petiole positioning in Arabidopsis. RxS phosphorylation also triggers 14-3-3 binding combined with changes in NPH3 phosphorylation and localisation status. Mutants of NPH3 that are unable to bind or constitutively bind 14-3-3s show compromised functionality consistent with a model where phototropic curvature is established by signalling outputs arising from a gradient of NPH3 RxS phosphorylation across the stem. Our findings therefore establish that NPH3/RPT2-Like (NRL) proteins are phosphorylation targets for plant AGC kinases. Moreover, RxS phosphorylation is conserved in other members of the NRL family, suggesting a common mechanism of regulating plant growth to the prevailing light environment.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein extracts were prepared from 3-d-old etiolated WT seedlings or seedlings expressing GFP-NPH3 maintained in darkness (Dark) or irradiated with 20 µmol m-2 s-1 of blue light for 15 min (Light). Immunoprecipitations were preformed using the µMACS GFP isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotech), elutions were separated 1 cm by SDS-PAGE, the whole gel lane excised, and proteins identified by liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry at the Fingerprints Proteomics Facility (University of Dundee). Proteins were subjected to in-gel digestion with 12.5 µg/ml trypsin in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 30 ⁰C. Extracted tryptic peptides were dried and resuspended in 50µl 1% Formic acid/5% Acetonitrile for mass spectrometry analysis. Peptide mixtures were injected at a volume of 15µl on to an Ultimate RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an LTQ OrbiTrap Velos Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping column Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (100μm x 2cm ID, 5μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) before elution at a flow rate of 0.3μl per min onto an Easy Spray C18 PepMap column (50 cm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A gradient from 2 to 98% acetonitrile in 0.08% formic acid was used for peptide separation. In data-dependent acquisition mode Full MS1 scans were performed at 60,000 resolution followed by 15 sequential dependant MS2 scans where the top 15 ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID, normalized collision energy NCE = 35.0) and analysis in the Ion Trap with an MSn AGC target of 5000 and multistage activation enabled. An isolation window of 2.0 m/z units around the precursor was used and selected ions were then dynamically excluded from further analysis. Co-immunoprecipitated proteins were quantified from 2 independent biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16) and searched against Arabidopsis thaliana protein database (Uniprot UP000006548). Database search parameters were set as follows: carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), Gln->pyro-Glu and acetyl (N-term) as variable modifications; enzyme trypsin, two missed cleavage sites allowed per peptide; minimal peptide length of 7 residues, maximal peptide mass of 4600 Da. FTMS and TOF MS/MS tolerance were 10 ppm and 40 ppm, respectively and protein and peptide identifications were filtered to 0.01 FDR. Quantification was performed in LFQ mode with razor peptide, LFQ minimum ratio count of 2 and match between runs and second peptides true. Data were exported and further processed in MS Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Ltq orbitrap velos

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, University of Glasgow, UK
University of Glasgow

### Submitter
Stuart Sullivan

### Lab Head
Dr John M. Christie
Institute of Molecular, Cell and Systems Biology, University of Glasgow, UK


