### Accession
PXD012274

### Title
Global Interferon-stimulated Genes Interactome Network

### Description
Interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) form the backbone of innate immune system and are pivotal for limiting intra- and intercellular viral replication and spread. We conducted a mass spectrometry–based survey to understand the fundamental organization of the innate immune system and to explore molecular functions of individual ISGs. We identified interactions between 104 ISGs and 1,401 cellular binding partners engaging in 2,734 high-confidence interactions. 90% of these interactions are unreported so far, and our survey therefore illuminates a far wider activity spectrum of ISGs than currently known. Integration of the resulting ISG-interaction network with published datasets and functional studies allowed us to identify novel regulators of immunity and immune system–related processes. Given the extraordinary robustness of the innate immune system, this ISG network may serve as a blueprint for therapeutic targeting of cellular systems in order to efficiently fight viral infections.

### Sample Protocol
Expression of ISGs in HeLa- and HEK-FlpIn TREX cells was induced by doxycycline (1 µg/ml) treatment for 48h. For affinity enrichment, two 15 cm dishes per replicate were used. Cells were scraped off, washed in PBS, precipitated, and pellets were lysed on ice using TAP lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 5% (v/v) glycerol, 0.2 % (v/v) Nonidet-P40, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1µg/ml Avidin (2-0204-015; IBA) and protease inhibitor cocktail (EDTA-free, cOmplete; Roche)) for 15 min followed by a 5 min sonication step at 4°C. Strep-Tactin agarose was added to the clarified cell lysates and incubated for 3h at 4°C on a rotary wheel. Beads were washed four times in TAP lysis buffer to reduce the concentration of unspecific proteins and to separate specific binders from background ones. Samples were washed five additional times with TAP washing buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 5% (v/v) glycerol, 1.5 mM MgCl2) to eliminate remaining detergents. Beads were re-suspended in 20 µl guanidinium chloride buffer (6 M GdmCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8), boiled at 95 °C for 5 min and digested by adding 20 µl LysC-Protease-Mix (100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8 and 0.5 µg LysC (WAKO Chemicals USA)) for 3h at 30°C. Samples were diluted 1:5 with Trypsin-Protease-Mix (100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8 and 1 µg Trypsin) (Promega) and incubated for 12h at room temperature. TFA and acetonitrile was added to a final concentration of 0.6 % and 2 %, respectively. Peptides were desalted and concentrated using C18 Empore filter discs (3M)32. After elution, peptides were analysed employing an EASY-nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was directly coupled to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on an analytical 15 cm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C10-AQ, 3 µM; Dr. Maisch) and eluted using an 115 min acetonitrile gradient starting with 5% to 30% (85 min), 30% to 95% (15 min), a wash out period of 5 min at 95% and a re-adjustment phase to 5% of organic acetonitrile buffer (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid) (10 min) at a constant flow of 250 nl/min. Proteomic analysis was performed as described earlier33. Briefly, the mass spectrometer was used in a data-dependent acquisition mode with one full MS scan at a resolution of 60,000 at 400m/z in the Orbitrap, followed by 10 MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap (target ion value = 1000, isolation width = 2 m/z, CID fragmentation mode with normalized collision energy = 40) of the highest reported peaks obtained in the full MS scan before.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.34 or 1.6.0.15, using label-free quantification (LFQ) and match between run options and searched against forward and reverse sequences of the human proteome (UniprotKB, release 03.2016) by the built-in Andromeda search engine34. Carbamidometylation was set as fixed, methionine oxidation and N-acetylation as variable modification. Precursor ions with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm and fragmented ions with a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da were accepted. Peptide and protein identification was controlled by a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.01. Perseus version 1.5.3.0 or 1.6.0.7 was used to analyze the output of MaxQuant35. Protein groups identified as known contaminants or reverse sequence matches were excluded from the analysis. Only proteins with a minimum of 2 LFQ quantifications in at least one group of replicate experiments (N = 3) for a specific ISG bait were considered for the analysis. Missing values were imputed using normal distribution, whose standard deviation was defined as 30% and the mean was offset by -1.8 standard deviations of the data distribution of the real intensities observed in the corresponding MS run, respectively. To identify true interactors of ISG baits and eliminate unspecific (false positive) binders, statistical data analysis was performed as follows: based on the similarity of their protein content, MS runs were classified into 7 groups of 15 ISG baits each and complemented with a fixed set of control experiments (see Supplementary Table 10, “ISG bait groups”). Within each resulting subset, the significance of the protein enrichment in the pulldowns of a specific ISG bait versus the other baits and control experiments was determined by t-test (two sided, equal variance, S0=0.5) and corrected for multiple hypothesis testing using permutation-based false discovery rate statistics (FDR=0.05, 250 permutations) as described previously36, 37. The groups of ISG baits were determined by co-cluster analysis using the Spearman’s ranked correlation of protein abundance (LFQ) profiles as the similarity measure. The complemented set of control experiments included AE-LC-MS/MS experiments of tagged GFP, and experiments defining precipitated background binders obtained in cell lysate without tagged protein, measured in parallel with the AE-LC-MS/MS runs for ISG baits.

### Publication Abstract
Interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) form the backbone of the innate immune system and are important for limiting intra- and intercellular viral replication and spread. We conducted a mass-spectrometry-based survey to understand the fundamental organization of the innate immune system and to explore the molecular functions of individual ISGs. We identified interactions between 104 ISGs and 1,401 cellular binding partners engaging in 2,734 high-confidence interactions. 90% of these interactions are unreported so far, and our survey therefore illuminates a far wider activity spectrum of ISGs than is currently known. Integration of the resulting ISG-interaction network with published datasets and functional studies allowed us to identify regulators of immunity and processes related to the immune system. Given the extraordinary robustness of the innate immune system, this ISG network may serve as a blueprint for therapeutic targeting of cellular systems to efficiently fight viral infections.

### Keywords
Ifn, Isg interactome, Ap-lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany
Systems Arbovirology, Leibniz Institute of Virology

### Submitter
Pietro Scaturro

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany


