### Accession
PXD006752

### Title
Compartment-resolved proteomic analysis of mouse aorta during atherosclerotic plaque formation

### Description
Atherosclerosis leads to vascular lesions that involve major rearrangements of the vascular proteome, especially of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Using single aortas from ApoE knock out mice, we quantified formation of plaques by single-run, high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. To probe localization on a proteome-wide scale, we employed quantitative detergent solubility profiling. This compartment- and time-resolved resource of atherogenesis comprised 5,117 proteins, 182 of which changed their expression status in response to vessel maturation and atherosclerotic plaque development. In the insoluble ECM proteome, 65 proteins significantly changed, including relevant collagens, matrix metalloproteinases and macrophage specific proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Aorta were disrupted in PBS using a micro tissue grinder. After centrifugation (20min at 16,000g) the supernatant was collected and the pellet resuspended in buffer 1 (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5% Glycerol, 1% IGEPAL-CA-630, 1mM MgCl2, 1% Benzonase). After 20min incubation on ice, the extract was centrifuged and the supernatant collected and combined with the first supernatant (FR1). The pellet was resuspended in buffer 2 (50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, 150mM NaCl, 1.0% IGEPAL CA-630, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1% Benzonase), incubated on ice for 20min and centrifuged. The supernatant was collected (FR2), the pellet resupended in buffer 3 (50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, 500mM NaCl, 1% IGEPAL CA-630, 2% sodium deoxycholate, 1% SDS, 1% Benzonase), and incubated at room temperature for 20min. Following centrifugation, the supernatant was collected (FR3) and the insoluble pellet resuspended in PBS (INSOL). All four fractions were acetone precipitated and resupended in denaturation buffer (6M guanidinium hydrochloride, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 10mM TCEP, 50mM CAA), incubated at 99°C for 10min and sonicated 15min in a Bioruptor (Diagenode) at high setting with 30s on 30s off cycles. Samples from FR1-3 were diluted 10-fold with digestion buffer (10% ACN) and digested over night with Trypsin and Lys-C (1:20 enzyme to protein ratio for each enzyme) at 37°C. Samples of the INSOL fraction were diluted with 1:1:1 with digestion buffer and U/T buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea) followed by addition of 2.5 μg Lys-C and mechanical disruption applying 200 strokes in a micro tissue grinder. The resulting mixture was sonicated again 15min in the Bioruptor and incubated 3h at 37°C under vigourous shaking conditions. The pre-digested samples were diluted 1:3 with dilution buffer and digested over night by addition of 2.5μg Trypsin and 2.5μg Lys-C at 37°C. Peptides of all 4 fractions were desalted using stage-tips containing SDB-RPS material and separated on a reverse phase column (50cm length, 75μm inner diameter) coupled to a Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and eluted with a nonlinear 120-min gradient of 5–60% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 95% buffer B and re-equilibrated with buffer A. Column temperature was kept at 50 °C.  MS data were acquired  in a top15 method. The target value for the full scan MS spectra was 30 Mio. in the 300−1,650 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and a resolution of 60,000. Isolation of precursors was performed at a window of 1.4 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 27%. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 with an ion target value of 100,000 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. Underfill ratio was set to 10%, and dynamic exclusion to 20s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.29) and peak lists were searched against the mouse Uniprot FASTA database (UP000000589_10090.fasta and UP000000589_10090_additional.fasta, version June 2015), and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine. As fixed modification cysteine carbamidomethylation and as variable modifications methionine oxidation were included. False discovery rate was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed precursor mass deviation up to 4.5ppm after time-dependent mass calibration and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20ppm. For matching between runs the retention time alignment window was set to 20min and the match time window was 0.7min. For total proteome analyses, solubility fractions were defined in MaxQuant for a combined protein MaxLFQ output (minimum ratio count 2). For fraction specific analyses no fraction information was predefined (minimum ration count 1).

### Publication Abstract
Atherosclerosis leads to vascular lesions that involve major rearrangements of the vascular proteome, especially of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Using single aortas from ApoE knock out mice, we quantified formation of plaques by single-run, high-resolution mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. To probe localization on a proteome-wide scale we employed quantitative detergent solubility profiling. This compartment- and time-resolved resource of atherogenesis comprised 5117 proteins, 182 of which changed their expression status in response to vessel maturation and atherosclerotic plaque development. In the insoluble ECM proteome, 65 proteins significantly changed, including relevant collagens, matrix metalloproteinases and macrophage derived proteins. Among novel factors in atherosclerosis, we identified matrilin-2, the collagen IV crosslinking enzyme peroxidasin as well as the poorly characterized MAM-domain containing 2 (Mamdc2) protein as being up-regulated in the ECM during atherogenesis. Intriguingly, three subunits of the osteoclast specific V-ATPase complex were strongly increased in mature plaques with an enrichment in macrophages thus implying an active de-mineralization function.

### Keywords
Qdsp, Atherosclerosis, Mouse model, Apoe, Ecm

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Wierer

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


