### Accession
PXD005412

### Title
Mouse glycoproteome: Kidney -  pGlyco 2

### Description
Precise and large-scale characterization of glycoproteome is critical for understanding the biological functions of glycoproteins. Due to the complexity of glycosylation, the overall throughput, data quality and accessibility of site-specific glycosylation analysis are overwhelmingly lower than those of routine proteomic studies. Here, we introduce a workflow that robustly identifies intact glycopeptides at a proteome scale using stepped-energy mass-spectrometry (MS) and pGlyco 2.0, a dedicated search engine for large-scale glycopeptide analysis with comprehensive quality control (false discovery rate evaluation on the glycan, peptide and glycopeptide matches).

### Sample Protocol
Precise and large-scale characterization of glycoproteome is critical for understanding the biological functions of glycoproteins. Due to the complexity of glycosylation, the overall throughput, data quality and accessibility of site-specific glycosylation analysis are overwhelmingly lower than those of routine proteomic studies. Here, we introduce a workflow that robustly identifies intact glycopeptides at a proteome scale using stepped-energy mass-spectrometry (MS) and pGlyco 2.0, a dedicated search engine for large-scale glycopeptide analysis with comprehensive quality control (false discovery rate evaluation on the glycan, peptide and glycopeptide matches).

### Data Protocol
Precise and large-scale characterization of glycoproteome is critical for understanding the biological functions of glycoproteins. Due to the complexity of glycosylation, the overall throughput, data quality and accessibility of site-specific glycosylation analysis are overwhelmingly lower than those of routine proteomic studies. Here, we introduce a workflow that robustly identifies intact glycopeptides at a proteome scale using stepped-energy mass-spectrometry (MS) and pGlyco 2.0, a dedicated search engine for large-scale glycopeptide analysis with comprehensive quality control (false discovery rate evaluation on the glycan, peptide and glycopeptide matches).

### Publication Abstract
The precise and large-scale identification of intact glycopeptides is a critical step in glycoproteomics. Owing to the complexity of glycosylation, the current overall throughput, data quality and accessibility of intact glycopeptide identification lack behind those in routine proteomic analyses. Here, we propose a workflow for the precise high-throughput identification of intact N-glycopeptides at the proteome scale using stepped-energy fragmentation and a dedicated search engine. pGlyco 2.0 conducts comprehensive quality control including false discovery rate evaluation at all three levels of matches to glycans, peptides and glycopeptides, improving the current level of accuracy of intact glycopeptide identification. The N-glycoproteome of samples metabolically labeled with <sup>15</sup>N/<sup>13</sup>C were analyzed quantitatively and utilized to validate the glycopeptide identification, which could be used as a novel benchmark pipeline to compare different search engines. Finally, we report a large-scale glycoproteome dataset consisting of 10,009 distinct site-specific N-glycans on 1988 glycosylation sites from 955 glycoproteins in five mouse tissues.Protein glycosylation is a heterogeneous post-translational modification that generates greater proteomic diversity that is difficult to analyze. Here the authors describe pGlyco 2.0, a workflow for the precise one step identification of intact N-glycopeptides at the proteome scale.

### Keywords
Mouse glycoproteome

### Affiliations
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
Institutes of Biomedical Sciences and department of Chemistry, Fudan University, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
pGlyco pFind

### Lab Head
Dr Mingqi Liu
Institutes of Biomedical Sciences and department of Chemistry, Fudan University, Shanghai, China


