### Accession
PXD024193

### Title
Secretome analysis of C-mannosyltransferase-deficient hiPSCs

### Description
C-mannosylation is a modification of tryptophan residues with a single mannose effecting protein folding, secretion and/or function. To date, only few proteins have been proven to be C-mannosylated and studies aiming at global assessment of protein C-mannosylation from cells or tissues are scarce. In order to interrogate the C-mannosylome of human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), we made use of the common finding that C-mannosylation is important for protein secretion. Thus we compared the secretomes of C-mannosyltransferase-deficient DPY19L1 and DPY19L3 mutants to their parental wild-type hiPSCs by mass-spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics. Secretion of numerous proteins was reduced in the mutants.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for secretome analysis: For the secretome analysis, iPSCs were cultured under feeder free conditions. 100,000 - 400,000 cells, depending on the growth behaviour of different clones, were seeded on a Matrigel-coated T25 cell culture flask in TeSR E8 medium supplemented with RI. Medium was changed after 24 h hours and cells were cultured in 4 mL TeSR E8 medium for 72 h. Provided that a confluency of 40 - 60% was reached and the medium did not contain a large amount of detached and apoptotic cells, the cell culture supernatant was harvested and prepared for LC-MS analysis as described previously. Concisely, cell culture supernatant was centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 5 min to remove cell debris. Proteins were precipitated applying the TCA-NLS method, resuspended in 50 µL Laemmli buffer containing 5% (vol/vol) 2-mercaptoethanol, incubated at 95°C for 5 min and separated by SDS PAGE followed by Coomassie staining. Each sample lane was cut in five to seven fractions which were further cut into small pieces and digested with trypsin Trypsin gold (Promega) over night at 37°C.  Mass spectrometry analysis of hiPSC secretomes: MS analysis was performed applying an LTQ Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer coupled to a reversed-phase liquid chromatography system. Reversed phase chromatography was performed by using a nanoflow ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatography system (RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a trapping column (2 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm C18 particle size) and a reversed-phase separating column (50 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 μm C18 particle size). For trapping, a flow rate of 6 µL 0.1% TFA /min was applied for 5 min. For separation, flow rate was set to 250 nL/min at 45% and a gradient of buffer B (80% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA) in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) FA) was applied. The concentration of buffer B was increased from 4% to 25% in 115 min, from 25% to 50% in 25 min, from 50% to 90% in 5 min and hold at 90% for additional 10 min. Ionisation and electrospray injection of peptides was performed with a Nano Spray Flex Ion Source II by using metal-coated fused silica emitters (Silica Tip, 20 μm inner diameter, 10 μm tip inner diameter) and a voltage of 1.2 kV. Overview scans were performed in the Orbitrap analyser with a resolution of 60 k at m/z 400 in a mass range of m/z 300-1600 and stored in profile mode. The 10 most intensive double- and triple-charged peptides with a minimum intensity of 2,000 counts were selected for CID fragmentation with normalised collision energy of 38, an activation time of 10 ms and an activation Q of 0.250 in the LTQ. Recording of fragment ion mass spectra was performed at the LTQ with normal scan rate. Spectra were stored as centroid m/z value and intensity pairs. Peptides that were subjected to fragmentation were excluded within a time frame of 70 s and a mass window of 10 ppm of m/z.

### Data Protocol
Processing of MS raw data by MaxQuant: MaxQuant software suite v1.6.11.0 with the integrated search engine Andromeda was applied to process raw data for the identification and quantification of proteins. A combined analysis was performed for all 15 MS raw files. Unless stated otherwise, pre-configured standard settings were used: digest mode set to specific, missed cleavages set to 2, oxidation (M) and acetylation (N term) chosen as variable modifications carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, mass tolerance set to 20 ppm (precursor) and 0.5 Da (MS/MS), respectively. MS spectra were searched against the UniProt database of human proteins (reviewed + unreviewed, 188,357 entries, database downloaded on 09/03/2020) with a false discovery rate of 1% for proteins and peptides. iBAQ and LFQ was chosen for label free quantification of proteins with LFQ min. ratio count set to 1 and Fast LFQ switched off.  Secretome data analysis with Perseus software: Perseus software V.1.6.2.1 with implemented annotations of the human proteome (mainPerseusAnnot.txt.gz downloaded on 02/04/2020 at  http://annotations.perseus-framework.org) was used for filtering and statistical analysis (see section Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale for details) of the “protein groups” output table of the MaxQuant analysis. Proteins or protein groups identified by at least one peptide within any of all conditions were uploaded into a single matrix followed by exclusion of contaminants and proteins only identified by site or matching to the reverse database. Extracellular proteins were filtered by exclusion of protein IDs not annotated with Gene Ontology Cellular Compartment (GOCC) slim names “extracellular matrix”, “extracellular region” or “extracellular space”. In addition, analysis was restricted to proteins identified by at least two different peptides and detected in at least two replicates of WT cells or both clones of the DPY19L1 KO or the DPY19L3 KO. For statistical analysis, LFQ values were normalised by transformation into the base-2 logarithm and missing values were replaced by imputation of low LFQ values drawn from the normal distribution of the dataset (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8, separately for each column). Levels of secreted proteins in different cell lines were compared by pairwise T tests. Proteins containing consensus sites for C mannosylation were annotated by applying a custom-made R script searching all UniProt ID related protein sequences of a protein group for the presence of WxxW or WxxC motifs. Fisher exact tests were applied to identify protein domains enriched within the group of proteins with altered abundance in the KO secretomes.  Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale: Experiments were performed with WT cells (control) and two individual clones of both DPY19L1 and DPY19L3 KOs to avoid random results caused by the procedure of genome editing. Three biological replicates of each clone were analysed. All biological replicates of independent cultures of WT (n=3) and of both clones for DPY19L1 KO (two clones with n=3, each > n=6) and DPY19L3 KO (two clones with n=3 each > n=6) were grouped and the WT group was compared separately to the DPY19L1 KO and DPY19L3 KO group by pairwise T tests (two tailed Student’s T test with S0 = 0, no valid value filter, threshold p value = 0.05). For enrichment analysis, fisher exact tests (p = 0.05) were applied to identify enrichment of protein families (according to the Pfam database). Among the 25 proteins which were significantly affected in the DPY19L1-KO or DPY19L3-KO groups and which contain at least one consensus site (WxxW / WxxC) for C-mannosylation, referred to the frequency within all 398 extracellular proteins that remained upon filtering.

### Publication Abstract
C-mannosylation is a modification of tryptophan residues with a single mannose and can affect protein folding, secretion, and/or function. To date, only a few proteins have been demonstrated to be C-mannosylated, and studies that globally assess protein C-mannosylation are scarce. To interrogate the C-mannosylome of human induced pluripotent stem cells, we compared the secretomes of CRISPR-Cas9 mutants lacking either the C-mannosyltransferase DPY19L1 or DPY19L3 to WT human induced pluripotent stem cells using MS-based quantitative proteomics. The secretion of numerous proteins was reduced in these mutants, including that of A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase with ThromboSpondin Motifs 16 (ADAMTS16), an extracellular protease that was previously reported to be essential for optic fissure fusion in zebrafish eye development. To test the functional relevance of this observation, we targeted dpy19l1 or dpy19l3 in embryos of the Japanese rice fish medaka (Oryzias latipes) by CRISPR-Cas9. We observed that targeting of dpy19l3 partially caused defects in optic fissure fusion, called coloboma. We further showed in a cellular model that DPY19L1 and DPY19L3 mediate C-mannosylation of a recombinantly expressed thrombospondin type 1 repeat of ADAMTS16 and thereby support its secretion. Taken together, our findings imply that DPY19L3-mediated C-mannosylation is involved in eye development by assisting secretion of the extracellular protease ADAMTS16.

### Keywords
Tsr, C-mannosylation, Secretomics, Dpy19l3, Dpy19l1, Hipscs

### Affiliations
Hannover Medical School Institute for Clinical Biochemistry (OE 4340) Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1 Building J03, Level 04, Room 1291 (Office), Room 1250 (Lab) 30625 Hannover
Hannover Medical School

### Submitter
Karsten Cirksena

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Büttner
Hannover Medical School Institute for Clinical Biochemistry (OE 4340) Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1 Building J03, Level 04, Room 1291 (Office), Room 1250 (Lab) 30625 Hannover


