### Accession
PXD022088

### Title
TINC - a method to dissect transcriptional complexes at single locus resolution - reveals novel Nanog regulators in mouse embryonic stem cells

### Description
Cellular identity is ultimately dictated by the interaction of transcription factors with regulatory elements (REs) to control gene expression. Advances in genome-wide epigenome profiling techniques have significantly increased our understanding of cell-specific utilization of REs. However, it remains difficult to dissect the majority of factors that interact with these REs due to the lack of appropriate techniques. To address this issue, we developed a novel epigenetic method termed TINC: TALE-mediated Isolation of Nuclear Chromatin. Using TINC we interrogated the protein complex formed at the Nanog promoter in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and identified many known interactors as well as numerous previously unknown complex members, including RCOR2. Further interrogation of the role of RCOR2 in the ESC network revealed its involvement in the repression of lineage genes and the fine-tuning of pluripotency genes. Consequently, using the Nanog promoter as a paradigm, we demonstrated the power of TINC to provide important insights into the molecular makeup of transcriptional complexes at individual REs as well as into control of cellular identity in general.

### Sample Protocol
To determine the proteins isolated by TINC, 4X loading dye (40 % v/v glycerol, 4 % w/v SDS, 400 mM DTT, 0.04 % w/v bromophenol blue, 125 mM Tris pH 8.3) was added to the samples prior to incubation at 100°C for 30 min. Samples were then loaded onto a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#NP0335BOX) and a short gel was run using NuPAGE MOPS SDS Running Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#NP0001) to stack the proteins. The proteins were visualized with InstantBlue Coomassie Protein Stain (Expedeon, ISB1L) and the according band excised from the gel. The proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT (Agilent Technologies, Cat#5188-6439), alkylated with 18mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma Cat#C0267-100G) and in-gel digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Cat#V5111). The peptides were then extracted with extraction buffer (50% acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical Cat#A955-4), 5% formic acid (Sigma Cat#56302-50ML-F)) followed by extraction with 100% acetonitrile. All extracted peptides were combined and dried to completion in a CentriVap Concentrator (Labconco). Samples were then resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Acquired .raw files were searched against the murine UniProtKB/SwissProt database (v2017_07) appended with the TALE protein sequence using Byonic (Protein Metrics) considering a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using the target-decoy approach. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were selected as variable modifications. Trypsin was used as the enzymatic protease and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Data visualization and mining was performed in Excel. To minimize false positive protein identifications, we only considered proteins that were identified by at least two unique peptides. Proteins enriched in at least two of the three negative controls were considered as background and removed from the TALE samples and excluded from further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular identity is ultimately dictated by the interaction of transcription factors with regulatory elements (REs) to control gene expression. Advances in epigenome profiling techniques have significantly increased our understanding of cell-specific utilization of REs. However, it remains difficult to dissect the majority of factors that interact with these REs due to the lack of appropriate techniques. Therefore, we developed TINC: TALE-mediated isolation of nuclear chromatin. Using this new method, we interrogated the protein complex formed at the Nanog promoter in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and identified many known and previously unknown interactors, including RCOR2. Further interrogation of the role of RCOR2 in ESCs revealed its involvement in the repression of lineage genes and the fine-tuning of pluripotency genes. Consequently, using the Nanog promoter as a paradigm, we demonstrated the power of TINC to provide insight into the molecular makeup of specific transcriptional complexes at individual REs as well as into cellular identity control in general.

### Keywords
Stem cells, Nanog, Cellular identity, Tinc, Regulatory elements

### Affiliations
Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute, Monash University, Australia
Monash University

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr Jose Polo
Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute, Monash University, Australia


