### Accession
PXD015949

### Title
Quantitative characterization of the neuropeptide level changes in dorsal horn and dorsal root ganglia regions of the murine itch models

### Description
In this study, we performed a label-free relative quantitation to identify the peptide candidates correlated with itch sensation in murine models. We tested two different itch models-the AEW model (known commonly as the dry skin model) and the MC903 model. Performed peptide extraction from the dorsal horn (DH) and dorsal root ganglia regions of these two models and compared their levels with that of control mice.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide extraction was performed via a 3-stage extraction protocol followed by c-18 spin-column based de-salting. These peptide extracts were then subjected to a label-free untargeted and un-biased LC-MS based relative quantitation via extracted ion chromatogram method (XIC). The peak areas of all the quantified peptides were then further analyzed to identify the relevant candidates

### Data Protocol
The data was processed using SKYLINE, a freeware for peptide quantitation. Following the XIC determination, the raw results were then normalized and uploaded onto Perseus, another freeware for statistical analysis of peptide quantitation studies.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic itch can be extremely devastating and, in many cases, difficult to treat. One challenge in treating itch disorders is the limited understanding of the multitude of chemical players involved in the communication of itch sensation from the peripheral to the central nervous system. Neuropeptides are intercellular signaling molecules that are known to be involved in the transmission of itch signals from primary afferent neurons, which detect itch in the skin, to higher-order circuits in the spinal cord and brain. To investigate the role of neuropeptides in transmitting itch signals, we generated two mouse models of chronic itch-Acetone-Ether-Water (AEW, dry skin) and calcipotriol (MC903, atopic dermatitis). For peptide identification and quantitation, we analyzed the peptide content of dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and dorsal horn (DH) tissues from chronically itchy mice using liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry. De novo-assisted database searching facilitated the identification and quantitation of 335 peptides for DH MC903, 318 for DH AEW, 266 for DRG MC903, and 271 for DRG AEW. Of these quantifiable peptides, we detected 30 that were differentially regulated in the tested models, after accounting for multiple testing correction (<i>q</i> &#x2264; 0.1). These include several peptide candidates derived from neuropeptide precursors, such as proSAAS, protachykinin-1, proenkephalin, and calcitonin gene-related peptide, some of them previously linked to itch. The peptides identified in this study may help elucidate our understanding about these debilitating disorders. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015949.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Extracted ion chromatogram, Label-free quantitation

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign

### Submitter
Krishna Anapindi

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Sweedler
Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign


