### Accession
PXD005628

### Title
CLUH regulates mitochondrial metabolism by controlling translation and decay of target mRNAs

### Description
Mitochondria are essential organelles that host crucial metabolic pathways and produce ATP. The mitochondrial proteome is heterogeneous among tissues, and can dynamically change in response to different metabolic conditions. While the transcriptional programs that govern mitochondrial biogenesis and respiratory function are well-known, post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms remain unclear. Here we show that the cytosolic RNA-binding protein CLUH regulates the expression of a mitochondrial protein network supporting key metabolic programs required under nutrient deprivation. CLUH exerts its function by controlling the stability and translation of target mRNAs. In absence of Cluh, mitochondria are severely depleted of crucial enzymes involved in catabolic energy-converting pathways. CLUH preserves oxidative mitochondrial function and glucose homeostasis, thus preventing death at the foetal-neonatal transition. In the adult liver, CLUH ensures maximal respiration capacity and the metabolic response to starvation. Our results shed new light into post-transcriptional mechanisms controlling the expression of mitochondrial proteins, and suggest novel strategies to tailor mitochondrial function to physiological and pathological conditions.

### Sample Protocol
In solution digestion In-solution digestion was carried out as described previously [1], with minor modifications. Proteins were dissolved in 8M Urea (in 50 mM Triethylammoniumbicarbonate [TEAB]), reduced (5 mM DTT, 30 min at 56°C) and alkylated (10 mM Iodoacetamid, 30 min in the dark at room temperature). Endoproteinase Lys-C was added in a 1:100 ratio, and samples were incubated for 4h at 37°C. 50 mM TEAB was added to achieve a final Urea concentration of 2 M. LysC was again added in a 1:100 ratio and digestion was performed at 37°C for 14 h. Digestion was stopped by addition of formic acid. Prior to LC‐MS/MS analysis, samples were desalted using StageTips [2]. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen), coupled to an EASY nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on an in‐house packed 50 cm analytical column (1.9 μm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch) using a binary buffer system: (A) 0.1% formic acid in water and (B) 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The fraction of buffer B was raised from 6 to 28% within 220 min and followed by an increase to 55% within 5 min. Then, 95% B was used to wash for 10 min. The flow rate was set to 250 nl/min. Eluting peptides were ionized by an applied voltage of 2.4 kV. The capillary temperature was 325°C. MS1 spectra were acquired using a resolution of 70,000, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6, and a maximum injection time of 20 ms in a scan range of 300–1,750 Th. In data‐dependent mode, the 10 most intense peaks were selected for isolation and fragmentation in the HCD cell using a normalized collision energy of 27. Dynamic exclusion was enabled to prevent repetitive sequencing of abundant peptides. The MS/MS scan resolution was set to 17,500. The AGC target was set to 5e5, allowing a maximum injection time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 [3] and the implemented Andromeda search engine [4]. MS/MS spectra were correlated against the Uniprot mouse database including a list of common contaminants. We used 7 and 4.5 ppm MS/MS tolerances for first and main search, respectively. The FDR at the peptide‐spectrum match and the protein level was controlled by the implemented decoy algorithm using the reverse database approach. Match‐between runs and the re‐quantify option were enabled. N‐term acetylation and oxidation at methionine residues were defined as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was defined as a fixed modification. Data was further analyzed using the Perseus computational platform [5]. SILAC ratios were log2 transformed, and changes between between KO and wild type were determined as described [6]. Briefly, a one sample two‐tailed t-test was used to calculate p.values (S0 was set to 0). The False-discovery-rate was set to 0.05 (# of permutations: 500). Mitochondrial proteins were annotated based on the mitocarta database [7].

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are essential organelles that host crucial metabolic pathways and produce adenosine triphosphate. The mitochondrial proteome is heterogeneous among tissues and can dynamically change in response to different metabolic conditions. Although the transcriptional programs that govern mitochondrial biogenesis and respiratory function are well known, posttranscriptional regulatory mechanisms remain unclear. In this study, we show that the cytosolic RNA-binding protein clustered mitochondria homologue (CLUH) regulates the expression of a mitochondrial protein network supporting key metabolic programs required under nutrient deprivation. CLUH exerts its function by controlling the stability and translation of target messenger RNAs. In the absence of <i>Cluh</i>, mitochondria are severely depleted of crucial enzymes involved in catabolic energy-converting pathways. CLUH preserves oxidative mitochondrial function and glucose homeostasis, thus preventing death at the fetal-neonatal transition. In the adult liver, CLUH ensures maximal respiration capacity and the metabolic response to starvation. Our results shed new light on the posttranscriptional mechanisms controlling the expression of mitochondrial proteins and suggest novel strategies to tailor mitochondrial function to physiological and pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Silac mouse, Post transcriptional gene expression control

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
Head Proteomics Core Facility   University of Cologne CECAD Research Center Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26 50931 Cologne

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Christian K. Frese
Head Proteomics Core Facility   University of Cologne CECAD Research Center Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26 50931 Cologne


