### Accession
PXD015545

### Title
Human Glioblastoma Multiforme Tissue Proteome

### Description
Quantitative analysis of human glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) using Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) reagent. Mass spectra comprised with global proteome and phosphoproteome with standard channel.

### Sample Protocol
3 mg of proteins were treated with TCEP/IAM and trypsinized subsequently. Peptides were cleaned up using HLB columns. TMT labeling were done according to manufacturer's protocol. We prefractionated the peptide using basic reverse phase fractionation into 24 fractions.

### Data Protocol
The data searched and quantified using maxquant 1.5.6.0. We upload here the detailed information of search setting which in mqpar.xml

### Publication Abstract
The prognostic and therapeutic relevance of molecular subtypes for the most aggressive isocitrate dehydrogenase 1/2 (IDH) wild-type glioblastoma (GBM) is currently limited due to high molecular heterogeneity of the tumors that impedes patient stratification. Here, we describe a distinct binary classification of IDH wild-type GBM tumors derived from a quantitative proteomic analysis of 39 IDH wild-type GBMs as well as IDH mutant and low-grade glioma controls. Specifically, GBM proteomic cluster 1 (GPC1) tumors exhibit Warburg-like features, neural stem-cell markers, immune checkpoint ligands, and a poor prognostic biomarker, FKBP prolyl isomerase 9 (FKBP9). Meanwhile, GPC2 tumors show elevated oxidative phosphorylation-related proteins, differentiated oligodendrocyte and astrocyte markers, and a favorable prognostic biomarker, phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH). Integrating these proteomic features with the pharmacological profiles of matched patient-derived cells (PDCs) reveals that the mTORC1/2 dual inhibitor AZD2014 is cytotoxic to the poor prognostic PDCs. Our analyses will guide GBM prognosis and precision treatment strategies.

### Keywords
Human, Tmt, Phosphoproteome, Quantitation, Glioblastoma multiforme

### Affiliations
L7235, Center for Theragnosis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea
KIST

### Submitter
Shinyeong Ju

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
L7235, Center for Theragnosis, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea


