### Accession
PXD026192

### Title
Metaproteomic analysis of nine coral species with and without Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD)

### Description
Florida’s coral reefs are currently experiencing a multi-year disease-related mortality event, that has resulted in massive die-offs in multiple coral species. Approximately 21 species of coral, including both Endangered Species Act-listed and the primary reef-building species, have displayed tissue loss lesions which often result in whole colony mortality [Stony Coral Tissue Loss Disease (SCTLD)]. Determining the causative agent(s) of coral disease relies on a multidisciplinary approach since the causation may be a combination of abiotic, microbial or viral agents. Metaproteomics was used to survey changes in the molecular landscape in the coral holobiont with the goal of providing useful information not only in diagnosis, but for prediction and prognosis. Specifically, in the case of SCTLD, defining molecular changes in the coral holobiont will help define disease progression and aid in identifying the causative agent by clearly defining traits of disease progression shared across affected species. Using samples from nine coral species (46 samples total; those appearing healthy, n = 23, and diseased, n = 23), analysis of the coral and its associated microbiome were performed using bottom-up proteomics. Ongoing analysis (including improving coral holobiont genome-based search space) will demonstrate the utility of this approach and help define improved future experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Nine coral species were selected to represent highly susceptible species with fast onset and slower onset disease dynamics with five replicates of each condition (i.e., healthy, SCTLD). Specimens were collected in July and September 2019 in collaboration with the FL Keys National Marine Sanctuary under permit # FKNMS-2019-069 to Dr. Cheryl Woodley of NOAA and FKNMS-2019-001-A1 to Dr. Andy Bruckner of the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary. Samples in July were taken offshore of Key West, FL in a diseased zone and paired with specimens from a SCTLD-free zone. In September, diseased samples were collected offshore of Key West but the disease line was approaching the Marquesas, requiring the specimens from the disease-free zone to be collected in a yet unaffected area of the Marquesas. The permitted species include: Colpophyllia natans Dichocoenia stokesii Diploria labyrinthiformis Meandrina meandrites Montastraea cavernosa Orbicella annularis Orbicella faveolata Pseudodiploria strigosa Pseudodiploria clivosa  Protein from each species was extracted by incubating coral skeleton with adherent tissue in 5% SDS for 30 minutes with manual disruption using a bristle brush in a 15 mL falcon tube. Samples were centrifuged at 1,500 RCF to pellet loose tissue. The remaining sample with pellet was tip sonicated to further lyse refractory cells. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 1,500 RCF. Protein from each coral sample was digested with trypsin following reduction (DTT) and alkylation (CAA) using micro S-traps (ProtoFi, LLC). Peptides were eluted and assayed using a colorimetric peptide assay kit (Pierce).

### Data Protocol
Peptide mixtures in 0.1% formic acid (volume fraction) were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 Nano LC coupled to a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Using the original sample randomization yielded a randomized sample order and injection volumes were determined for 0.5 μg loading (between 0.5 and 4.8 μL). Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (75 µm id x 2 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 3 µL/min for 10 min with 2 % acetonitrile (volume fraction) and 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid (volume fraction) followed by separation on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 2 µm C18 column (75µm id x 25 cm length; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 40 °C. Peptides were separated along a 65 min two-step gradient of 5 % to 30 % mobile phase B (80 % acetonitrile volume fraction, 0.08 % formic acid volume fraction) over 50 min followed by a ramp to 45 % mobile phase B over 10 min and lastly to 95% mobile phase B over 5 min, and held at 95 % mobile phase B for 5 min, all at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Fusion Lumos was operated in positive polarity with 30 % RF lens, data-dependent mode (topN, 3 sec cycle time) with a dynamic exclusion of 60 s (with 10 ppm error). Full scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 60 000, the mass range was m/z 375 to 1500. Full scan ion target value was 4.0e5 allowing a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Monoisotopic peak determination was used, specifying peptides and an intensity threshold of 2.5e4 was used for precursor selection, including charge states 2 to 6. Data-dependent fragmentation was performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 32 with quadrupole isolation at m/z 1.3 width. The fragment scan resolution using the orbitrap was set at 15 000, m/z 100 as the first mass, ion target value of 2.0e5 and 30 ms maximum injection time. The MS1 data was collected as profile data, the MS2 data was collected as centroid data and inject all ions for parallelizable time was not used. Raw files were converted to peak lists using ThermoRawFileParserGUI 1.2.1 using “Native Thermo library peak picking”. These data were searched using the Mascot algorithm (v2.6.2; Matrix Science). All the searches included a metagenomic database compiled from a subset of the samples: SCTLD_unigenes_protein_cdhit.fasta as well as Symbiodinium (taxonID:2949) from the UniProtKB 2021_01 release (both SwissProt and TrEMBL). The 10 samples from Orbicella spp. were searched with the Orbicella faveolata RefSeq database (release 100: GCF_002042975.1_ofav_dov_v1), while all the data (including these Orbicella spp.) were searched with Scleractinia (taxonID:6125) from the UniProtKB 2021_01 release (both SwissProt and TrEMBL). Searches also included the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database (cRAP; 2012.01.01; the Global Proteome Machine; 107 sequences). These fasta are included in the PRIDE dataset. The following search parameters were used: trypsin was specified as the enzyme allowing for one mis-cleavages; carbamidomethyl (C) was fixed and oxidation (M) was variable modification; 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 10 ppm fragment ion tolerance; instrument type was specified as ESI-FTICR; the decoy setting was used within Mascot to provide local FDR. The resulting dat files were loaded into Scaffold to enable users to explore the data and export count based relative quantification. These result files are also included (a viewer can be downloaded from Proteome Software) and protein inference settings may be changed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Corals, Sctld

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Hollings Marine Laboratory

### Submitter
Benjamin Neely

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Neely, Cheryl M. Woodley, Michael G. Janech
Hollings Marine Laboratory


