### Accession
PXD000977

### Title
Shotgun proteomics study on Cabernet sauvignon cells exposed to hot and cold temperature stresses

### Description
Grapes are a valuable fruit and an important economic crop in the world, where wine production is a major industry. Drought, salinity and extreme temperatures are abiotic stresses that can trigger significant complex responses in grapevines. This project investigates plant protein reactions in response to abiotic stresses, with particular reference to proteomic changes induced by the impact of hot and cold temperature stress on cultured Cabernet sauvignon cells. The aim of this quantitative label-free shotgun proteomics experiment is to provide insights into the targeted proteins, metabolic pathways and regulatory networks that are related to temperature stress in grapevine and futuristically assist in marker assisted selection.

### Sample Protocol
Cabernet sauvignon cell suspension cultures grown at 26°C were subject to 14 hours of exposure to 34°C and 42°C for hot temperature, and 18°C and 10°C for cold temperature stresses. Cells from the five temperatures were harvested in biological triplicates. Proteins were extracted using guanidine hydrochloric acid and methanol-chloroform precipitation, digested by filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method and Lys-C and trypsin digestion. Proteins were identified using LC-MS/MS spectra acquired by gas phase fractionation (GPF) in four mass ranges with m/z values of 400 – 506, 501 – 658, 653 – 913 and 908 – 1600 from a Velos Pro linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were searched against the UniProtKB Vitis vinifera genome. Protein abundances were quantified using spectral counting.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained from the nanoLC-MS/MS were converted to mzXML files and searched against the UniProtKB Vitis vinifera genome (65,328 entries, March 2013) using the global proteome machine (GPM) software, Version 2.1.1 (http://www.thegpm.org) and the X!Tandem algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Grapes (Vitis vinifera) are a valuable fruit crop and wine production is a major industry. Global warming and expanded range of cultivation will expose grapes to more temperature stresses in future. Our study investigated protein level responses to abiotic stresses, with particular reference to proteomic changes induced by the impact of four different temperature stress regimes, including both hot and cold temperatures, on cultured grape cells. Cabernet Sauvignon cell suspension cultures grown at 26&#xb0;C were subjected to 14 h of exposure to 34 and 42&#xb0;C for heat stress, and 18 and 10&#xb0;C for cold stress. Cells from the five temperatures were harvested in biological triplicates and label-free quantitative shotgun proteomic analysis was performed. A total of 2042 non-redundant proteins were identified from the five temperature points. Fifty-five proteins were only detected in extreme heat stress conditions (42&#xb0;C) and 53 proteins were only detected at extreme cold stress conditions (10&#xb0;C). Gene Ontology (GO) annotations of differentially expressed proteins provided insights into the metabolic pathways that are involved in temperature stress in grape cells. Sugar metabolism displayed switching between alternative and classical pathways during temperature stresses. Additionally, nine proteins involved in the phenylpropanoid pathway were greatly increased in abundance at extreme cold stress, and were thus found to be cold-responsive proteins. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000977 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000977).

### Keywords
Grapes, Cabernet sauvignon, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Professor, Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University

### Submitter
Iniga George

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Haynes
Professor, Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Macquarie University


