### Accession
PXD045185

### Title
Structural recognition and stabilization of tyrosine hydroxylase by the J-domain protein DNAJC12

### Description
Pathogenic variants of the J-domain protein DNAJC12, a co-chaperone of Hsp70, cause parkinsonism, which seems associated with a defective interaction of DNAJC12 with tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), the rate limiting enzyme in dopamine synthesis. Here, we report the characterization of TH:DNAJC12 complex formation and show that DNAJC12 binding stabilizes TH and delays its time-dependent aggregation in an Hsp70-independent manner, while maintaining TH activity and regulatory inhibition by dopamine. Interestingly, although neither TH nor DNAJC12 alone significantly [MDT1] [AM2] activate Hsc70, the complex stimulates [AM3] its ATPase activity. Cryoelectron microscopy reveals two DNAJC12 monomers bound per TH tetramer, each embracing one of the two regulatory domain dimers, leaving all active sites available for substrate and dopamine interaction. Biochemical data confirm the key role of the DNAJC12 last eight residues in TH binding, explaining the molecular disease mechanism of C-terminal truncated DNAJC12 variants.

### Sample Protocol
30 μg of TH:DNAJC12, TH:DNAJC12(108-198) and TH(DA):DNAJC12 complexes were subjected to chemical crosslinking by incubation with 3 mM BS3 in PBS pH 7.4 for 30 min at RT. The reactions were quenched for 15 min at RT by adding 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.0. BS3-crosslinked samples were incubated in Laemmli sample buffer (0.02% [w/v] bromophenol blue, 2% [w/v] SDS, 10% [v/v] glycerol, 60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8) for 5 min at 96 °C and loaded onto a 12% polyacrylamide gel. The gel was stained, and the visible bands were excised and subjected to automated reduction, alkylation with iodoacetamide and trypsin digestion in a Proteineer DP robot (Bruker Daltonics). The resulting peptide mixture was speed-vac dried and re-dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was carried out using a nano-LC Ultra HPLC (Eksigent, Framingham, MA) coupled online to a 5600 triple TOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) through a nanospray III ion source (AB Sciex) equipped with a fused silica PicoTip emitter (10 μm x 12 cm; New Objective, Woburn, MA). Peptides were fractionated at a flow rate of 0.250 mL/min at 50 °C under gradient elution conditions. The ion source was operated in positive ionization mode at 150 °C with a potential difference of 2300 V.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, raw MS data was searched against a custom-made database containing the amino-acid sequence of human TH and the different variants of DNAJC12. The MS/MS ion search was performed with Meros 2.0{Gotze, 2015 #286}. Search parameters were set as follows: BS3 as crosslinker and trypsin as enzyme, allowing 3 missed cleavages for Arg and Lys. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) and oxidation (Met) were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Searches were performed with MS and MS/MS tolerances of 10 and 20 ppm. Peptide identifications were filtered at an FDR < 5% and an XlinkX score > 30 and all the MS2 spectra of the resulting peptides were manually revised.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp70, Dnajc12, Tyrosine hydroxylase, Hsp40, Tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC)
National Center for Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC), Department of Macromolecular Structures)

### Submitter
Jimena Muntaner

### Lab Head
Dr José María
National Center for Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC), Department of Macromolecular Structures)


