### Accession
PXD015012

### Title
CD4+ Th immunogenicity of Ascaris spp.

### Description
Application of a reconstituted in vitro system to define the CD4+ Th immunogenicity of complex antigenic mixtures.

### Sample Protocol
The previously described cell-free reconstituted in vitro system(Hartman et al., 2010) was modified according to the specific needs of the experiments. HLA molecules together with the candidate antigens and HLA-DM were incubated for 2 h at 37° C in citrate phosphate 50 mM pH 5.2 in the presence of 150 mM NaCl. Cathepsins were added to reaction mixtures after incubation with L-Cysteine (6 mM) and EDTA (5 mM). Cathepsin B (Enzo), H (Enzo), L (Enzo) and S (Sigma) were used for our in vitro experiments at molar ratios (cathepsin:substrate) ranging from 1:250 to 1:500. The final reaction mixture was incubated at 37° C for 2 to 5 hours. Afterwards the pH was adjusted to 7.5 and Iodoacetamide was added (25 μM). Immunoprecipitation (IP) of the pMHCII complexes was performed using L243 covalently linked to Fast Flow sepharose. Peptides were eluted from purified MHCII adding TFA 0.1% to the samples. Peptides were separated from the MHCII molecules by using Vivaspin filters (10kDa MWCO) and a subsequent reverse phase C18 enrichment. The filtrates were further lyophilized and resuspended for mass spectrometry analyses in a mixture of H2O (0.94):AcN (0.05): TFA (0.01).

### Data Protocol
Peptides eluted from the reconstituted in vitro antigen processing system were measured as described and MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) was used for peptide identification. Customized databases featuring reviewed and non-redundant Uniprot Ascaris spp. proteins from uniprot were used (accessed March 2017) for the in vitro reconstituted experiments to which we included all other recombinant proteins used in the assay, namely human cathepsins, HLA-DR2 and -DR7, as well as HLA-DM. No enzyme specificity was used for the search, and a tolerance of 10 ppm was allowed for the main ion search and 50 ppm for the MSMS identification The “match between runs” feature was enabled. The FDR was set at 0.01 (1 %). Reverse IDs and known contaminants like keratins were filtered before further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Ascaris spp</i>. is a major health problem of humans and animals alike, and understanding the immunogenicity of its antigens is required for developing urgently needed vaccines. The parasite-secreted products represent the most relevant, yet complex (&gt;250 proteins) antigens of <i>Ascaris spp</i>. as defining the pathogen-host interplay. We applied an in vitro antigen processing system coupled to quantitative proteomics to identify potential CD4<sup>+</sup> T<sub>h</sub> cell epitopes in <i>Ascaris</i>-secreted products. This approach considerably restricts the theoretical list of epitopes using conventional CD4<sup>+</sup> T<sub>h</sub> cell epitope prediction tools. We demonstrate the specificity and utility of our approach on two sets of candidate lists, allowing us identifying hits excluded by either one or both computational methods. More importantly, one of the candidates identified experimentally, clearly demonstrates the presence of pathogen-reactive T cells in healthy human individuals against these antigens. Thus, our work pipeline identifies the first human T cell epitope against <i>Ascaris spp</i>. and represents an easily adaptable platform for characterization of complex antigens, in particular for those pathogens that are not easily amenable for in vivo experimental validation.

### Keywords
Mhcii, Cd4+ th epitope, In vitro, Ascaris

### Affiliations
Protein Biochemistry Group. Department of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy. Institut für Biochemie
FU Berlin

### Submitter
Miguel Alvaro

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Freund
Protein Biochemistry Group. Department of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy. Institut für Biochemie


