### Accession
PXD013178

### Title
Reconstruction, refinement and validation of a Streptomyces coelicolor consensus genome scale metabolic model

### Description
The rapid rise in antibiotic-resistance of microbial pathogens has brought the attention to new, heterologous approaches to better exploit the vast repertoire of biosynthetic gene clusters in Actinobacteria genomes and the large number of potentially novel bioactive compounds encoded in these. To enable and optimize production of these compounds, a better understanding of -among others- the interplay between primary and secondary metabolism in the selected suitable heterologous production hosts is needed, in our case the model Streptomycete Streptomyces coelicolor.  In this study, a genome-scale metabolic model is reconstructed based on several previous metabolic models and refined by including experimental data, in particular proteome data. This new consensus model provides not only a valuable and more accurate mathematical representation to predict steady-state flux distributions in this strain, but also provides a new framework for interpretation and integration of different 'omics' data by the Streptomyces research community for improved strain-specific systems-scale knowledge to be used in targeted strain development, e.g. for efficient new antibiotics production.

### Sample Protocol
Mycelium pellets for proteome analysis were thawed and resuspended in the remaining liquid. 50 μL re-suspended mycelium was withdrawn and pelleted by centrifugation. 100 μL lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 50 mM EDTA) was added, and samples were sonicated in a water bath sonicator (Biorupter Plus, Diagenode) for 5 cycles of 30 s high power and 30 s off in ice water. Cell debris was pelleted and removed by centrifugation. Total protein was precipitated using the chloroform-methanol method described by Wessel & Flugge, 1984 (doi: 10.1016/0003-2697(84)90782-6). Briefly, 0.4 mL of methanol and 0.2 mL of chloroform was added to 0.1 mL sample sequentially and mixed after each step. 0.3 mL of water was then added and vortexed to allow phase separation. After removing the water phase, 0.3 mL of methanol was added to the remaining protein disk and the organic phase and vortexed. Protein precipitation was then pelleted by centrifugation. The pellet was dried in a vacuum centrifuge before dissolving in 0.1% RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters) at 95 °C. The protein concentration was measured at this stage using BCA method. Protein samples were then reduced by adding 5 mM DTT and incubated at 60 °C for 30 min, followed by thiol group protection with 21.6 mM iodoacetamide incubation at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Then 0.1 μg trypsin (recombinant, proteomics grade, Roche) per 10 μg protein was added, and samples were digested at 37 °C overnight. After digestion, trifluoroacetic acid was added to 0.5% and samples were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min followed by centrifugation to degrade and remove RapiGest SF. Peptide solution containing 8 μg peptides was then cleaned and desalted using STAGE-Tipping technique (doi: 10.1038/nprot.2007.261). Briefly, 8 μg of peptide was loaded on a conditioned StageTip with 2 pieces of 1 mm diameter SDB-XC plug (Empore), washed twice with 0.5% formic acid solution, and eluted with elution solution (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid). Acetonitrile was then evaporated in a SpeedVac. Final peptide concentration was adjusted to 40 ng/μL using sample solution (3% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid) for analysis. 200 ng digested peptide was injected and analysed by reversed-phase liquid chromatography on a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) equipped with HSS-T3 C18 1.8 μm, 75 µm X 250 mm column (Waters). A gradient from 1% to 40% acetonitrile in 110 min (ending with a brief regeneration step to 90% for 3 min) was applied. [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B was used as lock mass compound and sampled every 30 s. Online MS/MS analysis was done using Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters) with an UDMSE method set up as described in (doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2767).

### Data Protocol
Raw data from all samples were first analysed using the vender software ProteinLynx Global SEVER (PLGS, version 3.0.3). Generally, mass spectrum data were generated using an MSE processing parameter with charge 2 lock mass 785.8426, and default energy thresholds. For protein identification, default workflow parameters except an additional acetyl in N-terminal variable modification were used. Reference protein database was downloaded from GenBank with the accession number NC_003888.3. The resulted dataset was imported to ISOQuant (doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2767, version 1.8) for label-free quantification. Default high identification parameters were used in the quantification process. TOP3 result was converted to PPM (protein mass) and send to modelling scientists and others involved in interpreting the data. TOP3 quantification was filtered to remove identifications meet these two criteria: 1. identified in lower than 70% of samples of each strain and 2. sum of TOP3 value less than 1 × 105. Cleaned quantification data was further subjected to DESeq2 package (doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8, version 1.22.2) and PCA was conducted after variance stabilizing transformation (vst) of normalized data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Streptomyces coelicolor, Metabolic model, Scogem

### Affiliations
Leiden University
Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University

### Submitter
Chao DU

### Lab Head
Dr Gilles van Wezel
Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University


