### Accession
PXD012106

### Title
The Trichoplax H2 holobiont: a simple animal and its two intracellular symbionts

### Description
The Placozoa are an enigmatic group of simple marine metazoans where all taxa harbor intracellular bacteria. Despite four decades of research, the bacterial identities, their location and their roles remain elusive. Here we show that the placozoan Trichoplax H2 is associated with two intracellular bacteria. We detected the symbionts and reconstructed their physiology using metagenomic and metatranscriptomic evidence from the same single-animal specimens. One symbiont forms a new genus in the Midichloriaceae (Rickettsiales) and correlative fluorescent labelling and 3-D electron microscopic tomography showed that it inhabits the rough ER in the fiber-cells. It has mutualistic traits and occurs worldwide as we could detect it in 10% of all aquatic tag sequencing datasets. The second symbiont is an intracellular bacterium from the Margulisbacteria, a phylum-level clade previously only identified from DNA sequencing and not known to form intracellular associations. It resides in the digestive ventral epithelial cells, uses lipids digested by the host and has the physiological capacity to supplement the placozoan nutrition. Our single-individual approach revealed that this cultivable placozoan host forms a tripartite symbiosis and provides experimental access to microbial dark matter – a rickettsiales that inhabits a novel niche within eukaryote cells and an intracellular margulisbacterial symbiont.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide samples for proteomics were prepared and quantified from two samples of 10 Trichoplax each and one sample of 30 Trichoplax specimens as described by Kleiner et al., 2017, Nat. Comm. 8 (1558) according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009, Nat. Methods 6 (359-361)). In addition to minor modifications as described in Hamann et al., 2016, Nature 534 (254-258), we did not clear the lysate by centrifugation after boiling the sample in lysis buffer. Instead, since sample size was extremely limited (10 Trichoplax specimens = 0.2 ul), the whole lysate was loaded on to the filter units used for FASP. Centrifugation times before column washes with 100 μl UA were halved as compared to Hamann et al., 2016, Nature 534 (254-258). Eluted peptides were not desalted. Peptide concentrations were determined with the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. All samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS as described in Kleiner et al., 2017, Nat. Comm. 8 (1558), with the modification that a 75 cm analytical column was used. Briefly, the sample containing 30 specimens was measured in technical replicate, for the others the whole sample was used in one analysis. 0.8-3 μg peptide were loaded with an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in loading solvent A (2 % acetonitrile, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid) onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Elution and separation of peptides on the analytical column (75 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm material, Thermo Fisher Scientific; heated to 60 °C) was achieved at a flow rate of 225 nl  min 1 using a 460 min gradient going from 98 % buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) to 31 % buffer B (0.1 % formic acid, 80 % acetonitrile) in 363 min, then to 50 % B in 70 min, to 99 % B in 1 min and ending with 99 % B. The analytical column was connected to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via an Easy-Spray source. Eluting peptides were ionized via electrospray ionization (ESI). Carryover was reduced by to wash runs (injection of 20 µl acetonitrile, 99 % eluent B) between samples. Data acquisition in the Q Exactive Plus was done as in Petersen et al, 2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195).

### Data Protocol
A database containing protein sequences from the Trichoplax host as well as from the two symbionts was used. Sequences of common laboratory contaminants were included by appending the cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The final database contained 13,801 protein sequences. Searches of the MS/MS spectra against this database were performed with the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as in Petersen et al, 2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195).

### Publication Abstract
Placozoa is an enigmatic phylum of simple, microscopic, marine metazoans<sup>1,2</sup>. Although intracellular bacteria have been found in all members of this phylum, almost nothing is known about their identity, location and interactions with their host<sup>3-6</sup>. We used metagenomic and metatranscriptomic sequencing of single host individuals, plus metaproteomic and imaging analyses, to show that the placozoan Trichoplax sp. H2 lives in symbiosis with two intracellular bacteria. One symbiont forms an undescribed genus in the Midichloriaceae (Rickettsiales)<sup>7,8</sup> and has a genomic repertoire similar to that of rickettsial parasites<sup>9,10</sup>, but does not seem to express key genes for energy parasitism. Correlative image analyses and three-dimensional electron tomography revealed that this symbiont resides in the rough endoplasmic reticulum of its host's internal fibre cells. The second symbiont belongs to the Margulisbacteria, a phylum without cultured representatives and not known to form intracellular associations<sup>11-13</sup>. This symbiont lives in the ventral epithelial cells of Trichoplax, probably metabolizes algal lipids digested by its host and has the capacity to supplement the placozoan's nutrition. Our study shows that one of the simplest animals has evolved highly specific and intimate associations with symbiotic, intracellular bacteria and highlights that symbioses can provide access to otherwise elusive microbial dark matter.

### Keywords
Rickettsiales, Intracellular symbiosis, Midichloriaceae, Margulisbacteria, Placozoa, Trichoplax h2, Grellia incantans, Rough endoplasmic reticulum, Ruthmannia eludens

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Greifswald Intitute of Marine Biotechnology
Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA

### Submitter
Tjorven Hinzke

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Kleiner
Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA


