### Accession
PXD036736

### Title
Characterization of Chemotherapy-treated PyMT Liver Matrisome

### Description
Metastasis accounts for 90% of cancer-related deaths, yet the mechanisms by which cancer cells colonize secondary organs remain poorly understood. For breast cancer patients, metastasis to the liver is associated with poor prognosis and a median survival of 6 months. Standard of care is chemotherapy, but recurrence occurs in 30% of patients. Systemic chemotherapy has been shown to induce hepatotoxicity and fibrosis, but how chemotherapy impacts the composition of the liver extracellular matrix (ECM) remains unknown. Individual ECM proteins drive tumor cell proliferation and invasion, features that are essential for metastatic outgrowth in the liver. Here, we characterize the liver ECM of tumor-bearing mice treated with and without chemotherapy using the MMTV-PyMT transgenic model of breast cancer. We identify distinct drug-specific changes induced by commonly used cytotoxic chemotherapies. We identify Collagen V as an ECM protein that is more abundant in livers isolated from paclitaxel-treated mice and identify mechanisms of Collagen V driven invasion via ECM organization and signaling through α1β1 integrins.

### Sample Protocol
Livers isolated from tumor-bearing PYMT mice treated with or without chemotherapy were decellularized using 0.1% SDS in PBS solution. These decellularized ECM scaffolds were digested to isolate peptides for mass sprectrometry. Peptides were labeled with TMT10Plex isobaric labels, separated by reversed-phased HPLC, and run using a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were searched for peptide hits using Proteome Discoverer and the results were loaded into Scaffold 3 for analysis. Quantification of tandem mass tags was done using the Scaffold Q+ function and significance was determined using a Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected t test with a 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis accounts for 90% of cancer-related deaths, yet the mechanisms by which cancer cells colonize secondary organs remain poorly understood. For breast cancer patients, metastasis to the liver is associated with poor prognosis and a median survival of 6 months. Standard of care is chemotherapy, but recurrence occurs in 30% of patients. Systemic chemotherapy has been shown to induce hepatotoxicity and fibrosis, but how chemotherapy impacts the composition of the liver extracellular matrix (ECM) remains unknown. Individual ECM proteins drive tumor cell proliferation and invasion, features that are essential for metastatic outgrowth in the liver. First, we find that the ECM of livers isolated from chemotherapy-treated MMTV-PyMT mice increases the invasion, but not proliferation, of metastatic breast cancer cells. Proteomic analysis of the liver ECM identified Collagen V to be more abundant in paclitaxel-treated livers. We show that Collagen V increases cancer cell invasion via &#x3b1;1&#x3b2;1 integrins and MAPK signaling, while also increasing the alignment of Collagen I, which has been associated with increased invasion. Treatment with obtustatin, an inhibitor specific to &#x3b1;1&#x3b2;1 integrins, inhibits tumor cell invasion in decellularized ECM from paclitaxel-treated livers. Overall, we show chemotherapy treatment alters the liver microenvironment, priming it as a pro-metastatic niche for cancer metastasis.

### Keywords
Mouse, Breast cancer, Liver metastasis

### Affiliations
Tufts University
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tufts University, United States

### Submitter
Justinne Guarin

### Lab Head
Dr Madeleine J Oudin
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tufts University, United States


