### Accession
PXD030575

### Title
Quantitative proteomic comparison between wild type Col and sec-5 mutant using 15N metabolic labeling

### Description
SECRET AGENT (SEC) is an O-GlcNAc transferase involved in O-GlcNAcylation of many proteins. However, sec-5 null allele mutant phenotype is very subtle. To examine if there are proteins that show altered expression in the sec-5 mutant compared to wild-type Col, we designed MS experiments to identify these candidates on a global scale using 15N metabolic labeling.

### Sample Protocol
The WT and sec-5 plants were grown on Hoagland medium containing 14N or 15N (1.34 g/L Hogland’s No. 2 salt mixture without nitrogen, 6 g/L Phytoblend, and 1 g/L KNO3 or 1 g/L K15NO3 (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), pH 5.8, 1% Sucrose) for 14 days. Plates were placed vertically in a growth chamber under the constant light condition at 21–22 °C. Whole plant tissues were harvested in liquid nitrogen. Proteins were extracted from eight samples (two 14N-labeled Col samples - 1 and 5; two of 15N-labeled Col samples - 2 and 6; two of 14N-labeled sec-5 samples - 3 and 7; and two 15N-labeled sec-5 samples - 4 and 8) individually using SDS sample buffer (mass (mg): buffer (µL) ratio=1:3) and mixed as the following: two forward sample F1 and F2 (14N Col/15N sec-5, Mix1+4; Mix 5+8) and two reverse samples R1 and R2 (14N sec-5/15N Col, Mix 2+3; Mix 6+7) and separated by the SDS-PAGE gel. Five segments were excised, and trypsin digested. The peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated using analytical column ES803 (Thermo Fisher). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and a 120-min gradient was used. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28% solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 100 min and from 28 to 44% solvent B over 20 min, followed by a short wash at 90% solvent B. For data-dependent acquisition, the precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to 1600 and the top 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for fragmentation. Peptides were fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) 27.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectrometry peak lists were extracted using an in-house script PAVA, and data were searched using Protein Prospector against the same TAIR database (TAIR10), to which random sequence versions were concatenated (a total of 35,386 entries) to allow estimation of a false discovery rate (FDR). Carbamidomethylcysteine was searched as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal methionine loss, N-terminal Glutamate to Pyroglutamate Conversion, and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Data were searched with a 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Peptide and protein FDRs were set as 0.01 and 0.05. 15N labeled amino acids were also searched as a fixed modification for 15N data. 15N labeling efficiency was calculated as about 98.5 % for all F1, F2, R1, and R2 by manually comparing experimental peak envelop data of the 15N labeled peptide from the top 10 proteins in the raw data to theoretical isotope distributions using Software Protein-prospector (MS-Isotope module). Quantification was done using Protein Prospector which automatically adjusts the L/H ratio with labeling efficiency. The WT/sec-5 ratio was normalized using the median ratio of the top 100 proteins. With 98.5% of the labeling, the identification rates between 14N and 15N samples are almost similar.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantification, Arabidopsis, 15n metabolic labeling, Secret agent (sec), Protein prospector

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Director of Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility, Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Shouling Xu
Director of Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility, Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford


