### Accession
PXD019610

### Title
Data on European seabass fed with methionine supplemented diets obtained through label free shotgun proteomics

### Description
Plant-based protein sources play an important role in aquaculture by dwindling fish meal to sustainable levels. However, the use of such feedstuffs requires nutrient supplementation to fulfil fish nutritional requirements. This work addressed the response in the liver of farmed fish to dietary methionine (Met), assessing at the same time the growth performance. Fish were fed at suboptimal levels of dietary Met (0.77% w/w; M0.65 diet), within (1% w/w Met; M0.85 diet)and above(1.36 % w/w Met (M1.25 diet); 1.66% w/w Met(M1.5 diet)) the estimated requirement for this species, in a total of four tested conditions. The impact of dietary methionine supplementation in seabass juvenile’s performance was assessed through 85 days of trial, between May and August of 2018. Fish were reared in triplicate tanks and three liver samples/tank (9 per treatment) were collected for liver proteome analysis at the beginning and at the end of the trial i.e., after 18 and 85 days offeeding, correspondingly. This dataset refers to the 18th day of sampling.

### Sample Protocol
Fish were randomly selected and after tissue isolation, samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until further analysis. Total proteins from 100 mg of liver tissue (3 fish/tank in triplicate tanks, i.e., 9 fish/treatment) from European seabass were solubilized in 7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, containing 1 mM EDTA and 1% (v/v) Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma). Liver tissues were homogenized using an Ultra-Turrax IKA T8 (IKA-WERG), followed by sonication (5 cycles of 5 s each) and two centrifugation steps at 13000 × g for 10 min, at 4 ºC. The final supernatants were cleared from contaminants using a ReadyPrep™ 2-D Cleanup kit (Bio-Rad) and total proteins were quantified using the Quick Start™ Bradford Protein Assay using BSA as standard (Bio-Rad). The cleaned protein pellet was further resuspended in 100 mM Tris pH 8.5, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM chloroacetamide and protease inhibitors for 10 minutes at 95ºC at 1000 rpm (Thermomixer, Eppendorf). Samples were then prepared following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol as described by Hughes et al. (2019). Enzymatic digestion was performed with Trypsin/LysC (2 micrograms) overnight at 37ºC at 1000 rpm. The peptides obtained were analysed through reverse phase nano liquid chromatography, by using an Ultimate 3000 system coupled online to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100Å, 5 mm x 300 µm i.d., 160454, Thermo Scientific) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 µL/min. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm by 75μm inner diameter EASY-Spray column (ES803, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 300 nL/min. Separation was generated by mixing A: 0.1% FA, and B: 80% ACN, with the following gradient:  5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B) and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min.

### Data Protocol
Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.9 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent (dd) positive acquisition mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV.  Global settings: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS, chrom. peak width (FWHM) 15s. Full scan settings: 70k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 120 ms. dd settings: minimum AGC target 8e3, intensity threshold 7.3e4, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion 45s. MS2 settings: microscans 1, resolution 35k (m/z 200), AGC target 2e5, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, spectrum data type profile.All MS/MS samples were analysed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388) and searched against the UniProt database for the Eupercaria taxonomic selection (Release 10_2018; 194001 entries). The Sequest HT search engine was used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragmented ions. The maximum of allowed missing cleavage sites was two. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high and only those with at least six amino acids were considered for identification.  The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target FDR 1%, validation based on q-value. Protein label free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification was performing at the processing step with the following parameters: peptides to use unique plus razor, precursor abundance was based on intensity, normalization mode was based on total peptide amount, pairwise protein ratio calculation, hypothesis test was based on ANOVA (background based).  The Magellan storage files (MSF) were imported into Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications, and perform quantitative analysis based on extracted ion chromatograms and for the TOP3 resulting most intense ion peak areas. A second database search was conducted by using the X! Tandem algorithm (The GPM, thegpm.org; version X! Tandem Alanine 2017.2.1.4 to increase/improve protein identification. X!Tandem was set up to search also for a reverse concatenated UniProt_Eupercaria_2018_10 database (421118 entries), besides UniProt_Eupercaria_2018_10 database. Trypsin digestion was assumed, together with a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance of 0,020 Da. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications. Peptide identifications in the Scaffold software (version Scaffold_4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95,0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, Nesvizhskii, Kolker & Aebersold, 2002) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99,0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides, with 0.1% Decoy FDR. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Keller, Kolker & Ruedi Aebersold, 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nutrition, European seabass, Liver, Methionine, (dicentrarchus labrax)

### Affiliations
Universidade Algarve
CCMAR (Center of Marine Sciences), Universidade do Algarve,Campus de Gambelas, Portugal

### Submitter
Ana Paula Farinha

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Miguel Rodrigues
CCMAR (Center of Marine Sciences), Universidade do Algarve,Campus de Gambelas, Portugal


