### Accession
PXD034795

### Title
ABRF iPRG2020 Metaproteomics Study Data

### Description
Replicate metaproteomic datasets containing four bacterial species and one bacteriophage.

### Sample Protocol
Four biological replicates of a mixture of proteins from T4 bacteriophage, its host E. coli and non-host species Salmonella typhimurium and Bacillus subtilis were analyzed. All proteins were reduced and then alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to digestion with trypsin. Each digest was analyzed by capillary LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. On-line HPLC separation was accomplished with a Thermo Scientific/Dionex RSLC NANO HPLC system: column, PicoFrit™ (New Objective; 75 μm i.d.) packed to 15 cm with C18 adsorbent (Vydac; 218MS 5 μm, 300 Å); mobile phase A, 0.5% acetic acid (HAc)/0.005% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA); mobile phase B, 90% acetonitrile/0.5% HAc/0.005% TFA; gradient 3 to 42% B in 30 min; flow rate, 0.4 μl/min. Precursor ions were acquired in the Orbitrap in centroid mode (scan range, m/z 300 – 1500; resolution, 120,000); data-dependent higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) spectra of ions in the precursor scan were acquired at the same time in the ion trap ("top speed;" threshold to trigger MS2, 50,000; quadrupole isolation, 0.7; charge states, 2+ – 5+; dynamic exclusion, 30 sec; normalized collision energy, 30%). The manufacturer recommended mass tolerances for data generated in this way are 10 ppm for MS1 and 0.6 Da for MS2.

### Data Protocol
For the PRIDE submission, data was serched with Comet (version 2018.01 rev. 4) in the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (version 5.2.0 Flammagenitus) against the FASTA database provided to participants in Phase 2 of the Study.

### Publication Abstract
Metaproteomics research using mass spectrometry data has emerged as a powerful strategy to understand the mechanisms underlying microbiome dynamics and the interaction of microbiomes with their immediate environment. Recent advances in sample preparation, data acquisition, and bioinformatics workflows have greatly contributed to progress in this field. In 2020, the Association of Biomolecular Research Facilities Proteome Informatics Research Group launched a collaborative study to assess the bioinformatics options available for metaproteomics research. The study was conducted in 2 phases. In the first phase, participants were provided with mass spectrometry data files and were asked to identify the taxonomic composition and relative taxa abundances in the samples without supplying any protein sequence databases. The most challenging question asked of the participants was to postulate the nature of any biological phenomena that may have taken place in the samples, such as interactions among taxonomic species. In the second phase, participants were provided a protein sequence database composed of the species present in the sample and were asked to answer the same set of questions as for phase 1. In this report, we summarize the data processing methods and tools used by participants, including database searching and software tools used for taxonomic and functional analysis. This study provides insights into the status of metaproteomics bioinformatics in participating laboratories and core facilities.

### Keywords
Iprg2020, Metaproteomics, Bacteria, Abrf, Bacteriophage, Iprg, Phage

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics

### Submitter
Magnus Palmblad

### Lab Head
Dr Magnus Palmblad
Leiden University Medical Center


