### Accession
PXD036078

### Title
C. Novyi's TcnA on HEp-2 cells, whole cell lysate Phosphoproteomics

### Description
The effect of TcnA on target cells is largely unexplored. Therefore, we performed a comprehensive screening approach of TcnA treated HEp-2 cells and analyzed their proteome and their phosphoproteome using LC-MS-based methods. With this data-dependent acquisition (DDA) approach, 5,086 proteins and 9,427 phosphosites could be identified and quantified. Of these, 35 proteins were found to be significantly altered after toxin treatment, and 1,832 phosphosites were responsive to TcnA treatment. By analyzing the TcnA-induced proteomic effects of HEp-2 cells, 23 common signaling pathways were identified to be altered, including Actin Cytoskeleton Signaling, Epithelial Adherens Junction Signaling, and Signaling by Rho Family GTPases. All those pathways are also regulated after application of TcdA or TcdB of C. difficile. After TcnA treatment the regulation on phosphorylation level was much stronger compared to the proteome level, in terms of both strength of regulation and the number of regulated phosphosites. Interestingly, various signaling pathways such as Signaling by Rho Family GTPases or Integrin Signaling were activated on proteome level while being inhibited on phosphorylation level or vice versa as observed for Role of BRCA1 in DNA Damage Response. ZIP kinase, as well as Calmodulin-dependent protein kinases IV & II, were observed as activated while Aurora-A kinase and CDK kinases tended to be inhibited in cells treated with TcnA based on their substrate regulation pattern.

### Sample Protocol
HEp-2 cell culture; treatment with TcnA, formaldehyde inactivated TcnA (FA_TcnA) and mock cells. Phosphorylation enrichment for phospho data, also non enriched cells for proteomic reference, TMT labeling, Measurements on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, data processing with MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS Measurments with a 120min Gradient of Eluent A (0.1% FA) and Eluent B (0.1% FA/100% ACN). Data processing with MaxQuant, mqparfiles will be provided and Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tcna; lcgts; c. difficile; tcda; tcdb; proteomics; pathway analysis; phosphoproteomics, C. novyi; clostridium novyi

### Affiliations
Toxikology
Toxicology, ZFA Proteomics, Medical School Hannover, Germany

### Submitter
Theresa Schweitzer

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pich
Toxicology, ZFA Proteomics, Medical School Hannover, Germany


