### Accession
PXD044158

### Title
Antagonistic roles of canonical and alternative-RPA in disease-associated tandem CAG repeat instability

### Description
Ongoing CAG expansions in Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) and Huntington disease (HD) brains exacerbate disease.  Expansions involve aberrant repair of mutagenic slipped-DNAs, formed from single-stranded DNAs.  Whether singlestranded DNA-binding proteins prevent or facilitate expansions is unknown.  We assessed canonical RPA (RPA1-RPA2-RPA3) and Alternative-RPA (RPA1-RPA4- RPA3), containing primate-specific RPA4.  RPA is essential for all DNA metabolism.  Alt-RPA has undefined functions.  Alt-RPA is upregulated 10-fold in HD and SCA1 patient brains.  RPA enhances, while Alt-RPA blocks, correct repair of slipped-CAGs.  RPA, but not Alt-RPA, efficiently binds and melts slipped-DNAs.  RPA enhances, while Alt-RPA blocks, removal of excess slipped-DNAs by FAN1 nuclease.  Protein-protein interactomes reveal unique and shared partners of RPA and Alt-RPA, including expansion-driving proteins.  RPA-overexpression in SCA1 mice inhibits CAG expansions in brains, rescuing neuron morphology and motor phenotypes.  Modulating repeat mutations is one example involving antagonistic Alt-RPA↔RPA interactions, illuminating questions as to which RPA-mediated processes are also modulated by AltRPA.

### Sample Protocol
Cloning and expression in HEK293FT cells. RPA1, RPA2, RPA3 and RPA4 expression constructs were generated from specific PCR amplification from a cDNA library, and inserted into either a pgLAP1-3MYC-BioID2 vector (RPA1, RPA2, RPA3) or a pgLAP1-FLAG-BioID2 vector (RPA4) using Gateway cloning as per the manufacture’s protocols (Gateway BP Clonase-ThermoFisher Scientific, catalogue #11789100 and Gateway LR Clonase - ThermoFisher Scientific, catalogue #11791020). This vector produces a myc-tagged construct conjugated to a functional BioID2 at the protein N-terminal. pgLAP1-3MYC-BioID2 subunit plasmids were then transformed and stably integrated into HEK293-Flp-In-T-REx cells using the manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoFisher Scientific, catalogue #R78007).  Biotinylation, pull down, and sample preparation. 293-FT stable cell lines were induced to express pgLAP1-3MYC-BioID2-RPA 1-4 by Doxycyclin 48 hours prior to pull-down at ~40-50% cell confluency. The next day, 50 µM Biotin was added 24 hours prior to the pulldown, with or without hydroxyurea treatment of 1 mM. After 24 hours, cells were washed 3x with cold sterile 1x PBS, trypsinised, pelleted at 1500xg for 5 minutes at 4 °C, and then washed again 2x with cold sterile 1x PBS. 600 µL of cold, freshly made lysis buffer (8M urea, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT, 1% Triton X-100) was added to each pellet and allowed to lyse on ice for 1 hour. Pellets were then sonicated on ice (30 amplitude, 2 cycles of 10 second on and 10 seconds off, with 600 µL of fresh lysis buffer being added to the pellet between the two cycles). The lysate was centrifuged at 16,500xg for 10 minutes at 4 °C, and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance beads (Sigma-Aldrich, catalogue # GE17-5113-01) were washed 3x with 1 mL cold lysis buffer, and then added to each of the samples. Samples were rotated overnight with the beads at 4°C. The next day, the samples were centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1000xg, and the supernatant removed. Beads were washed 4x by rotated for 10 minutes at room temperature in 1 ml wash buffer (8M Urea, 50 mM HEPES,pH 7.4). Beads were pelleted by centrifuging for 2 minutes at 1000xg and transferred to a new tube. From this point on MS-grade water was used for the preparation of all buffers. Beads were washed 4x with 1 mL 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate water, and then 1x with the same buffer with 1 mM added biotin (to saturate unbound streptavidin). The bound proteins were then reduced using 50 µl of 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 10 mM added DTT for 30 minutes, rotating at 60°C. Samples were cooled to room temperature for 5 minutes. Proteins were then alkylated in a light-tight container using 50 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 15 mM chloroacetamide for 1 hour rotating at room temperature. The chloroacetamide was neutralized by adding DTT to a final concentration of 15 mM and then rotating for 3 minutes at room temperature. The proteins were then digested by adding 1 µg Pierce MS-grade trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific, catalogue # 90058) and incubating overnight at 37°C while rotating. The next day, formic acid was added to a final concentration of 1%, and tubes rotated for 5 minutes at room temperature, to stop the reaction. Beads were centrifuged at 2000xg for 3 minutes at room temperature and the supernatant was collected into a fresh tube and then put to the side. Beads were then resuspended in 100 µL of 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA, and then rotated for 5 minutes at room temperature. The beads were then centrifuged again at 2000xg for 3 minutes at room temperature and the supernatant collected and added to the supernatant from two steps prior. The supernatant was dried by a centrifugal evaporator at 60°C until completely dried and then resuspended in 30 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) buffer. Peptides were then purified with ZipTip 10-µl micropipette tips containing a C18 column as per the manufacturer’s protocol (EMD Millipore, catalogue # ZTC18M008). Peptides were eluted in new tubes, in a final volume of 30 µL comprised of 50% ACN and 1% FA buffer. The supernatant was dried by a centrifugal evaporator at 60°C until completely dried and then resuspended in 30 µL of 1% FA buffer. Peptides were then transferred to a glass vial and stored at -20°C until mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis. 250 ng of each sample was injected into an HPLC nanoElute system (Bruker Daltonics), loaded onto a trap column with a constant flow of 4 µl/min (Acclaim  PepMap100 C18 column, 0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation, catalogue # 164567), and then eluted onto an analytical C18 Column (1.9 µm beads size, 75 µm x 25 cm, PepSep). Peptides were eluted over 2 hours in a gradient of acetonitrile (5-37%) in 0.1% FA at 500 nL/min while being injected into a TimsTOF Pro ion mobility mass spectrometer equipped with a Captive Spray nano electrospray source (Bruker Daltonics). Data was acquired using data-dependent auto-MS/MS with a 100-1700 m/z mass range, with PASEF enabled, number of PASEF scans set at 10 (1.27 seconds duty cycle), a dynamic exclusion of 0.4-minute, m/z dependent isolation window and collision energy of 42.0 eV. The target intensity was set to 20,000, with an intensity threshold of 2,500. Protein identification by MaxQuant analysis. Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 software392 and a Uniprot human proteome database (21/03/2020, 75,776 entries). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis (with TIMS-DDA type in group-specific parameters) were: 2 miscleavages were allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzymes were Trypsin (K/R not before P); variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and protein carbamylation (K, N-terminal). A mass tolerance of 10 ppm was used for precursor ions and a tolerance of 20 ppm was used for fragment ions. Identification values "PSM FDR", "Protein FDR" and "Site decoy fraction" were set to 0.05. Minimum peptide count was set to 1. Label-Free-Quantification (LFQ) was also selected with a LFQ minimal ratio count of 2. Both the "Second peptides" and "Match between runs" options were also allowed.  Data analysis and statistics. Following analysis, results were sorted by parameters set by Prostar software (Proteomics statistical analysis with R). Proteins positive for at least either one of the "Reverse", "Only.identified.by.site" or "Potential.contaminant" categories were eliminated, as well as proteins identified from a single peptide. An SLSA (Structured Least Square Adaptative) and DetQuantile imputation were performed for, respectively, POV (Partially Observed Value) and MEC (Missing in the Entire Condition) missing values. After a mean centering within each condition, results were sorted to retain proteins that were present in at least 2 of 3 biological replicates for each condition. For the mass spectrometry analysis, the specific protein-protein interaction networks involving each of the RPA or Alt-RPA proteins was quantified based on intensities to obtained enrichment ratios and MS/MS counts. Quantification of the identified proteins for each subunit measured the enrichment in comparison to the negative control HEK293-FT. Experiments were performed in biological triplicates. Enrichment ratios where significant when over the 90% percentile of associated proteins. Enrichment ratios detected for each quantified protein were compared between subunits.

### Publication Abstract
Expansions of repeat DNA tracts cause &gt;70 diseases, and ongoing expansions in brains exacerbate disease. During expansion mutations, single-stranded DNAs (ssDNAs) form slipped-DNAs. We find the ssDNA-binding complexes canonical replication protein A (RPA1, RPA2, and RPA3) and Alternative-RPA (RPA1, RPA3, and primate-specific RPA4) are upregulated in Huntington disease and spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) patient brains. Protein interactomes of RPA and Alt-RPA reveal unique and shared partners, including modifiers of CAG instability and disease presentation. RPA enhances in&#xa0;vitro melting, FAN1 excision, and repair of slipped-CAGs and protects against CAG expansions in human cells. RPA overexpression in SCA1 mouse brains ablates expansions, coincident with decreased ATXN1 aggregation, reduced brain DNA damage, improved neuron morphology, and rescued motor phenotypes. In contrast, Alt-RPA inhibits melting, FAN1 excision, and repair of slipped-CAGs and promotes CAG expansions. These findings suggest a functional interplay between the two RPAs where Alt-RPA may antagonistically offset RPA's suppression of disease-associated repeat expansions, which may extend to other DNA processes.

### Keywords
Slipped-dnas; post-mortem brains, Sca1 mice, Cag repeat expansion diseases; spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (sca1); huntington's disease (hd); somatic cag repeat expansions; rpa (single-strand dna binding protein; alternative-rpa (alt-rpa); dna repair

### Affiliations
Sherbrooke Universitty
Sherbrooke University, Immunology and cellular biology department, FMSS

### Submitter
Jennifer Raisch

### Lab Head
Dr Francois-Michel Boisvert
Sherbrooke University, Immunology and cellular biology department, FMSS


