### Accession
PXD014000

### Title
‘Shotgun’ Proteome Analyses Do Not Require Alkylation of Cysteine

### Description
It is a common belief that reduction of disulfide bridges and alkylation of thiols in proteins are indispensable steps in proteomic sample preparation. Since this chemical procedure is often incomplete and prone to side reactions and can results in various artefacts we reexamined its importance. We found that the reduction and alkylation do not increase the depth of analysis and quality of proteomic quantification therefore these steps are unessential in shotgun-type investigations of proteomes. Moreover, we found that compared to a standard procedure using iodoacetamide for thiol-alkylation, sample preparation under conditions protecting thiols from oxidation improves quality of peptides and allows identifying of 10-20% more peptides and proteins.   Excluding the thiol-alkylation from proteomic sample preparation, shorten the workflows, and decreases the probability of biases resulting from occurrence of artificially modified peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation. Protein lysates were processed by the FASP18 and MED-FASP 19protocol using Microcon 30K centrifugal ultrafiltration units (Merck, Darmstadt) operated at 10,000 × g with modifications that have been described recently20. Aliquots containing 100 g total protein were mixed with 200 L of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 (UA) in the ultrafiltration unit and then centrifuged at 20°C, for 15 min. The eluates were discarded, 100 L of UA was pipetted into the filtration unit, and the units were centrifuged again. Then 50 L of 0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA was added to the filters and samples were incubated in darkness for 20 min. This step was omitted for the samples that were not alkylated at cysteine residues. Filters were washed twice with 100 L of UA followed by two washes with 100 L of 0.05M Tris/HCl pH 8.5 (digestion buffer DB) and were digested in 40 L of the DB buffer at 37°C for 18 h, using 2 g endoproteinase LysC (MED FASP) or 2 g trypsin (FASP), at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100. The released peptides were collected by centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 10 min followed by two washes with 100 L of DB. In the MED FASP protocol, the material remaining on the filter was digested with 1 g trypsin using the above conditions, except that the cleavage reaction was performed only for 2 h. The peptide eluates containing 10 µg total peptide were concentrated to a volume of 4-5 µL and were stored frozen at -20 C until mass spectrometric analysis. Sample preparation in the continuous presence of DTT. FASP and MED FASP were conducted using UA, UB, and DB buffers without or containing either 0.1, 0.3. 1.0, 3.0, or 10 mM DTT. Before sample desalting the isolated peptides were incubated with additional 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 20 min.

### Data Protocol
The spectra were searched using MaxQuant software. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01. The concentration of the targeted proteins were assessed using ‘light’ to ‘heavy’ ratios of the target peptides  from the MaxQuant output

### Publication Abstract
It is a common belief that reduction of disulfide bridges and alkylation of thiols in proteins are indispensable steps in proteomic sample preparation. Since this chemical procedure is often incomplete and prone to side reactions we reexamined its importance. We found that reduction and alkylation do not increase the depth of analysis and quality of proteomic quantification and therefore these steps are not essential in 'shotgun'-type investigations of proteomes. Moreover, we found that compared to a standard procedure using iodoacetamide for thiol-alkylation, sample preparation under conditions protecting thiols from oxidation improves quality of peptides and allows identifying of 10-20% more peptides and proteins. Excluding thiol-alkylation from proteomic sample preparation shortens the workflows and decreases the probability of biases resulting from occurrence of artificially modified peptides.

### Keywords
Iodoacetamide, Thiol alkylation, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Martinsried, Germany


