### Accession
PXD038894

### Title
Proteomic exploration into the inhibitory activities of lemongrass and lemon essential oils against Botrytis cinerea

### Description
Essential oils (EOs) have been demonstrated as efficacious against B. cinerea. However, the underpinning enzymatic and proteomic mechanism for these inhibitory effects is not fully understood. This study investigated the effects of lemon (Le) and lemongrass (Lg) EOs (individually and in combination) against B. cinerea based on enzymatic and proteomic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Total soluble proteins from Botrytis cinerea mycelia was isolated using a modified pheneol SDS method. 10 ug of each sample was  size fractionated via electrophoresis on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel and visualized using the ENDUROTM GDS Gel Documentation System (Labnet International, Edison, NJ). For LC-MS/MS analysis, protein pellets were solubilzed in a solution containing 100 mM Tris, 1% TritonX-100 and 4 M guanidine hydrochloride followed by three cycles of sonication steps. A phase separatoion was induced by performing a methanol-chloroform liquid-liquid analysis. Protein pellets were air dried and resuspended in 50 mM Tris buffer containing 2% SDS and 4 M urea. Protein samples were re-suspended in 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate before reduction with 5 mM triscarboxyethyl phosphine and cystein residues thiomethylated with 20 mM S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate. Proteins were incbated with MagResyn HILIC magnetic particles and digested using trypsin. Residual digest reagents were removed using an in-house manufactured C18 stage tip (Empore Octadecyl C18 extraction discs; Supelco). The eluate was dried and the peptides dissloved in 2% ACN:water; 0.1% FA for nanoLC-MS analysis using a Thermo Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLC equipped with a 5 mm x 300 µm C18 trap column and an Asentic Express 15 cm x 75 µm of 2.7 µm size C18 analytical column (Supelco). Detection was performed using a Thermo Scientific Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex ionization source. The sample was introduced through a stainless-steel emitter. Data were collected in a positive mode with spray voltage set to 1.8 kV and ion transfer capillary set to 280 °C.

### Data Protocol
The raw files generated by the mass spectrometer were imported into Proteome Discoverer v1.4 software (Thermo Scientific, USA) and processed using both Sequest and Amanda algorithms. Database interrogation was performed against a concatenated database created using the Uniprot Botrytis database concatenated with the cRAP contaminant protein database. Allowed semi-tryptic cleavage was set at two missed cleavages. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.05 Da. Deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) and acetylation of protein N-terminal was allowed as dynamic modifications and thiomethylation of C as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using the Target-Decoy PSM validator node set to search against a decoy database with strict FDR 1% and delta Cn of 0.1. The result files were imported into Scaffold 1.4.4 and identified peptides validated using the X!Tandem, peptide and protein prophet search algorithm included in Scaffold. Peptide and protein validation were done using the Peptide and Protein Prophet algorithms. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability and contained at least two unique identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Botrytis cinerea, Essential oils, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of the Western Cape
Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of the Western Cape, Bellville, 7535, South Africa

### Submitter
Ashwil Klein

### Lab Head
Dr Ashwil Klein
Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of the Western Cape, Bellville, 7535, South Africa


