### Accession
PXD027623

### Title
Multistep mechanism of G-quadruplex resolution during DNA replication

### Description
G-quadruplex (or G4) structures are non-canonical DNA structures that form in guanine-rich sequences and threaten genome stability when not properly resolved. G4 unwinding occurs during S phase via an unknown mechanism. Using Xenopus egg extracts, we define a three-step G4 unwinding mechanism that acts during DNA replication. First, the replicative helicase (CMG) stalls at a leading strand G4 structure. Second, the DHX36 helicase mediates the bypass of the CMG past the intact G4 structure, which allows approach of the leading strand to the G4. Third, G4 structure unwinding by the FANCJ helicase enables the DNA polymerase to synthesize past the G4 motif. A G4 on the lagging strand template does not stall CMG, but still requires active DNA replication for unwinding. DHX36 and FANCJ have partially redundant roles, conferring robustness to this pathway. Our data reveal a novel genome maintenance pathway that promotes faithful G4 replication thereby avoiding genome instability.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmid pull-down mass spectrometry Replicating ssDNA plasmids were pulled down as previously described (64, 66). Streptavidin magnetic beads (Dynabeads M-280, Thermo Fisher, Cat#DB11205) were washed 3 times with 1 volume of wash buffer I (50 mM Tris-HCl pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 0.02% Tween-20), resuspended with 1 volume of wash buffer I, and incubated with biotinylated LacI (2 µM final concentration) for 45 minutes with mixing every 10 minutes at room temperature. The beads were washed 4 times with 1 volume of IP buffer (ELBS buffer supplemented with 0.25 mg/mL BSA and 0.02% Tween 20), resuspended with 6.64 volume of IP buffer, and stored at 4ºC. To capture replication intermediates via LacI that nonspecifically binds to ssDNA and dsDNA (67), 150 µL of the replication reaction was mixed with 750 µL beads solution (containing 113 µL biotin-LacI-bound Streptavidin magnetic beads) at the indicated times, and incubated for 30 minutes at 0-2ºC with mixing every 10 minutes. The beads were washed three times with 750 µL IP buffer containing 0.03% Tween 20, and resuspended in 40 µL 1x SDS sample buffer (75 mM Tris-HCl pH6.8, 10% glycerol, 2.5% SDS, 10% (v/v) Bond-Breaker TCEP Solution (Thermo Fisher, Cat# 7772), and 0.02% (w/v) bromophenol blue). The samples were heated at 95ºC for 5 min and separated on a 12% Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel (Biorad). The gel was run for 2-3 cm and stained with colloidal coomassie dye G-250 (Gel Code Blue Stain Reagent, Thermo Scientific) after which each lane was cut out. Gel pieces were reduced, alkylated and digested overnight with trypsin at 37°C. The peptides were extracted with 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and dried in a vacuum concentrator.   Mass spectrometry  Samples were resuspended in 10% (v/v) formic acid for UHPLCMS/MS. The data was acquired using an UHPLC 1290 system coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Biopharma HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were first trapped (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 µm, 2 cm x 100 μm) before being separated on an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 278 μm, 40 cm x 75 μm), using a gradient of 100 min at a column flow of 300 nl/min. Trapping was performed at 5 μL/min for 5 min in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and the gradient was as follows 13- 44% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) in 95 min, 44-100% in 3 min, 100% solvent B for 1 min and 100-0% in 1 min. Full scan MS spectra from m/z 375 – 1600 were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 after accumulation to a target value of 3e6. Up to ten most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation. HCD fragmentation was performed at normalised collision energy of 27% after the accumulation to a target value of 1e5. MS/MS was acquired at a resolution of 30.000.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  Raw data were analysed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.17) using label-free quantification (68). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids were used. MS/MS spectra were searched against a non-redundant Xenopus database (69). For the Andromeda search the enzyme trypsin was chosen allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification, and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Two missed cleavages were allowed maximally. Initial mass deviation of precursor ion was up to 7 ppm and mass deviation for fragment ions was 0.05 Dalton. Protein identification required one unique peptide to the protein group and “Match between run” was enabled.   Statistical analysis  All bioinformatics analysis was carried out with the Perseus software Version 1.6.10.0. For each comparison, the processed data was filtered to contain at least 3 valid values in at least one of the replicate group (four repeats per condition).

### Publication Abstract
G-quadruplex (or G4) structures form in guanine-rich DNA sequences and threaten genome stability when not properly resolved. G4 unwinding occurs during S phase via an unknown mechanism. Using Xenopus egg extracts, we define a three-step G4 unwinding mechanism that acts during DNA replication. First, the replicative helicase composed of Cdc45, MCM2-7 and GINS (CMG) stalls at a leading strand G4 structure. Second, the DEAH-box helicase 36 (DHX36) mediates bypass of the CMG past the intact G4 structure, allowing approach of the leading strand to the G4. Third, G4 structure unwinding by the Fanconi anemia complementation group J helicase (FANCJ) enables DNA polymerase to synthesize past the G4 motif. A G4 on the lagging strand template does not stall CMG but still requires DNA replication for unwinding. DHX36 and FANCJ have partially redundant roles, conferring pathway robustness. This previously unknown genome maintenance pathway promotes faithful G4 replication, thereby avoiding genome instability.

### Keywords
Fancj, G-quadruplex, Dhx36, Dna replication, G4 resolution, Helicases, G4

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Group
Oncode Institute, Hubrecht Institute-KNAW & University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht, 3584 CT, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Harm Post

### Lab Head
Dr Puck Knipscheer
Oncode Institute, Hubrecht Institute-KNAW & University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht, 3584 CT, The Netherlands


