### Accession
PXD019447

### Title
Proteomic signature of NPC1 KO microglia

### Description
Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) disease is a rare neurodegenerative disorder mainly caused by autosomal recessive mutations in Npc1 which result in abnormal late endosomal/lysosomal lipid storage. Although microgliosis is one of the prominent pathological features, consequences of NPC1 loss on microglial function and disease outcome remain largely unknown. Here, we provide an in-depth characterization of microglial proteomic signatures and phenotypes in an NPC1-deficient (Npc1-/-) murine model. We demonstrate that microglial defects, including enhanced phagocytosis and impaired lipid trafficking, occur early in the NPC pathological cascade and precede neuronal death. Compromised microglial function during Npc1-/- mouse development is reflected by enhanced synaptic pruning and deficient turnover of myelin. Accumulation of the undigested myelin occurs mainly within multi-vesicular bodies (MVBs) of Npc1-/- microglia and not within lysosomes. This is in agreement with the impairments in recycling of myelin into lipid droplets. Macrophages of NPC patients displayed similar molecular and functional alterations as murine Npc1-/- microglia, strengthening the role of NPC1 in immune homeostasis. Generated ex vivo assays using patient macrophages are novel promising clinical tools to monitor the progression and therapeutic efficacy in NPC patients.

### Sample Protocol
The microglia enriched fractions from MACS sorting were lysed in 200µl of STET lysis buffer (50mM Tris, 150mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, pH 7.5) and incubated 15 min on ice with intermediate vortexing. The samples were centrifuged for 5min at 16,000xg at 4°C to remove cell debris and undissolved material. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh protein LoBind tube (Eppendorf) and the protein concentration was estimated using the Pierce 660nm protein assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). A protein amount of 15µg was subjected to tryptic protein digestion using the filter aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) using Vivacon spin filters with a 30kDa cut-off (Sartorius). Briefly, proteins were reduced with 20mM dithiothreitol and free cysteine residues were alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich). After the urea washing steps, proteins were digested with 0.3µg LysC (Promega) for 16h at 37°C followed by a second digestion step with 0.15µg trypsin (Promega) for 4h at 37°C. The peptides were eluted into collection tubes and acidified with formic acid (Sigma Aldrich). Afterwards, proteolytic peptides were desalted by stop and go extraction (STAGE) with self-packed C18 tips (Empore) [83]. After vacuum centrifugation, peptides were dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% formic acid (Biosolve). For label free protein quantification (LFQ), peptides were analysed on an Easy nLC 1000 or 1200 nanoHPLC (Thermo Scientific) which was coupled online via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Sientific) equipped with a PRSO-V1 column oven (Sonation) to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). An amount of 1.3µg of peptides was separated on in-house packed C18 columns (30cm x 75µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a binary gradient of water (A) and acetonitrile (B) supplemented with 0.1% formic acid (0 min, 2% B; 3:30 min, 5% B; 137:30 min, 25% B; 168:30 min, 35% B; 182:30 min, 60% B) at 50°C column temperature. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was used for LFQ. Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (m/z range: 300-1400; AGC target: 3E+6). The 15 most intense peptide ions per full MS scan were selected for peptide fragmentation (resolution: 15,000; isolation width: 1.6 m/z; AGC target: 1E+5; NCE: 26%). A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The data from mouse microglia was analyzed with the software Maxquant, version 1.6.3.3 (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich). The MS data was searched against a reviewed canonical fasta database of Mus musculus from UniProt (download: November the 5th 2018, 17005 entries). Trypsin was defined as a protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-terminal as well as oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1%. The “match between runs” option was enabled with a matching window of 1.5 min. LFQ of proteins required at least one ratio count of unique peptides. Only unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Npc1, Neurodegeneration, Niemann-pick disease, Microglia

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, D-81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, D-81377 Munich, Germany


