### Accession
PXD040716

### Title
The GlycoPaSER prototype as a real-time N-glycopeptide identification tool based on the PaSER parallel computing platform

### Description
Real-time database searching allows for simpler and automated proteomics workflows as it eliminates technical bottlenecks in high throughput experiments. Most importantly, it enables results dependent acquisition (RDA) where search results can be used to guide data acquisition during acquisition. This is especially beneficial for glycoproteomics since the wide range of physicochemical properties of glycopeptides lead to a wide range of optimal acquisition parameters. We established here the GlycoPaSER prototype by extending the Parallel Search Engine in Real-time (PaSER) functionality for real-time glycopeptide identification from fragmentation spectra. Glycopeptide fragmentation spectra were decomposed into peptide- and glycan-moiety spectra using common N-glycan fragments. Each moiety was subsequently identified by a specialized algorithm running in real-time. GlycoPaSER can keep up with the rate of data acquisition for real-time analysis with similar performance to other glycoproteomics software and produces results that are in line with literature reference data. The GlycoPaSER prototype presented here provides the first proof-of-concept for real-time glycopeptide identification that unlocks future development of RDA technology to transcend data acquisition.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Plasma samples of 10 healthy human control subjects were received from the Sanquin blood bank (Nijmegen, Netherlands) according to their protocols of informed consent. Samples were prepared as described in [DOI: 10.1101/2022.05.31.494121]. Briefly, 10µl of plasma was denatured in 10µl urea (8 M urea, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) and reduced with 15 µl 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Reduced cysteines were alkylated through incubation with 15 µl 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide in the dark for 20 min at RT. Next, proteins were subjected to LysC digestion (1 µg LysC/50µg protein) by incubating the sample at RT for 3 hours. Then, samples were diluted with 3 volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and trypsin was added (1 µg trypsin /50 µg protein) for overnight digestion at 37°C. Glycopeptides were enriched using 100 µl Sepharose CL-4B beads slurry (Sigma) per sample well in a 0.20 µm pore size 96 multi well filter plate (AcroPrep Advance, VWR). The beads were washed three times with 20% ethanol and 83% acetonitrile (ACN), respectively, prior to sample application. The sample was then incubated on the beads for 20 min at room temperature on a shaking plate. The filter plate was then centrifuged and beads were first washed three times with 83% ACN and then three times with 83% ACN with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Next, glycopeptide eluates were collected by incubation of the beads with 50 µl milliQ water for 5 min at room temperature, followed by centrifugation. MS acquisition Samples were measured using a nanoElute nanoflow liquid chromatograph (Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a timsTOF Pro2 instrument (Bruker Daltonics) via a CaptiveSprayer nanoflow electrospray ionization source using acetonitrile as nanoBooster dopant (Bruker Daltonics) [DOI: 10.1101/597922]. Peptides were separated on an ELUTE FITEEN C18 reversed phase column (0.075mm ID x 150mm length, 1.9µm particles, 120Å pore size, C18-AQ2 chemistry) operated at 45°C using a linear increase of 5 to 43% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 0.02% trifluoroacetic acid over 25 minutes at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Mass spectrometry measurements were performed in positive ionization mode using 0.2bar N2 nanoBooster gas pressure and 1500V capillary voltage as source conditions. Spectra were acquired within 0.7-1.5 1/K0 mobility and 50-4000 m/z ranges using 10 dda-PASEF ramps at 50.000 target intensity and 30eV at 0.6 Vs/cm2 1/K0 to 90eV at 1.6 Vs/cm2 1/K0 as default collision energy. Collision energies were varied for selective experiments as:20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, and 32 eV at 0.6 Vs/cm2 1/K0 to 60, 66, 72, 78, 84, 90, and 96 eV at 1.6 Vs/cm2 1/K0, etc.

### Data Protocol
Database search settings PaSER database searches were done with version 2022c with the default parameters modified to match the glycoproteomics experiment. The database contained all human proteins which are labelled as secreted on uniprot, downloaded on 22 November 2021. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 30 ppm with 3 isotopic peaks, precursor mass range to 600-50000 Da, and semi-tryptic enzyme digestion specificity. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine, HexNAc on asparagine, and N-terminal ammonia loss. MS/MS spectra were considered to be deisotoped and decharged and the multistage activation mode was set to 1 (consider both neutral loss and non-neutral loss peaks). FDR was set to 1% at the protein level, noisy PSMs were filtered, and spectra display mode was set to 0 (include all PSMs for each sequence). MSFragger searches were conducted with fragpipe 17.1, msfragger 3.4, and philosopher 4.1.1. The glyco-N-HCD parameters were adjusted to match the glycoproteomics experiment. Namely, the mass tolerance was set to 30 ppm with isotope error of 0-3, enzyme was set to trypsin (semi specific), peptide length to 5-50, and m/z range to 600-20000. Variable modifications: oxidation of methionine and N-terminal ammonia loss. The glycan mass offsets were extracted for unique composition in the GlyGen glycan reference database[DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwz080]. The FDR was set to 1% at PSM, peptide, and protein levels. For glycan assignment and FDR, the GlyGen database downloaded on 22.4.2022 was filtered for unique compositions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Results dependent acquisition (rda), Glycopaser, Paser, Real-time search

### Affiliations
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Gad Armony

### Lab Head
Dr Hans J.C.T. Wessels
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands


