### Accession
PXD024528

### Title
KRAS G12V spliced neoepitope is produced by proteasomes

### Description
This dataset contains further evidence that the HLA-A*02:01+ KRAS G12V+ spliced neoepitope we previously identified (Mishto et al., Front. Immunol. 2019) is produced by proteasomes in various experimental conditions

### Sample Protocol
All peptides were synthesized using Fmoc solid phase chemistry. 20S proteasome was purified from human erythrocytes. Synthetic polypeptides (40 µM) were digested by 20S proteasomes in various buffers in kinetics experiments (0-4 h) at 37°C. Samples were measured by various Orbitrap mass spectrometers.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Mascot Distiller software (Matrix Science). Peptides were identified using the Mascot version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science) search engine. Mass spectra were searched against a customized database that includes all theoretically possible spliced and non-spliced peptides (Liepe et al., 2010). M oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and NQ deamidation were set as variable modification.  For the peptide identification and quantification in the Q Exactive Orbitrap and in the Q Exactive HF Orbitrap measurements, we set as mass tolerances for MS and MS2 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. For the peptide identification we set 5 ppm and 0.02 Da as mass tolerances for MS and MS2, respectively, in the Exploris 480 and Fusion Lumos Orbitrap measurements.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Epitope discovery, Peptide splicing, Cis-spliced peptides, Kras, Mass spectrometry, Proteasome

### Affiliations
King's College London
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; Goettingen; Germany

### Submitter
Michele Mishto

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane Liepe
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry; Goettingen; Germany


