### Accession
PXD005584

### Title
Identifying the Ubiquitination Targets of E6AP by Orthogonal Ubiquitin Transfer

### Description
E3 ubiquitin (UB) ligases, the ending module of the E1-E2-E3 cascades, transmit diverse signals in the cell by attaching UB to cellular proteins. Identifying E3 substrates holds the key to elucidate the roles of E3s in cell regulation. We constructed an orthogonal UB transfer (OUT) cascade to identify the substrates of E6AP, a HECT E3 also known as Ube3a that is implicated in neurodevelopmental disorders and cancer. We used yeast cell surface display to engineer E6AP to exclusively transfer an affinity-tagged UB variant (xUB) to its substrate proteins. Proteomic identification of xUB-conjugated proteins in HEK293 cells afforded 131 potential E6AP targets. Among them we verified MAPK1, CDK1 and CDK4, and PRMT5 are directly ubiquitinated by E6AP in vitro and in the cell. Our work establishes OUT as an efficient platform to profile E6AP substrates and would guide the engineering of OUT cascades with other E3s to interrogate their biological functions.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem purification of cellular proteins conjugated to HBT-xUB was performed as previously described. 30 Briefly, 30 dishes (10 cm in diameter) of HEK293 cells stably expressing the xUba1-xUbch7-xE6AP cascade were acutely infected with lentivirus HBT-xUB for 72 hours. To inhibit proteasome activity, cells were treated with 10 μM MG132 for 4 hours at 37 °C. Cells were then washed twice with ice cold 1× PBS, pH 7.4, and harvested by cell scraper with buffer A (8 M urea, 300 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 50 mM NaH2PO4, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM PMSF and 125 U/ml Benzonase, pH 8.0). For Ni-NTA purification, cell lysates were centrifuged at 15,000g for 30 min at room temperature. 35 μL of Ni2+ sepharose beads (GE Healthcare) for each 1 mg of protein lysates were added to the clarified supernatant. After incubation overnight at room temperature in buffer A with 10 mM imidazole on a rocking platform, Ni2+ sepharose beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 100 g for 3 min and washed sequentially with 20-bead volume of buffer A (pH 8.0), buffer A (pH 6.3), and buffer A (pH 6.3) with 10 mM imidazole. After washing the beads, proteins were eluted twice with 5-bead volume of buffer B (8 M Urea, 200 mM NaCl, 50 mM Na2HPO4, 2% SDS, 10 mM EDTA, 100 mM Tris, 250 mM imidazole, pH 4.3). For streptavidin purification, the pH of above elution was adjusted to pH 8.0. 50 μL streptavidin sepharose beads (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) was added to the elution to bind ubiquitinated proteins. After incubation on a rocking platform overnight at room temperature, streptavidin beads were pelleted and washed sequentially with 1.5 mL buffer C (8 M Urea, 200 mM NaCl, 2% SDS, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0), buffer D (8 M Urea, 1.2 M NaCl, 0.2% SDS, 100 mM Tris, 10% EtOH, 10% Isopropanol, pH 8.0) and buffer E (8 M urea, 100 NH4HCO3, pH 8).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 against human Uniprot database (90,300 target sequences).  Searching parameters included fully tryptic restriction and a parent ion mass tolerance (± 20 ppm).  Methionine oxidation (+15.99492 Da), asaparagine and glutamine deamidation (+0.98402 Da), lysine ubiquitination (+114.04293 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.03670) were variable modifications (up to 3 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.021465 Da). All identifications were filtered to a PSM false discovery rate of 1% by the use of Percolator included in the Proteome Discoverer suite.

### Publication Abstract
E3 ubiquitin (UB) ligases are the ending modules of the E1-E2-E3 cascades that transfer UB to cellular proteins and regulate their biological functions. Identifying the substrates of an E3 holds the key to elucidate its role in cell regulation. Here, we construct an orthogonal UB transfer (OUT) cascade to identify the substrates of E6AP, a HECT E3 also known as Ube3a that is implicated in cancer and neurodevelopmental disorders. We use yeast cell surface display to engineer E6AP to exclusively transfer an affinity-tagged UB variant (xUB) to its substrate proteins. Proteomic identification of xUB-conjugated proteins in HEK293 cells affords 130 potential E6AP targets. Among them, we verify that MAPK1, CDK1, CDK4, PRMT5, &#x3b2;-catenin, and UbxD8 are directly ubiquitinated by E6AP in vitro and in the cell. Our work establishes OUT as an efficient platform to profile E3 substrates and reveal the cellular circuits mediated by the E3 enzymes.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Conjugate, Lc-ms/ms, Iap

### Affiliations
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases
Georgia State University

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Yin
Georgia State University


