### Accession
PXD020383

### Title
Lineage-Specific Proteomic Signatures in the Mycobacterium Tuberculosis Complex Reveal Differential Abundance of Proteins Involved in Virulence, DNA Repair, CRISPR-Cas, Bioenergetics and Lipid Metabolism

### Description
Despite the discovery of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) more than 130 years ago, Mtb physiology and the mechanisms of virulence are still not fully understood. The objective of this study was to compare and characterize the differentially abundant protein profiles of modern, pre-modern and ancient Mtb lineages. Using a comprehensive analysis of the proteome of Mtb lineages 3, 4, 5 and 7, unique and shared proteomic signatures in these modern, pre-modern and ancient Mtb lineages were delineated. Main proteomic findings were verified by using immunoblotting. In addition, analysis of multiple genome alignment of all lineages was performed using Geneious Prime software. Label-free peptide quantification of whole cells from Mtb lineage 3, 4, 5 and 7 yielded 38,346 unique peptides derived from 3092 proteins, representing 77% coverage of the predicted Mtb proteome. Mtb lineage-specific differential abundances was observed for 539 proteins. Lineage 7 exhibited a markedly reduced abundance of proteins involved in DNA repair, type VII ESX-3 and ESX-1 secretion systems, lipid metabolism and inorganic phosphate uptake, and an increased abundance of proteins involved in alternative pathways of the TCA cycle and the CRISPR/Cas system as compared to the other lineages. Lineages 3 and 4 exhibited a higher abundance of proteins involved in virulence, DNA repair, drug resistance and other metabolic pathways. The high throughput analysis of Mtb proteome by super resolution massspectrometry provided an insight into the differential expression of proteins between Mtb lineages 3, 4, 5 and 7 that may explain the slow growth and reduced virulence of lineage 7, as well as metabolic flexibility and the ability to survive under adverse growth conditions.

### Sample Protocol
A total cellular protein lysate were extracted using a lysis buffer containing 2% SDS, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 tablet per 50 ml EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail  and 1 tablet per 10 ml PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail. Proteins (100µg) were pre-fractionated by 1.0 mm, 4%-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel, at 80 V for 5 min followed by 20 min at 200 V. Colloidal Blue stained gel lane was divided into 6 fractions, and each fraction was subjected to in-gel reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of peptide products was performed using a Q Exactive plus hybrid quadropole-orbitrap instrument coupled with an EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Biberach, Germany). Purified peptide sample, 6µL, was directly injected into column. The analytical columns used were 75µm x 2cm, C18 Acclaim PepMap columns with 3 µm particles, 25 cm long and 25cm x 75um ID, 2µm, PepMap RSLC C18, both from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Biberach, Germany). Separation was performed in a 65 min solvent gradient and flow rate of 0.3 μL/min at 40°C. The solvents used for mobile phase A and B were water containing 0.1% FA and 80/20 acetonitrile/water containing 0.1% FA, respectively. The MS instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed from 380 to 1500 m/z with a 3 x 106-ion count target and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.  The full MS scans were acquired at 70,000 resolution. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set at 3 × 106 ions with maximum injection time of 50 ms. The AGC target for MS/MS was set to 104 and the maximum injection time limited to 100 ms with dynamic exclusion of 30 s.  RAW MS/MS data were analyzed using the MaxQuant (MQ) software package (version 1.4.0.5) (Cox and Mann, 2008) employing its own peptide database search engine, Andromeda. The data was searched against the Mtb H37Rv reference proteome UP000001584 (3993 entries, accessed in July 2017, UniProt-proteome) using reverse decoy databases and a selection of known laboratory contaminants. For peptide identification, the following parameters were applied: Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin without proline with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Acetylation of the protein N-terminus, conversion of N-terminal glutamine and glutamic acid to pyroglutamic acid and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The first search for precursor ions was performed with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for calibration, while 6 ppm was applied for the main search.  For protein identification, at least one unique peptide was required per protein group. Minimum peptide length of seven amino acids was required for identification. To increase the number of peptides that can be used for quantification, the “requantify” and “match between runs” features of MQ were utilized with a retention time alignment window of 3 min. Unique peptides were used for peptide quantification. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 0.01 (1%) was set at both the peptide spectra matches and the protein group levels. For all other parameters, the default setting was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the discovery of the tubercle bacillus more than 130 years ago, its physiology and the mechanisms of virulence are still not fully understood. A comprehensive analysis of the proteomes of members of the human-adapted <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> complex (MTBC) lineages 3, 4, 5, and 7 was conducted to better understand the evolution of virulence and other physiological characteristics. Unique and shared proteomic signatures in these modern, pre-modern and ancient MTBC lineages, as deduced from quantitative bioinformatics analyses of high-resolution mass spectrometry data, were delineated. The main proteomic findings were verified by using immunoblotting. In addition, analysis of multiple genome alignment of members of the same lineages was performed. Label-free peptide quantification of whole cells from MTBC lineages 3, 4, 5, and 7 yielded a total of 38,346 unique peptides derived from 3092 proteins, representing 77% coverage of the predicted proteome. MTBC lineage-specific differential expression was observed for 539 proteins. Lineage 7 exhibited a markedly reduced abundance of proteins involved in DNA repair, type VII ESX-3 and ESX-1 secretion systems, lipid metabolism and inorganic phosphate uptake, and an increased abundance of proteins involved in alternative pathways of the TCA cycle and the CRISPR-Cas system as compared to the other lineages. Lineages 3 and 4 exhibited a higher abundance of proteins involved in virulence, DNA repair, drug resistance and other metabolic pathways. The high throughput analysis of the MTBC proteome by super-resolution mass spectrometry provided an insight into the differential expression of proteins between MTBC lineages 3, 4, 5, and 7 that may explain the slow growth and reduced virulence, metabolic flexibility, and the ability to survive under adverse growth conditions of lineage 7.

### Keywords
Virulence, Proteomics, Dna repair, Mycobacterium tuberculosis; lineage 7, Esx-3 secretion system, Ethiopia

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
University of Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Tahira Riaz

### Lab Head
Dr Tone Tønjum
University of Oslo, Norway


