### Accession
PXD041452

### Title
Human - plasma extracellular vesicles from pSS patients, SLE patients and HD

### Description
Proteomic analysis of plasma extracellular vesicles from primary Sjögren syndrom patients, compared to systemic lupus erythematosus patients and helathy donors

### Sample Protocol
Venous blood plasma was collected in citrate tubes and centrifuged twice at 2,500 g for 15 min. EVs were enriched using size exclusion chromatography (SEC) on sepharose columns and concentrated by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 g for 80 min. EVs were lysed in RIPA buffer (Thermo Scientific) before protein quantification by Bradford assay (Thermo Scientific), and protein concentrations were standardized across samples before storage at -80°c. Then, 5 µg of each sample was dried and solubilized in 10 µL 8M urea, 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol, pH 8 with vortexing at 37°C for 1 h. After cooling to room temperature, cysteines were alkylated by adding 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. After diluting to 1 M urea with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, samples were digested with 0.2µg trypsine/LysC (Promega) overnight, with vortexing at 37°. Samples were then loaded onto homemade C18 StageTips packed by stacking three AttractSPE Disk (#SPE-Disk-Bio-C18, Affinisep) for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid, vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in 10µl injection buffer (0.3% TFA) before nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data was searched against the Homo Sapiens (UP000005640) UniProt database using Sequest-HT through proteome discoverer (version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavages sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, Met-loss, Met-loss-Acetyl and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins were set as fixed modification. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.9.3 ( https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms; PMID: 1761030). FDR calculation used Percolator (PMID: 27572102) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label-free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs), reextracted across all conditions and computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.1 (PMID: 21751374). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) and missed cleavages were allowed. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate for total signal and global variance biases. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed, and p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) procedure

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles (ev), Biomarker, Systemic lupus erythematosus, Primary sjögren syndrom (pss)

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


