### Accession
PXD008908

### Title
Ablation of mitochondrial rhomboid Parl causes Leigh syndrome

### Description
The mitochondrial intramembrane rhomboid protease Parl plays essential roles in cell death but its physiological contribution remains unclear. In the present study we show that Parl ablation causes a dramatic necrotic neurodegeneration consistent with Leigh syndrome, a mitochondrial disease characterized by disrupted energy metabolism. Brain- but not liver or muscle- specific Parl deficient animals mimick Parl knock out animals. Deficiencies of the major substrates, Pink1, Pgam5, and of the complex III assembly factor Ttc19 are insufficient to modify or mimic the phenotype, suggesting that the mechanism involve a combination of Parl-/- induced effects. To investigate which mitochondrial protein changes could underlie the Parl-/- neurodegeneration we performed a quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteome analysis of brain mitochondria purified from three WT and three Parl-/- mice, leading to the quantification of 781 proteins annotated as mitochondrial resident in Swissprot. Statistical analysis revealed the accumulation or disappearance of Parl substrates, and following extensive validation, our data indicate that Pink1, Pgam5, Ttc19, Stard7, Diablo, and Clpb are genuine Parl substrates, and that Pink1, Pgam5, and Ttc19 are the most severely misprocessed substrates in brain. Together, alterations in the brain mitochondrial proteome of Parl-/- mice indicate defects in the ubiquinone pathway and complex III, which is confirmed by functional assays on neuronal mitochondria. Deficient processing of substrates by Parl leads to progressive loss of cristae structure, destabilization of electron transport, coenzyme Q deficiency, and mitochondrial calcium metabolism leading to Leigh syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria isolated from brain of WT and Parl-/- mice were lysed in urea buffer (8 M urea; 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0; and phosphatase inhibitors PhosStop from Roche. For each condition, triplicate samples were prepared. Samples were sonicated with a Branson 450 sonicator by 3 pulses of 10 s at an amplitude of 20% and centrifuged for 15 minutes at 16,000 g at room temperature to remove insoluble components. The protein concentration in the supernatants was measured using a BCA assay (Biorad) and 500 µg total protein was used for further analysis. Proteins were reduced by adding 4.5 mM DTT and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C. Alkylation was performed by addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature. The samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a urea concentration of 4 M and proteins were digested with 2 µg endoLysC (Wako) (1/250, w/w) for 4 hours at room temperature. All samples were further diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final urea concentration of 2 M and proteins were digested with 5 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 ˚C. Peptides were then purified on a SampliQ SPE C18 cartridge (Agilent) and from each replicate 100 µg vacuum dried peptides were used for strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation. To this end, SCX tips were made by stacking 3 discs (1.5 mm diameter) of polystyrene divinylbenzene copolymer with sulfonic acid (EmporeTM, 3M) in a 200 µl pipette tip. First, the SCX tips were rinsed with 100 µl acetonitrile (ACN) by pipetting the solvent in the tip, flicking the tip so the ACN touches the discs, and pushing the solvent through with a syringe. Then, each sample was dissolved in 100 µl loading buffer (1% TFA in water/ACN (95:5, v/v)) and peptides were loaded on the SCX tip. After washing the tip with 50 µl loading buffer, the peptides were fractionated by subsequently pipetting up and down 20 µl of the following fractionation buffers: 100 mM ammonium acetate, 0.5% FA (fraction 1); 175 mM ammonium acetate, 0.5% formic acid (FA) (fraction 2); 375 mM ammonium acetate, 0.5% FA (fraction 3). Remaining peptides were eluted in 2 x 20 µl of elution buffer (5% NH4OH in water/ACN (20:80, v/v)) (fraction 4). To prevent deamidation in this fraction, 2 µl 10% FA was added. Fractionated peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator. Dried peptides from each fraction were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) of which 10 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 140 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 15-minutes wash reaching 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C in a column oven (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 32% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states from fragmentation selection.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the mouse proteins in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of March 2016 containing 16,618 mouse protein sequences) with the mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained for identification, while a minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.2.6) after loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant. Proteins were only identified by site, reverse database hits, and potential contaminants were removed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit. In this way, a total of 2,154 proteins were quantified and listed in Table 1. Then, a t-test was performed (FDR=0.05 and S0=0.5) to reveal proteins that are significantly different between WT and Parl-/- samples.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial intramembrane rhomboid protease PARL has been implicated in diverse functions in vitro, but its physiological role in vivo remains unclear. Here we show that <i>Parl</i> ablation in mouse causes a necrotizing encephalomyelopathy similar to Leigh syndrome, a mitochondrial disease characterized by disrupted energy production. Mice with conditional PARL deficiency in the nervous system, but not in muscle, develop a similar phenotype as germline <i>Parl</i> KOs, demonstrating the vital role of PARL in neurological homeostasis. Genetic modification of two major PARL substrates, PINK1 and PGAM5, do not modify this severe neurological phenotype. <i>Parl</i><sup>-<i>/</i>-</sup> brain mitochondria are affected by progressive ultrastructural changes and by defects in Complex III (CIII) activity, coenzyme Q (CoQ) biosynthesis, and mitochondrial calcium metabolism. PARL is necessary for the stable expression of TTC19, which is required for CIII activity, and of COQ4, which is essential in CoQ biosynthesis. Thus, PARL plays a previously overlooked constitutive role in the maintenance of the respiratory chain in the nervous system, and its deficiency causes progressive mitochondrial dysfunction and structural abnormalities leading to neuronal necrosis and Leigh-like syndrome.

### Keywords
Leigh syndrome, Pink1, Pgam5, Rhomboids, Proteolysis, Neurodegeneration, Complex iii, Ttc19, Parl, Necrosis, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
Ghent University
VIB-KU Leuven Center for Brain & Disease Research, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

### Submitter
Impens Francis

### Lab Head
Dr Bart De Strooper
VIB-KU Leuven Center for Brain & Disease Research, 3000 Leuven, Belgium


