### Accession
PXD001824

### Title
Improved protease digestion conditions for membrane protein detection

### Description
This work presents improved protease digestion conditions for membrane protein detection. Two improved conditions, 0.01% SDS or the combination of 10% MeOH and 0.01% RapiGest, were chosen and applied to proteins from Escherichia coli. The application of both improved conditions to a membrane protein fraction of Escherichia coli resulted in the identification of 309 (SDS) and 329 (MeOH/RapiGest) unique proteins of which 140/309 and 148/329 were membrane proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Luria-Bertani (LB) broth (3 mL) was inoculated with E. coli W3110 cells; cultures were grown overnight with shaking at 37 oC. One mL of overnight culture was used to inoculate 50 mL fresh LB in an Erlenmeyer flask. After OD600 reached 0.6, the cells were harvested by centrifugation at 3000 g for 10 min at 4 oC. Cell pellets were washed 2 times with an ice-cold solution containing 10 mM Tris, 75 mM NaCl and 1 mM EDTA, then sonicated in the same buffer on ice for 5 min. The cell lysate was centrifuged at 2500 g for 5 min. The resultant supernatant was further centrifuged at 173000 g on an ultracentrifuge. The resultant pellet was used as membrane protein fraction. The E. coli membrane protein fractions were resuspended in 50 mM ABC buffer, with or without 0.01% SDS or 10% MeOH + 0.01% RapiGest. Protein suspensions were agitated at 37 oC for 30 min, sonicated for 5 min on ice, and assayed for protein concentration with a Bradford assay. Samples with 50 g E. coli membrane protein fractions were digested with trypsin or chymotrypsin at 37 oC for 16 hours at enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:20. The digest was then acidified with 10% formic acid (Acros Organics, Fair Lawn, NJ), and incubated at room temperature for 2 hours followed by centrifugation at 16000 g for 5 min.  Digests of E. coli membrane protein fractions were fractionated on an Agilent 1100 HPLC equipped with a RP-LC-S reverse phase column (3 m, 100 Å, 150 mm x 2.1 mm, Varian Inc., Palo Alto, CA). Gradient elution was performed with the mobile phase C (50 mM NH4OH in 2% ACN) and mobile phase D (50 mM NH4OH in 80% ACN). A program of 4% D for 10 min, 4% to 10% D in 2 min, 10% to 50% D in 28 min, 50% to 96% D in 10 min, and 96% D for 10 min was used to elute the peptides. The elution was monitored with UV absorbance. Fifteen fractions were collected and subsequently dried by vacuum concentration. Each fraction was reconstituted in 32 L of 2% ACN in 0.1% formic acid and 15 L was analyzed on a QTrap 4000 (AB Sciex) equipped with an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Samples were injected onto a C18 precolumn (PepMap100, 300 M I.D. x 5 mm, 5 M, 100 Å, Dionex). Peptides were washed with mobile phase E (0.1% formic acid in 2% ACN) for 5 min, then eluted to a C18 column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 m I.D. x 150 mm, 3 m, 100 Å, Dionex) through a program of 2% mobile phase F (0.1% formic acid in 98% ACN) for 5 min, 2% to 10% F in 10 min, 10% to 50% F in 65 min, 50% to 90% F in 10 min, 90% F for 10 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The eluted peptides were ionized with a Nanospray II source (AB Sciex) and data were acquired at 2500 V, 150 oC with 450-1800 m/z MS survey scans set to trigger enhanced resolution scans and up to 6 enhanced product ion scans with dynamic exclusion and scan range of 100-1800 m/z in positive ion mode.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data of E. coli membrane protein fractions were searched against a local copy of an E. coli database, downloaded from NCBI, with Mascot through ProteinPilot software (v3, AB Sciex).

### Publication Abstract
This work presents improved protease digestion conditions for membrane protein detection. The enzymatic digest of bacteriorhodopsin (BR), a model membrane protein with seven transmembrane domains (TMDs) was investigated. An initial in-gel digestion identified 17% BR sequence coverage, including part of the seventh TMD. To improve sequence coverage, BR digest was tested with different concentrations of RapiGest, methanol (MeOH) and SDS using either trypsin or chymotrypsin. Two improved conditions, 0.01% SDS or the combination of 10% MeOH and 0.01% RapiGest, were chosen. Trypsin digestions in both conditions achieved more than 40% BR sequence coverage compared to 0% using standard digestion conditions. Peptides detected from trypsin and chymotrypsin digestions in the same condition were combined to maximize sequence coverage. The same conditions were applied to a different membrane protein with one TMD, Selenoprotein S, and proteins from Escherichia coli. For Selenoprotein S, a higher sequence coverage, including a peptide from the TMD, was detected from the improved condition compared to the typical condition. The application of both improved conditions to a membrane protein fraction of Escherichia coli resulted in the identification of 309 (SDS) and 329 (MeOH/RapiGest) unique proteins of which 140/309 and 148/329 were membrane proteins.

### Keywords
Membrane protein, Proteomics, E. coli

### Affiliations
Delaware Biotechnology Institute, Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Delaware
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Delaware Biotechnology Institute, University of Delaware 

### Submitter
Lie Min

### Lab Head
Dr Kelvin H. Lee
Delaware Biotechnology Institute, Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Delaware


