### Accession
PXD033944

### Title
Quinone reductase 2-dependent HCT116 proteome

### Description
NQO2/QR2 is related to NQO1, a known quionine reductase that functions in detoxicification for cells. NQO2, however, uses a distinct co-substate with uncertain availability in cells and as a result the functions of NQO2 are poorly understood. Here, to gain insight into potential pathways regulated by NQO2, we performed label-free proteomics on isogenic control and NQO2 knockout HCT116 colon cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare for mass spectrometry the parental C1 (HCT116NQO2+), C3, and C5 (both HCT1161ΔNQO2) were seeded in 10 cm plates (n=5). Cells were cultured until reaching about 80% confluency, at which point cells were collected, washed twice with PBS, lifted from plates with trypsin-EDTA (0.25%), and centrifuged at 1,000g; cell pellets were frozen at -80 °C. Frozen cell pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 10 mM DTT, 2% SDS and sonicated with a probe sonicator. Twenty-five μg of protein lysate, as quantified by PierceTM 660 nm Protein Assay (ThermoFisher Scientific), was reduced in 10 mM DTT for 25 minutes and  alkylated in 100 mM iodoacetamide for 25 minutes in the dark, followed by methanol precipitation. The protein pellet was resuspended in 200 μL of ABC and subjected to a sequential digest first with 250 ng of LysC (Wako Chemicals, USA) for 4 hours, then 500 ng of Trypsin/LysC (Promega) for 16 hours, followed by 500 ng of Trypsin (Promega) for an additional 4 hours. Digestions were incubated at 37 °C with interval mixing at 600 rpm (30 seconds mix, 2 minutes pause) on a Thermomixer C (Eppendorf, catalogue #2231000667). After the last digestion, samples were acidified with 10% formic acid to pH 3 to 4 and centrifuged at 14,000g to pellet insoluble material.  Approximately 1 μg of peptide sample was injected onto a Waters M-Class nanoAcquity HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) operating in positive mode. Buffer A consisted of mass spectrometry grade water with 0.1% formic acid and buffer B consisted of acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (ThermoFisher Scientific). All samples were trapped for 5 min at a flow rate of 5 mL/min using 99% buffer A and 1% buffer B on a Symmetry BEH C18 Trapping Column (5 mm, 180 mm x 20 mm, Waters). Peptides were separated using a Peptide BEH C18 Column (130 A ̊, 1.7 mm, 75 mm x 250 mm) operating at a flow rate of 300 nL/min at 35°C (Waters). Samples were separated using a non-linear gradient consisting of 1%–7% buffer B over 1 min, 7%–23% buffer B over 179 min and 23%– 35% buffer B over 60 min, before increasing to 98% buffer B and washing.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw data files were searched in MaxQuant version 1.5.8.3 using the Human Uniprot database (reviewed only; updated May 2017 with 42,183 entries) (references required). Missed cleavages were set to 2, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and Oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation (protein) and deamidation (NQ) were set as a variable modifications (max. number of modifications per peptide = 5), peptide length ≥ 6. Protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was left to 0.01 (1%) and decoy database was set to revert. Match between runs was enabled and all other parameters left at default.

### Publication Abstract
Biological aging can be described as accumulative, prolonged metabolic stress and is the major risk factor for cognitive decline and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recently, we identified and described a quinone reductase 2 (QR2) pathway in the brain, in which QR2 acts as a removable memory constraint and metabolic buffer within neurons. QR2 becomes overexpressed with age, and it is possibly a novel contributing factor to age-related metabolic stress and cognitive deficit. We found that, in human cells, genetic removal of QR2 produced a shift in the proteome opposing that found in AD brains while simultaneously reducing oxidative stress. We therefore created highly specific QR2 inhibitors (QR2is) to enable evaluation of chronic QR2 inhibition as a means to reduce biological age-related metabolic stress and cognitive decline. QR2is replicated results obtained by genetic removal of QR2, while local QR2i microinjection improved hippocampal and cortical-dependent learning in rats and mice. Continuous consumption of QR2is in drinking water improved cognition and reduced pathology in the brains of AD-model mice (5xFAD), with a noticeable between-sex effect on treatment duration. These results demonstrate the importance of QR2 activity and pathway function in the healthy and neurodegenerative brain and what we believe to be the great therapeutic potential of QR2is as first-in-class drugs.

### Keywords
Nq02, Qr2, Hct116

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemisty, The University of Western Ontario, London,Canada
University of Western Ontario

### Submitter
Matthew Maitland

### Lab Head
Dr Brian Shilton
Department of Biochemisty, The University of Western Ontario, London,Canada


