### Accession
PXD032815

### Title
Using proteomics based on mass spectrometry, to elucidate the mechanism by which aminopeptidase N levels in circulating plasma exosomes regulate lung epithelial cell necrosis in patients with septic induced acute lung injury and mice

### Description
Plasma samples from healthy people and patients with sepsis were used to analyze the mechanism of the occurrence and development of sepsis from the protein level with the help of LC-MS/MS proteomics methods

### Sample Protocol
Firstly, the cellular debris of serum sample was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Then, the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. The top 12 high abundance proteins were removed by Pierce Top 12 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns Kit (Thermo Fisher). Finally, the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.Then the protein were trypsin digested, and peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile.The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human；plasma；lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Guangdong
Shenzhen Hospital of Southern Medical University

### Submitter
ye yinfeng

### Lab Head
Dr Ting Gong
Shenzhen Hospital of Southern Medical University


