### Accession
PXD014928

### Title
Proteome-wide identification of in vitro substrates for P. aeruginosa ClpXP

### Description
we treated the cell lysates of ΔclpX mutant with or without P. aeruginosa ClpXP protease and used Label-free quantitative techniques (LFQ) to identify and quantify the proteolytic targets of ClpXP (p.aeruginosa PAO1). As a result, 3338 proteins were identified and 2493 proteins were quantified. The abundance (LFQ intensity) of 44 proteins were decreased (≥1.5-fold, p < 0.05) by the treatment with ClpXP. Moreover, we observed that there are 31 proteins which have valid LFQ intensity values in all the three biological replicates of the control group but not in the experimental group (i.e., ClpXP-treated). These results suggest that exogenously added ClpXP has a profound effect on the abundance of proteins in our in vitro assays and that those 75 proteins may serve as potential substrates for the P. aeruginosa ClpXP.

### Sample Protocol
To obtain the samples, overnight LB cultures of ΔclpX were diluted 100-fold (OD600 ≈ 0.05) with fresh LB broth, and then the diluted cultures were grown in a 250 ml Erlenmeyer flask with a flask volume-to-medium volume ratio of 5:1, shaking with 250 rpm. After incubated at 37 °C for 4 h, the cells were harvested, washed twice and resuspended in 1 ml of 50 mM HEPES-KOH (PH 7.6). The suspensions were homogenized by mechanical disruption (Fast Prep FP2400 instrument; Qbiogene) and the debris was removed by centrifuging. The supernatant was filtrated through 0.22 μm filters. The ClpXP-treated group was set as following: 40-μl of the cell lysates were mixed with 5 µM ClpX-His6 and 3 µM ClpP-His6 in an 80-μl of reaction buffer containing 50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.6), 50 mM KCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 5 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol, 40 mM creatine phosphate (Sigma, #27920), 80 µg/ml creatine phosphokinase (Sigma, #C3755), and 8 mM ATP. The reaction mixtures without adding ClpX-His6 and ClpP-His6 were set as the control group. All the reaction mixtures were incubated at 37°C for 1.5 h and stopped by adding 40 μl of 4 x SDS-PAGE loading buffer. Each group was set in triplicate biological replicates. Protein samples were precipitated with cold 15% trichloroacetic (TCA, Sigma) for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was re-dissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4HCO3, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo, #23227) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For trypsin digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, sigma) for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin (Promega) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. The sample was further fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile (ACN, Fisher Chemical) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions, then, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA, Fluka), directly loaded and separated with a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo)., The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kv. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against target database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. First search range was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions, Main search range set to 5 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. Label-free quantification method was LFQ, FDR was adjusted to < 1% and min. Score for modified peptides score was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Intracellular protein degradation is essential for the survival of all organisms, but its role in interspecies interaction is unknown. Here, we show that the ClpXP protease of Pseudomonas aeruginosa suppresses its antimicrobial activity against Staphylococcus aureus, a common pathogen co-isolated with P. aeruginosa from polymicrobial human infections. Using proteomic, biochemical, and molecular genetic approaches, we found that this effect is due to the inhibitory effects of ClpXP on the quorum sensing (QS) of P. aeruginosa, mainly by degrading proteins (e.g., PhnA, PhnB, PqsR, and RhlI) which are critical for the production of QS signal molecules PQS and C4-HSL. We provide evidence that co-culturing with S. aureus induces a decrease in the activity of ClpXP in P. aeruginosa, an effect which was also achieved by the treatment of P. aeruginosa with N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), a widespread chemical present on the surface of diverse cell types from bacteria to humans. These findings extend the range of biological events governed by proteolytic machinery to microbial community structure, thus also suggesting that a chemical-induced alteration of protein homeostasis is a mechanism for interspecies interactions.

### Keywords
Proteolytic targets, Label-free quantification lc-ms/ms, P.aeruginosa pao1, Clpxp

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Nana Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Lefu Lan
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences


