### Accession
PXD035576

### Title
Systematic mutagenesis identifies p52/Tfb2 residues required for XPB/Ssl2 function within TFIIH and genetic interactions with TFB6

### Description
TFIIH is an evolutionarily conserved complex that plays central roles in both RNA polymerase II (pol II) transcription and DNA repair. As an integral component of the pol II Pre-Initiation Complex (PIC), TFIIH regulates the activity of the pol II enzyme in numerous ways. The TFIIH subunit XPB/Ssl2 is an ATP-dependent DNA translocase that stimulates promoter opening prior to transcription initiation. Crosslinking-mass spectrometry and cryo-EM results have shown a conserved interaction network involving XPB/Ssl2 and the C-terminal Hub region of the TFIIH p52/Tfb2 subunit. Here, we systematically mutagenized the HubA region of Tfb2 and screened for growth phenotypes in a TFB6 deletion background in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We identified six lethal and twelve conditional mutants. Slow growth phenotypes of all but three conditional mutants were relieved in the presence of TFB6, thus identifying a functional interaction between Tfb2 HubA mutants and Tfb6, a protein that dissociates Ssl2 from TFIIH. Biochemical analysis of Tfb2 mutants with severe growth phenotypes revealed defects in Ssl2 association, with similar results in human cells. Further characterization of these tfb2 mutant cells revealed defects in GAL gene induction, and reduced occupancy of TFIIH and pol II at GAL gene promoters, suggesting that functionally competent TFIIH is required for proper pol II recruitment to PICs in vivo. Consistent with recent structural models of TFIIH, our results identify key residues in the p52/Tfb2 HubA domain that are required for stable incorporation of XPB/Ssl2 into TFIIH, and for pol II transcription.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS analysis of Rad3-pA Ips Culturing and lysis: Each yeast strain was cultured to optical density at 600nm (OD600) of 0.8-1 in CSM Leu- at 30C. Next, cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed with 1 ml of cold Extraction Buffer (EB, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.6 at 4°C), 250 mM potassium acetate (KOAc), 1 mM magnesium acetate (MgOAc), 1 mM EDTA, 20% glycerol, and 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) with protease inhibitors) before being frozen in a dry ice bath and stored at -80°C. Cells were resuspended in ~1.5 ml cold EB and beaten with ~0.7 ml glass beads in a Fisher Vortex Genie2. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000×g at 4°C for 20 min. Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Assay. Immunoprecipitation: 2.5 mg IgG-conjugated Tosyl-Dynabeads (ThermoFisher) were incubated with the 25 mg WCE prepared from strains expressing pA-tagged Rad3 and FLAG tagged Tfb2 derivatives at 4°C overnight. Beads were washed twice with 1 ml of EB, followed by three washes with 1 ml of EB-N2 (EB containing 0.05% Nonidet P-40, 150mM KCl, and no protease inhibitors). Proteins were eluted proteins by incubating beads in 33 μl of EB-N2 containing 45 ng/ul TEV (UbpBio) for 2.5 hrs with shaking at 23°C, followed by a second incubation in 33 μl of EB-N2+TEV for 2 hrs, and final wash of 33 ul of EB-N2+TEV.  Mass Spectrometry: 75% of the eluates were prepared for MS analysis using S-Traps (Protifi, Micro column) following the manufacturers protocol. Samples were digested with 1 ug trypsin (Pierce) for 1 hr at 47ºC. After drying the samples in a speedvac, they were resuspended in 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic, acid and injected onto a reversed-phase C18 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm X 200 mm trap column and 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm X 15 cm analytical column in series using an Easy nLC1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/minute using a gradient from 3-30% acetonitrile over 45 min, and 30-45% acetonitrile over 15 min into an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS1 were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 from 375-1500 m/z with an AGC target of 1E6 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Duty cycle was set to 3 seconds with the most intense precursor ions selected for MS2 analysis in the ion-trap with an AGC target of 1E4, max injection time of 50 ms, 30% normalized collision energy, and scan rate set to rapid. Precursor peptide ion isolation width for MS2 fragment scans was 1.6 Da, with dynamic exclusion enabled after two MS2 scans for 90 seconds with a mass tolerance of +/–10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Search and analysis: Rawfiles were searched against the a custom Uniprot database (2022) containing the S. cerevisiae proteome, TEV, Rabbit-IgG, and Trypsin using Maxquant version 2.0.3.0. with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were searched as variable modifications. All peptides and proteins were thresholded at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and iBAQ values reported. For visualization, the Log2 of the iBAQ values was displayed after normalizing to p52 abundance to account for sample concentration variability. Statistical analysis of the IP-MS was performed with a multiple t-tests Holm-Sidak method using a custom R script.

### Publication Abstract
TFIIH is an evolutionarily conserved complex that plays central roles in both RNA polymerase II (pol II) transcription and DNA repair. As an integral component of the pol II preinitiation complex, TFIIH regulates pol II enzyme activity in&#xa0;numerous ways. The TFIIH subunit XPB/Ssl2 is an ATP-dependent DNA translocase that stimulates promoter opening prior to transcription initiation. Crosslinking-mass spectrometry and cryo-EM results have shown a conserved interaction network involving XPB/Ssl2 and the C-terminal Hub region of the TFIIH p52/Tfb2 subunit, but the functional significance of specific residues is unclear. Here, we systematically mutagenized the HubA region of Tfb2 and screened for growth phenotypes in a TFB6 deletion background in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We identified six lethal and 12 conditional mutants. Slow growth phenotypes of all but three conditional mutants were relieved in the presence of TFB6, thus identifying a functional interaction between Tfb2 HubA mutants and Tfb6, a protein that dissociates Ssl2 from TFIIH. Our biochemical analysis of Tfb2 mutants with severe growth phenotypes revealed defects in Ssl2 association, with similar results in human cells. Further characterization of these tfb2 mutant cells revealed defects in GAL gene induction, and reduced occupancy of TFIIH and pol II at GAL gene promoters, suggesting that functionally competent TFIIH is required for proper pol II recruitment to preinitiation complexes in&#xa0;vivo. Consistent with recent structural models of TFIIH, our results identify key residues in the p52/Tfb2 HubA domain that are required for stable incorporation of XPB/Ssl2 into TFIIH and for pol II transcription.

### Keywords
Function, Tfb6, General transcription factor tfiih, P52/tfb2, Xpb/ssl2, Mutagenesis, Transcription start site, Structure, Rna polymerase ii transcription, Gtf2h4, Integrity

### Affiliations
Ranish Lab, Institute for Systems Biology, USA
Institute for Systems Biology

### Submitter
Jacob Bassett

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey Alan Ranish
Ranish Lab, Institute for Systems Biology, USA


