### Accession
PXD023727

### Title
Cell surface processing of CD109 by meprin β leads to the release of soluble fragments and reduced expression on extracellular vesicles

### Description
Cluster of differentiation 109 (CD109) is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchored protein expressed on primitive hematopoietic stem cells, activated platelets, CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and keratinocytes. In recent years CD109 was also associated with different tumor entities and identified as a possible future diagnostic marker linked to reduced patient survival. Also, different cell signaling pathways were proposed as targets for CD109 interference including the TGFβ, JAK-STAT3, YAP/TAZ and EGFR/AKT/mTOR pathways. Here, we identify the metalloproteinase meprin β to cleave CD109 at the cell surface and thereby induce the release of cleavage fragments of different size. Major cleavage was identified within the bait region of CD109 residing in the middle of the protein. To identify the structural localization of the bait region, homology modeling and single particle analysis were applied, resulting in a molecular model of membrane associated CD109, which allows for the localization of the newly identified cleavage sites for meprin β and the previously published cleavage sites for the metalloproteinase bone morphogenetic protein 1 (BMP-1). Full-length CD109 localized on extracellular vesicles (EVs) was also identified as a release mechanism and we can show that proteolytic cleavage of CD109 at the cell surface reduces the amount of CD109 sorted to EVs. In summary, we identified meprin β as the first membrane bound protease to cleave CD109 within the bait region, provide a first structural model for CD109 and show that cell surface proteolysis correlates negatively with CD109 released on EVs.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative Proteomics of cell membranes and extracellular vesicles The provided proteins were fixated in gel for 15 min in a solution of 7% acetic acid and 40% methanol and subsequently stained for 15 min with a solution of 0.25% Coomassie Blue G-250 (Biozym), 7% acetic acid and 45% ethanol. The gel was processed using standard techniques. The dried samples were rehydrated and disulfide bonds were reduced using reduction buffer (10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.0) for 1 h at 56°C. Buffer was removed by pipetting and cysteine residues of proteins were subsequently alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) dissolved in 50mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.0 for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were dehydrated again by adding pure acetonitrile, and dried with vacuum evaporation. The vacuum dried gel slices were incubated with 1 µg trypsin per tube in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer pH 8.0 at 37°C overnight. Digested peptides were extracted by adding twice 150 µl with 30% acetonitrile and once 150 µl pure acetonitrile for 15 min at 25°C agitating at 1400 rpm in a thermo shaker (Eppendorf). As next step, we performed reductive dimethylation as described previously for each sample pair including a replicate with switched dimethyl labels. Equal amounts of peptides from all labelled samples were mixed. Purification and desalting was done using C18 material (M3 company) stage tips as previously described. The eluted peptides were loaded on a column of 75 µm inner diameter (New Objective, FS360-75-8-N-5-C30) packed to 25cm length with 1.9µm Reprosil beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) using the EasyLC1000 (Thermo) Peptides were separated on an EasyLC1000 HPLC (Thermo) and directly sprayed into a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operating in positive scan mode with a full scan resolution of 70,000; AGC target 3x106; max. IT = 20ms; Scan range 300 - 1650 m/z with a top10 MS/MS DDA method. Normalized collision energy was set to 25 and MS/MS scan mode operated at a resolution of 17,000; AGC target 1x105 and max IT of 120 ms. Database search was performed using MaxQuant [55] Version 1.5.2.8 with the Homo sapiens Uniprot database. Trypsin/P was set as digestion mode allowing for 2 missed cleavages. Further settings were, variable modification: Acetyl (Protein N-term); Oxidation (M), fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), FDR of 1% on peptide and protein level was applied.  For quantification light label and heavy label were assigned on either lysine residues or N-terminal amino group with a maximum allowance for 3 labeled amino acids per peptide. Proteins with at least two peptides, one of them unique were considered as identified. Proteins matching the reverse database or a common contamination list, as well as proteins containing only peptides with a modification were removed. The quantification ratios from MaxQuant of the dimethyl labels were log2 transformed. Identification of meprin β cleavage sites - in-gel N-terminomics The gel bands were washed and destained, reduced and destained according to standard techniques but in the presence of 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) rather than ABC.  Protein N-terminus and lysine residues were reductively dimethylated using 40 mM formaldehyde (CH2O) and 20 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (NaBH3CN) for 3h at 25 °C for 3 h in HEPES buffer (pH 7.5). Excessive reagents were quenched with washing steps: once with 50 mM ABC and two times with 30% ACN/50mM ABC. Gel bands were dehydrated with ACN and vacuum centrifugation. Chymotrypsin (50 ng) was added and the samples were digested over night at 37 °C in the presence of ABC.  Peptides were extracted from the gel band using 1% formic acid (FA), 50% acetonitrile (ACN), 1% FA and 100% ACN with the aid of sonication. Pooled supernatants were dried down by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 °C and resuspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior to analysis. Quantitative reductive dimethylation of meprin β cleaved CD109 Briefly, 1.5 µg of CD109 transfected with active (mep) and inactive meprin β (E153A) were made up to 30 µl in a denaturing buffer 100 mM TEAB, 1% SDS and inactivated by the addition of Tris(carboxyehtyl)phosphine (TCEP, 5 mM) at 95 °C for 10 min. Samples were reduced for another 30 min and then alkylated with IAA (12.5 mM) for 30 min at room temperature (RT) and then quenched with DTT. Samples were precipitated onto a mixture of SpeedBeads, Magnetic Carboxylate particles (GE healthcare), and then labelled with light (CH2O, meprin β) and heavy (CD2O, meprin β E153A) formaldehyde in the presence of NaCNBH3, as described previously. After labeling samples were quenched, precipitated on fresh beads and then digested with 100 ng of trypsin overnight at 37 °C in 100 mM TEAB buffer. Samples were combined at this stage and dried down and resuspended prior to analysis, as described above.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA, version 2.2.0.388) and MS/MS spectra were searched using the Sequest HT algorithm against common contaminants and the canonical and reviewed human database.  A MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm and a MS2 tolerance of 0.02 Da was implemented. Carbamidomethylation (57.02146 Da) on cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification while oxidation of methionine (15.995 Da) residues was set as a variable modification for all searches. For in gel N-terminomics, samples were searched with semi-chymotrypsin specificity with dimethylation on lysine residues (28.031 Da) set as a static modification, while dimethylation on N-termini was set as dynamic. For quantitative reductive dimethylation, two sequest nodes were used to search the data: one node with “light” dimethylation (+28.031 Da) set as dynamic modification on peptide N-termini, and as a fixed modification on lysine residues, while the other implemented “heavy” dimethylation (+32.056 Da) on the aforementioned lysine residues and peptide N-termini. High-confidence peptides were set to a 1% FDR, while medium-confidence peptides were allowed a 5% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cd109; macroglobulin; meprin β; exosomes; extracellular vesicles; tem; tep1r

### Affiliations
Institute for Experimental Medicine
Institute of Functional and Clinical Anatomy, FAU Erlangen,91054 Erlangen, Germany

### Submitter
Tomas Koudelka

### Lab Head
Dr Pd. Philipp Arnold
Institute of Functional and Clinical Anatomy, FAU Erlangen,91054 Erlangen, Germany


