### Accession
PXD024830

### Title
Proteogenomic Landscape of Uterine Leiomyomas from Hereditary Leiomyomatosis and Renal Cell Cancer Patients

### Description
Pathogenic mutations in fumarate hydratase (FH) drive hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) and increase the risk of developing uterine leiomyomas (ULMs). An integrated proteogenomic analysis of ULMs from HLRCC (n=16; FH-mutation confirmed) and non-syndromic (NS) patients (n=12) identified a significantly higher protein:transcript correlation in HLRCC (R=0.35) vs. NS ULMs (R=0.242, MWU p=0.0015). Co-altered proteins and transcripts (228) included antioxidant response element (ARE) target genes, such as thioredoxin reductase 1 (TXNRD1), and correlated with activation of NRF2-mediated oxidative stress response signaling in HLRCC ULMs. We confirm 185 transcripts previously described as altered between HLRCC and NS ULMs, 51 co-altered at the protein level and several elevated in HLRCC ULMs are involved in regulating cellular metabolism and glycolysis signaling. Furthermore, 367 S-(2-succino)cysteine peptides were identified in HLRCC ULMs, of which sixty were significantly elevated in HLRCC vs. NS ULMs (LogFC=1.86, MWU p<0.0001). These results confirm and define novel proteogenomic alterations in uterine leiomyoma tissues collected from HLRCC patients and underscore conserved molecular alterations correlating with inactivation of the FH tumor suppressor gene.

### Sample Protocol
Flash-frozen uterine leiomyomas were cryopulverized for proteomic sample preparation, resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and sonicated. Protein was quantified by a bicinchoninic acid (BCA, Thermo Scientific) assay and 50 µg of total protein in 100 mM TEAB was transferred to MicroTubes (Pressure Biosciences, Inc) and incubated at 99 ºC for 1 h. One microgram of SMART Digest Trypsin (Thermo Scientific) was added to each sample and MicroTubes were capped with MicroPestles. Pressure-assisted lysis and digestion was performed in a barocycler (2320 EXT, Pressure BioSciences, Inc) by sequentially cycling between 45 kpsi (50 s) and atmospheric pressure (10 s) for 120 cycles at 50 ºC. The peptide digests were transferred to 0.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes, vacuum-dried, resuspended in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0 and the peptide concentration of each digest was determined by a BCA assay. Fifteen micrograms of peptide from each sample, along with a reference sample assembled by pooling equivalent amounts of peptide digests from individual patient samples, were aliquoted into a final volume of 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB and labeled with tandem-mass tag (TMT) isobaric labels (TMT10 Isobaric Label Reagent Set, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Each TMT sample multiplex was pooled and fractionated by basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC, 1260 Infinity II liquid chromatographer, Agilent) into 96 fractions through development of a linear gradient of acetonitrile (0.69%/min). Concatenated fractions (12 total per TMT multiplex) were generated for global LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identifications and quantitation for TMT multiplexes were performed as recently described (doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.03.066). Briefly, .RAW data files were searched with a publicly-available, nonredundant human proteome database (Uniprot, 07/12/2016) using Mascot (v2.6.0, Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer (v2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da, a maximum of two tryptic miscleavages, dynamic modifications for oxidation (15.9949 Da) on methionine residues, 2-succinyl (2SC) (116.0109 Da) on cysteine residues for 2SC-specific searches and TMT reporter ion tags (229.1629 Da) on peptide N-termini and lysine residues.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Proteogenomics, Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer, Hlrcc, Uterine leiomyoma, Fibroid, Tmt-10

### Affiliations
Director of Women’s Health Research Women’s Service Line Inova Health System  Chief Scientific Officer Gynecologic Cancer Center of Excellence John P. Murtha Cancer Center Research Program Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
Women's Health Integrated Research Center

### Submitter
Brian Hood

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas P Conrads, PhD
Director of Women’s Health Research Women’s Service Line Inova Health System  Chief Scientific Officer Gynecologic Cancer Center of Excellence John P. Murtha Cancer Center Research Program Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences


