### Accession
PXD023291

### Title
SWATH-MS and MRM: Quantification of Ras-related proteins in HIV-1 Infected and Methamphetamine-Exposed Human Monocyte-Derived Macrophages (hMDM)

### Description
Macrophages are involved in the immunological response to inflammatory and infectious agents, including Human Immunodeficiency Virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection. They are a primary targets of the virus and facilitate transfer across the blood brain barrier into the central nervous system. In the presence of toxic substances, such as methamphetamine (Meth), the protective functions of macrophages are further impaired. It has been shown that both HIV-1 infection and Meth induce changes in the proteome of macrophages. Therefore, in the presented study we employed a nano-liquid chromatography (nanoLC)-SWATH mass spectrometry (MS) approach to detect and quantify changes on proteome level that are induced in human monocyte derived macrophages (hMDM) that were exposed to Meth before or after HIV infection. As we focused in this study on actin and a cluster of Ras-related proteins (Rab), we selected the following proteins:  actin (UniProt P60709), Ras-related protein Rab-1A (UniProt P62820), Ras-related protein Rab-2A (UniProt P61019), Ras-related protein Rab-4B (UniProt P61018), Ras-related protein Rab-7A (UniProt P51149), Ras-related protein Rab-9A (UniProt P51151), Ras-related protein Rab-11 (UniProt P62491), Ras-related protein Rab-14 (UniProt P61106), Ras-related  protein Rab-22A (UniProt Q9UL26), Ras-related protein Rab-24 (UniProt Q969Q5), Ras-related protein Rab-37 (UniProt Q96AX2) for further validation, which we performed using liquid chromatography-multiple reaction monitoring (LC-MRM) MS technique. The MRM data from this study, along with LC-MRM analysis and data processing parameters, were separately described and deposited in PASSEL repository with accession number PASS01591.

### Sample Protocol
hMDMs from four healthy donors were HIV-1 infected and Meth (100 µM) treated in the following scheme: a condition of HIV-1 infection only (CIC), a condition of Meth-treatment post-HIV-1 infection (CIM) and a condition in which the macrophages were Meth-treated before and after HIV-1 infection (MIM). The cells were harvested and lysed using 0.3% (w/v) NP-40/0.1M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, with protease inhibitor. Proteins were reduced (DTT 25 mM, final concentration) and heated (95 °C, 5 min).  Cooled samples were digested using the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol. Resulting peptides were cleaned using Waters Oasis mixed cation exchange cartridges according to the manufacturer’s protocol. They were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid in water. Then, the samples from all four donors from CIC, CIM or MIM conditions were pooled together and spiked with iRT Kit peptides (Biognosys). Aliquots of all CIC, CIM and MIM samples were also pooled together forming a sample used for spectral ion library creation. Both, data-dependent analyses necessary for spectral library creation, as well as quantitative SWATH analyses were performed on Eksigent 415 nanoLC (Eksigent) coupled with TripleTOF 6600 (SCIEX) mass spectrometer nanoLC-MS/MS system equipped with ESI OptiFlow TurboV Ion Source and SteadySpray NanoProbe (SCIEX), and controlled by Analyst TF 1.7 software (SCIEX). The nanoLC-MS/MS was calibrated using PepCalMix (SCIEX). The samples (2 µg) were loaded for 10 min at flow rate of 2 µL/min onto the RP-1 (General RP, 10 x 0.075 mm) Trap Column (Phenomenex) and then, through SecurityLINK Sgl (25µm x 75 cm, Phenomenex) onto the bioZen Peptide Polar-C18 column (150 x 0.075 mm, 3 μm; Phenomenex). They were there separated using the mobile phases A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in ACN (Honeywell Inc.) and the following gradient program: (a) 3-8% B (0-2 min), 8-30% B (2-90 min), 30-40% B (90-100 min), 40-80% B (100-105 min), 80% B (105-110 min), 80-3% B (112-135 min), at the flow rate of 300nL/min. The ESI source parameters in positive mode were as follows: 3 kV ion spray voltage, 25 psi curtain gas, 12 psi  ion source gas 1, 0 psi ion source gas 2, 150 ºC temperature, 75 de-clustering potential. Acquisition parameters for DDA mode were: (1) a TOF-MS scan acquired in 400-1250 m/z range in 250 ms accumulation time; (2) up to 30 product ion scans, where +2 to +5-charged precursors, were selected for fragmentation in the 100-1500 m/z range, using 50 ms accumulation time, rolling collision energy and high sensitivity mode of acquisition, with 15 s exclusion from reselection (1.8 s cycle time). Acquisition parameter for SWATH mode were: (1) a TOF-MS scan acquired in 400-1250 m/z range in 250 ms accumulation time; (2) product ion scans acquired in a looped mode in 100 variable windows, in 100-1500 m/z range, with collision energy calculated for +2- to +5-charged ions centered for each window, collision energy spread of 5 and accumulation time of 30 ms (3.3 s cycle time).

### Data Protocol
The acquired in DDA analysis MS/MS spectra for four technical replicates of CIC-CIM-MIM pooled sample were searched together using Paragon algorithm in ProteinPilot 5.0.1 software (SCIEX) against a Human and HIV reviewed database from UniProt (downloaded on 09.04.2020.). The applied database search parameters were: sample type – identification, cysteine modification – iodoacetamide, enzyme – trypsin, instrument – TripleTOF 6600, ID focus – biological modifications, search effort – thorough, and automatic FDR analysis. The resulting .group file was used as a spectral ion library for SWATH data extraction, which were acquired in five technical replicates for each CIC, CIM and MIM sample. SWATH 2.0 MicroApp in PeakView 2.2 software (SCIEX) was used for SWATH data extraction with the following parameters: up to 30 peptides per protein and 6 transitions per peptide; peptide confidence threshold 99%, false discover rate threshold (FDR) 1%, peptides shared between proteins excluded, XIC extraction window 10 min, XIC width 75 ppm, retention timer recalibrated using iRT Kit peptides. After exporting of the processed peak to MarkerView 1.2.1 software (SCIEX), they were normalized using Total Area Sum approach and a t-Test was performed to compare CIC vs. CIM, CIC vs MIM and CIM vs MIM conditions. The fold changes were also calculated and Log transformed. The differences were considered as statistically significant when the p value was <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are key elements of the innate immune system. Their HIV-1 infection is a complex process that involves multiple interacting factors and various steps and is further altered by exposure of infected cells to methamphetamine (Meth), a common drug of abuse in people living with HIV. This is reflected by dynamic changes in the intracellular and secreted proteomes of these cells. Quantification of these changes poses a challenge for experimental design and associated analytics. In this study, we measured the effect of Meth on expression of intracellular and secreted galectins-1, -3, and -9 in HIV-1 infected human monocyte-derived macrophages (hMDM) using SWATH-MS, which was further followed by MRM targeted mass spectrometry validation. Cells were exposed to Meth either prior to or after infection. Our results are the first to perform comprehensive quantifications of galectins in primary hMDM cells during HIV-1 infection and Meth exposure a building foundation for future studies on the molecular mechanisms underlying cellular pathology of hMDM resulting from viral infection and a drug of abuse-Meth.

### Keywords
Hiv, Actin, Methamphetamine, Swath, Macrophages, Ras-related proteis (rab)

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 985800 University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5800, USA

### Submitter
Katarzyna Macur

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Pawel Ciborowski
Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 985800 University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5800, USA


