### Accession
PXD015679

### Title
membrane substrates of gingipains

### Description
Porphyromonas gingivalis secretes cysteine proteases named gingipains which can cleave an array of proteins and importantly contribute to the development of periodontitis. In this study we focused on gingipain-exerted proteolysis at the cell surface of human gingival epithelial cells (telomerase immortalized gingival keratinocytes [TIGK]). We examined whether gingipains have sheddase activity or if their main activity is degradation of membrane proteins into small fragments. Using mass spectrometry, we investigated the whole sheddome/degradome of TIGK cell surface proteins by P. gingivalis strains differing in gingipain expression. We observed extensive degradation of TIGK surface proteins, suggesting that gingipains could in fact be the major cause of damage to the gingival epithelium. Most of the identified gingipain substrates were molecules involved in adhesion, suggesting that gingipains may cause tissue damage through cleavage of cell contacts, resulting in cell detachment and rounding, and consequently leading to anoikis. These results reveal a molecular underpinning to P. gingivalis-induced tissue destruction and enhance our knowledge of the role of P. gingivalis’ proteases in the pathobiology of periodontitis.

### Sample Protocol
TIGK cells were washed with DPBS twice, then treated with buffer containing gingipains at final concentration of 4 nM or 75nM for 45 minutes at 37°C. Conditioned media was collected and gingipain inhibitors (at concentration 1 µM) were added before the samples were centrifuged twice at 300 x g and at maximum speed for 5 minutes in order to remove cells and cell debris. Next, samples were concentrated to a final volume of 200 µL using membrane concentrators (MWCO 3000, Millipore). As a control, gingipains that were previously inhibited with KYTs, were used for TIGK cell treatment. Samples were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE precast Tris-Gly gels (Lonza). The gels were stained with either Commassie Brilliant Blue or Silver Stain. Each protein lane was cut into six bands that were further cut into 1 mm3 pieces (referred to as samples in the following text). Samples were destained (25 mM NH4HCO3 (Fluka Biochemica) in 50% acetonitrile (JT Baker)), washed with acetonitrile and vacuum dried, before rehydrated in reducing solution (10 mM DTT (Fluka Biochemica) in 25 mM NH4HCO3) and incubated at 56°C for 45 minutes. Next, samples were soaked in the alkylating solution (55 mM iodoacetamide (Amersham Biosciences) in 25 mM NH4HCO3) and incubated for 30 minutes in the dark. Subsequently, the samples were first washed with 25 mM NH4HCO3, followed by an acetonitrile washing step and finally vacuum dried before trypsinization. Next, samples were rehydrated in trypsinization buffer (Promega) with sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega) and left to be digested overnight at 37°C. Next day, the digest was collected and the remaining peptides were extracted from the gels using the extraction solution (50% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid (Fluka)). The samples were then concentrated on a speedvac and loaded on C18 tips for desalting. The C18 tips were prepared by packing Empore C18 disks (Sigma Aldrich) in 200 µL pipet tips. Briefly, the tips were conditioned with 50 µL 100% methanol (Merck), followed by 80% acetonitrile containing 3% acetic acid (VWR Chemicals) and equilibrated with 0.1% formic acid (JT Baker). Afterwards the samples were loaded on the tips followed by 2 washes with 0.1% formic acid (JT Baker). The samples were eluted with 50% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (JT Baker) and concentrated to 10 µl before proceeding with the MS analysis. Every experiment for mass spectrometry was repeated at least 3 times. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nanoLC II HPLC (Thermo Fischer Scientific) in-line with LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). The peptide samples were loaded on a C18 trapping column (EASY-ColumnTM, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on a C18 PicoFritTM AQUASIL analytical column (New Objective) with a 90 min linear gradient (5–40% solvent B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LC-MS/MS was operated via Xcalibur software (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyser at 30,000 resolution and a mass range of 300–2000 m/z. HCD fragmentation of the nine most intense precursor ions from the full MS was used to generate MS/MS spectra which were recorded at resolution 7,500. Only precursors with a charge state ≥ 2 were selected for further fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using the MaxQuant version 1.5.6.0, against the UniProt-derived human reference proteome (UniProtKB, Homo sapiens, canonical database containing 20,316 entries). The database searches of the peptide spectra were performed using the standard trypsin specificity rule KR/-P allowing for one missed cleavage. The following modifications were set in the searches: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.0215 Da) as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) and acetylation of protein N-termini (+42.0106 Da) as variable modifications. The mass tolerances of the precursor ion and fragment ion were 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da and 1% FDR settings were used for protein identification. MaxQuant was used for the label-free quantification using default settings. For relative quantification, spectral counting of razor and unique peptides was used.  The data were processed with Perseus to filter potential contaminants, reverse sequences and single peptide identifications. To minimize the number of false positives only proteins with more than 2 counts per protein were considered in the analysis. Protein SCR (spectral count ratios) were calculated by dividing spectral counts in gingipain treated samples by spectral counts in the negative control. Spectral counts of all proteins were increased by 1 to avoid division by zero. When SCR has values between 0.33 and 3 (0.33 < SCR < 3) abundance of selected protein is considered non-changed between control and the sample. SCR lower than 0.33 (SCR ≤ 0.33) means that protein abundance has decreased in the sample, comparing to the control, while SCR greater than 3 (SCR ≥ 3) means that protein abundance has increased in the sample. For the potential target list, we included only extracellular proteins that had a SCR ratio ≥ 3.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Porphyromonas gingivalis</i>, the main etiologic agent of periodontitis, secretes cysteine proteases named gingipains. HRgpA and RgpB gingipains have Arg-specificity, while Kgp gingipain is Lys-specific. Together they can cleave an array of proteins and importantly contribute to the development of periodontitis. In this study we focused on gingipain-exerted proteolysis at the cell surface of human gingival epithelial cells [telomerase immortalized gingival keratinocytes (TIGK)] in order to better understand the molecular mechanisms behind tissue destruction in periodontitis. Using mass spectrometry, we investigated the whole sheddome/degradome of TIGK cell surface proteins by <i>P. gingivalis</i> strains differing in gingipain expression and by purified gingipains, and performed the first global proteomic analysis of gignpain proteolysis at the membrane. Incubation of TIGK cells with <i>P. gingivalis</i> resulted in massive degradation of proteins already at low multiplicity of infection, whereas incubating cells with purified gingipains resulted in more discrete patterns, indicative of a combination of complete degradation and shedding of membrane proteins. Most of the identified gingipain substrates were molecules involved in adhesion, suggesting that gingipains may cause tissue damage through cleavage of cell contacts, resulting in cell detachment and rounding, and consequently leading to anoikis. However, HRgpA and RgpB gingipains differ in their mechanism of action. While RgpB rapidly degraded the proteins, HRgpA exhibited a much slower proteolysis indicative of ectodomain shedding, as demonstrated for the transferrin receptor protein 1 (TFRC). These results reveal a molecular underpinning to <i>P. gingivalis</i>-induced tissue destruction and enhance our knowledge of the role of <i>P. gingivalis</i> proteases in the pathobiology of periodontitis. Proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015679.

### Keywords
Shedding, Protease, Proteolysis, Gingipain, Anoikis

### Affiliations
Jozef Stefan Institute
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Structural Biology, Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia

### Submitter
Marko Fonovic

### Lab Head
Dr Marko Fonovic
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Structural Biology, Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia


