### Accession
PXD039247

### Title
A hinge glycan regulates spike bending and impacts coronavirus infectivity

### Description
Analysis of the structures and distributions of native spike conformations on vitrified human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63) virions without chemical fixation by cryogenic electron tomography (cryoET) and subtomogram averaging, along with site-specific glycan composition and occupancy determined by mass spectroscopy

### Sample Protocol
Intact and deglycosylated glycopeptides generated by enzymatic digestion of spike glycoprotein (S) from human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63) virions. The resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Intact glycopeptide data was processed by pGlyco3 and deglycosylated glycopeptide data was processed by Proteome Discoverer (v2.5).

### Publication Abstract
Coronavirus spike glycoproteins presented on the virion surface mediate receptor binding, and membrane fusion during virus entry and constitute the primary target for vaccine and drug development. How the structure dynamics of the full-length spikes incorporated in viral lipid envelope correlates with the virus infectivity remains poorly understood. Here we present structures and distributions of native spike conformations on vitrified human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63) virions without chemical fixation by cryogenic electron tomography (cryoET) and subtomogram averaging, along with site-specific glycan composition and occupancy determined by mass spectrometry. The higher oligomannose glycan shield on HCoV-NL63 spikes than on SARS-CoV-2 spikes correlates with stronger immune evasion of HCoV-NL63. Incorporation of cryoET-derived native spike conformations into all-atom molecular dynamic simulations elucidate the conformational landscape of the glycosylated, full-length spike that reveals a role of hinge glycans in modulating spike bending. We show that glycosylation at N1242 at the upper portion of the stalk is responsible for the extensive orientational freedom of the spike crown. Subsequent infectivity assays implicated involvement of N1242-glyan in virus entry. Our results suggest a potential therapeutic target site for HCoV-NL63.

### Keywords
Spike, Coronavirus, N-glycan

### Affiliations
Univeristy of Georgia
University of Georgia

### Submitter
Peng Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Lance Wells
Univeristy of Georgia


