### Accession
PXD038305

### Title
PTEN deficiency exposes a requirement for an ARF GTPase module in integrin-dependent invasion in ovarian cancer

### Description
Dysregulation of the PI3K/AKT pathway is a common occurrence in ovarian carcinomas. Loss of the tumour suppressor PTEN in high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) is associated with a patient subgroup with poor prognosis. The cellular mechanisms of how PTEN loss contributes to HGSOC are largely unknown. We utilise long-term time-lapse imaging of HGSOC spheroids coupled to a machine learning approach to classify the phenotype of PTEN loss. PTEN deficiency does not affect proliferation but rather induces PI(3,4,5)P3-rich and -dependent membrane protrusions into the extracellular matrix (ECM), resulting in a collective invasion phenotype. We identify the small GTPase ARF6 as a crucial vulnerability upon PTEN loss. Through a functional proteomic CRISPR screen of ARF6 interactors, we identify the ARF GTPase-activating protein (GAP) AGAP1 and the ECM receptor β1-integrin as key ARF6 interactors regulating the PTEN loss-associated invasion phenotype. ARF6 functions to promote invasion by controlling the recycling of internalised, active β1-integrin complexes to maintain invasive activity into the ECM. The expression of the ARF6-centred complex in HGSOC patients is inversely associated with outcome, allowing identification of patient groups with improved versus poor outcome. ARF6 may represent a new therapeutic vulnerability in PTEN-depleted HGSOC tumours.

### Sample Protocol
An improved version of the promiscuous ligase BirA* (TurboID 34), was fused to the C-terminus of ARF6, followed by a V5 Tag, a cleavable T2A peptide and BFP and cloned into a lentiviral vector. The construct was stably expressed in ID8 cells as described above. A construct lacking ARF6 but containing BirA*, V5, T2A and BFP was used as a negative control for non-specific labelling. Cells at ~70- 80% confluence were labelled for 30 min at 37oC by adding 50 μM of Biotin in full medium (Sigma-Aldrich S4501). Cells on Biotin-free medium were used as negative control. Cells were washed five times in ice-cold PBS and lysates were obtained by adding 800 μl of Lysis Buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 100mM NaCl, 5mM in MS-grade water) supplemented with one each of cOmplete™, Mini Protease Inhibitor (Roche 05892970001) and PhosSTOP™ Phospatase Inhibitor tablets (Roche 04906837001). The lysates were scrapped, left to incubate on ice for 30 min, sonicated and centrifuged at 13,600 g for 30 min at 4oC. Protein concentration was determined by performing a BCA assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific 23225, used following manufacturer's instructions). 350 μg of proteins were used per condition. 200 μL of streptavidin sepharose beads (Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance, MerckMillipore GHC-17-5113-01) were washed thrice in 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4. All samples were incubated with 25 μL pre-washed beads in each at 4oC for 2h with rotation. Beads were washed 4 times with 400 μL Washing Buffer (50mM Tris pH 7.4, 100mM NaCl, 5mM EDTA) and each time centrifuged at 1,200 g for 1 min at 4oC. Samples were resuspended in 2M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and stored at -20oC until further processing. On-bead digestion was performed from the supernatants. Quadruplicate biological replicates were digested with Lys-C (Alpha Laboratories) and trypsin (Promega) on beads as previously described 59. Following trypsin digestion, peptides were separated by means of nanoscale C18 reverse-phase Liquid Chromatography (LC) using an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Scientific) system directly coupled to a mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, Thermo Scientific). Elution was performed using a 50cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). Separation was carried out using a 135 min binary gradient at flow rate of 300nl/min. The packed emitter was maintained at 50 °C by means of a column oven (Sonation) integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Air contaminants signal levels were decreased using an Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD ESI Source Solutions). Data acquisition was performed using the Xcalibur software. A full scan was acquired over a mass range of 350-1400m/z at 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z. The 15 most intense ions underwent higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation and the fragments generated were analysed in the Orbitrap (15,000 resolution).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.14.0 was used for data processing. Data were processed with MaxQuant software 60, 61querying SwissProt (UniProt, 2019) Mus musculus (25198 entries). First and main searches were performed with precursor mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and specificity for trypsin cleavage was required. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, whereas Methionine oxidation, Phosphorylation on Serine-Threonine-Tyrosine, and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The peptide, protein, and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %. All MaxQuant outputs were analysed with Perseus software version 1.6.2.3 62. Protein abundance was measured using label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities, which were calculated according to the label-free quantification algorithm available in MaxQuant 63, reported in the ProteinGroups.txt file. Only proteins quantified in all 3 replicates in at least one group, were used for further analysis. Missing values were imputed separately for each column (width 0.3, down shift 1.8), and significantly enriched proteins were selected using a permutation-based t-test with FDR set at 5% and s0 = 0. Processed data were filtered using Microsoft Excel to select the hits likely representing true interactions. Typically, proteins with Student's T-test Difference in their LFQ value of >1.2 , when compared to ID8 Trp53-/-;Pten-/- 1.15 TurboID, were considered as true interactors.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Id8, Arf6, Turboid, Hgsoc, Pi3k/akt pathway, Gtpase

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


