### Accession
PXD026955

### Title
Mitochondrial responses during hyperammonemia

### Description
Ammonia is a cytotoxic metabolite with pleotropic molecular and metabolic effects in non-hepatic tissue/cells targeting mitochondrial oxidative function that may contribute to post-mitotic senescence. Global molecular responses were determined by analysis of unbiased data followed by experimental validation of critical functional consequences in hyperammonemic differentiated myotubes and skeletal muscle from the portacaval anastomosis (PCA) rat. Integrating whole cell transcriptome with whole cell and mitochondrial proteome from hyperammonemic myotubes identified oxidative dysfunction and senescence pathways as being the most enriched with differentially expressed genes/proteins. Hyperammonemia and ammonia-lowering result in distinct clusters of molecular responses. Functional and metabolic studies in hyperammonemic myotubes showed that defects in electron transport chain (ETC) complexes I and III, loss of supercomplex assembly, decreased ATP synthesis, increased free radical generation with oxidative modification of proteins/lipids and increased expression of senescence associated molecular phenotype (SAMP) that were partially reversed by ammonia lowering. Studies in muscle from PCA rats established physiological relevance of our cellular studies. Dysregulated ammonia metabolism causes mitochondrial dysfunction by transcriptional and translational perturbations in multiple pathways that result in reversible senescence.

### Sample Protocol
For the cell and the mitochondria samples, each sample were suspended in 150 μL 8 M urea 0.1 M TrisHCl buffer pH8 with freshly added protease inhibitor cocktail(ROCHE, Basel, Switzerland). The samples were homogenized using a sonication cell disruptor for 15s x 3 with 15 second between runs. The samples were centrifuged at 17kg for 15 minutes and the supernatants were transferred to new centrifuge tubes. A 2 μL supernatant was used for BCA assay analysis. Based on the BCA result, 30 µg from each sample was used for in-solution trypsin digestion.  The rat muscle tissues were thawed on ice. Each tissue sample was transferred to a lysing Matrix D (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH) in 200 µl 8M urea 0.1M Tris-HCl buffer pH 8.0 with freshly added complete™ Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (ROCHE, Basel, Switzerland). The samples were homogenized on a FastPrep 24 (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH) using a 30s x 4 program at 6 m/s speed with 5min between runs. Homogenized samples were centrifuged at 17kg for 15 minutes at room temperature. Supernatants of the samples were transferred to new Eppendorf tubes, and a small aliquot from each supernatant were diluted 10x with water and used for a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). Thirty µg of protein from each sample based on BCA result was taken for in-solution trypsin digestion. The samples were reduced by dithiothreitol, alkylated by iodoacetamide. Half μg of sequencing grade trypsin was added to each sample and incubated at room temperature overnight. The digested samples were desalted using C18 cartridges. Desalted samples were lyophilized and reconstituted in 1% acetic acid and ready for LCMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer V2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) with the search engine Sequest-HT which is integrated in the Proteome Discoverer software. For the cell and mitochondria samples, the protein sequence database used to search the MS/MS spectra was the Uniprot mouse protein database containing 16,996 entries (downloaded on July 9th, 2019) with an automatically generated decoy database (reversed sequences). For the rat muscle samples, the protein sequence database used to search the MS/MS spectra was the Uniprot rat protein database containing 8,131 entries (downloaded on June 24th, 2021) with an automatically generated decoy database (reversed sequences).  The protease was set to full activity trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages.  Oxidation of Methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were set as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was set as static modifications. The precursor mass tolerance for these searches was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Keratins were known contaminants and were excluded from identified proteins. A false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptide and protein identification and calculated using the number of identified peptides/proteins from decoy database divided by the total number of identified peptides/proteins. Two peptides were required for positive protein identification to decrease the chance of false discovery by a random match.  A precursor intensity based label free quantification was achieved by the Minora Feature Detector node of Proteome Discoverer using peptide precursors in MS full scans and normalized by total amount of peptide in each sample. The peptides used in this quantitation correspond to unique + razor. At least two quantifiable peptides are required for a protein.

### Publication Abstract
Ammonia is a cytotoxic molecule generated during normal cellular functions. Dysregulated ammonia metabolism, which is evident in many chronic diseases such as liver cirrhosis, heart failure, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, initiates a hyperammonemic stress response in tissues including skeletal muscle and in myotubes. Perturbations in levels of specific regulatory molecules have been reported, but the global responses to hyperammonemia are unclear. In this study, we used a multiomics approach to vertically integrate unbiased data generated using an assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with high-throughput sequencing, RNA-Seq, and proteomics. We then horizontally integrated these data across different models of hyperammonemia, including myotubes and mouse and human muscle tissues. Changes in chromatin accessibility and/or expression of genes resulted in distinct clusters of temporal molecular changes including transient, persistent, and delayed responses during hyperammonemia in myotubes. Known responses to hyperammonemia, including mitochondrial and oxidative dysfunction, protein homeostasis disruption, and oxidative stress pathway activation, were enriched in our datasets. During hyperammonemia, pathways that impact skeletal muscle structure and function that were consistently enriched were those that contribute to mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and senescence. We made several novel observations, including an enrichment in antiapoptotic B-cell leukemia/lymphoma 2 family protein expression, increased calcium flux, and increased protein glycosylation in myotubes and muscle tissue upon hyperammonemia. Critical molecules in these pathways were validated experimentally. Human skeletal muscle from patients with cirrhosis displayed similar responses, establishing translational relevance. These data demonstrate complex molecular interactions during adaptive and maladaptive responses during the cellular stress response to hyperammonemia.

### Keywords
Ammonia, Hyperammonemia, Portacaval anastomosis, Cytotoxic, Pca

### Affiliations
Department of Inflammation and Immunity, Gastroenterology and Hepatology. Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland Ohio
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Ling Li

### Lab Head
Dr Srinivasan Dasarathy
Department of Inflammation and Immunity, Gastroenterology and Hepatology. Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland Ohio


