### Accession
PXD006254

### Title
Phosphorylation of OSBL8 protein in interphase vs mitotic human cells

### Description
Phosphorylation of OSBL8 human protein was compared in interphase vs mitotic Hela cells with a new software developed in-house, Msviz, a graphical software tool developed for in-depth manual validation and quantitation of post-translational modifications.

### Sample Protocol
OSBL8 was overexpressed as tagged protein in HeLa cells and purified with anti-Flag M2 affinity resin. To study differential phosphorylation in different cellular conditions, OSBL8-Flag was immuno-precipitated from cells treated with nocodazole  (100ng/ml, 18h) to obtain a fraction of OSBL8 at mitosis (FLAG-M) or DMSO for purifying OSBL8 from mainly interphase cells (FLAG-I). Prior to collection, DMSO treated cells was washed with PBS to detach the mitotic cells as to minimize their carry over. After affinity purification and beads elution with SDS, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and Coomassie blue staining, the OSBL8 band representing approx. 2 ug of protein with an apparent mw of 145 kDa was in-gel digested with trypsin as described and the obtained peptides were analysed by nanoLC-MS with DDA on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS1 and MS2 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 70’000 and 17’500, respectively (resolution at m/z =200).

### Data Protocol
Database searches were carried out with MASCOT 2.6 using a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, a fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, phosphorylation on serine and threonine, and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. MASCOT searches were carried out in the 2015.12 version of SWISSPROT, human taxonomy, containing 20194 entries, including a decoy database search for false discovery rate (FDR) calculation. Using a significance threshold of 0.05 for PSMs, the FDR was below 2%. Similarly, standard parameters were used for MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30), which applied precursor and fragment tolerances of 5, respectively 20 ppm after recalibration. The database used for MaxQuant searches was the release UP000005640_9606 of the curated UNIPROT human proteome (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/), containing 21038 entries (released October 2015). Identifications were filtered at 1% FDR against a decoy database search. Additionally, MaxQuant applied a 1% site FDR to all PTM modified peptide matches as per default parameters. For both MASCOT and MaxQuant searches, two possible trypsin missed cleavages were considered and the databases were supplemented with a set of common protein contaminants distributed with the MaxQuant releases. The sequence of OSBL8 (UNPROT AC: Q9BZF1) was identical in the databases used for the two search engines.     Full MS1 and MS2 spectral data as well as protein identification results were imported in MsViz, a software developed in-house for manual validation and quantitation of phosphorylation. A public demo version of MsViz server can be found at http://msviz-public.vital-it.ch. All datasets presented here were loaded to the public version. The current documentation for MsViz can be found on http://msviz-docs.vital-it.ch/.Thermo raw files were converted into mzML files using MsConvert from ProteoWizard version 3.0.6447 64-bit. The “peak picking” option of ProteoWizard was chosen and set to “true” for all MS levels (“1-“) and used the vendor-specific algorithm as recommended by ProteoWizard for centroiding. No filter on peak intensity or S/N ratio was applied. All other parameters of ProteoWizard were left as per default. Mascot results were exported as mzIdentML files with default parameters from the Mascot web interface. The mzIdentML files were moved to a new directory together with the corresponding spectral data in mzML format. The folder was ZIP compressed and then uploaded to MsViz. MaxQuant PSM data were imported into MsViz from the following tables: evidence.txt, msms.txt, parameters.txt, peptides.txt, proteinGroups.txt and summary.txt. The entire txt folder was copied to a new folder together with the corresponding spectral data in mzML format. Unused “txt” files were removed from the folder and the parent folder was ZIP compressed before submission to MsViz. Databases of human proteins used for Mascot and MaxQuant searches were downloaded from UniProt (www.uniprot.org), and uploaded to MsViz as fasta files.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) has become the tool of choice for the large scale identification and quantitation of proteins and their post-translational modifications (PTMs). This development has been enabled by powerful software packages for the automated analysis of MS data. While data on PTMs of thousands of proteins can nowadays be readily obtained, fully deciphering the complexity and combinatorics of modification patterns even on a single protein often remains challenging. Moreover, functional investigation of PTMs on a protein of interest requires validation of the localization and the accurate quantitation of its changes across several conditions, tasks that often still require human evaluation. Software tools for large scale analyses are highly efficient but are rarely conceived for interactive, in-depth exploration of data on individual proteins. We here describe MsViz, a web-based and interactive software tool that supports manual validation of PTMs and their relative quantitation in small- and medium-size experiments. The tool displays sequence coverage information, peptide-spectrum matches, tandem MS spectra and extracted ion chromatograms through a single, highly intuitive interface. We found that MsViz greatly facilitates manual data inspection to validate PTM location and quantitate modified species across multiple samples.

### Keywords
Human, Tandem mass spectrometry, Phosphorylation, Qexactive, Osbl8

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Protein Analysis Facility University of Lausanne 1015 Lausanne Switzerland

### Submitter
Patrice Waridel

### Lab Head
Dr Manfredo Quadroni
Protein Analysis Facility University of Lausanne 1015 Lausanne Switzerland


