### Accession
PXD023939

### Title
Mitochondrial membrane proteins and VPS35 orchestrate selective removal of mtDNA

### Description
Integrity of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), encoding several subunits of the respiratory chain, is essential to maintain mitochondrial fitness. Mitochondria, as a central hub for metabolism, are affected in a wide variety of human diseases but also during normal ageing, where mtDNA integrity is compromised. Mitochondrial quality control mechanisms work at different levels, and mitophagy and its variants are critical to remove dysfunctional mitochondria and mtDNA to maintain cellular homeostasis. Understanding the mechanisms governing a selective turnover of mutation-bearing mtDNA without affecting the entire mitochondrial pool is fundamental to design therapeutic strategies against mtDNA diseases and ageing. Here, we show that mtDNA damage after expressing a dominant negative version of the mitochondrial helicase Twinkle, or by chemical means, leads to an exacerbated mtDNA turnover. mtDNA removal depends on lysosomal function and requires the autophagy protein Atg5 but is independent of canonical mitophagy or autophagy. Using proximity labelling, we demonstrated that the area of influence of mitochondrial nucleoids differs upon mtDNA damage, which induces mitochondrial membrane remodelling and endosomal recruitment in close proximity to mitochondrial nucleoid sub compartments. Targeting of nucleoids is controlled by the mitochondrial transmembrane proteins ATAD3 and SAMM50, which together with the endosomal trafficking protein VPS35, orchestrate endosomal nucleoid engulfment. SAMM50 acts as a gatekeeper to avoid mtDNA release to the cytoplasm and facilitating mtDNA transfer to VPS35. Lastly, we show that stimulation of lysosomal activity by rapamycin selectively removes mtDNA deletions in vivo, without affecting mtDNA copy number. With these results, we unveil the molecular players of a new complex mechanism specifically targeting and removing mutant mtDNA which occurs outside the mitochondrial network, a process with multiple potential benefits to understand human mtDNA related diseases, either inherited, acquired or due to normal ageing.

### Sample Protocol
APEX2 proximity biotinylation Cells transduced with retroviral vectors containing Twinkle-APEX2-V5, K320E-APEX2-V5 and mitochondrial matrix targeted APEX2-V5 (mitoAPEX), were used for proximity biotinylation experiments. Biotin-phenol labelling was performed by incubating transgenic C2C12 with 2.5 mM biotin-phenol for 7h. For crosslink, 1 mM H2O2 was added to the cells and incubated for 1min at room temperature. Streptavidin-magnetic-beads were used to purify 500 μg of total protein extracts and prepared for MS analysis as explained below.  Co-immunoprecipitation For immunoprecipitation, cells expressing Twinkle-APEX2-V5 were pelleted and solubilized in IP Buffer (500 mM HEPES KOH pH 7.2, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 1% Triton-X1000 and Protease inhibitor). 500 µg of total protein extract was used to IP with 2.5 µg V5 rabbit polyclonal antibody over night at 4°C, and recovered after incubating for 6h at 4°C in a rotator with equilibrated Agarose Protein-G beads. Prior to analysis by MS, samples were washed thrice with ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer, denatured with 50 µl of urea buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea) and followed by disulfide-bridge reduction using dithiothreitol (DTT) at a final concentration of 5 mM for 1 hour at room temperature. To alkylate oxidized cysteines, 2-Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to the samples until a concentration of 40 mM was reached and incubated for 30 min in the dark. Lys-C was added in a ratio of 1:100 (0.1 µg enzyme for 10 µg protein) and incubated for 2-3 hours. Samples were finally diluted with ABC buffer to reach 2M urea concentration. Protein digestion was performed overnight with trypsin 1:100. Samples were acidified with 1% formic acid and desalted using a modified version of the Stop and Go extraction tip (StageTip) protocol.  Pulsed SILAC labelling in mice and in-solution digestion For pulsed SILAC labelling mice, 30-40 weeks old mice for K320E; Mlc1 line (C57BL/6J) were fed a 13C6-lysine (Lys6)-containing mouse diet for 14 days to monitor newly synthesized proteins by comparing the incorporation of Lys-6 with the naturally occurring Lys-0. Following, tissues were dissected and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Samples were grinded and proteins extracted and denatured by the addition of 4% SDS in PBS. After acetone precipitation protein pellets were dissolved in urea buffer (6 M urea / 2 M thiourea). The following protein digestion was performed as described previously but instead of overnight tryptic digestion, proteins were only digested with Lys-C (1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio) for both pre-digestion (2h at RT) and overnight digestion after dilution of urea using ABC buffer. Liquid chromatography – mass spectrometric analysis Both affinity-enriched and pulsed SILAC proteomics samples were analysed in positive mode using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) either by an Easy-nLC 1000 – Q Exactive Plus or an Easy-nLC 1200 – Orbitrap Eclipse tribrid system. Peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography with a binary buffer system of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) using a 60 min chromatographic gradient for IP samples and 120 min for pulsed SILAC samples. Separation was performed on a 50 cm long in-house packed analytical column filled with 1.9 µM C18-AQ Reprosil Pur beads (Dr. Maisch). Full MS spectra (300 to 1750 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target of 3e6. The top 10 most abundant peptide ions were isolated (1.8 m/z isolation windows) for subsequent HCD fragmentation (NCE = 28) and MS/MS recorded at a resolution of 35,000, a maximum injection time of 120 ms and an AGC target of 5e5. Peptide ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 20 seconds.  Using the 120 min chromatographic gradient full MS spectra (375 to 1500 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000, a dynamic injection time and an automated AGC target. The top 20 most abundant peptide ions (charge state 2 – 7) were isolated (1.2 m/z isolation windows) for subsequent HCD fragmentation (NCE = 30) and MS/MS recording at a resolution of 15,000, a maximum injection time of 22 ms and an automated AGC target. Peptide ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
All recorded RAW files were processed with the MaxQuant software suite (1.5.3.8 for IP data, 1.6.14 for pSILAC). For peptide identification and scoring MS/MS spectra were matched against the mouse Uniprot database (downloaded 08/15/2019) using the Andromeda search algorithm. For the affinity-enriched samples, multiplicity was set to one and trypsin/P was selected as digestive enzyme. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation or N-terminal acetylation was selected as variable modification. Peptides were identified with a minimum amino acid length of seven and a false-discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1% on the peptide level. Proteins were identified with FDR < 1% using unique and razor peptides for quantification. Label-free quantification was performed using the standard settings of the maxLFQ algorithm. Match between runs was activated. pSILAC data were analysed with the same settings with some modifications. Multiplicity was set to two with Lys6 as heavy isotope label. Lys-C/P was selected as digestive peptide and LFQ quantification was deactivated. Statistical analysis and visualization were done with the Perseus (1.6.5) and InstantClue software suits. LFQ intensities of IP samples were log2-transformed and filtered for proteins identified in at least two replicates of one condition. Missing values were imputed with the Perseus plugin ImputeLCMD using deterministic minimal value approach (MinDet, q-value = 0.001) to simulate the lower detection limits of the mass spectrometer. To evaluate principal components responsible for the variances between samples, we performed a principal component analysis. Further, we performed a two-sided Student’s t-test to identify significantly regulated proteins (S0 = 0.1, permutation-based FDR = 0.05, 500 randomizations). If not otherwise indicated, significantly enriched proteins were determined by a combination of FDR-corrected p-values and log2 protein fold changes (q-value < 0.05 and absolute log2 FC > 1). For enrichment quantification, significant hits were filtered according to their annotation in MitoCarta, and grouped using their subcellular compartment annotated in GOCC. Z-score-normalized protein intensities were hierarchically clustered using Euclidean distances to visualize protein enrichments in different heat maps. We proceeded similarly for the pulsed SILAC data but used the heavy-to-light (H/L) ratios for statistical testing. We used the same filtering-criteria but did not impute missing values. We performed 1D annotation enrichments and Fisher exact tests (both p-value < 0.02, Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction) to identify enriched categorical terms in the different conditions.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the mechanisms governing selective turnover of mutation-bearing mtDNA is fundamental to design therapeutic strategies against mtDNA diseases. Here, we show that specific mtDNA damage leads to an exacerbated mtDNA turnover, independent of canonical macroautophagy, but relying on lysosomal function and ATG5. Using proximity labeling and Twinkle as a nucleoid marker, we demonstrate that mtDNA damage induces membrane remodeling and endosomal recruitment in close proximity to mitochondrial nucleoid sub-compartments. Targeting of mitochondrial nucleoids is controlled by the ATAD3-SAMM50 axis, which is disrupted upon mtDNA damage. SAMM50 acts as a gatekeeper, influencing BAK clustering, controlling nucleoid release and facilitating transfer to endosomes. Here, VPS35 mediates maturation of early endosomes to late autophagy vesicles where degradation occurs. In addition, using a mouse model where mtDNA alterations cause impairment of muscle regeneration, we show that stimulation of lysosomal activity by rapamycin, selectively removes mtDNA deletions without affecting mtDNA copy number, ameliorating mitochondrial dysfunction. Taken together, our data demonstrates that upon mtDNA damage, mitochondrial nucleoids are eliminated outside the mitochondrial network through an endosomal-mitophagy pathway. With these results, we unveil the molecular players of a complex mechanism with multiple potential benefits to understand mtDNA related diseases, inherited, acquired or due to normal ageing.

### Keywords
Mtdna, Twinkle, Mitophagy, Autophagy, Mitochondrial nucleoid

### Affiliations
Department for Systems Immunology & Proteomics
Institute of Innate Immunity
University Hospital Bonn
Venusberg - Campus 1
53127 Bonn Germany
Center for Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Vegetative Physiology, University of Köln, Köln, Germany Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany (lab head)

### Submitter
Sebastian Kallabis

### Lab Head
Dr David Pla-Martin
Center for Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute of Vegetative Physiology, University of Köln, Köln, Germany Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany (lab head)


