### Accession
PXD007744

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Reveals Specialized Wiring of Signaling Pathways that Protects Human Regulatory T Cell Identity - 6 populations ex vivo

### Description
Regulatory CD4+ T cells (Tregs) are functionally distinct from conventional CD4+ T cells (Tconvs). To understand Treg identity, we compared by proteomics and transcriptomics human naïve (n) and effector (e)Tregs, Tconvs and transitional FOXP3+ cells. Only 12% of 422 differentially expressed proteins was identified as such at the mRNA level, demonstrating the importance of direct proteome measurement. Fifty-one proteins discriminated Tregs from Tconvs. This common Treg protein signature indicates altered signaling by TCR-, TNF receptor-, NFB-, PI3 kinase/mTOR-, NFAT- and STAT pathways, and unique cell biological and metabolic features. Another protein signature uniquely identified eTregs and revealed active cell division, apoptosis sensitivity and suppression of NFB- and STAT signaling. eTreg fate appears consolidated by FOXP3 outnumbering its partner transcription factors. These features explain why eTregs cannot produce inflammatory cytokines, whereas transitional FOXP3+ cells can. Collectively, our data reveal that Treg identity is defined and protected by uniquely “wired” signaling pathways. Associated GEO dataset is available at GSE90600.

### Sample Protocol
Cell isolation and cell sorting Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were obtained from fresh buffy coats from healthy male donors using Ficoll-Paque Plus (GE Healthcare) gradient centrifugation. Total CD4+ T cells were isolated using magnetic sorting with CD4 microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec) and viable cells were separated using flow cytometric sorting for CD25, CD127 and CD45RA on a FACS Aria III (BD Biosciences). Blood samples were obtained from anonymized volunteers with written informed consent used in accordance to guidelines established by the Medical Ethical Committee. Antibodies The following antibodies were used: CD25 (43839) and CD45RA (560675) from BD Biosciences. CD127 (351309), NFB p50 (616704), IFN (502510), IL-17A (512325), and NFATc1 (649603) from Biolegend. FOXP3 (25-4777-42), Helios (48-9883), phospho-STAT4 Y693 (12-9044-42), GZMA (25-9177-41), GATA3 (12-9966-42), and RORt (17-6988-80) from eBioscience. SHMT2 (HPA020549), Actin (A3853), and NFB p52 (FCMAB346F) from Sigma. GZMK (21144054, Immunotools), FTL (ab69090, Abcam), ANXA1 (sc-12740, Santa Cruz), and NFATc2 (14324S, Cell Signaling). Sample preparation for mass spectrometry (MS) FACS-purified CD4+ subsets from 3-6 donors were washed in PBS and immediately lysed in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris HCl [pH 8.0]) in Protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf). The samples were heated at 95 °C, sonicated (Bioruptor), and after centrifugation (16,000 g), the supernatants were kept frozen at -80 °C. Cell lysates were then processed using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) as described before (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Briefly, lysates were subjected to alkylated and digested into peptides using sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). After digestion, peptides were desalted using StageTips (Rappsilber et al, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75 (3), pp 663–670), reduced in a speedvac, and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA in water before analysis by MS. Mass spectrometry data acquisition Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm 75–360 µm inner-outer diameter fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was installed on a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo Scientific) using a MicroTee union formatted for 360 μm outer diameter columns (IDEX) and a liquid junction. The spray voltage was set to 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5 % acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5 % acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5% buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5-15% (22-87 min) and 15-38% (87-147 min), followed by a 10 minute wash to 90 % and a 5 min regeneration to 5%. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1.5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 1.6, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing and Analysis RAW mass spectrometry files were processed with the MaxQuant computational platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.2.8 using label-free quantitation (LFQ). Peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (2015-02, 89796 entries) with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off both at peptide and protein level. Potential contaminants, proteins only identified by site and reverse hits were eliminated using Perseus version 1.5.1.6. To compare proteomes of different cell populations, LFQ values were log2-transformed and the 3-6 biological replicates per experimental condition grouped. For further analysis, only proteins with 3 valid values in at least one of the groups were included. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width= 0.3, shift= 1.8). Intergroup differences in protein levels were calculated using ANOVA using Benjamini-Hochberg FDR of 0.05 and S0 0.4. General relatedness of samples was assessed through Principal Component Analysis (PCA) using Perseus’ built-in tool. Clusters of proteins with specific expression patterns were identified using unsupervised hierarchical clustering based on K-means and Euclidian distance after z-score normalization.

### Publication Abstract
To obtain a molecular definition of regulatory T (Treg) cell identity, we performed proteomics and transcriptomics on various populations of human regulatory and conventional CD4<sup>+</sup> T (Tconv) cells. A protein expression signature was identified that defines all Treg cells, and another signature that defines effector Treg cells. These signatures could not be extrapolated from transcriptome data. Unique cell-biological and metabolic features in Treg cells were defined, as well as specific adaptations in cytokine, TCR, and costimulatory receptor signaling pathways. One such adaptation-selective STAT4 deficiency-prevented destabilization of Treg cell identity and function by inflammatory cytokines, while these signals could still induce critical transcription factors and homing receptors via other pathways. Furthermore, our study revealed surface markers that identify FOXP3<sup>+</sup>CD4<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cells with distinct functional properties. Our findings suggest that adaptation in signaling pathways protect Treg cell identity and present a resource for further research into Treg cell biology.

### Keywords
Human, Cd4+ t lymphocyte, Blood

### Affiliations
Sanquin Research
Sanquin Research, department of Plasma Proteins, Plesmanlaan 125, 1066 CX, Amsterdam, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Maartje van den Biggelaar

### Lab Head
Dr Maartje van den Biggelaar
Sanquin Research, department of Plasma Proteins, Plesmanlaan 125, 1066 CX, Amsterdam, the Netherlands


