### Accession
PXD030925

### Title
Rapidly evolving genes underlie Aedes aegypti mosquito reproductive resilience during drought

### Description
Female Aedes aegypti mosquitoes impose a severe global public health burden as primary vectors of multiple viral and parasitic pathogens. Under optimal environmental conditions, Aedes aegypti females have access to human hosts that provide blood proteins for egg development, conspecific males that provide sperm for fertilization, and freshwater that serves as an egg-laying substrate suitable for offspring survival. As global temperatures rise, Aedes aegypti females are faced with climate challenges, like intense droughts and intermittent precipitation, which create unpredictable and suboptimal conditions for the egg-laying step of their reproductive cycle. Aedes aegypti mosquitoes nonetheless show remarkable reproductive resilience, but how they achieve this is unknown. Here we show that under drought-like conditions simulated in the laboratory, mated, blood-fed Aedes aegypti females carrying mature eggs retain them in their ovaries for extended periods, while maintaining the viability of these eggs until they can be deposited in freshwater. Using transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of Aedes aegypti ovaries, we identify two previously uncharacterized genes – here named tweedledee and tweedledum – that show ovary-enriched, temporally-restricted expression during egg retention. These genes are mosquito-specific, linked within a syntenic locus, and rapidly evolving under positive selection, raising the possibility that they serve an adaptive function. Using loss-of-function mutagenesis to disrupt both genes, we show that, tweedledee and tweedledum, which encode secreted proteins, are specifically required for extended retention of viable eggs, such as during intermittent precipitation or drought. These results highlight an elegant example of taxon-restricted genes at the heart of an important adaptation that equips Aedes aegypti females with “insurance” to, when contextually appropriate, flexibly extend their reproductive sequence without losing reproductive capacity, thus allowing this species to exploit diverse and unpredictable/chaotic/changing habitats.

### Sample Protocol
Dry protein pellets of both ovary and hemolymph samples were dissolved and reduced in 8 M urea/70 mM ammonium bicarbonate/20 mM dithiothreitol (EMD millipore), followed by alkylation in the dark (50 mM iodoacetamide, Sigma). Samples were then diluted 2-fold and digested overnight with endoproteinase LysC (Wako Chemicals). Samples were additionally diluted 2-fold and digested with trypsin (Promega) for 6 hours. Digestions were halted by acidification and peptides were solid phase extracted prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS. Peptide samples were analyzed by nano-flow LC-MS/MS (EasyLC 1200) coupled to a Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher) operated in High/High Data Dependent Acquisition, (DDA) mode using Lock mass 445.12003. Peptides were separated by reversed phase chromatography (12 cm/75 µm, 3 µm C 18 beads, Nikkyo Technologies, Japan) using buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, and buffer B: 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. For the hemolymph samples, a gradient from 2% buffer B/98% buffer A to 35% buffer B/65% buffer A in 70 minutes was used. For the ovary samples, a gradient from 2% buffer B/98% buffer A to 38%/62% buffer A in 90 minutes was used.

### Data Protocol
Data were queried against ’GCF_002204515.2_AaegL5.0_protein.fasta’ database using MaxQuant software with the Andromeda search engine v.1.6. 6.0 (75). Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were allowed as a variable, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Mass tolerance was set at 4.5 parts per million (ppm) for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Two missed cleavages were allowed for specific tryptic searches. The ‘match between runs’ setting was enabled. False discovery rate (FDR) for proteins was set at 1% combined with a peptide FDR of 2%. Intensity based absolute quantitation (iBAQ) (76) values were used as a proxy for protein abundances. Data were processed using Perseus v. 1.6.10.50 (77). Reverse database hits and contaminating proteins were removed and it was required that a protein was to be measured (using iBAQ) in at least 3 of 4 replicates for least one of the experimental cohorts. For each sample, log2-transformed iBAQ signals were normalized by subtracting the median iBAQ signal. Missing values were assumed ‘Missing Not At Random’ (MNAR) (78) and a random distribution of signals with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8 were used to impute missing values. The sample sets were assessed for quality and correlation using scatter plots and principal component analysis (PCA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aedes aegypti; mosquito; proteomics; taxon-restricted genes; behavior; reproduction; climate change; rapid evolution; adaptation

### Affiliations
THE ROCKEFELLER UNIVERSITY
Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Behavior The Rockefeller University 1230 York Avenue Box 63 New York, NY 10065

### Submitter
henrik molina

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie B. Vosshall
Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Behavior The Rockefeller University 1230 York Avenue Box 63 New York, NY 10065


