### Accession
PXD005911

### Title
Phosphoproteome of RA-responsive and RA-resistant breast cancer cell lines

### Description
Retinoic acid (RA), the main active vitamin A metabolite, controls multiple biological processes such as cell proliferation and differentiation through genomic programs and kinase cascades activation. Due to these properties, RA has proven anti-cancer capacity. Several breast cancer cells respond to the antiproliferative effects of RA, while others are RA-resistant. However, the overall signaling and transcriptional pathways that are altered in such cells have not been elucidated. Here, in a large-scale analysis of the phosphoproteins and in a genome-wide analysis of the RA-regulated genes, we compared two human breast cancer cell lines, a RA-responsive one, the MCF7 cell line, and a RA-resistant one, the BT474 cell line, which depicts several alterations of the "kinome".

### Sample Protocol
1-MCF-7 and BT474 human breast cancer cell lines incubated with all-trans retinoic acid [10-6 M] 2- preparation of cytosolic extract and nuclear extract 3-TCA precipitation, lysC then trypsin digestion, LC-MS/MS analysis (Orbitrap Elite) 4-RARα immunoprecipitation, thermolysin digestion, 5-phosphopeptide enrichment with Phos-select iron affinity beads

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database searching using SequestHT with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Human Swissprot database (2013–06 release, 20218 entries). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 7 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M) and Phosphorylation (S, T, and Y) were set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification. Peptides from nuclear and cytosolic extracts were filtered with a 1% FDR (false discovery rate) using the “Target Decoy” Proteome Discoverer’s node and rank 1. Trypsin was defined to cut in C-terminus of Lysine (K) and Arginine (R), whereas Chymotrypsin was defined to cut in C-terminus of Phenylalanine (F), Tryptophan (W), Tyrosine (Y) and Leucine (L). Phosphorylation sites were validated using the PhosphoRS 3.0 node, with at least 99% phospho-site probability. Exported phosphopeptides were then processed using ProteinModificationToolkit, with a cutoff value at 99%, and automatically sent to Motif-x with the following parameters: Occurrences 20 / Significance P < 10-6 / Background IPI Human Proteome. Peptides from RARα immunoprecipitation were filtered with a score versus charge state (1.5 z1, 2.5 z2, 3 z3 and 3.2 z≥4, Proteome Discoverer’s recommendations) because dataset was not sufficient to apply FDR and rank 1. Thermolysin was defined to cut in Cterminus of Valine (V), Alanine (A), Methionine (M), Isoleucine (I), Leucine (L) and Phenylalanine (F). RARα phosphopeptides spectra were manually inspected and RARα phosphorylation sites were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
Retinoic acid (RA), the main active vitamin A metabolite, controls multiple biological processes such as cell proliferation and differentiation through genomic programs and kinase cascades activation. Due to these properties, RA has proven anti-cancer capacity. Several breast cancer cells respond to the antiproliferative effects of RA, while others are RA-resistant. However, the overall signaling and transcriptional pathways that are altered in such cells have not been elucidated. Here, in a large-scale analysis of the phosphoproteins and in a genome-wide analysis of the RA-regulated genes, we compared two human breast cancer cell lines, a RA-responsive one, the MCF7 cell line, and a RA-resistant one, the BT474 cell line, which depicts several alterations of the "kinome". Using high-resolution nano-LC-LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometry associated to phosphopeptide enrichment, we found that several proteins involved in signaling and in transcription, are differentially phosphorylated before and after RA addition. The paradigm of these proteins is the RA receptor &#x3b1; (RAR&#x3b1;), which was phosphorylated in MCF7 cells but not in BT474 cells after RA addition. The panel of the RA-regulated genes was also different. Overall our results indicate that RA resistance might correlate with the deregulation of the phosphoproteome with consequences on gene expression.

### Keywords
Retinoic acid;  phosphorylation;  phosphoproteome;  breast cancer;  gene expression; rna-seq

### Affiliations
CNRS
Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch Cedex, FRANCE

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Cecile Rochette-Egly
Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch Cedex, FRANCE


