### Accession
PXD030699

### Title
Schistosoma mansoni Excretroy/Secretory Products from adult males and females

### Description
In the present study we compare the secretome from S. mansoni adult males and females using a label free quantitative proteomic approach

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of ES from males, females and mix samples were freeze-dried and dissolved with 22 µL of 50 mM ABC to quantify the protein concentration. Ten (10) µg of protein were taken and volumes set to 22.5 mL of 50 mM ABC. Reduction and alkylation were performed by incubating samples at60 °C during 20 min with 2 mM dithiothreitol followed by a 30 min incubation at RT in dark with 5.5 mM 2-iodoacetamide. Samples were then in solution digested with 400 ng trypsin overnight at 37 ºC and acidified with 10% TFA to a final concentration of 1%. Digested peptides were finally concentrated by speed vacuum to 15 µL. Five (5) µl of peptide mixtures were loaded onto a trap column (3µ C18-CL, 350 µm x 0.5mm; Eksigent) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 5 µl/min during 5 min. The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (3µ C18-CL 120 Ᾰ, 0.075 x 150 mm; Eksigent) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA. Elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 15 a 40 % B in A for 60 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (6600+ TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). Sample was ionized in a Source Type: Optiflow < 1 µL Nano applying 3.0 kV to the spray emitter at 175 °C. Analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode. Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1400 m/z for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘LOW’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 25 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode. Following switch criteria were used: charge: 2+ to 4+; minimum intensity; 250 counts per second (cps). Up to 100 ions were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using FragPipe (v16.0) with MSFragger (v3.3) and Philosopher (v4.0)against a concatenated target/decoy database consisting of the S. mansoni proteome (UP000008854) and common contaminants from Uniprot (downloaded on June 30th, 2021; 14,615 proteins). For the MSFragger analysis, precursor and fragment mass tolerance were both set to 20 ppm. Mass calibration and parameter optimization were enabled, and isotope error was set to 0/1/2 with two missed trypsin cleavages allowed. The peptide length was set from 7 to 50, and the peptide mass was set to 500 to 5000 Da. Carbamidomethylation of C (+57.021464 Da) was set as fixed modification and Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da) and acetylation of protein N-term (+42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Philosopher with PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet was used to estimate the identification FDR. The PSMs were filtered at 1% PSMand 1% protein identification FDR. Quantification and match between runs (MBR) was performed with IonQuant using default values. Label-free quantitative (LFQ) analysis of identified proteins was performed with the MSstats R package using default parameters (equalizeMedians as normalization method; log transformation: 2; Tukey’s median polish as the summary method; censored values in intensity column: null and MBimpute: false). Using a power calculation of 0.9 and FDR to 0.05, fold-changes were considered as significant when ≥ 2.450 and p-value ≤ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Esp, Adults, Secretome, Schistosoma, Males, Females, Es

### Affiliations
National Center for Microbiology - Instituto de Salud Carlos III
Instituto de Salud Carlos III

### Submitter
Javier Sotillo

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Sotillo
National Center for Microbiology - Instituto de Salud Carlos III


