### Accession
PXD007758

### Title
Vitamin C alters the amount of specific endoplasmic reticulum associated proteins involved in lipid metabolism in the liver of mice synthesizing a nonfunctional WRN mutant protein

### Description
Werner syndrome (WS) is a premature aging disorder caused by mutations in a DNA helicase/exonuclease. Mice lacking the helicase domain of the Wrn protein orthologue exhibit transcriptomic and metabolic alterations, some of which are reversed by vitamin C. Recent studies on the liver of these animals indicated that the Wrn mutant protein is associated with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) resulting in an ER stress response. In this study, we identified liver proteins that exhibit actual level differences in the ER fraction between wild type and Wrn mutant mice using quantitative proteomic profiling with label-free Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Multiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM) and immunoblotting were performed to validate findings in a secondary independent cohort of wild type and Wrn mutant mice in the presence or absence of vitamin C in drinking water. The list of identified proteins showing significant altered expression levels was compared to transcriptomic results that were obtained in previous studies to assess the extent of correlation between the mRNA levels and their corresponding encoded protein levels in the liver of our different mouse cohorts.

### Sample Protocol
Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) enrichment was performed on liver from five-month old untreated wild type mice and age-matched Wrnhel/hel mice treated or not with 0.4% vitamin C (w/v) in drinking water since weaning. Proteins were extracted form total ER fraction using sodium deoxycholate extraction buffer and submitted to trypsin digestion. The resulting peptides were purified HLB Oasis cartridge and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC chromatography system. An equivalent of 1ug of peptides per sample was separated at 300nL/min on a ReproSil-Pur C18 50cm length column with an acetonitrile gradient of 150 minutes and analyzed in Data Dependent Acquisition mode with MS spectra acquisition in the Orbitrap at 120K resolution, HCD fragmentation of the most intense peptides and acquisition of the resulting fragments (MSMS spectra) in the Ion Trap for a total cycle time of 3 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were search against the UniProt Mus musculus complete proteome database using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant software v 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, Nature Biotech., 2008). Carbamidomethyl cysteins was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminus and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications.  For validation of the protein identifications, the False Discovery Rate was set at 1% at peptide and protein levels based on a target/decoy search. MaxQuant was also used for ‘Label Free’ quantification with the ‘match between runs’ option activated.

### Publication Abstract
Werner syndrome (WS) is a premature aging disorder caused by mutations in a protein containing both a DNA exonuclease and DNA helicase domain. Mice lacking the helicase domain of the Wrn protein orthologue exhibit transcriptomic and metabolic alterations, some of which are reversed by vitamin C. Recent studies on these animals indicated that the mutant protein is associated with enriched endoplasmic reticulum (ER) fractions of tissues resulting in an ER stress response. In this study, we identified proteins that exhibit actual level differences in the ER enriched fraction between the liver of wild type and Wrn mutant mice using quantitative proteomic profiling with label-free Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Multiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM) and immunoblotting were performed to validate findings in a secondary independent cohort of wild type and Wrn mutant mice. DAVID 6.7 (NIH) was used for functional annotation analysis and indicated that the identified proteins exhibiting level changes between untreated wild type, Wrn mutant, and vitamin C treated Wrn mutant mice (ANOVA P-value &lt; 0.05) were involved in fatty acid and steroid metabolism pathways (Bonferroni P-value = 0.0137). Finally, when we compared the transcriptomic and the proteomic data of our mouse cohorts only ~7% of the altered mRNA profiles encoding for ER gene products were consistent with their corresponding protein profiles measured by the label-free quantification methods. These results suggest that a great number of ER gene products are regulated at the post-transcriptional level in the liver of Wrn mutant mice exhibiting an ER stress response.

### Keywords
Label free quantification, Vitamin c, Lc-msms shotgun, Liver proteome, Mouse model, Werner syndrome, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
Centre de recherche du CHU de Québec, Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval, Quebec City Québec, Canada
Centre Hospitalier de l’Université Laval (CHUL)

### Submitter
Michel Lebel

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Lebel
Centre de recherche du CHU de Québec, Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval, Quebec City Québec, Canada


