### Accession
PXD009138

### Title
Mice lacking the mitochondrial exonuclease MGME1 accumulate mtDNA deletions without developing progeria

### Description
Replication of mammalian mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is an essential process that requires high fidelity and control at multiple levels to ensure proper mitochondrial function. Mutations in the mitochondrial genome maintenance exonuclease 1 (MGME1) gene were recently reported in mitochondrial disease patients. Here, to study disease pathophysiology, we generated Mgme1 knockout mice and report that homozygous knockouts develop depletion and multiple deletions of mtDNA. The mtDNA replication stalling phenotypes vary dramatically in different tissues of Mgme1 knockout mice. Mice with MGME1 deficiency accumulate a long linear subgenomic mtDNA species, similar to the one found in mtDNA mutator mice, but do not develop progeria. This finding resolves a long-standing debate by showing that point mutations of mtDNA are the main cause of progeria in mtDNA mutator mice. We also propose a role for MGME1 in the regulation of replication and transcription termination at the end of the control region of mtDNA.

### Sample Protocol
The on-beads trypsinized peptides were cleaned with home-made StageTip (Empore Octadecyl C18; 3M) (Rappsilber et al. 2003, Anal. Chem., 75 663-670) and eluted with60% ACN/0.1% formic acid. The elute was then dried with speed-vac and resuspended with 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source, coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) UHPLC. A 25 cm long reverse-phase C18 column with 75μm inner diameter (PicoFrit, LC Packings) was used for separating peptides. The LC run lasted 90 min with a concentration of 5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) increasing to 25% over 80 min and further to 50% over 10 min .  The column was subsequently washed and re-equilibrated. MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner with a top 10 method. MS spectra were acquired with a mass range of 300−1800m/z and 60 000 resolution at 200m/z. The AGC target of MS was set to 3e6, and the maximum injection time was 80 ms. Peptides were fragmented with HCD with collision energy of 25. The AGC target of MSMS was set to 2e5 and the maximum injection time was 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) was used for analyzing the LC/MSMS raw data. The raw data were searched against the human proteome from UniProt (knowledgebase 2016_05). Following parameters were used for data analysis: for ‘’fixed modification’’: cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation; for ‘’variable modification’’: methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation; for ‘’digestion’’ specific with Trypsin/P, Max. miss cleavages 2; for label-free quantification, match between runs is selected. Other parameters were set as default.  Protein quantification significant analysis was performed with the Perseus statistical framework (Cox, 2014) (http://www.perseus-framework.org/) version 1.5.2.4. After removing the contaminants and reverse identifications, the intensities were transformed to log2. The replicates of each genotype were grouped and filtered with at least 3 validate values in at least one group. The missing values were replaced from normal distribution with width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8.  Mitochondrial proteins were filtered out for statistical analysis. Two-sample test was performed to identify the significantly different proteins. Each group has three replicates.  Proteins with an adjusted p-value (“BH” FDR of less than 0.001) were designated as differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Replication of mammalian mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is an essential process that requires high fidelity and control at multiple levels to ensure proper mitochondrial function. Mutations in the mitochondrial genome maintenance exonuclease 1 (MGME1) gene were recently reported in mitochondrial disease patients. Here, to study disease pathophysiology, we generated Mgme1 knockout mice and report that homozygous knockouts develop depletion and multiple deletions of mtDNA. The mtDNA replication stalling phenotypes vary dramatically in different tissues of Mgme1 knockout mice. Mice with MGME1 deficiency accumulate a long linear subgenomic mtDNA species, similar to the one found in mtDNA mutator mice, but do not develop progeria. This finding resolves a long-standing debate by showing that point mutations of mtDNA are the main cause of progeria in mtDNA mutator mice. We also propose a role for MGME1 in the regulation of replication and transcription termination at the end of the control region of mtDNA.

### Keywords
Mgme1 knock out, Progeria, Mtdna deletions

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing, Germany

### Submitter
Xinping Li

### Lab Head
Dr Xinping Li
Max-Planck-Institute for Biology of Ageing, Germany


