### Accession
PXD034121

### Title
Proteomic response of A549 lung cancer cell line to Venetin-1

### Description
Earthworm's celomic fluid has long attracted scientists' interest due to its toxic properties. It has been shown that subjecting it to a short heating at 70 ° C, which effectively reduces the toxicity to healthy cells, and demonstrates the selective action of the obtained Venetin-1 preparation against Candida albicans cells, as well as tumor cells from the A549 line. In order to find out about the molecular mechanisms behind the anti-cancer properties of the preparation, the conducted research investigated the proteome response of A549 cells to the presence of Venetin-1. The sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) methodology was used for the analysis, which allows for a relative quantitative analysis to be carried out without radiolabelling. The results showed that the formulation did not induce significant proteome responses in healthy BEAS cells. In the case of the tumor line, 31 proteins were up-regulated and 18 proteins down-regulated. Proteins with increased expression in neoplastic cells are mainly associated with the mitochondrion, membrane transport and the endoplasmic reticulum. In the case of altered proteins, Venetin-1 interferes in proteins that stabilize the structures, i.e. keratin, glycolysis / gluconeogenesis and metabolic processes. This information shows the potential of Venetin-1, which may be used in the treatment of lung cancer in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Two Venetin-1 treated and untreated cell lines were submitted for proteomic analysis (cell line A549 and BEAS). The standard FASP method protocol was used for protein extraction and digestion31. Briefly, cells were lysed by treatment with lysis buffer (1% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8, 50 mM DTT) and then heated for 10 min at 95° C. After heating, the concentration of the released proteins was measured spectrophotometrically (Multiscan Thermo) and 100 g of protein was taken for each sample for further digestion. The FASP procedure was performed on a 10 kDa mass cut-off membrane, and the digestion was performed with trypsin. After digestion and collection of the tryptic peptides, the final purification was performed according to the StageTips procedure on the C18 phase, where 10 mikrog of peptides were taken for purification based on spectrophotometric concentration measurement.  Spectrum registration was performed on a TripleTOF 5600+ (Sciex Framingham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer connected to a chromatography system the Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System (Eksigent, Redwood City, CA, USA). All chromatographic separations were performed on the ChromXP C18CL column (3 µm, 120 Å, 150 × 0.3 mm). For each sample the chromatographic gradient for each MS run was 11–42.5% B (solvent A 0% aqueous solution, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 60 min. The whole system was controlled by the SCIEX Analyst TF 1.7.1 software. Measurements for the spectral library were acquired in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Each cycle of the applied DDA method comprised precursor spectra accumulation in 100 ms in the range of 400–1200 m/z followed by top 20 precursor's product ion spectra accumulation in 50 ms in the range of 100–1800 m/z, resulting in a total cycle time of 1.15 s. Formerly fragmented precursor ions were dynamically excluded.

### Data Protocol
For quantitative analysis of four samples types, a spectral library was created with the group file data processing in PeakView v. 2.2 (SCIEX), with settings described in detail by Lewandowska. Joint search for library generation included all measurements conducted in DDA mode. For database search, ProteinPilot 4.5 software (Sciex) was used. It is based on the Paragon algorithm against the dedicated SwissProt Homo sapiens database (2 July 2020) with an automated false discovery rate. All files from SWATH experiments for cells lines were downloaded to PeakView software and were processed with the previously established library. The resulting data were exported to an .xml file and to Marker View software. All files from SWATH experiments for cells lines were downloaded to PeakView software and were processed with the previously established library. The resulting data were exported to an .xml file and to Marker View software. All data were normalized using log2 approach, and further processed in Perseus software. Cytoscape 3.8.0 and STRING 11.0 were used for the interactome network visualization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Swath, Venetin-1, Earthworms, Coelomic fluid

### Affiliations
University of Gdansk
University of Gdansk, Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry

### Submitter
Paulina Czaplewska

### Lab Head
Dr Paulina Czaplewska
University of Gdansk, Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry


