### Accession
PXD039657

### Title
PALEOPROTEOMICS APPLIED TO THE WAZIERS SITE

### Description
The ancient preserved molecules in bones offer the opportunity to gain a better knowledge on the biological past. In recent years, bones proteomics has become an attractive method to study extinct species and phylogenetic evolution as an alternative to DNA analysis which is limited by DNA amplification present in ancient samples and its contamination. The analysis of fossils must consume a low quantity of material to avoid damaging the samples. Another difficulty is the absence of genomic data for most of the extinct species. This study applied a proteomic methodology to mammalian bones of 130,000 / 120,000 years old from the last Chibanian and the earlier Upper Pleistocene site of Waziers (France). The presence of lithic artefacts and the traces of butchery observed on the bones indicate the presence of Neanderthal Man on this site. Starting from 5 milligram samples, our results show that most detected peptides match collagen I alpha 1 and alpha 2 proteins with a sequence coverage up to 60 %. Using sequence homology with modern sequences, a biological classification was successfully achieved. Each bone taxonomic rank by proteomics was consistent with the existing osteomorphological studies and palaeoenvironmental and palaeodietary data.

### Sample Protocol
The excavations carried out in Waziers, the Bas-Terroir in 2014 and 2015 then in 2017 led to the discovery of several dozen dental and bone remains of vertebrates. This site is located in the Nord department on the outskirts of the Douai urban area. Fifteen bones from the “Le Bas-terroir” site in Waziers were sampled. They come from the 2014, 2015 and 2017 excavations The sample digestion method is based on the publication of Bray et al (Bray et al., 2022). The samples were digested with the eFASP method adapted from Erde et al. (Erde et al., 2014). LC-MS/MS analyzes were performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer coupled to a U3000 RSLC microfluidic HPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) (Helle et al., 2019).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data were processed with Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) against the NCBI database (NCBIProt_20210815) limited to mammals (12,254,278 sequences) and birds (4,179,719 sequences). The second bioinformatic analysis was performed with PEAKS X (Bioinformatic solution INC., Waterloo, Canada) against an in-house database containing 1,765 collagen sequences extracted from the NCBi database (All_Collagen, uploaded 12-2021) restricted to mammals and birds. Peptides identified on collagen I alpha 1 and I alpha 2 were aligned to the non-redundant NCBI protein sequence (all non-redundant GenBank translations CDS + PDB + SwissProt + PIR + PRF excluding environmental samples from WGS projects containing 308,570,119 sequences) to find similarity to BLASTp (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Proteins). The identified peptides were submitted to Unipept (version 4.0, https://unipept.ugent.be/) for taxonomic analysis (Mesuere et al., 2015). Peptide-protein pairing is based on data from UniProtKB database, while taxa are from NCBI taxonomy.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Waziers, Taxonomy, Mammalian bones, Palaeoproteomics, Post translational modifications., Pleistocene

### Affiliations
Laboratoire MSAP UAR 3290 CNRS Bâtiment C4 Avenue Paul Langevin Cité Scientifique 59655 Villeneuve D'ascq
MSAP USR 3290

### Submitter
BRAY FABRICE

### Lab Head
Dr fabrice bray
Laboratoire MSAP UAR 3290 CNRS Bâtiment C4 Avenue Paul Langevin Cité Scientifique 59655 Villeneuve D'ascq


