### Accession
PXD006858

### Title
Identification of recombinant settlement-inducing protein complex from Amphibalanus amphitrite by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Settlement-inducing protein complex (SIPC) is a protein that acts as a phoromone cue to attract conspecific of the barnacle Amphibalanus amphitrite to settle on a substrate. Recombinant settlement-inducing protein complex was expressed in insect Sf9 cells through a baculovirus overexpression system, purified and analysed by mass spectrometry to confirm its identity.

### Sample Protocol
A purified sample 20 μl of SpSIPC expressed in Sf9 cells was subjected to SDS-PAGE electrophoresis in a 5% acrylamide/bis-acrylamide gel. The gel was then fixed for 30 minutes (45% methanol, 1% acetic acid) and subjected to silver staining using the Pierce™ Silver Stain for mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manusfacturer’s instructions. Upon band visualization, a gel slice corresponding to the 217 kDa MW of SpSIPC (Supplementary Figure S1F), was excised and cut into smaller pieces and transferred into a tube, washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile and subjected to in-gel enzymatic digestion with trypsin (Gold, mass spec grade, Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution overnight at 37°C. Peptides were eluted and dried to completeness upon speed-vac-assisted solvent removal. The dried peptide mixtures were reconstituted in 2% ​acetonitrile , 0.1% ​formic acid, in water and analysed by LC-MS/MS.Peptides were pre-concentrated with a flow of 3 μl/min for 10 min on a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100μmx2cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then loaded onto a 15 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, particle size 2 μm, 100Å, Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) consisted of solution A (2% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and solution B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). The peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 4% solution B up to 40% in 50 min for an 1 h gradient run with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The column was placed in an oven operating at 35 °C. For LC-MS/MS, purified peptides were analysed by HPLC MS/MS coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanospray source.  Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 300–1600) in profile mode and data-dependent acquisition, with the resolution set to 60,000 at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 106 ions. The six most intense ions were sequentially isolated for collision-induced (CID) MS/MS fragmentation and detection in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to 1 min and activated for 90 sec. Ions with single charge states were excluded. Lockmass of m/z 445,120025 was used for internal calibration. Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to control the system and acquire the raw files.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Orbitrap raw data with peak S/N threshold set to 1.5, were searched in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using the SEQUEST HT against the SpSIPC FASTA sequence of SIPC as well as the Uniprot reviewed entries of human proteome (20192 sequences), the Uniprot entries of Drosophila melanogaster proteome (21969 sequences) and the Uniprot entries of Bombyx mori proteins (14788 sequences)  with strict trypsin specificity and with maximum two missed cleavages and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, deamidation of glutamine and asparagines residues and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The identified peptides were filtered based on their Xcorr values versus peptide charge states (XCorr >2 for charge state +2 and XCorr >2.5 for charge state +3).

### Publication Abstract
Reproduction in barnacles relies on chemical cues that guide their gregarious settlement. These cues have been pinned down to several sources of settlement pheromones, one of which is a protein termed settlement-inducing protein complex (SIPC), a large glycoprotein acting as a pheromone to induce larval settlement and as an adhesive in surface exploration by the cyprids. Settlement assays in laboratory conditions with <i>Amphibalanus</i> (=<i>Balanus</i>) <i>amphitrite</i> cyprids in the presence of SIPC showed that cyprids exhibit settlement preference behaviour at lower concentrations of SIPC [half maximal effective concentration (EC<sub>50</sub>)=3.73&#x2005;nmol&#x2005;l<sup>-1</sup>] and settlement avoidance behaviour at higher concentrations (EC<sub>50</sub>=101&#x2005;nmol&#x2005;l<sup>-1</sup>). By using truncated fragments of SIPC in settlement assays, we identify that domains at the N-terminus of SIPC transduce settlement preference cues that mask the settlement avoidance cues transduced by domains at its C-terminus. Removing the N-terminal 600 amino acids from SIPC resulted in truncated fragments that transduced only settlement avoidance cues to the cyprids. From the sexual reproduction point of view, this bimodal response of barnacles to SIPC suggests that barnacles will settle gregariously when conspecific cues are sparse but will not settle if conspecific cues inform of overcrowding that will increase reproductive competition and diminish their reproductive chances.

### Keywords
Settlement-inducing protein complex, Amphibalanus anphitrite, Biofouling, Settlement assays, Sipc

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece
Department of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens 157 84, Greece,

### Submitter
Skarlatos Dedos

### Lab Head
Dr Skarlatos G. Dedos
Department of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens 157 84, Greece,


