### Accession
PXD037693

### Title
Targeted protein of USP20 by LC-MS/MS in HepG2 cells

### Description
Obesity is a metabolic disease accompanied by lipid metabolism that can cause hyperlipidemia, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, and artery atherosclerosis. Sleeve gastrectomy (SG) is a type of bariatric surgery that can effectively treat obesity and improve lipid metabolism. However, its specific underlying mechanism remains unclear. Therefore, we herein performed SG, and sham surgery on two groups of diet-induced obese mice. The results showed that compared to the sham group, the SG group displayed a downregulation of deubiquitinase ubiquitin-specific peptidase 20 (USP20). And USP20 could promote lipid accumulation in vitro. Co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analyses showed that heat-shock protein family A member 2 (HSPA2) potentially acts as a substrate of USP20. HSPA2 was also downregulated in the SG group and could promote lipid accumulation in vitro. Further research showed that USP20 targeted and stabilized HSPA2 via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. The downregulation of the USP20-HSPA2 axis in diet-induced obese mice following SG improved lipid dysmetabolism, indicating that USP20-HSPA2 axis was a noninvasive therapeutic treatment to be investigated in the future.

### Sample Protocol
For in-gel tryptic digestion, gel pieces were destained in 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% acetonitrile (v/v) until clear. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 100 μl of 100% acetonitrile for 5 min, the liquid removed, and the gel pieces rehydrated in 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 56 °C for 60 min. Gel pieces were again dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile, liquid was removed and gel pieces were rehydrated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were incubated at room temperature, in the dark for 45 min. Gel pieces were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. Gel pieces were rehydrated with 10 ng/μl trypsin resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 on ice for 1 h. Excess liquid was removed and gel pieces were digested with trypsin at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were extracted with 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid, followed by 100% acetonitrile. Peptides were dried to completion and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 16 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt human database. Trypsin/P (or other enzymes if any) was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modification. Peptide confidence was set at high, and peptide ion score was set > 20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Usp20, Hepg2, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University
Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, China

### Submitter
Wenjie Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang Wenjie
Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University


