### Accession
PXD014442

### Title
Analysis of 5000 year-old human teeth using optimized large-scale and targeted proteomics approaches for detection of sex-specific peptides

### Description
Tooth is a remarkable source of information for paleoanthropologists. Investigation of ancient dental proteomes is able to provide biomolecular data helping at understanding past life. In particular, the enamel protein amelogenin (AMEL) offers the possibility to determine the sex of the specimen. Here, we have analysed eleven 5000 year-old human teeth from a French Neolithic site using a dedicated paleoproteomics strategy for phenotypic characterization of ancient samples. We have set up a shotgun proteomics analysis based on an optimized 3-step iterative search strategy. This allowed the identification of a total number of 1496 proteins including the main proteins characteristic of dental tissues. Most of the proteins were identified by the no enzyme database search mode included in the iterative bioinformatics data analysis pipeline. This demonstrates that a number of peptides issued from randomly degraded proteins may be missed when using the conventional semi-tryptic database search mode. Based on the identification of the sex-specific peptides TALVLTPLK, IALVLTPLK and WYQSIRPPYP of amelogenin, a targeted MS approach using a parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mode was performed to maximize the sensitivity and the reproducibility of detecting these unique peptides for sex estimation. This led to confirm the sex of individualsin all the samples.

### Sample Protocol
The archeological material originates from the French Neolithic necropole of Mont Aimé (3650-3380 cal BC. Eleven teeth were randomly collected from individuals of the hypogea 1 (1H01, 1H05, 1H06, 1H07, 1H12, 1H15, 1H18) and the hypogea 2 (2H08, 2H10, 2H12, 2H23). The sex of the individuals (4 females and 7 males) was previously determined by genetic analyses. Two modern teeth from male individuals were also analysed. After abrasion of the tooth surfaces by manual drilling with a Dremel instrument, teeth were totally reduced into a ﬁne powder in liquid nitrogen using a Spex SamplePrep TM6870 Freezer/MillTM. Then, protein extraction was performed on 10-50 mg of tooth powder by using an adapted filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, including extraction blank (Blk-E) samples with no material but exactly processed as the tooth samples. Finally, protein extracts were subjected to enzymatic digestion and the obtained tryptic peptides was dried by using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and kept at -20°C.The dried peptides were resuspended with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile at a concentration of 1µg/µl, and analysed by on-line nanoLC using an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific, Dionex) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 1µg of the samples were loaded on a 300 μm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 pre-column (Thermo Scientific, Dionex) at 20 μl/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After 5 min of desalting, peptides were on-line separated on a 75 μm ID x 50 cm C18 column (in-house packed with Reprosil C18-AQ Pur 3 μm resin, Dr. Maisch; Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) equilibrated in 95% of buffer A (0.2% formic acid), with a gradient of 5 to 25% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) for 80 min then 25% to 50% for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using a top-speed approach (cycle time of 3s). The survey scans MS were performed in the Orbitrap over m/z 350-1550 with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Most intense ions per survey scan were selected at 1.6 m/z with the quadrupole and fragmented by Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD). The monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on, the intensity threshold for fragmentation was set to 50,000 and the normalized collision energy was set to 35%. The resulting fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 (at 200 m/z), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 5e4, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. For internal calibration the 445.120025 ion was used as lock mass. Based on the shotgun analysis results, three sex-specific peptides TALVLTPLK and WYQSIRPPYP from AMELX  and IALVLTPLK  from AMELY, respectively, were selected for targeted mass spectrometry analysis. Corresponding peptides used as standard references were synthetized as isotopically labelled C-terminus Lys U-13C6,15N2 or Arg U-13C6,15N4 heavy peptides. Both labelled peptides were coated together on a water-soluble biopolymer bead in a controlled amount (READYBEADS™, ANAQUANT, Villeurbanne, France). One coated READYBEADTM was dissolved in 1ml of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile for 5 min by vortexing, releasing the heavy isotope-labelled peptides at final concentrations of 1 pmol/µL for TALVLTPLK, 1.2 pmol/µL for IALVLTPLK, 3 pmol/µL for WYQSIRPPYP and  1.9 pmol/µL for WYqSIRPPYP. Subsequently, 10 µl of each sample at a concentration of 1µg/µl were spiked with 1µl of the standard heavy peptide solution. 1.1µl of each spiked-in sample was analysed by a targeted mass spectrometry approach conducted in parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mode with the same instrument and chromatographic conditions as for shotgun nanoLC-MS/MS analyses. The PRM acquisition method combined two scan events starting with a full scan followed by targeted MS/MS of the doubly charged precursor ions for both light  and heavy sex-specific peptides along the complete chromatographic run. The full scan event employed a m/z 350–1550 mass range selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z), a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 4e5, and maximum filling times of 50 ms. The targeted MS/ MS was run at an Orbitrap resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z), target AGC value of 1e5, and maximum filling times of 120 ms. The targeted peptides were isolated using a 2 m/z unit window with the quadrupole and fragmented by Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation(HCD) with normalized collision energy of 35 eV.

### Data Protocol
Data obtained from the shotgun nanoLC-MS/MS analysis were processed using an iterative search method in two different search engines: Mascot 2.6.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) in Proteome DiscovererTM software 2.1.1.21 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and X!Tandem version X! Tandem Sledgehammer (2013.09.01.1) in SearchGUI 3.2.14. Data were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database released 2016_02 with Homo sapiens taxonomy (20,295 sequences) implemented with a number of isoforms and variants.  The iterative database search performed with Mascot in Proteome DiscovererTM consisted of three steps and was combined with the Percolator algorithm (version 2.05) for calculation of q-values and Posterior Error Probability (PEP) of peptide-spectrum matches (PSM). For all steps, a target-decoy approach was used for FDR estimation using reversed or randomised databases for semi-tryptic step or no enzyme steps, respectively. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 20 mmu, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The iterative search strategy consists in making, at the end of a first semi-tryptic search with multiple dynamic modifications, additional successive searches (no enzyme and oxidation, no enzyme and multiple dynamic modifications) on the pool of not well-identified spectra (PSM > 1% FDR) at each step. The dynamic modifications  include asparagine and glutamine deamidation, methionine and proline oxidation, peptide N-terminal and lysine carbamylation, and N-terminal glutamine conversion to pyro-glutamic acid. In a final consensus step, all the processed data (msf files) were combined, validated and filtered with the following parameters: only PSM with rank 1 and a Mascot  ion score ≥ 20 were considered. PSM and peptides were validated based on Percolator PEP values at a FDR set to 1%. Then, the peptide identifications were grouped into proteins according to the law of parsimony and filtered to 5% FDR. Using X!Tandem, protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy version of the customized human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database and the decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 20 mmu, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Mgf files were initially searched using tryptic enzyme specificity with a maximum of three missed cleavages and a limited number of variable modifications : oxidation (M,P). This method is known as a non-refined search. Then, a refined search of the “candidate proteins” identified in the non-refined search is performed allowing non-specific hydrolysis and supplemental protein modifications: deamidation (N,Q), carbamylation (K, N-terminal protein), Acetylation (N-terminal protein), Pyrolidone (E,Q, carbamidomethylated C). Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.15 (Vaudel et al., 2015). Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0%, 1.0%, and 5.0% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution, respectively. PRM data were processed in Skyline 3.7.0.11317. Firstly, the peptide search results (.dta files) were used for spectral library building with a cut-off score of 0.95. The MS/MS spectra of imported PRM data were matched (dotp ≥ 0.8) with that of the spectral library to confirm the sex-specific peptide identities. The heavy isotope-labelled sex-specific peptides were invoked as standard references for supplemental reliable identification (rdotp ≥ 0.98) and peak selection. All the extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) of selected fragments were manually inspected. The peak areas intensity from the selected peptide transitions, the results of comparison on retention time (RT) and the product ions peak area percentage were exported for heavy and light sex-specific peptides. For the determination of linearity, response curves were generated by spiking the CW02 present-day sample with various dilutions of one coated READYBEADSTM, and the LOD/LLOQ of the assays was calculated using the Quasar software implemented as an external tool in Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
The study demonstrates the high potential of MS-based proteomics coupled to an iterative database search strategy for the in-depth investigation of ancient proteomes. An efficient targeted PRM MS-based approach, although limited to the detection of a single pair of sex-specific amelogenin peptides, allowed confirming the sex of individuals in ancient dental remains, an essential information for paleoanthropologists facing the issue of sex determination and dimorphism.

### Keywords
Sex determination, Data dependent acquisition, Paleoproteomics, Parallel reaction monitoring, Tooth, Amelogenin

### Affiliations
Laboratoire d’Anthropologie Moléculaire et Imagerie de Synthèse (AMIS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse,France
IPBS-CNRS

### Submitter
Carine Froment

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine Mollereau
Laboratoire d’Anthropologie Moléculaire et Imagerie de Synthèse (AMIS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse,France


