### Accession
PXD007132

### Title
Global profiling of protein-DNA and protein-nucleosome binding affinities using quantitative mass spectrometry

### Description
Interaction proteomics studies have provided fundamental insights into multimeric biomolecular assemblies and cell-scale molecular networks. Significant recent developments in mass spectrometry-based interaction proteomics have been fueled by rapid advances in label-free, isotopic, and isobaric quantitation workflows. Here, we report a quantitative protein-DNA and protein-nucleosome binding assay that uses affinity purifications from nuclear extracts coupled with isobaric chemical labeling and mass spectrometry to quantify apparent binding affinities proteome-wide. We use this assay with a variety of DNA and nucleosome baits to quantify apparent binding affinities of monomeric and multimeric transcription factors and chromatin remodeling complexes.

### Sample Protocol
DNA and nucleosome affinity purifications were performed using a filter plate based workflow described first by Hubner et al. The essential protocol is described below. First, all dsDNA oligos were annealed by heating to 95C for 10 minutes before cooling to room temperature. Each oligo was then diluted to a working stock of 3uM, which represented the highest concentration “reference” titration point in this study. A series of nine three-fold dilutions was then prepared, resulting in a titration series of 10 oligo concentrations ranging from 0.15nM to 3uM. We prepared 200uL of oligo per titration point per replicate in this fashion. Dilutions were performed in DNA binding buffer (DBB: 1M NaCl, 10mM Tris pH 8, 1mM EDTA, 0.05% NP-40). Filter plates were first prepared with 50uL of ethanol per well (96-well filter plate, 1.2uM pore, Millipore/Merck MSBVS1210). Wells were then washed twice with DBB. 20uL streptavidin-sepharose bead slurry was added to each well (GE, 10uL beads, 3nmol binding capacity). Wells were washed twice with DBB. 150uL of the corresponding oligo titration point was added to each well, and oligos were immobilized to the streptavidin-conjugated beads over a 1 hour incubation at 4C while shaking on a tabletop microplate shaker. Samples were then washed once with DBB and twice with protein binding buffer (PBB: 150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH8, 0.25% NP-40, 1mM TCEP, and CPIs). 100ug of HeLa nuclear lysate was then diluted to 150uL final volume in PBB and added to each well. Samples were incubated for 2 hours at 4C while shaking while shaking on a microplate shaker, then washed six times with washing buffer (150mM NaCl, 100mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate, TEAB). Sample preparation for mass spectrometry was performed by first adding 50uL of elution buffer (20% methanol, 80mM TEAB, 10mM TCEP). Proteins were incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature, alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide, and digested with 0.25ug trypsin overnight while shaking on a tabletop shaker at room temperature. Isobaric labeling was performed using the 10-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) system (Thermo)13. 0.8mg TMT reagent for each reporter mass was resuspended in 100uL anhydrous acetonitrile. 10ul resuspended TMT reagent was then added to the corresponding sample. Reactions were incubated for 1 hour in the dark before quenching for 30 minutes with 100mM Tris pH 8.0. All ten pulldowns corresponding to all ten oligonucleotide titration points labelled by the corresponding TMT reagent were pooled into one Eppendorf tube, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid, and desalted for mass spectrometry analysis by the C18 StageTip method. Samples containing labelled peptides were eluted from StageTips with buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), concentrated to 5uL by SpeedVac centrifugation at room temperature, and resuspended to 12uL in buffer A (0.1% formic acid). Samples were separated by liquid chromatography using an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo). We used a modified gradient from 7-15% buffer B over 5 minutes, from 15%-35% buffer B over 214 minutes, from 35-50% buffer B over 5 minutes, and finally from 50-95% buffer B in 1 minute followed by 5 minutes hold at 95% buffer B. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Thermo Fusion Tribrid instrument using the built-in Thermo synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 method, with a modified nano-HPLC gradient as described above. Briefly, full MS scans were collected in the orbitrap at 120,000 resolution in a scan range from 380-1500 m/z. We used an AGC target of 2.0e5, and a maximum injection time of 50ms. Peaks were selected for MS2 based on selection criteria of charge state 2-7 and an intensity threshold of 5.0e3. Dynamic exclusion was enabled, with peaks excluded after 1 scan for a duration of 70 seconds in a ±10ppm window. MS2 was conducted in top speed data dependant acquisition mode, with precursor priority given based on highest intensity. MS2 scans were performed after isolation in the quadrupole using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z units. We used CID activation at a collision energy of 35% for fragmentation. MS2 detection was performed in the ion trap with an AGC target of 1.0e4 and a maximum injection time of 50ms. MS2 precursors in the mass range 400-1200 m/z were selected for MS3 analysis using the Thermo TMT reagent isobaric tag loss exclusion property and excluding MS2 precursor ions 18 m/z units low and 5 m/z units high. MS3 selection was conducted in top 10 data dependent acquisition mode giving the most intense ions the highest precursor priority. MS3 ions were selected with synchronous precursor selection activated for 10 precursors. MS and MS2 isolation windows were set to 2 m/z. HCD activation was used at a collision energy of 65%. Fragment ions were detected in the orbitrap with 60,000 resolution in the scan range 120-500 m/z. For MS3, we used an AGC target of 1.0e5 and a maximum injection time of 120ms.

### Data Protocol
Spectral matching to peptides, grouping of peptide identifications into proteins, and isobaric label quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo). We used the built-in processing workflow “PWF_Fusion_Reporter_Based_Quan_SPS_MS3_SequestHT_Percolator” and the built-in consensus workflow “CWF_Comprehensive_Enhanced Annotation_Quan_Results”, both with default settings. We used the TMT 10-plex quantification method with the 131 mass set as the control channel. In our workflow, the 131 reporter mass always corresponded to the titration point with the highest bait concentration (3uM), with each sequentially lighter reporter tag corresponding to a threefold dilution of the next highest bait concentration. For the Sequest HT search, database parameters were enzymatic digestion with trypsin allowing two missed cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids and a maximum peptide length of 144 amino acids. Our search was performed against the uniprot curated human proteome (downloaded December 2015). We used a precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was included as a static modification (57.021Da), while methionine oxidation (15.995Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (42.011Da) were included as dynamic modifications. We included the 6-plex TMT reagent mass (229.163Da) as a dynamic modification on lysine, histidine, serine, and threonine, as well as the peptide N-terminus. FDR filtering was performed via percolator with a strict target FDR of 0.01 and a relaxed FDR of 0.0532. Strict parsimony was applied for protein grouping, and unique plus razor peptides were used for quantification. Peptide quantification normalization was applied based on total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
Interaction proteomics studies have provided fundamental insights into multimeric biomolecular assemblies and cell-scale molecular networks. Significant recent developments in mass spectrometry-based interaction proteomics have been fueled by rapid advances in label-free, isotopic, and isobaric quantitation workflows. Here, we report a quantitative protein-DNA and protein-nucleosome binding assay that uses affinity purifications from nuclear extracts coupled with isobaric chemical labeling and mass spectrometry to quantify apparent binding affinities proteome-wide. We use this assay with a variety of DNA and nucleosome baits to quantify apparent binding affinities of monomeric and multimeric transcription factors and chromatin remodeling complexes.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Dna-protein interactions, Transcription, Binding affinity

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology  Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences  Radboud University  Nijmegen 6500 HB  the Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Matthew Makowski

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology  Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences  Radboud University  Nijmegen 6500 HB  the Netherlands


