### Accession
PXD025767

### Title
A quantitative map of human primary microRNA processing sites

### Description
Maturation of canonical microRNA (miRNA) is initiated by DROSHA that cleaves the primary transcript (pri-miRNA). Over 1,800 miRNA loci are annotated in humans, but it remains largely unknown if and at which sites the pri-miRNAs are cleaved by DROSHA. Here we performed in vitro processing on a full set of human pri-miRNAs (miRBase v21) followed by sequencing. This comprehensive profiling enabled us to classify miRNAs based on DROSHA-dependence and map their cleavage sites with respective processing efficiency measures. Only 758 pri-miRNAs are confidently processed by DROSHA, while the majority may be non-canonical or false entries. Analyses of the DROSHA-dependent pri-miRNAs show key cis-elements for processing. We observe widespread alternative processing as well as unproductive cleavage events such as “nick” or “inverse” processing. SRSF3 is a broad-acting auxiliary factor modulating alternative processing and suppressing unproductive processing. The profiling data and methods developed in this study will allow systematic analyses of miRNA regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Eluates from triplicate pull-down experiments with no bait, pri-mir-142, or pri-mir-17 were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis to identify the precipitated proteins. Samples were prepared using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), as described by Wiśniewski and colleagues (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Samples were further desalted using solid-phase extraction (SPE) tube packed with C18 particles (MilliporeSigma, Discovery DSC-18 SPE Tube) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis as described by Shin and colleagues (Shin et al., 2020). Eluates were reconstituted with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution after desiccation in speed-vac.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). Peptides were searched with the Andromeda search engine in the SwissProt Homo Sapiens proteome database (20199 entries, UniProt (http://uniprot.org)). The following search terms were used: tryptic digestion, fixed carbamidomethylation on cysteine, dynamic oxidation of methionine, and dynamic acetylation to the protein N-terminus. The ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the false discovery rate was set to <1% protein level. Label-free quantification (LFQ) and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) features were activated for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microrna; pri-mirna processing; drosha; dgcr8; microprocessor; srsf3; rna pull-down assay

### Affiliations
Seoul National University

### Submitter
Kijun Kim

### Lab Head
Dr V. Narry Kim
Seoul National University


