### Accession
PXD026932

### Title
reductive debromination of polybrominated diphenyl ethers by Dehalococcoides

### Description
Extensive use of polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) has resulted in widespread environmental distribution and concerns remain about risks to human health and ecosystems from legacy PBDE contamination.  Though bioremediation has been proven to be a cost-effective and efficient technology for treating halogenated pollutants in situ, application of bioremediation technologies at PBDE-contaminated sites is restricted by a lack of knowledge about functional PBDE-dehalogenating microbes. In the current study, we observed distinct PBDE-dehalogenation activity by three previously isolated Dehalococcoides mccartyi strains (CG1, CG4, and 11a5). PBDE debromination proceeded via distinct pathways in each D. mccartyi strain and involved previously characterized (TceA11a5, PcbA1, and PcbA4) and uncharacterized (11a5_e001) reductive dehalogenases (RDase), suggesting that this phenotype may be more widespread among the Dehalococcoides than is currently recognized.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics, cells of strains CG1, CG4, and 11a5 were harvested from 500 ml cultures amended with the penta- and tetra-BDEs mixture by centrifugation (12,000 ×g, 20 min, 4 °C) and resuspended in de-gassed tris-HCl buffer (100 mM, pH 7.0).  Proteins were extracted from resuspended pellets using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) equipped with a nanoLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC; Thermo Fisher Scientific), as previously described.  Briefly, proteins were digested with trypsin and peptide samples were desalted using ZipTip-C18 material (Merck Millipore).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified against the UniProt protein database with Proteome Discover (v2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SequestHT search engine. Protein and peptide abundances were calculated by label-free quantification on the basis of area counts using the Minora node implemented in Proteome Discoverer, as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polybrominated diphenyl ethers, Reductive dehalogenation, Dehalococcoides

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, National University of Singapore

### Submitter
Siyan Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr He Jianzhong
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, National University of Singapore


