### Accession
PXD019530

### Title
Molecular determinant for MED1 interaction with the VDR-RXR heterodimer

### Description
To provide structural insights into the mechanism of the specific association of the coactivator MED1 with the Vitamin D nuclear (VDR)-RXR heterodimer, we used combined structural methods including X-ray crystallography, small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), NMR, hydrogen-deuterium exchange coupled to mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), crosslinking mass spectrometry as well as biophysical methods.

### Sample Protocol
HDX experiments of VDR-RXR-rANF1 complex were carried out with and without 2 molar excess of NR2 motif in 20mM Tris pH8, 75mM NaCl, 75mM KCl, 2mM CHAPS, 5% glycerol, 4mM MgSO4, 1mM TCEP. The same buffer was used for VDR-RXR-rANF1-MED1(50-660) complex HDX experiment. Preparation and injection of the samples were automatically conducted using a LEAP HDX Automation Manager (Waters), while chromatography was carried out on Acquity UPLC system with HDX technology (Waters, Manchester, UK). Samples were incubated for a range of exchange times (0 min, 0.5 min, 2 min, 10 min, and 30 min) in 95% of deuterated buffer (20 mM Tris pD 8.0, 75 mM NaCL, 75 mM KCl, 4 mM MgSO4, 1 mM TCEP) before quenching the exchange by adding a 150 mM glycine pH 2.4, 2 M GdHCl, 4mM MgSO4, 1mM TCEP buffer at 1 °C during 30 s. Digestion of  samples (between 20 and 50 pmol injections) was then performed through a pepsin-immobilized cartridge in 0.1% aqueous formic acid solution at a 200 µl/min. Generated Peptides were then trapped on UPLC pre-column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard pre-column, 2.1 mm I.D. × 5 mm, 1.7 µM particle diameter, Waters) and separated on UPLC column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.0 mm I.D. × 100 mm, 1.7 µM particle diameter, Waters) at 0 °C. Mass spectrometry analyses were acquired with Synapt G2Si HDMS (Waters) with electrospray ionization, using data-independent acquisition mode (MSE) over an m/z range of 50–2000 and100 fmol/µl Glu-FibrinoPeptide solution as lock-mass correction and calibration. Analyses were performed with the following parameters: capillary voltage, 3 kV; sampling cone voltage, 40 V; source temperature, 80°C; desolvation gas, 150°C and 600 L.h-1; acquisition range, acquisition range, 50−2000 m/z; scan time, 0.3 s; trap collision energy, 15 to 40 eV. Crosslinking reactions were conducted with 25 µM protein solutions in 20 mM HEPES, 75 mM NaCl, 75 mM KCl, 4 mM MgSO4, 1 mM TCEP, pH 8. Freshly prepared 10 mM stock solution of DSBU and C2-arm version of DSBU in DMSO (CF Plus Chemicals s.r.o., Czech Republic) were added in 50-, 100- and 200-fold molar excess. The reaction were conducted during 45 min at room temperature. The reaction was quenched during 20 min using NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 20 mM final. Disulfide reduction was performed by incubating the crosslinked complex solution with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 60°C. Alkylation was performed with 15 mM IAA for 30 min in the dark. Then trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) was added to a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio. Samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Digestion was quenched with 1% formic acid. Peptides were cleaned up using SPE cartridges and samples were concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator before LC/MS/MS analysis. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoAcquity Ulta-Performance-LC (Waters, Milford, USA) coupled to the Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with a nanoSpray source. The sample were trapped on a nanoACQUITY UPLC precolumn (C18, 180µm x 20mm, 5 µm particle size), and the peptides were separated on a nanoACQUITY UPLC column (C18, 75µm x 250 mm with 1.7 µm particle size, Waters, Milford, USA) maintained at 60°C. The sample were first injected with a 285 min gradient  and a flow rate of 450 nL/min. The Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap source temperature was set to 250°C and spray voltage to 1.8kV. Full scan MS spectra (300-1800 m/z) were acquired in positive mode at a resolution of 140 000, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges, with lock-mass option being enabled (polysiloxane ion from ambient air at 445.12 m/z). The 10 most intense multiply charged peptides per full scan (charge states ˃2) were isolated using a 2 m/z window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (30 normalized collision energy, ±3%). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 35 000, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105, and dynamic exclusion was set to 60 sec. The system was fully controlled by XCalibur software v3.0.63, 2013 (Thermo Scientific) and NanoAcquity UPLC console v1.51.3347 (Waters).

### Data Protocol
HDX experiments were realized in triplicate for each time point. Peptide identification was performed using ProteinLynx Global Server 2.5.3 (Waters) with a home-made protein sequence library containing VDR, RXR and MED1(50-660) sequences, where peptide and fragment tolerances were set automatically by PLGS, and oxidized methionine was set as variable modification. Deuterium uptakes for all identified peptides were then filtered and validated manually using DynamX 3.0 (Waters) as follows: only peptides identified in all replicates were kept with only one charge and deuterium uptakes were not corrected for back-exchange, representing as relative with a minimum fragment of 0.2 per amino acid, a minimum intensity at 103, a length between 5 and 30 residues and a file threshold of 3. HDX–MS results were statistically validated using Mixed-Effects Model for HDX experiments(Hourdel et al., 2016) where statistical significance thresholds were set to 0.01.  XL-MS data were processed and converted in .mgf format. The MS/MS data were analyzed using MeroX software version 1.6.6 (Götze et al 2015). Mass tolerence of 5 ppm for precursor ions and 10 ppm for product ions were applied. A 5% FDR cut-off and a signal-to-noise ≥2 were applied. For both crosslinker, Lys and Arg were considered as protease sites with a maximum of three missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as static modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modification (max. mod. 2). Primary amino groups (Lys side chains and N-termini) as well as primary hydroxyl groups (Ser, Thr and Tyr side chains) were considered as crosslinking sites. The cRap database was used in combination with the reporter ion scan event (RISE) mode on. Crosslinks composed of consecutive amino acid sequences were ignored. Each crosslinked products automatically annotated with MeroX was manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
The MED1 subunit of the Mediator complex is an essential coactivator of nuclear receptor-mediated transcriptional activation. While structural requirements for ligand-dependent binding of classical coactivator motifs of MED1 to numerous nuclear receptor ligand-binding domains have been fully elucidated, the recognition of the full-length or truncated coactivator by full nuclear receptor complexes remain unknown. Here we present structural details of the interaction between a large part of MED1 comprising its structured N-terminal and the flexible receptor-interacting domains and the mutual heterodimer of the vitamin D receptor (VDR) and the retinoid X receptor (RXR) bound to their cognate DNA response element. Using a combination of structural and biophysical methods we show that the ligand-dependent interaction between VDR and the second coactivator motif of MED1 is crucial for complex formation and we identify additional, previously unseen, interaction details. In particular, we identified RXR regions involved in the interaction with the structured N-terminal domain of MED1, as well as VDR regions outside the classical coactivator binding cleft affected by coactivator recruitment. These findings highlight important roles of each receptor within the heterodimer in selective recognition of MED1 and contribute to our understanding of the nuclear receptor-coregulator complexes.

### Keywords
Nuclear receptor, Hdx-ms, Xl-ms, Vdr-rxr

### Affiliations
LSMBO-IPHC CNRS
LSMBO - IPHC / CNRS

### Submitter
Maxime BOURGUET

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianferani
LSMBO-IPHC CNRS


