### Accession
PXD019009

### Title
IL1RAP augments cysteine metabolism to promote ferroptosis resistance and metastasis in Ewing sarcoma

### Description
Aggressive cancer cells must adapt and overcome oxidative stress encountered during the metastatic cascade to successfully disseminate. In this work, a combination of proteomic approaches is used to identify the IL1 receptor accessory protein (IL1RAP) as an in vitro suppressor of anoikis (detachment-induced cell death). IL1RAP is found to be a direct transcriptional target of characteristic Ewing sarcoma (EwS) oncogenic fusions and an important overall mediator of redox homeostasis through the maintenance of glutathione (GSH) synthesis. IL1RAP is found to control intracellular cysteine and GSH synthesis in EwS via binding to CD98 and SLC7A11 of the system Xc- transporter to enhance exogenous cystine uptake for cysteine conversion. In addition, IL1RAP transcriptionally controls cystathionine gamma lyase (CTH), an enzyme that is crucial for de novo cysteine synthesis via the transsulfuration pathway. IL1RAP or CTH depletion is found to susceptibility to ferroptosis and dramatically reduced overall lung metastasis of EwS xenografts in mice. Together, this work describes the critical role of IL1RAP in the maintenance of redox homeostasis through cysteine metabolism in EwS, and identifies a previously unidentified pathway in the pathobiology of this disease.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using detergent lysis, SP3-based clean-up and trypsin digestion. Fractionation of peptides was carried out using a high-pH reversed phase protocol with concatenation. MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion using an SPS-MS3 data acquisition protocol.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer with downstream data handling carried out in R.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer cells must overcome anoikis (detachment-induced death) to successfully metastasize. Using proteomic screens, we found that distinct oncoproteins upregulate IL1 receptor accessory protein (IL1RAP) to suppress anoikis. IL1RAP is directly induced by oncogenic fusions of Ewing sarcoma, a highly metastatic childhood sarcoma. IL1RAP inactivation triggers anoikis and impedes metastatic dissemination of Ewing sarcoma cells. Mechanistically, IL1RAP binds the cell-surface system X<sub>c</sub> <sup>-</sup> transporter to enhance exogenous cystine uptake, thereby replenishing cysteine and the glutathione antioxidant. Under cystine depletion, IL1RAP induces cystathionine gamma lyase (CTH) to activate the transsulfuration pathway for <i>de novo</i> cysteine synthesis. Therefore, IL1RAP maintains cyst(e)ine and glutathione pools, which are vital for redox homeostasis and anoikis resistance. IL1RAP is minimally expressed in pediatric and adult normal tissues, and human anti-IL1RAP antibodies induce potent antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity of Ewing sarcoma cells. Therefore, we define IL1RAP as a new cell-surface target in Ewing sarcoma, which is potentially exploitable for immunotherapy. SIGNIFICANCE: Here, we identify cell-surface protein IL1RAP as a key driver of metastasis in Ewing sarcoma, a highly aggressive childhood sarcoma. Minimal expression in pediatric and adult normal tissues nominates IL1RAP as a promising target for immunotherapy.<i>See related commentary by Yoon and DeNicola, p. 2679</i>.<i>This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 2659</i>.

### Keywords
Ewing sarcoma, Il1rap, Tmt, Cysteine metabolism

### Affiliations
BC Cancer Agency
Senior Scientist, Molecular Oncology, BC Cancer Research Centre/University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Christopher Hughes

### Lab Head
Dr Poul Sorensen
Senior Scientist, Molecular Oncology, BC Cancer Research Centre/University of British Columbia


