### Accession
PXD023782

### Title
Proteomics data analysis for the identification of proteins and derived proteotypic peptides to be used as drought tolerance markers in Quercus ilex

### Description
Drought is considered one of the main causes of mortality of holm oak (Quercus ilex) upon seedling plantations in reforestation programs. Although Q. ilex shows high adaptability to extreme climate conditions prevailing in Southern Spain, the genetic variability inherent to this species could be associated with a differential response depending on populations or individuals. The objective of this work was to identify proteins and derived proteotypic peptides to be used as markers of tolerance to drought in holm oak using a targeted post-acquisition proteomics approach. The study was based on a set of proteins identified by shotgun (LC-MSMS) from a drought experiment carried out in Q. ilex seedlings from four Andalusian provenances (Granada, Huelva, Cadiz and Seville). A double strategy, shotgun protein quantification and target peptides quantification post-acquisition data analysis based on proteotypic peptides, was used. For this purpose, an initial list of target peptides consisting in proteotypic peptides derived of proteins highly represented in drought conditions was compiled. Then, the proteotypic peptides list and the raw files from the shotgun experiment were imported into the Skyline software to quantify the relative abundance of the fragments ion peaks. Those peptides significantly more abundant in drought conditions at least in two populations were selected as putative markers of tolerance to drought. These corresponded to proteins belonged to redox, stress related proteins, synthesis, folding and degradation, and primary and secondary metabolism functional groups. Two proteins were found to be increased in three populations, making them especially interesting for validation in subsequent experiments as markers of drought tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
Shotgun experiment was performed using 90 µg of BSA protein equivalents per sample previously prefractionated in SDS-PAGE as described Valledor and Weckwerth (2014). Unique resulting bands were excised from the gels and digested with proteomics-grade trypsin (Promega) at a final concentration of 12.5 ng/µL as described by Romero et al. (2018). The resulting digested peptides were desalted by passage through C18 cartridges from Scharlau (Barcelona, Spain). Finally, eluted peptides were vacuum-dried and dissolved in a mixture of 70% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.  The nano-LC, Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC equipment (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to nanoelectrospray ionization source and a trihybrid analyzer Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in the positive mode were used. Settings for the LC-MSMS analysis were as described in Castillejo et al. (2020).

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained from MS analysis were processed by using the software Proteome Discoverer v.2.1.0.81 (Thermo Scientific). MS2 spectra were searched with the SEQUEST engine against the FASTA database obtained from the Q. ilex transcriptome (Guerrero-Sanchez et al., 2017, 2019). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance fixed to 0.8 Da. Only ions charge state +2 or greater were used. In silico peptide lists were generated by theoretical tryptic digestion allowing up to two missed cleavage, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. Peptides were grouped into proteins according to the law of parsimony and filtered to FDR = 5% and XCorr ≥ 2.  For relative protein quantification the peak area for precursor ions of identified peptides were used (Al Shweiki et al., 2017). Protein values were then normalized according to a method that accounts for variability between runs to normalize relative protein abundance between samples, using the total sum of the peak area values per each sample. Only those values consistently present in the three biological replicates were considered for further statistical analysis.  A list of target peptides generated from the proteotypic peptides of the selected proteins was created. Proteotypic peptides were searched by alignment of the sequences on the entire Q. ilex DB, using the Bash (Bourne-again shell) tool (http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/bash/) (Altschul et al., 1990) and Blast protein (blasp) for Ubuntu (https://www.exoscale.com/syslog/blast/) tool. Quantification of proteotypic peptides was performed by integrating the chromatographic fragment ion peak areas in Skyline software (https://skyline.ms). The parameters used for MS1 relative quantification were 0.055 m/z mass tolerance for instrument, 0.5 m/z for library peak integration and at a resolution of 120 000 at m/z 200. Integration peak and retention time (RT) for all the peptides were manually revised to check reproducibility on ions in the samples. Peptide values were subsequently submitted to statistical significance analysis using MS Stats (Chang et al., 2012) external tool included in Skyline. Normalization of data based on equalizing medians of the intensity values was performed, followed by log2-transformation.

### Publication Abstract
Drought is one of the main causes of mortality in holm oak (<i>Quercus ilex</i>) seedlings used in reforestation programs. Although this species shows high adaptability to the extreme climate conditions prevailing in Southern Spain, its intrinsic genetic variability may play a role in the differential response of some populations and individuals. The aim of this work was to identify proteins and derived proteotypic peptides potentially useful as putative markers for drought tolerance in holm oak by using a targeted post-acquisition proteomics approach. For this purpose, we used a set of proteins identified by shotgun (LC-MSMS) analysis in a drought experiment on <i>Q. ilex</i> seedlings from four different provenances (viz. the Andalusian provinces Granada, Huelva, Cadiz and Seville). A double strategy involving the quantification of proteins and target peptides by shotgun analysis and post-acquisition data analysis based on proteotypic peptides was used. To this end, an initial list of proteotypic peptides from proteins highly represented under drought conditions was compiled that was used in combination with the raw files from the shotgun experiment to quantify the relative abundance of the fragment's ion peaks with the software Skyline. The most abundant peptides under drought conditions in at least two populations were selected as putative markers of drought tolerance. A total of 30 proteins and 46 derived peptides belonging to the redox, stress-related, synthesis,-folding and degradation, and primary and secondary metabolism functional groups were thus identified. Two proteins (viz., subtilisin and chaperone GrpE protein) were found at increased levels in three populations, which make them especially interesting for validation drought tolerance markers in subsequent experiments.

### Keywords
Targeted post-acquisition proteomics, Drought tolerance, Peptides markers, Quercus ilex

### Affiliations
University of Cordoba
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba, Spain

### Submitter
Maria Angeles Castillejo

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús V. Jorrín Novo
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba, Spain


