### Accession
PXD018990

### Title
TMEM16K is an interorganelle regulator of endosomal sorting.

### Description
Using proximity biotinylation proteomics based on TMEM16K/Ano10 (an endoplasmic reticulum lipid scramblase causative for spinocerebellar ataxia) BioID chimeras, we identify endosomal transport as a major functional cluster of interacting proteins.

### Sample Protocol
To purify protein complexes surrounding TMEM16K via in situ BioID-catalyzed biotin labeling, we transfected HEK293 cells with BioID-myc-TMEM16K or TMEM16K-HA-BioID and incubated with 50 µM biotin overnight (12-16 hours). Mock transfected cells were processed in parallel to account for endogenously biotinylated proteins. Experiment was performed as previously described (Roux et al. J. Cell Biol. 196, 801–810, 2012). Briefly, cells were washed 3x with ice cold PBS and lysed with lysis buffer with protease inhibitors (Roche).  Cell lysate was centrifuged for 30 min at 15000 g and supernatant was applied to streptavidin-conjugated magnetic beads (Dynabeads® MyOne™ Streptavidin C1, Invitrogen, # 65001). Beads were extensively washed 5x with lysis buffer followed by 5x washes with ice-cold PBS, and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80ºC for further processing on-beads, alkylating with iodoacetamide followed by digestion with trypsin and mass spectrometry analysis

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the human and mouse subsets of the SwissProt database (SwissProt.2015.12.1) (plus the corresponding randomized sequences to calculate FRD on the searches, and adding sequences for BioID when necessary), using Protein Prospector. 1% FDR were allowed on individual searches

### Publication Abstract
Communication between organelles is essential for their cellular homeostasis. Neurodegeneration reflects the declining ability of neurons to maintain cellular homeostasis over a lifetime, where the&#xa0;endolysosomal pathway plays a prominent role by regulating protein and lipid sorting and degradation. Here we report that TMEM16K, an endoplasmic reticulum lipid scramblase causative for spinocerebellar ataxia (SCAR10), is an interorganelle regulator of the endolysosomal pathway. We identify endosomal transport as a major functional cluster of TMEM16K in proximity biotinylation proteomics analyses. TMEM16K forms contact sites with endosomes, reconstituting split-GFP with the&#xa0;small GTPase RAB7. Our study further implicates TMEM16K lipid scrambling activity in endosomal sorting at these sites. Loss of TMEM16K function led to impaired endosomal retrograde transport and neuromuscular function, one of the symptoms of SCAR10. Thus, TMEM16K-containing ER-endosome contact sites represent clinically relevant platforms for regulating endosomal sorting.

### Keywords
Bioid, Endosomal sorting, Tmem16k

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Phrmaceutical Chemistry, UCSF

### Submitter
Juan Oses-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Alma L Burlingame
Department of Phrmaceutical Chemistry, UCSF


