### Accession
PXD004187

### Title
Temporal proteomic analysis of HIV-Infection Reveals Remodelling of the Cellular Phosphoproteome by Phylogenetically Diverse Lentiviral Vif Variants

### Description
HIV accessory proteins manipulate host factors to evade cellular restriction and enhance viral replication. We used multiplex tandem mass tag (TMT)-based whole cell proteomics to gain a comprehensive, time-based overview of proteins and processes subverted during HIV infection. To make specific functional and mechanistic predictions and systematically identify candidate accessory protein targets, we categorized cellular proteins regulated by HIV according to their patterns of temporal expression. As well as depleting APOBEC family members, we found Vif to be necessary and sufficient for CUL5-dependent degradation of all members of the B56 family of regulatory subunits of the key cellular phosphatase PP2A. Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of HIV-infected cells confirmed Vif-dependent hyperphosphorylation of >200 cellular proteins, particularly substrates of the aurora kinases. The ability of Vif to target PP2A subunits spans primate and non-primate lentiviral lineages, and remodeling of the cellular phosphoproteome is therefore a second ancient and conserved Vif function.

### Sample Protocol
For the TMT-based HIV-1 infection timecourse, CEM-T4s were spinoculated with VSVg-pseudotyped NL4-3-dE-EGFP HIV-1 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10 in the presence or absence of reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Aliquots of cells were harvested sequentially at the indicated timepoints, and dead cells removed using the Miltenyi Dead Cell Removal kit. Cells were analysed by flow cytometry for CD4 and GFP expression (confirming 95% productive infection). For whole cell proteomic analysis, 2x106 viable cells per timepoint were then washed with ice-cold PBS with Ca/Mg pH 7.4 (Sigma) and frozen at -80°C prior to Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP). Cell pellets were thawed on ice, lysed in 4% SDS/100mM HEPES (Sigma) supplemented with Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (without EDTA; Roche), and sonicated at 4°C using a Diagenode Bioruptor. Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit and 100μg protein per timepoint subjected to downstream processing. Lysates were transferred to Microcon-30kDa Centrifugal Filter Units, reduced (100mM DTT) and alkylated (50mM iodoacetamide) at room temperature, washed with a total of 5 column volumes of 8M urea/100mM HEPES and 100mM HEPES pH 8.5, then incubated with 1μg/50μl modified sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) in 100mM HEPES pH 8.5 at 37° for 8hrs. After digestion, peptide eluates were collected by centrifugation and stored at +4° prior to TMT labelling the next day.   For TMT labelling, TMT 6-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (0.8mg/40µl) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA Protein Assay kit and 25μg peptide per sample labelled with 20μl reconstituted TMT 6-plex reagent at a final acetonitrile concentration of 30% (v/v). Samples were labelled as follows: uninfected cells, 0hrs (TMT 126); 6hrs (TMT 127); 24hrs (TMT 128); 48hrs (TMT 129); 72hrs (TMT 130); 72hrs plus reverse transcriptase inhibitors (TMT 130). Following incubation at room temperature for 1hr, reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). Samples were mixed at a ratio of 1:1:1:1:1:1 and dried down to remove acetonitrile prior to off-line peptide fractionation.  TMT-labelled tryptic peptides were subjected to HpRP-HPLC fractionation using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 powered by an ICS-3000 SP pump with an Agilent ZORBAX Extend-C18 column (4.6mm × 250mm, 5μm particle size). Mobile phases (H20, 0.1% NH4°H or MeCN, 0.1% NH4°H) were adjusted to pH 10.5 with the addition of formic acid and peptides were resolved using a linear 40min 0.1-40% MeCN gradient over 40mins at a 400μl/min flow rate and a column temperature of 15°C. Eluting peptides were collected in 15 s fractions. One hundred and twenty fractions covering the peptide-rich region were re-combined to give 10 samples for analysis. To preserve orthogonality, fractions were combined across the gradient, with each of the concatenated samples comprising 12 fractions which were 10 fractions apart. Re-combined fractions were dried down using an Eppendorf Concentrator and resuspended in 15µl MS solvent (3% MeCN, 0.1% TFA).  Data for TMT labelled samples were generated using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were fractionated using an RSLCnano 3000 (Thermo Scientific) with solvent A comprising 0.1% formic acid and solvent B comprising 80% MeCN, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto a 50cm Acclaim PepMap C18 column (Thermo Scientific) and eluted using a gradient rising from 10 to 25% solvent B by 90mins and 40% solvent B by 115mins at a flow rate of 250nl/min. MS data was acquired in the Orbitrap at 120,000 fwhm between 400-1600 m/z. Spectra were acquired in profile with AGC 4x105. Ions with a charge state between 2+ and 6+ were isolated for fragmentation in top speed mode using the quadrupole with a 1.5 m/z isolation window. CID fragmentation was performed at 35% collision energy with fragments detected in the ion trap between 400-1200 m/z. AGC was set to 5x103 and MS2 spectra were acquired in centroid mode. TMT reporter ions were isolated for quantitation in MS3 using synchronous precursor selection. Ten fragment ions were selected for MS3 using HCD at 53% collision energy. Fragments were scanned in the Orbitrap at 60,000 fwhm between 100-500 m/z with AGC set to 2x105. MS3 spectra were acquired in profile mode with injection parallelisation enabled.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Scientific). Data were searched against a concatenated human (UniProt, downloaded on 04/11/13) and HIV-1 (based on pNL4-3, Genbank: AF324493.2) database. VSVg (UniProt: P03522) and dEnv-EGFP-KDEL (inferred from the pNL4-3-dE-EGFP sequence) were substituted for Env. Precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively, with a maximum of 2 missed tryptic cleavage sites. Percolator was used for post-processing of search results with a peptide false discovery rate of 0.01. Observed reporter ion intensities were adjusted for lot-specific isotopic impurities and missing quan values replaced with the minimum detected ion intensity. Protein abundances were calculated using unique peptides and normalised according to median protein ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Viruses manipulate host factors to enhance their replication and evade cellular restriction. We used multiplex tandem mass tag (TMT)-based whole cell proteomics to perform a comprehensive time course analysis of &gt;6500 viral and cellular proteins during HIV infection. To enable specific functional predictions, we categorized cellular proteins regulated by HIV according to their patterns of temporal expression. We focussed on proteins depleted with similar kinetics to APOBEC3C, and found the viral accessory protein Vif to be necessary and sufficient for CUL5-dependent proteasomal degradation of all members of the B56 family of regulatory subunits of the key cellular phosphatase PP2A (PPP2R5A-E). Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis of HIV-infected cells confirmed Vif-dependent hyperphosphorylation of &gt;200 cellular proteins, particularly substrates of the aurora kinases. The ability of Vif to target PPP2R5 subunits is found in primate and non-primate lentiviral lineages, and remodeling of the cellular phosphoproteome is therefore a second ancient and conserved Vif function.

### Keywords
Hiv, Temporal, Tmt, Whole cell proteome

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK.
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Yagnesh Umrania

### Lab Head
Dr Paul J Lehner
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK.


