### Accession
PXD037997

### Title
The effect of elevated copper concentrations on protein production in copper and sulfite tolerant S. cerevisiae

### Description
Copper tolerance and sulfite tolerance are two well-studied phenotypic traits of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The genetic bases of these traits are derived from allelic expansion at the CUP1 locus and reciprocal translocation at the SSU1 locus, respectively. Previous work identified a negative association between sulfite and copper tolerance in S. cerevisiae wine yeasts. Here we probe the relationship between sulfite and copper tolerance and show that an increase in CUP1 copy number does not impart copper tolerance in all S. cerevisiae wine yeast.  Bulk-segregant QTL analysis was used to identify variance at SSU1 as a causative factor in copper sensitivity, which was verified by reciprocal hemizygosity analysis in a strain carrying 20 copies of CUP1. Transcriptional and proteomic analysis demonstrated that SSU1 over-expression did not suppress CUP1 transcription or constrain protein production but suggested that SSU1 overexpression induced sulfur limitation during exposure to copper. Finally, an SSU1 over-expressing strain exhibited increased sensitivity to moderately elevated copper concentrations in sulfur-limited medium, demonstrating that SSU1 over-expression burdens the sulfate assimilation pathway. Over-expression of MET 3/14/16, genes upstream of H2S production in the sulfate assimilation pathway increased the production of SO2 and H2S but did not improve copper sensitivity in an SSU1 overexpressing background. We conclude that copper and sulfite tolerance are conditional traits in S. cerevisiae and provide evidence of the metabolic basis for their mutual exclusivity. These findings suggest an evolutionary basis for the extreme amplification of CUP1 observed in some yeasts.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast cells pellets were prepared from samples by centrifugation for 1 min at 16,000 × g and the supernatant removed. Tubes containing cell pellets were placed in dry ice for 5 min before being stored at -80°C. Cell pellets were thawed gently, and 100 μL of each was washed with 1 mL 1 x TBS buffer, vortex mixed briefly, centrifuged at 5,000 × g for 2 min and the supernatant removed. This was repeated before a 50 μL aliquot was placed in a fresh tube with 200 μL of RIPA buffer (2 x concentration with protease inhibitor cocktail and dithiothreitol (DTT, 20 mM) added). Samples were vortexed briefly and heated at 95°C for 5 min. Following this, they were cooled and placed in the Diogenode Bioruptor on high for 10 min. The samples were then further reduced at 56°C for 15 min, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (IA, 55 mM) in the dark at room temp for 30 min. Fresh DTT was then added to the reaction to quench the IAM. The samples were centrifuged at 5,000 × g for 1 min, and the supernatant (114 μL) was removed to a fresh tube along with 1 μL of the pelleted cells and debris. For each sample, 40 μg total protein was digested at 37°C overnight in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate/3 % acetonitrile using 1 μg of sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega, USA) in a total volume of 150 μL. The enzymatic digestion was stopped with the addition of trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to 0.5 %. The tryptic peptides were cleaned up using Pierce C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher, USA), following the manufacturer’s protocol. Eluted peptides were dried in a Speedvac to about 2 μL, and then all samples were made up to 25 μL with the addition of 3 % acetonitrile. The relative concentration of the samples was determined using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer at 205 nm, followed by the addition of 0.5 μL of 10 % TFA to each 25 μL sample to give a final concentration of ~3 % acetonitrile/0.2 % TFA. Peptides were separated using an μtiMateTM3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fischer Scientific, USA) coupled online to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) for analysis using the default parameters in Data-Independent Acquisition – Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation (DIA-PASEF) long-gradient mode. Reverse-phase chromatography was performed using a 25 cm, 75 μm ID Aurora C18 nano column with an integrated emitter (Ion Opticks, Australia). The peptides (~200ng) were eluted using a 125 min gradient from 0 % to 37 % buffer B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) at a rate of 400 nL min−1. Buffer A consisted of 0.1 % aqueous formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files from each sample generated on the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer were processed using the software package MaxQuant1 v2.0.3.0 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Germany). The data were searched against the MaxQuant discovery library and FASTA database for Saccharomyces cerevisiae with the following parameters: variable modifications – deamidation (N/Q), oxidation (M); fixed modification – Carbamidomethyl (C); enzyme – trypsin; missed cleavages – 3, using standard Tims MaxDIA parameters2. The first and main search tolerances were set to 40 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) of ≤ 1% were reported. MaxQuant LFQ values were imported into R and analysed using the DEP package v. 1.19.0 (Zhang et al. 2018). The data was initially filtered for proteins identified in all replicates of at least one treatment and normalised by variance stabilizing transformation (Huber et al. 2002). Data imputation for missing values was performed using random draws from a Gaussian distribution centred around a minimal value (Gatto and Lilley 2011). Differential enrichment analysis was performed using limma v. 3.48.3 (Ritchie et al. 2015) and proteins with a 1 < Log2FC < -1 and an adjusted p-value < 0.005 were classified as differentially enriched.

### Publication Abstract
Copper tolerance and SO2 tolerance are two well-studied phenotypic traits of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The genetic bases of these traits are the allelic expansion at the CUP1 locus and reciprocal translocation at the SSU1 locus, respectively. Previous work identified a negative association between SO2 and copper tolerance in S. cerevisiae wine yeasts. Here we probe the relationship between SO2 and copper tolerance and show that an increase in CUP1 copy number does not always impart copper tolerance in S. cerevisiae wine yeast. Bulk-segregant QTL analysis was used to identify variance at SSU1 as a causative factor in copper sensitivity, which was verified by reciprocal hemizygosity analysis in a strain carrying 20 copies of CUP1. Transcriptional and proteomic analysis demonstrated that SSU1 over-expression did not suppress CUP1 transcription or constrain protein production and provided evidence that SSU1 over-expression induced sulfur limitation during exposure to copper. Finally, an SSU1 over-expressing strain exhibited increased sensitivity to moderately elevated copper concentrations in sulfur-limited medium, demonstrating that SSU1 over-expression burdens the sulfate assimilation pathway. Over-expression of MET 3/14/16, genes upstream of H2S production in the sulfate assimilation pathway increased the production of SO2 and H2S but did not improve copper sensitivity in an SSU1 over-expressing background. We conclude that copper and SO2 tolerance are conditional traits in S. cerevisiae and provide evidence of the metabolic basis for their mutual exclusivity. These findings suggest an evolutionary driver for the extreme amplification of CUP1 observed in some yeasts.

### Keywords
Sulfite, So2, Copper, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
The Australian Wine Research Institute

### Submitter
Simon Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Schmidt
The Australian Wine Research Institute


### SDRF
- organism: Saccharomyces cerevisiae
- organism part: nan
- disease: nan
- cell type: nan
- label: label free sample
- instrument: timsTOF Pro
- fractionation method: Reversed-phase chromatography (RP)
- modification parameters: NT = deamidation; MT = variable; TA = M 
- modification parameters: NT = deamidation; MT = variable; TA = N, Q
- modification parameters: NT = Carbamidomethyl; MT = fixed;  TA = C

