### Accession
PXD041011

### Title
Interaction between GPR110 (ADGFR1) and tight junction protein occludin implicated in blood-brain barrier permeability

### Description
Identifying GPR110 interacting proteins using chemical crosslinking, affinity purification  and quantitative mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
DSS was introduced into HEK cells expressing F663S or WT GPR110 tagged with HA at the C-terminal. GPR110 and its interacting partners linked by DSS were pulled down by immunoprecipitation with HA antibody. The co-immunoprecipitates were separated by SDS-PAGE, digested with trypsin, and analyzed by LC/MS/MS.F663S mutant was used as a negative control to filter out non-specific binders.

### Data Protocol
Spectra acquired from biological triplicate were loaded (Thermo raw files) into the Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (version 1.05156.29278) for label-free protein quantitation. Automatic alignment of chromatograms and automatic peak-picking settings were used to process the data. Features with charge of 1 and charge > 7 were filtered out for the analysis. Normalization to all proteins was performed based on the assumption that a significant number of features were unaffected across different sample runs.  Peptide and protein identifications were performed using Mascot search engine via Mascot Distiller. A Mascot score corresponding to a p-value of 0.05 was set as a threshold for peptide identifications. Proteins were quantitated from non-conflicting features. Protein bands (with molecular weight greater than 100 kDa) were combined and analyzed by the Progenesis QI for Proteomics.

### Publication Abstract
Activation of adhesion receptor GPR110 by the endogenous ligand synaptamide promotes neurogenesis, neurite growth, and synaptogenesis in developing brains through cAMP signal transduction. However, interacting partners of GPR110 and their involvement in cellular function remain unclear. Here, we demonstrate using chemical crosslinking, affinity purification, and quantitative mass spectrometry that GPR110 interacts with the tight junction adhesion protein occludin. By removing non-specific partners by comparing the binding proteins of GPR110 WT and an inactive mutant exhibiting impaired surface expression, occludin was distinguished as a true binding partner which was further confirmed by reciprocal co-immunoprecipitation assay. Deletion of GPR110 in mice led to the disruption of blood-brain barrier (BBB) and reduced occludin phosphorylation at Y285 in the brain. The Y285 phosphorylation increased upon the ligand-induced activation of GPR110. These data suggest an important role of GPR110-occludin interaction in BBB function and association of previously unknown GPR110-dependent occludin phosphorylation at Y285 with BBB integrity.

### Keywords
Hek cells, Gpr110, Lc-msms, Crosslinking, Occludin

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular Signaling National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism National Institutes of Health
NIH

### Submitter
Bill Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Hee-Yong Kim
Laboratory of Molecular Signaling National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism National Institutes of Health


