### Accession
PXD025898

### Title
NMS-873 leads to dysfunctional glycometabolism in a p97-independent manner

### Description
ATP-competitive p97 inhibitor CB-5339, the successor of CB-5083, is being evaluated in Phase 1 clinical trials for anti-cancer therapy. Different modes of action p97 inhibitors such as allosteric inhibitors are useful to overcome one the major problems of targeted therapy: drug-induced resistance. We previously demonstrated allosteric p97 inhibitor NMS-873 can overcome CB-5083-induced resistance. Here, we found that NMS-873 but not CB-5083 affected glycometabolism. By establishing NMS-873-resistant cell lines and performing both cell-based and proteomic analysis, we confirmed that NMS-873 dysregulates glycometabolism in a p97-independent manner. We then used proteome integral solubility alteration with a temperature-based method (PISA T) to identify NDUFAF5 as one of the potential targets of NMS-873 in the mitochondrial complex I. Overall, we employed chemical proteomics and drug-induced thermal proteome changes to identify drug targets, in combination with drug-resistant cell lines to dissect on- and off-target effects. We also demonstrated that glycolysis inhibitor 2-DG enhanced the anti-proliferative effect of NMS-873. The polypharmacology of NMS-873 can be advantageous for anti-cancer therapy.

### Sample Protocol
15 μg of peptide was prepared to label with TMTpro 16plex reagents (Thermo) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Labeled samples were combined and dried with vacuum centrifugation. Samples were then separated into eight fractions using the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo). The fractions were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, and peptide concentrations were determined with Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo). TMT labeled sample LC-MS/MS acquisitions were performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 connected to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer. 1 μg of each fraction was loaded on an Aurora UHPLC Column and separated with a 136-minute method, as described previously.14 MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120k resolution with a scan range of 350-1600 m/z. The AGC target was 8 x 105, and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. MS2 scans were acquired with collision-induced dissociation (CID) activation type with the Iontrap. The isolation window was 0.4 m/z, collision energy was 35%, maximum injection time was 45 ms, and AGC target was 104. MS3 scans were acquired with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) activation type in the Orbitrap at 50k resolution with a scan range of 100-500 m/z. The isolation window was 0.7 m/z, collision energy was 55%, maximum injection time was 86 ms, and AGC target was 2.5 x 105. System control and data collection were performed with Xcalibur software (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analyses were performed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo) using the Uniprot human database and the SequestHT with Percolator validation. Normalization was performed relative to the total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-competitive p97 inhibitor CB-5339, the successor of CB-5083, is being evaluated in Phase 1 clinical trials for anti-cancer therapy. Different modes-of-action p97 inhibitors such as allosteric inhibitors are useful to overcome drug-induced resistance, one of the major problems of targeted therapy. We previously demonstrated that allosteric p97 inhibitor NMS-873 can overcome CB-5083-induced resistance in HCT116. Here we employed chemical proteomics and drug-induced thermal proteome changes to identify drug targets, in combination with drug-resistant cell lines to dissect on- and off-target effects. We found that NMS-873 but not CB-5083 affected glycometabolism. By establishing NMS-873-resistant HCT116 cell lines and performing both cell-based and proteomic analysis, we confirmed that NMS-873 dysregulates glycometabolism in a p97-independent manner. We then used proteome integral solubility alteration with a temperature-based method (PISA T) to identify NDUFAF5 as one of the potential targets of NMS-873 in the mitochondrial complex I. We also demonstrated that glycolysis inhibitor 2-DG enhanced the anti-proliferative effect of NMS-873. The polypharmacology of NMS-873 can be advantageous for anti-cancer therapy for colon cancer.

### Keywords
Resistance, Glycometabolism, P97 inhibitor, Proteomics, Protein stability

### Affiliations
Caltech
BBE, Caltech

### Submitter
Shan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Tsui-Fen Chou
BBE, Caltech


