### Accession
PXD011499

### Title
A proteomics approach to study the role of lipid droplets in plant defense

### Description
Lipid Droplets (LDs), classically viewed as lipid storage particles, are recently emerging as dynamic organelles associated with stress responses and development; however, their involvement in plant immunity has been little investigated. Here we studied LDs in Arabidopsis thaliana leaves that respond to Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 avrRpm1 by inducing a hypersensitive defense reaction (HR), as well as during senescence. We established a protocol to reproducibly isolate LDs from a limited amount of tissue and performed a proteomic analysis of LDs from Pseudomonas-infected (for 24 h and 72 h) and senescent leaves.  The proteomes defined shared ~50% similarity, with an enrichment of proteins associated with the Gene Ontology terms “transport” and “responses to stress”.  As validation, we confirmed LD localization of glycerol-3-phosphate-acetyltransferase 8 (GPAT8) and GPAT4, enzymes required for e.g., cutin biosynthesis, by transient expression of GFP fusions in HR-induced leaves of Nicotiana benthamiana. Similarly, we proved the localization to LDs of aldehyde dehydrogenase 3F1 (ALDH3F1), α-dioxygenase1 (α-DOX1) and caleosin3 (CLO3), all involved in the synthesis of fatty acid derivatives. Moreover, we found that PAD3 (phytoalexin deficient 3) was distributed in patches along the ER and plasma membrane, and in LDs near dead cells. The nature of these proteins and of the additional components characterized in the LDs, together with the phenotypic examination of selected mutants, established a functional link between LDs and plant immunity. Our data suggest that these organelles participate in protein trafficking and in lipid changes that affect the interaction of plants with invading pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Lipid droplets (LDs) were isolated from Arabidopsis leaves after infection with Pst –DC3000 avrRpm1 (24 or 74 hours post-inoculation of 4-week-old plants), or during senescence (leaves of untreated 6-wek-old plants). Freshly collected leaves (2.5 g) were cut into small pieces and ground using a pestle and mortar containing sea sand (Merck) as an abrasive agent and 5 mL of cold extraction buffer with 0.6 M sucrose: 10 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% (v/v) Tween 20, 1 mM PMSF and proteinase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). The homogenate was filtered through three layers of Miracloth (Calbiochem) and placed in a centrifuge tube, covered with an equal volume of extraction buffer containing 0.4 M sucrose and ultracentrifuged for 1h and 30 min at 100,000 xg in a swinging-bucket rotor (Beckman Coulter Optima L-100 XP Ultracentrifugue, SW55 Ti Rotor). The LDs in the top layer were collected, placed in a centrifuge tube and layered with a volume of extraction buffer containing 0.2 M sucrose. The samples were then ultracentrifuged again at 100,000 xg for 90 min, the LDs in the top layer were collected and then concentrated by centrifugation for 60 min in Eppendorf tubes at 10,000 xg. The lower fraction without any LDs was removed with a Pasteur pipette, obtaining the purified LDs in a 50 L final volume.

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI-MSMS analysis and database searching Nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis was performed using an Eksigent 1D-nanoHPLC coupled to a 5600TripleTOF QTOF mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framinghan, MA, USA). The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase column Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC 75 µm × 15 cm, 1.7 µm particle size. The trap column was an Acclaim PepMap 100, 5 µm particle diameter, 100 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in 98% water / 2% acetonitrile (Scharlab, Barcelona, Spain) at 3 µL/min. The nanopump provided a flow-rate of 250 nL/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions, using 0.1% formic acid (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland) in water as mobile phase A, and 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile as mobile phase B. Gradient elution was performed according the following scheme: isocratic conditions of 96% A: 4% B for five minutes, a linear increase to 30% B in 110 min, a linear increase to 40% B in ten minutes, a linear increase to 95% B in five minutes, isocratic conditions of 95% B for five minutes and return to initial conditions in 10 min. Injection volume was 5 µL. The LC system was coupled via a nanospray source to the mass spectrometer. Automatic data-dependent acquisition using dynamic exclusion allowed obtaining both full scan (m/z 350-1250) MS spectra followed by tandem MS CID spectra of the 25 most abundant ions. Acquisition time was 250 ms and 100 ms for MS and MSMS spectra, respectively. MS and MS/MS data were used to search against an Arabidopsis thaliana database containing 31478 sequences (downloaded from UniProtKB, February 2016). Database searches were done using a licensed version of Mascot v.2.6 and search parameters were set as follows: carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-term), NQ deamidation, Glu to pyro-glutamic and oxidized methionine as variable onea. Peptide mass tolerance was set at 25 ppm and 0.1 Da for MS and MS/MS spectra, respectively, and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Peptides with individual Mascot ions scores indicating identity or extensive homology (p<0.05) were used for protein identification. Only those proteins with at least one unique peptide were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lipid droplets/pseudomonas/hr-induced defense/senescence/arabidopsis

### Affiliations
CNB-CSIC
Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Darwin 3, E 28049 Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Alberto Paradela

### Lab Head
Dr Carmen Castresana
Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Darwin 3, E 28049 Madrid, Spain


