### Accession
PXD002560

### Title
Systems level analysis of histone H3 post-translational modifications reveals features of PTM crosstalk in chromatin regulation

### Description
Chromatin structure and function is maintained by dynamic protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions. Histones are a family of proteins that are abundant chromatin constituents and that carry numerous post-translational modifications (PTMs). Histone PTMs mediate a variety of biological activities, including recruitment of enzymatic readers, writers and erasers that modulate protein activities, DNA replication, transcription and repair. Individual histone molecules contain multiple co-existing PTMs some of which exhibit crosstalk, i.e. coordinated or mutually exclusive activities. We here present an integrated experimental and computational approach for systems level molecular characterization of PTMs and PTM crosstalk. Using wildtype and engineered mouse embryonic stem cells with perturbations in the Polycomb Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1, suz12-/-), PRC2 (Ring1A/b-/-) and DNA methyltransferases (Dnmt1/3a/3b-/-) we performed comprehensive PTM analysis of histone H3 tails. We identified unique histone H3 PTM features of each of the four cell lines and we detected common combinatorial PTM features across cell lines. Using quantitative middle-down proteomics combined with probabilistic and statistical data analysis we extracted histone H3 PTM profiles for all four mESC systems. PTM crosstalk emerged as mutually exclusive histone PTMs or coordinately regulated PTMs independent of histone peptide abundance in the four model systems. We detected positive crosstalk between adjacent mono-methylated marks but strong negative crosstalk among most of the seven characterized di- and tri-methylations on lysines.  We report novel features of PTM interplay involving hitherto poorly characterized arginine methylation and lysine methylation sites in histone H3, including H3R2me, H3R8me and H3K37me, which exhibited specific PTM codes suggesting a particular role in chromatin. All histone H3 PTM data is available in our publicly available CrossTalkDB repository at http://crosstalkdb.bmb.sdu.dk

### Sample Protocol
Histone purification and digestion – Cells were grown and prepared as previously described for mouse ESCs wild type, Suz12-/-, Ring1A1B-/- and Dnmt triple knockout (strain E14). Histones were purified using common protocol with minor modifications. Briefly, cell membrane was disrupted by 30 minutes incubation with hypotonic solution (10 mM TrisHCl pH 8.0, 1 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2 and 1 mM DTT) and nuclei were precipitated by centrifugation at (10,000 g for 10 min). Pellet was resuspended in 0.2 M H2SO4 and incubated for 30 mins at room temperature. After centrifugation (10 min at 16,000 g) supernatant was recovered and trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added to the solution to a final concentration of 33%. After 30 min mix histones were spun down by centrifugation (16,000 g for 10 min at 4 degrees). Pellet was washed twice with cold acetone. Samples were evaporated in speedvac, resuspended in 40 µl of NH4HCO3 100 mM and digested overnight with GluC with a ratio of 1:50 enzyme:sample. Digestion was interrupted by adding 1 µl of 100% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  Liquid chromatography – Digested histones were analyzed as previously described with few modifications on the setup. Briefly, histones were loaded and separated in a Dionex nanoLC Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific). The two column system consisted on a 5 cm pre-column (100 µm ID) packed with C18 bulk material (ReproSil, Pur C18AQ 5 µm; Dr. Maisch) and a 22 cm analytical column with pulled needle (75 µm ID) packed with Polycat A resin (PolyLC, Columbia, MD, 3 µm particles, 1500 Å). Loading buffer was 0.1% formic acid. Buffer A was 75% acetonitrile, 20 mM propionic acid (Fluka), adjusted to pH 6.0 using ammonium hydroxide (Sigma-Aldrich), and solvent B was 25% acetonitrile adjusted to pH 2.5 with formic acid. Histones were run at least in four replicates at a flowrate of 250 nL/min, with a gradient of 5 min 100% solvent A, followed by 55 to 85% solvent B in 150 min and 85-100% in 10 min for column washing.  Tandem mass spectrometry – For detection an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos with ETD source (Thermo Scientific) was coupled online with the nanoLC. Nanoelectrospray (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) was used with a spray voltage of 2.2 kV. No sheath, sweep, and auxiliary gases were used, and capillary temperature was set to 270 °C. Acquisition method was set for not using dynamic exclusion. Acquisition was performed in the Orbitrap for both precursors and products, with a resolution of 60,000 (full-width at half-height) for MS and 30,000 for MS/MS. Precursor charge state 1+, 2+ and 3+ were excluded. Isolation width was set at 2 m/z. The six most intense ions were isolated for fragmentation using ETD with an activation Q value of 0.25, activation time of 90 ms, and supplementary activation. m/z window was set at 450-750.

### Data Protocol
Identification of peptide species – Spectra were deconvoluted with Xtract using the following parameters: S/N threshold 0; resolution at 400 m/z 30,000 and monoisotopic mass only true. Database search was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK) was chosen as search engine, with the following search parameters: MS mass tolerance 2.2 Da; MS/MS tolerance 0.01 Da; enzyme GluC with 0 missed cleavages allowed, database was manually curated by filtering for histone proteins from mouse in Uniprot (downloaded July 2015). Variable modifications were: mono- and dimethylation (KR), trimethylation (K) and acetylation (K). CSV result files from Mascot were imported and processed in `isoScale slim´ by using a tolerance of 30 ppm. Such tool includes filtering of ambiguously assigned PTMs (only PTMs with at least one ion before and after the assigned modification site were accepted) and quantification (principle of quantification described in Sidoli et al.). This release version of isoScale slim includes also the following improvements: (i) the modification symbol present in the final output can now be edited; for known PTMs (e.g. ac, me1, me2, me3) a default recommendation is provided. (ii) The output now is named as the Mascot data file plus "-results", allowing multiple file processing without tedious file renaming. (iii) The mass tolerance for both calculation of site determining ions, required for unambiguous PTM localization, and peptide quantification is selected only once at the data file upload. (iv) The software now accepts any kind of PTM, and not only predefined ones, as it reads the amino acid specificity of the PTM from the Mascot search parameters. For instance, if during Mascot database searching dimethylation on lysines and arginines is specified as variable modification, isoScale slim verifies site determining ions for an assigned dimethylation based on nearby lysines and arginines. isoScale slim is available at http://middle-down.github.io/Software.

### Publication Abstract
Histones are abundant chromatin constituents carrying numerous post-translational modifications (PTMs). Such PTMs mediate a variety of biological functions, including recruitment of enzymatic readers, writers and erasers that modulate DNA replication, transcription and repair. Individual histone molecules contain multiple coexisting PTMs, some of which exhibit crosstalk, i.e. coordinated or mutually exclusive activities. Here, we present an integrated experimental and computational systems level molecular characterization of histone PTMs and PTM crosstalk. Using wild type and engineered mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) knocked out in components of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2, Suz12(-/-)), PRC1 (Ring1A/B(-/-)) and (Dnmt1/3a/3b(-/-)) we performed comprehensive PTM analysis of histone H3 tails (50 aa) by utilizing quantitative middle-down proteome analysis by tandem mass spectrometry. We characterized combinatorial PTM features across the four mESC lines and then applied statistical data analysis to predict crosstalk between histone H3 PTMs. We detected an overrepresentation of positive crosstalk (codependent marks) between adjacent mono-methylated and acetylated marks, and negative crosstalk (mutually exclusive marks) among most of the seven characterized di- and tri-methylated lysine residues in the H3 tails. We report novel features of PTM interplay involving hitherto poorly characterized arginine methylation and lysine methylation sites, including H3R2me, H3R8me and H3K37me. Integration of the H3 data with RNAseq data by coabundance clustering analysis of histone PTMs and histone modifying enzymes revealed correlations between PTM and enzyme levels. We conclude that middle-down proteomics is a powerful tool to determine conserved or dynamic interdependencies between histone marks, which paves the way for detailed investigations of the histone code. Histone H3 PTM data is publicly available in the CrossTalkDB repository at http://crosstalkdb.bmb.sdu.dk.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification; crosstalk; histone; mass spectrometry; proteomics

### Affiliations
Centre for Epigenetics and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark Campusvej 55 DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark
Albert Einstein College of Medicine

### Submitter
Simone Sidoli

### Lab Head
Dr Ole N. Jensen
Centre for Epigenetics and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark Campusvej 55 DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark


