### Accession
PXD014779

### Title
Recombinant Mycobacterium smegmatis LC-MSMS

### Description
To further gain new insights into how MSMEG_6171 affects bacterial cell envelope properties, we performed global protein expression profiling on the Msm::6171 strains and the WT strains.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were extracted using a mechanical crushing method[5]. Cells were resuspended in 10 mL of 50 mM Tris (pH 7.0), 150 mL NaCl and 0.5 mM phenylmethanesulphonyl fluoride (PMSF) at 4 ℃, and disrupted in a Fastprep-24 (MP Biomedicals). The resulting whole-cell extract was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 12,000 × g for 15 min using an SW 41 Ti rotor (Sigma). Supernatants were filtered twice with a 0.22 μm pore Millex filter unit (Millipore). For each sample, total protein (100 μg) was digested with 3.3 μl of trypsin (1 μg/μl) (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C for 24 h. After trypsin digestion, peptides were dried via vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer's instructions (Applied Biosystems). Briefly, one unit of iTRAQ reagent (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA) was thawed and reconstituted in 24 μL Ethanol. Briefly, the control group was labeled with iTRAQ reagent 114,115,116, the experimental group was labeled with iTRAQ reagent 117,118,121. The peptides were then incubated at room temperature for 2 h. The labeled samples were then mixed and desalted with a SPEC18 ODS SPE Bulk Sorben column (Agilent, USA) and vacuum dried. Providing three biological replicates for each group. Strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography The iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixtures were dissolved in buffer A (NH3 in H2O, PH=10) and loaded onto a C18 column (ACQUITY UPLC CSH, 130Å, 1.7 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, 1/pkg, Waters, USA). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 200 μL/min with a gradient of 5-10% buffer B (80%ACN NH3 in H2O, PH=10) for 10 min, 10-38% buffer B for 60 min and 38-95% buffer B for 10 min. A total of twelve SCX fractions were collected for one run. The system was then maintained at 5% buffer B for 30 min before the next injection. The eluted peptides vacuum dried. The fractions above were dissolved in an aqueous solution containing 0.1% FA. Five Microliter supernatant was loaded on an EASY nLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) by the autosampler onto an analytical C18 column (75 um i.d. x 150mm, 2 um, 100Å, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The mobile phases used were composed of solvent A (0.1% FA in ACN) and solvent B (0.1% FA in H₂O). The gradient was run at 300 nL/min for 60 min at 7-35% solvent B, followed by running a linear gradient to 90% for 5 min, maintained at 90% B for 8 min. The peptides were subjected to nano-electrospray ionization followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q EXACTIVE (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to the nLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 and a mass range of 350−1,800 m/z. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD), and ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. MS/MS analysis was required for the 20 most abundant precursor ions. Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified with Sequest HT search engine using Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) software. A standardized iTRAQ 6 plex quantification workflow module within the Proteome Discoverer was slightly modified as below and utilized for the analysis. MS/MS data were searched against the M. smegmatis (strain ATCC,700084) UniProt database. The search parameters include 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, and trypsin miscleavage setting of two. Static modification settings included carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) on cysteine and iTRAQ 6 plex (114.102 Da) on N-terminus and lysine, while dynamic modifications were set to include oxidation (+15.995 Da) on methionine and Acetyl (+42.011 Da) on protein N-Terminus. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were verified based on q-values set to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Percolator module. Reporter Ions Quantifier node was used in the processing step workflow, and the Peptide and Protein Quantifier node was used in the consensus workflow of the Proteome Discoverer v2.2 to calculate and quantify peptides and protein abundances and ratios across samples. The final proteins that were deemed to be differentially expressed were filtered as a P value <0.05 and 1.5-fold changes (>1.50 or <0.667) relative to the control group.

### Data Protocol
For the proteomics results, gene ontology (GO) enrichment and kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) analysis were performed using DAVID online software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Itraq

### Affiliations
Center for Tuberculosis Control of Guangdong Province

### Submitter
Kin Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Lin Zhou
Center for Tuberculosis Control of Guangdong Province


