### Accession
PXD001692

### Title
Protein Structure Determination in Biological Matrices by Mass Spectrometry and Computational Biology

### Description
We have implemented the use of a heterobifunctional, UV photoactivatable cross-linker, which greatly increases the number of identified cross-links compared with homobifunctional, NHS-ester based cross-linkers. We have cross-linked human serum albumin in the context of human blood serum. We present a novel methodology that combines the use of this high-resolution cross-linking with conformational space search to investigate the structure of proteins in their native environment.

### Sample Protocol
Human blood serum was acquired from a healthy male donor. Immediately following collection, blood serum was isolated from the whole blood sample without anti-coagulants by centrifugation. Whole blood was allowed to clot by leaving it undisturbed at room temperature for 30 minutes. The clot was removed by centrifuging at 1900 x g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The resulting supernatant was immediately apportioned into 0.5 ml aliquots, which were flash frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored in a -80 °C freezer. Protein concentration was estimated using a Bradford protein assay. Human serum albumin (HSA) (either purified or in the context of human blood serum) was cross-linked using sulfosuccinimidyl 4,4’-azipentanoate (sulfo-SDA) (Thermo Scientific) in a two stage reaction. Firstly, lysine residues were allowed to react with the sulfo-NHS ester component of the cross-linker. The diazirine group was then photo-activated using UV irradiation from a UVP B-100AP, 100 W mercury lamp at 365 nm. The resulting cross-linked mixture was separated on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel using MES running buffer and Coomassie blue stain followed by in-gel digestion using trypsin. The resulting digests were desalted using self-made C18 StageTips prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides were loaded directly onto a spray emitter analytical column (75 µm inner diameter, 8 µm opening, 250 mm length; New Objectives) packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm; Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using an air pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems). Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into a hybrid linear ion trap - Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were analyzed using a “high/high” acquisition strategy, detecting at high resolution in the Orbitrap and analyzing the subsequent fragments also in the Orbitrap. Survey scan (MS) spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap at 100,000 resolution. The eight most intense signals in the survey scan for each acquisition cycle were isolated with an m/z window of 2 Th and fragmented with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap. 1+ and 2+ ions were excluded from fragmentation. Fragmentation (MS2) spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 7500 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with 90 seconds exclusion time and repeat count equal to 1.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant version 1.2.2.5 using default parameters except the setting for “Top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da” being set to 100. Peak lists were searched against a database from the sequences of HSA using in-house software, Xi (ERI, Edinburgh) for identification of cross-linked peptides. Search parameters were MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; specificity, fully tryptic; allowed number of missed cleavages, four; cross-linker, SDA; fixed modifications, none; variable modifications, carbamidomethylation on cysteine, oxidation on methionine, SDA-loop (SDA cross-link within a peptide that is also cross-linked to a separate peptide). The linkage specificity for sulfo-SDA was assumed to be at lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N-termini at one end, with the other end having specificity for any amino acid residue. False discovery rates were estimated following a modified target-decoy search strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical cross-linking combined with mass spectrometry has proven useful for studying protein-protein interactions and protein structure, however the low density of cross-link data has so far precluded its use in determining structures de novo. Cross-linking density has been typically limited by the chemical selectivity of the standard cross-linking reagents that are commonly used for protein cross-linking. We have implemented the use of a heterobifunctional cross-linking reagent, sulfosuccinimidyl 4,4'-azipentanoate (sulfo-SDA), combining a traditional sulfo-N-hydroxysuccinimide (sulfo-NHS) ester and a UV photoactivatable diazirine group. This diazirine yields a highly reactive and promiscuous carbene species, the net result being a greatly increased number of cross-links compared with homobifunctional, NHS-based cross-linkers. We present a novel methodology that combines the use of this high density photo-cross-linking data with conformational space search to investigate the structure of human serum albumin domains, from purified samples, and in its native environment, human blood serum. Our approach is able to determine human serum albumin domain structures with good accuracy: root-mean-square deviation to crystal structure are 2.8/5.6/2.9 &#xc5; (purified samples) and 4.5/5.9/4.8&#xc5; (serum samples) for domains A/B/C for the first selected structure; 2.5/4.9/2.9 &#xc5; (purified samples) and 3.5/5.2/3.8 &#xc5; (serum samples) for the best out of top five selected structures. Our proof-of-concept study on human serum albumin demonstrates initial potential of our approach for determining the structures of more proteins in the complex biological contexts in which they function and which they may require for correct folding. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001692.

### Keywords
Human serum albumin, Cross-linking and mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.
Technische Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Adam Belsom

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.


