### Accession
PXD026078

### Title
Impaired stability of tumor cells after targeting of lactate/pyruvate metabolism investigated by shotgun proteomics

### Description
Overexpression of heat shock proteins (HSPs), especially the major stress-inducible 72 kDa heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70), in malignant tumor cells is associated with therapeutic resistance. The heightened metabolic demand in tumor cells (Warburg effect) increases lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity and the corresponding increase in lactate concentrations promotes malignancy. Herein, we assessed the co-regulation of LDH and the heat shock response and its link to radiation resistance in B16F10 murine melanoma cells and LS174T human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells. Inhibition of LDHA/B by oxamate or GNE-140, significantly diminishes the expression of Hsp90, Hsp70 and Hsp27 in the cytosol. Diminished expression was also observed in LDHA/B double knockout (LDH-/-) cells. An increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) induced by a faster growth rate in wild type (WT) vs LDH-/- cells contributes to increased cytosolic HSP levels in WT cells. LDH-/- cells exhibit a lower density of membrane Hsp70 expression than WT cells and a decreased presence of the tumor-specific, Hsp70 anchoring glycosphingolipid Gb3 on the cell surface which could be attributed to an altered lipid metabolism mediated by the LDH knockout. Functionally, a double knockout of LDHA/B results in a generalized reduction in expression of HSPs in tumor cells and significantly increases radiosensitivity which is associated with a G2/M arrest. In summary, we demonstrate that pharmacological targeting of the lactate/pyruvate metabolism breaks radioresistance by impairing the stress response.

### Sample Protocol
Cells and cell culture  The mouse B16 F10 wildtype melanoma cell line (ATCC® CRL-6475™) (WT, 0.008 x 106 cells/ml) and LDHA/B double knockout B16 F10 cell line (LDH-/-, 0.012 x 106 cells/ml), and the human wild type LS174T colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line (ATCC® CL-188™) (0.06 x 106 cells/ml) and LDH-/- LS174T cell line (0.12 x 106 cells/ml) - kindly provided by Marina Kreutz (Zdralevic et al., 2018) - were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)-1640 Medium (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and high glucose Dulbecco`s Eagle`s Minimum Essential Medium (DMEM) (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% v/v heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% antibiotics (10,000 IU/ml penicillin, 10 mg/ml streptomycin, Sigma-Aldrich), 2 mM L-glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were routinely checked for mycoplasma contamination. Reagents and treatment Cells and cell culture  The mouse B16 F10 wildtype melanoma cell line (ATCC® CRL-6475™) (WT, 0.008 x 106 cells/ml) and LDHA/B double knockout B16 F10 cell line (LDH-/-, 0.012 x 106 cells/ml), and the human wild type LS174T colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line (ATCC® CL-188™) (0.06 x 106 cells/ml) and LDH-/- LS174T cell line (0.12 x 106 cells/ml) - kindly provided by Marina Kreutz (Zdralevic et al., 2018) - were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)-1640 Medium (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and high glucose Dulbecco`s Eagle`s Minimum Essential Medium (DMEM) (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% v/v heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% antibiotics (10,000 IU/ml penicillin, 10 mg/ml streptomycin, Sigma-Aldrich), 2 mM L-glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were routinely checked for mycoplasma contamination. Reagents and treatment Proteomics Proteins were digested using filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Grosche et al., 2016; Wisniewski et al., 2009) , and digested peptides analyzed by LC-MS/MS in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS data were acquired on a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a nano-RSLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC; Dionex) (Azimzadeh et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.4.1.15) was used for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine) against the Swiss-Prot human database (Release 2020_02, 20349 sequences in PD). The peptide spectrum matches and peptides were performed by accepting only the top-scoring hit for each spectrum, and satisfying the cut-off values for FDR <1%, and posterior error probability <0.01. The final protein ratio was calculated using the median abundance values of 4 replicates for each of the experimental groups (LS174T LDH-/- vs. WT). The statistical significance of the ratio change was ascertained employing the background based t-test approach, as described previously (Navarro et al., 2014). The proteins identified and quantified with at least 2 unique peptides and with ratios greater than 1.30-fold or less than 0.77-fold (t-test; p< 0.05) were defined as being significantly differentially expressed for final quantification. Interaction and signalling network analysis Protein-protein interaction and signalling networks analyses were performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software (QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis (Kramer et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
The heightened energetic demand increases lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity, the corresponding oncometabolite lactate, expression of heat shock proteins (HSPs) and thereby promotes therapy resistance in many malignant tumor cell types. Therefore, we assessed the coregulation of LDH and the heat shock response with respect to radiation resistance in different tumor cells (B16F10 murine melanoma and LS174T human colorectal adenocarcinoma). The inhibition of LDH activity by oxamate or GNE-140, glucose deprivation and <i>LDHA/B</i> double knockout (LDH<sup>-</sup><sup>/</sup><sup>-</sup>) in B16F10 and LS174T cells significantly diminish tumor growth; ROS production and the cytosolic expression of different HSPs, including Hsp90, Hsp70 and Hsp27 concomitant with a reduction of heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)/pHSF1. An altered lipid metabolism mediated by a <i>LDHA/B</i> double knockout results in a decreased presence of the Hsp70-anchoring glycosphingolipid Gb3 on the cell surface of tumor cells, which, in turn, reduces the membrane Hsp70 density and increases the extracellular Hsp70 levels. Vice versa, elevated extracellular lactate/pyruvate concentrations increase the membrane Hsp70 expression in wildtype tumor cells. Functionally, an inhibition of LDH causes a generalized reduction of cytosolic and membrane-bound HSPs in tumor cells and significantly increases the radiosensitivity, which is associated with a G2/M arrest. We demonstrate that targeting of the lactate/pyruvate metabolism breaks the radioresistance by impairing the stress response.

### Keywords
Ldha/b double knockout, Membrane hsp70 expression, Radiosensitivity, Lc-msms, Lactate/pyruvate metabolism, Heat shock proteins

### Affiliations
Central Institute for Translational Cancer Research (TranslaTUM) Radiation Immuno-Oncology Group, Klinikum rechts der Isar
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriele Multhoff
Central Institute for Translational Cancer Research (TranslaTUM) Radiation Immuno-Oncology Group, Klinikum rechts der Isar


