### Accession
PXD029840

### Title
Structure of transcription preinitiation complex engaged with the +1 nucleosome

### Description
The preinitiation complex (PIC) assembles on promoters of protein-coding genes to position RNA polymerase II (Pol II) for transcription initiation. Previous structural studies revealed the PIC on different promoters, but did not address how the PIC assembles in chromatin. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, PIC assembly occurs adjacent to the +1 nucleosome that is positioned downstream of the core promoter. Here we present the cryo-EM structure of the yeast PIC bound to promoter DNA and the +1 nucleosome at a resolution of 3.4–3.9 Å. The general transcription factor TFIIH forms four contacts with the nucleosome, indicating how PIC assembly can be assisted by the +1 nucleosome. The TFIIH subunit Ssl2 (XPB in human TFIIH) forms a wedge between promoter DNA and the nucleosome, stabilizing two turns of DNA that are detached from the nucleosome. During subsequent scanning for the transcription start site (TSS), three additional turns of DNA can be detached before the partially unraveled nucleosome may counteract further scanning, explaining why TSSs are located at a distance of ~60 bp from the dyad of the +1 nucleosome in yeast.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for mass spectrometry were prepared by sucrose gradient centrifugation as described above for cryo-EM sample preparation without glutaraldehyde. Fractions containing fully assembled complexes were pooled, subjected to chemical crosslinking using zero-length cross-linker EDC (100 mM) and NHS (100 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature, and quench with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The samples were adjusted to 8 M urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3, 10 mM DTT followed by an incubation for 30 min at 37°C. Proteins were alkylated in the presence of 40 mM iodoacetamide for another 30 min at 37 °C in the dark and the reaction was quenched by 10 mM DTT for 5 min at 37 °C. The reaction volume was adjusted to reach a final concentration of 1 M urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3. Nucleic acids fragments within the PIC-nucleosome complex were digested for 30 min at 37 °C by the addition of 0.1 M MgCl2 to a final concentration of 1 mM in the reaction and 500 U of universal nuclease (Pierce, cat. # 88702, 250 U/µl). Trypsin digest was performed overnight at 37 °C with 5 μg trypsin (Promega, V5111). Peptides were acidified with 4 µl of 100% formic acid (FA), desalted on MicroSpin columns (Harvard Apparatus) following manufacturer’s instructions and vacuum dried. Dried peptides were dissolved in 50 µl 30% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA and peptide size exclusion (pSEC, Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 column) on an ÄKTA micro system (GE Healthcare) was performed to enrich for crosslinked peptides at a flow rate of 50 µl min−1. Fractions of 50 µl were collected. The first 21 fractions enriched in cross-linked peptides were vacuum-dried and dissolved in 5% acetonitrile/0.05% TFA (v/v) for analysis by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS).  Crosslinked peptides derived from pSEC were analysed as technical duplicates on Q Exactive HF-X hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific). The sample was separated on an in-house-packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Sample separation was performed over 60 min using a buffer system consisting of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (buffer A) and 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.08% (v/v) formic acid (buffer B). The main column was equilibrated with 5% B, followed by sample application and a wash with 5% B. Peptides were eluted by a linear gradient from 15–48% B or 20–50% B. The gradient was followed by a wash step at 95% B and re-equilibration at 5% B. Eluting peptides were analysed in positive mode using a data-dependent top-30 acquisition methods. MS1 and MS2 resolution were set to 120,000 and 30,000 full width at half maximum, respectively. Precursors selected for MS2 were fragmented using 30% normalized, higher-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Allowed charge states of selected precursors were +3 to +7. Further MS/MS parameters were set as follows: isolation width, 1.4 m/z; dynamic exclusion, 10 s; max. injection time (MS1/MS2), 60 ms/200 ms.

### Data Protocol
For identification of crosslinked peptides, raw files were analysed by pLink (v. 2.3.5), pFind group, using EDC as cross-linker and trypsin/P as digestion enzyme with maximal three missed cleavage sites. The search was conducted against a customized protein database containing all proteins within the complex. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionines and acetylation at protein N-termini were set as a variable modification. Searches were conducted in combinatorial mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 p.p.m. and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.05 (separate mode). Spectra of both technical duplicates were combined and evaluated manually.

### Publication Abstract
The preinitiation complex (PIC) assembles on promoters of protein-coding genes to position RNA polymerase II (Pol II) for transcription initiation. Previous structural studies revealed the PIC on different promoters, but did not address how the PIC assembles within chromatin. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, PIC assembly occurs adjacent to the +1 nucleosome that is located downstream of the core promoter. Here we present cryo-EM structures of the yeast PIC bound to promoter DNA and the +1 nucleosome located at three different positions. The general transcription factor TFIIH engages with the incoming downstream nucleosome and its translocase subunit Ssl2 (XPB in human TFIIH) drives the rotation of the +1 nucleosome leading to partial detachment of nucleosomal DNA and intimate interactions between TFIIH and the nucleosome. The structures provide insights into how transcription initiation can be influenced by the +1 nucleosome and may explain why the transcription start site is often located roughly 60&#x2009;base pairs upstream of the dyad of the +1 nucleosome in yeast.

### Keywords
Transcription, +1 nucleosome, Tfiih, Preinitiation complex

### Affiliations
Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub  Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group  Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Goettingen, Germany ************************************************ University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry Robert Koch Strasse 40 D-37075 Goettingen, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry (Göttingen) and University Medical Center, Bioanalytics - Institute for Clinical Chemistry (Göttingen)

### Submitter
Momchil Ninov

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Prof. Dr. Henning Urlaub  Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group  Am Fassberg 11 D-37077 Goettingen, Germany ************************************************ University Medical Center Goettingen Bioanalytics Institute for Clinical Chemistry Robert Koch Strasse 40 D-37075 Goettingen, Germany


