### Accession
PXD005855

### Title
Multi-omics Analysis of Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium Infection of Wild Type C57BL/6 and Immunodeficient gp91-/-phox Mice

### Description
Three groups of sex- and aged-matched 9-12 week old C57BL/6 wild type mice and gp91-/-phox mice were infected by i.v. injection of bacterial suspensions:  Group 1 represents wild type C57BL/6 mice infected with virulent S. Typhimurium SL1344 grown in vitro. (Raw files: OTNCS_AGSL1344#3C#9C#10C-XX) Group 2 represents wild type C57BL/6 mice infected with virulent S. Typhimurium SL1344 grown in vivo for 72 h in the Group 1 C57BL/6 mice. (Raw files: OTNCS_AGSL1344#9F#10F-XX) Group 3 represents immunodeficient gp91-/-phox mice infected with virulent S. Typhimurium SL1344 grown in vitro. (Raw files: OTNCS_AGSL1344#11C#12C#13C-XX) And Input (Raw files: OTNCS_AGSL1344mixedAa-XX and OTNCS_AGSL1344mixedAb-XX)

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples In vitro grown bacteria were harvested from culture by centrifugation in a micro-centrifuge. The supernatant was removed by aspiration, and the pellets were resuspended in SDW (sterile distilled water) containing chloramphenicol, the washing and centrifugation was repeated three times. For the in vivo grown SL1344, mice were killed by cervical dislocation and the spleens were removed and homogenised in distilled water containing chloramphenicol.  The homogenate was passed through a filter followed by centrifugation.  The supernatant was removed by aspiration, and the pellets were resuspended in SDW containing chloramphenicol.  To remove host cell debris, the samples were centrifuged, the supernatant was removed and transferred to a fresh tube. Bacteria were harvested by centrifugation in a micro-centrifuge. The supernatant was removed by aspiration, and the pellets were resuspended in SDW containing chloramphenicol. The washing and centrifugation was repeated three times. Subsequently, for the in vitro and in vivo grown SL1344, the bacteria were harvested by centrifugation in a micro-centrifuge. The supernatant was removed by aspiration, and the pellets were resuspended with anti-Salmonella Dynabeads (Invitrogen) containing chloramphenicol and incubated at room temperature with constant mixing. Dynabead-bacteria were collected by placing the tube next to a magnet and removing the supernatant, and the pellets were resuspended to homogeneity in wash buffer containing chloramphenicol. The collection and wash step was repeated  LC-MS/MS analysis   Samples were reduced and alkylated then separated on a 4-12% Bis/Tris NuPAGE (Invitrogen).  Each gel lane was excised to 12 bands followed by in-gel digestion with trypsin overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted with 0.5% formic acid (FA)/50% CH3CN and dried in SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher). The peptides were resuspended in 0.5%FA/100% H2O just before the LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source. The peptides were first loaded and desalted to a PepMap C18 nano-trap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100Å, 5µm) at 10 µL/min for 15 min, then separated on a PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 100 Å, 2 µm) at a linear gradient of 4-32% CH3CN/0.1% FA) in 90min with total cycle time of 120 min at a flow rate at 300 nL/min.  The HPLC, columns and mass spectrometer were all from Thermo Fisher Scientific. The Orbitrap mass spectrometer was operated in the standard “top 10” data-dependant acquisition mode while the preview mode was disabled. The MS full scan was set at m/z 380 – 1800 with the resolution at 60,000 at m/z 400 and AGC at 1x106 with a maximum injection time at 200 msec. The siloxane ion at 445.120030 was used as lock mass.  The 10 most abundant multiply-charged precursor ions (z ≥ 2), with a minimal signal above 1000 counts, were dynamically selected for CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) fragmentation in the ion trap, which had the AGC set at 7000 with the maximum injection time at 300 msec. The precursor isolation width was set at 2 Da.  The normalized collision energy for CID MS/MS was set at 35%. The dynamic exclusion duration time for selected ions for MS/MS was set for 60 sec with ±0.5 Da exclusion mass width.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.3, Thermo Fisher) with Mascot (Version 2.3, Matrix Science) as the search engine. The Salmonella Typhimurium SL1344 protein database was extracted from SL1344 embl file (version 2011) and the mouse protein database is an IPI database (version May 2012). The Mascot search used following parameters: trypsin with maximum 3 missed cleavages sites; peptide mass tolerance 10 ppm, MS/MS fragment mass tolerance at 0.49 Da, and variable modifications of Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C), Deamidated (NQ), Oxidation (M), Dioxidation (M), Oxidation (W), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q) and Methyl (E). Peptides were filtered by the PEP (Posterior Error Probabilities) score at 0.0100 by the Percolator in Mascot, and significance threshold at 0.05. The protein content calculation (weight %) used emPAI score and protein molecular weight; when multiple protein IDs matched the same set of peptides, only one entry was used.

### Publication Abstract
Salmonella enterica are a threat to public health. Current vaccines are not fully effective. The ability to grow in infected tissues within phagocytes is required for S. enterica virulence in systemic disease. As the infection progresses the bacteria are exposed to a complex host immune response. Consequently, in order to continue growing in the tissues, S. enterica requires the coordinated regulation of fitness genes. Bacterial gene regulation has so far been investigated largely using exposure to artificial environmental conditions or to in vitro cultured cells, and little information is available on how S. enterica adapts in vivo to sustain cell division and survival. We have studied the transcriptome, proteome and metabolic flux of Salmonella, and the transcriptome of the host during infection of wild type C57BL/6 and immune-deficient gp91-/-phox mice. Our analyses advance the understanding of how S. enterica and the host behaves during infection to a more sophisticated level than has previously been reported.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Lc-ms/ms, Gel

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


