### Accession
PXD010487

### Title
KIN interactome -  Methylation of the DNA/RNA-binding protein Kin17 by METTL22 affects its association with chromatin

### Description
BioID experiment of KIN protein to determine its interactors

### Sample Protocol
BioID purification - BioID purification was performed according to Coyaud et al. with  modifications. Briefly, 0.1g of cells was harvested and washed in cold PBS 1X, then lysed in 2ml modified RIPA lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCL pH7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, Sigma protease inhibitor cocktail), added 1ul of Benzonase 250U (Novagen) and sonicated (30 sec at 30% amplitude. The lysate was centrifuged 30 min at 12,000rpm, and the clarified supernatant was incubated with 35ul of pre-equilibrated streptavidin-agarose beads (GE) at 4oC for 3 hrs with rotaion. An aliquot of the clarified supernatant was saved for Western blotting analysis. Beads were collected by centrifugation (2 min at 2,000rpm), washed twice in modified RIPA lysis buffer, three times in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 (ABC), and resuspended in 100ul of ABC for trypsin digestion.  Digestion and LC-MS/MS - For BioID, it has been recommended releasing the peptides for analysis by MS using on-bead tryptic digestion, which also prevents removal of the streptavidin itself from the beads that might interfere with MS analysis, therefore, the on-bead proteins are digested with 0.5 ug Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37oC with agitation. The supernatants were collected and the beads were washed two times with 100ul water. The supernatants of each wash were pooled and then reduced and alkylated. The reduction step is done with 9 mM dithiothreitol at 37oC and, after cooling for 10 minutes, the alkylation step is done with 17 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 20 minutes in the dark. The supernatants were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid for desalting and removal of residual detergents by MCX (Waters Oasis MCX 96-well Elution Plate) following the manufacturer’s instructions. After elution in 10% ammonium hydroxide/ 90% methanol (v/v), samples were with a speed-vac and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid. Desalted tryptic peptides were loaded onto a 75 μm i.d. × 150 mm Self-Pack C18 column installed in the Easy-nLC II system (Proxeon Biosystems). The buffers used for chromatography were 0.2% formic acid (buffer A) and 100% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid (buffer B). Peptides were eluted with a two slope gradient at a flowrate of 250 nl min−1. Solvent B first increased from 2 to 40% in 82 min and then from 40 to 80% B in 28 min. The HPLC system was coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a nano-ESI source (Proxeon Biosystems). Nanospray and S-lens voltages were set to 1.3–1.8 kV and 50 V, respectively. Capillary temperature was set to 225 °C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 1,360–2,000) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 with a target value at 1e6. The ten most intense peptide ions were fragmented by collision induced dissociation in the LTQ with a target value at 1e4 (normalized collision energy 35 V, activation Q 0.25, and activation time 10 ms). Target ions selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 25 s.

### Data Protocol
The peak list files were generated with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1) using the following parameters: minimum mass set to 500 Da, maximum mass set to 6 kDa, no grouping of MS/MS spectra, precursor charge set to auto, and minimum number of fragment ions set to 5. Data analysis was performed as described by Cloutier and collaborators (32). Protein database searching was performed with Mascot 2.3 (Matrix Science) against the human NCBInr protein database (version July 18, 2012). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 p.p.m. and 0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin was used as the enzyme allowing for up to one missed cleavage. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. In cases where multiple gene products were identified from the same peptide set, all were unambiguously removed from the data set. When multiple isoforms were identified for a unique gene, only the isoform with the best sequence coverage was reported. Proteins identified on the basis of a single spectrum were also discarded. Reliability of the data obtained was assessed using SAINTexpress version 3.6.1 which assigns a false discovery rate (FDR) to each protein–protein interactions. The threshold FDR score was set at 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Kin, Ribosome biogenesis, Protein-protein interaction, Splicing process, Cancer

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Gene Transcription and Proteomics Discovery Platform, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, QC H2W 1R7, Canada
Translational proteomics, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Canada

### Submitter
Christian Poitras

### Lab Head
Dr Benoit Coulombe
Translational proteomics, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Canada


