### Accession
PXD038411

### Title
Identification of Ubiquitination site of PAICS by LC-MS/MS

### Description
Purines serve as the building blocks for DNA and RNA, confer cellular energy and signaling. Purines are generated by de novo synthesis pathway and salvage pathway. Under purine-depleted or other cellular stresses, enzymes in the purine de novo synthesis pathway form a dynamic and reversible condensate called purinosome, but the underlying mechanism of purinosome formation is unknown. In this thesis, we found that ASB11-based Cul5 E3 ligase promotes ubiquitination of PAICS, a purine de novo synthesis enzyme. This ubiquitination does not lead to PAICS degradation, but drives purinosome assembly. We provide evidence that purinosome assembly involves a liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) process and identify several ubiquitin binding proteins that may bind ubiquitinated PAICS through a multivalent mode to drive LLPS and purinosome assembly. Importantly, ASB11 is upregulated under the stresses that promote purinosome assembly, thus increasing the formation of ASB11/PAICS complex. Finally, we demonstrated that melanoma cells express a high level of ASB11 to confer a constitutive purinosome formation, which support their viability. In summary, our study identifies ASB11-mediated PAICS ubiquitination as a driving mechanism for purinosome assembly, the regulation of this mechanism under stressed conditions, and the importance of this regulation in cell viability.

### Sample Protocol
The ubiquitinated PAICS was isolated from 293T cells transfected with His-ubiquitin, Myc-ASB11, and Flag-PAICS using anti-Flag M2 affinity agarose gel (Sigma-Aldrich). The immunoprecipitated proteins were incubated with Lb protease reaction buffer (50 μM Lbpro*, 50mM Tris, pH 8.0, and 10 mM DTT) at 37 °C for overnight. After incubation, the reaction mixture was separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with SYPROTM Ruby Protein Gel Stain (Invitrogen). The protein band corresponding to the molecular weight of free form Flag-PAICS was excised for in-gel digestion and mass spectrometric peptide sequencing. Briefly, gel slices were destained with 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced by 5 mM dithioerythritol, and alkylated by adding 10 mM iodoacetamide. Gel slices were then washed four times with 50% ACN/25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and dried by soaking in 100% ACN. After evaporating ACN, proteins were digested with Lys-C (Wako, #125-02543) at 37 °C for 3h and then with trypsin (Promega; v5117) at 37 °C for 18 h. Next, peptides were extracted by adding 50% ACN/5% trifluoroacetic acid. The supernatant was desalted by Zip-Tip and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
As described in method Label-free quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide identification was performed using Mascot search engine (v.2.7.0; Matrix Science, Boston, MA, USA) against the Swiss-Prot Human database (561,911 entries total). Search criteria used were trypsin digestion, variable modifications set as carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), ubiquitinylation (K) allowing up to two missed cleavages, mass accuracy of 10 ppm for the parent ion and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide identifications. Peptide sequence assignments contained in MASCOT search results were validated by manual confirmation from raw MS/MS data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Asb11, Paics, Ubiquitination site

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
IBC R602,128, Academia Road Sec. 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan

### Submitter
Ming-Chieh CHOU

### Lab Head
Dr Ruey-Hwa Chen
IBC R602,128, Academia Road Sec. 2, Nankang, Taipei 115, Taiwan


