### Accession
PXD001895

### Title
Soybean Suspension culture analysis

### Description
Proteomic analysis of  soybean suspension cell extracellular and intracellular protein

### Sample Protocol
To extract the cellular proteins, 200 mg  5.0 ml of Tris pH 8.8 buffered phenol was added to 5.0 ml of extraction media (0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 10 mM EDTA, 0.4% 2-metacaptoethanol, 0.9 M sucrose), and 0.1% C7BZO. This was transferred to a 50 ml Falcon tube and homogenized 3 times using a Polytron with a small probe at setting 4.  Each homogenizing session was for 1 minute, with 5 minutes of rest on ice between each minute of homogenizing. This was transferred to a 15 ml corex tube and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 5000 g and 4°C. After centrifugation, the phenol phase was removed and placed into a 30 ml corex tube. The phenol extracted proteins were precipitated by adding 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol (pre-chilled to -20°C). Next, it was vortexed and placed at -20°C for 2 hrs. The precipitate was collected by centrifugation 20 minutes at 10,000 rpm at 4°C.  The pellet was washed twice with ice cold 0.1M ammonium acetate/methanol containing 10mM DTT, then thrice with ice cold 80% acetone containing 10mM DDT, the last wash had no DTT.  The pellet was re-suspended each time by pipetting and was placed at -20°C for 20 minutes between each wash. The final pellet was allowed to air dry on the bench top for 10 minutes.  Day 5 and day 8 extracellular protein samples were re-suspended in 4 mL MS quality water.  Proteins were precipitated by adding 5 volumes of cold 100% acetone and 10 mM DTT and placed at -20°C for 1 hr.  The precipitate was collected by centrifugation 20 minutes at 10,000 rpm at 4°C.  Samples were washed twice in 80% acetone plus 10 mM DTT, pellets were broken up by pipetting. Second acetone wash, DTT was not added.  Final pellet was allowed to air dry on the bench top for 10 minutes. Both samples were resuspened in 8 M urea 50 mM hepes pH 8.0 on ice, samples were centrifuged to remove any particulate.  Protein was reduced with 25 mM TCEP for 1 hr at room temperature, then aylkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hr.  Samples were then diluted to 2 M urea 50 mM hepes pH 8.0 and added 0.1% trypsin and digest over night ~16 hrs at 37 C.  Nex day samples were desalted with Millpore ZipTips according to manufactures specifications. Samples were then handed off to University of Missouri Proteomics core facility.

### Data Protocol
Samples were lyophilized and resusupended in 5uL 5% ACN/1% fromic acid.  A portion of the digests (2.5 uL) was loaded onto a 43mm C18 CHIP (Agilent Technologies cat# G4240-62001).  Peptides were separated and eluted from the analytical column as follows: initial conditions were 3%B (A: 0.1% formic acid in water; B: 99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), ramp to 10%B over 1min, ramp to 40%B over 22min, ramp to 90%B over 1 min, hold at 90%B for 5min, ramp back to initial conditions, hold at 3% for 4min prior to next sample.   Following an MS scan of the eluting peptides, each cycle, the five most abundant peptides were subjected to peptide fragmentation (MSMS).  The Qualitative Analysis software was used to extract MS+MSMS using the “find compounds by auto MS/MS” feature.  These data were then exported as MGF files (MASCOT generic format).  These MGF files were loaded to Sorcerer-Sequest and searched against Glyma1.pep.nostar.DecoyRandom.cRAP.fasta database using these parameters: 25ppm mass accuracy on precursor, 0.1Da mass accuracy on fragments.  The resulting matches were analyzed using Scaffold 4; primary picks were made by the number of unique peptides per protein ID.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Suspension culture, Proteiomics, Secretome

### Affiliations
USDA Agriculture Research Service
USDA, ARS

### Submitter
Jan Miernyk

### Lab Head
Dr Jan A. Miernyk
USDA, ARS


