### Accession
PXD038481

### Title
Circadian Proteomics Landscape of Mouse Livers Organized by Time-restricted Feeding: Ubiquitylation

### Description
Meal timing is essential in synchronization of circadian rhythms in different organ systems through clock-dependent and -independent mechanisms. The liver is a critical metabolic organ whose circadian clock and transcriptome can be readily reset by meal timing. However, it remains largely unexplored how circadian rhythms in the liver are organized in time-restricted feeding that intervenes meal timing. Here, we applied affinity-purification based shotgun proteomics for ubiquitylation to characterize circadian features associated with day/sleep- (DRF) and night/wake (NRF)-time restricted feeding in nocturnal female mice. The transcriptomics and metabolomics datasets are public (see www.circametdb.org.cn).

### Sample Protocol
Mouse liver samples were pulverized in liquid nitrogen, and sonicated in the urea lysis buffer containing 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8), 8 M Urea and 0.2% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) for 5 min on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at After centrifuging for 12,000 g for 15 min at 4℃, the supernatants were reduced by 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56℃, and subsequently alkylated with sufficient iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Next, samples were completely mixed with 4X volume of precooled acetone by vortexing and incubated at -20℃ for at least 2 h. After centrifugation, the pellet was washed twice with cold acetone, and dissolved by dissolution buffer，which containing 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and 6 M urea. Protein samples were subjected to 12% SDS-PAGE, all of which showed no visible sign of degradation. Peptide digestion: 10 mg proteins were aliquoted and diluted to 10 mg/mL for a volume of 1 mL, then 50 μg trypsin and 10 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer were added, mixed and digested at 37 °C for 4 h. 50 μg trypsin and CaCl2 were added for digesting overnight. Formic acid was mixed with digested sample to adjusted pH to less than 3 and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with washing solution (0.1% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile) three times, then eluted by appropriate amounts of elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile). The eluents of each sample were collected and lyophilized. Immunoaffinity enrichment of ubiquitin peptides: Add IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS, 10 mM KH2PO4 and 50 mM NaCl) to dissolve the lyophilized powder, centrifuge at 12,000 g for 5 min. Supernatants were mixed with anti-Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) beads (CST #5562, Cell Signaling Technology) for 2 h at 4°C, and then centrifuged for 30 s at 2,000 g at 4°C. Beads were washed in precooled IAP buffer, then in water three times, centrifuge for 30 s at 3000 g at 4°C. Add eluent (0.15% TFA), mix with shaking and leave at room temperature for 10 min, centrifuge at 2,000 g for 30 s, and repeat the elution twice. The combined elution samples were centrifuged at 5,000 g for 5 min, the supernatant was desalted and lyophilized.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis: Prepare mobile phase A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) and B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The lyophilized powder was dissolved in 10 μL solution A and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 20 min at room temperature. 1 μg supernatant was used for detection. Shotgun proteomics analyses were performed using an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operating in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. 1 μg sample was injected into a home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (2 cm×75 μm, 3 μm). Peptides were separated in a home-made analytical column (15 cm×150 μm, 1.9 μm), using a linear gradient elution. The separated peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive HF-X, with ion source of Nanospray Flex™(ESI), spray voltage of 2.3 kV and ion transport capillary temperature of 320°C. Full scan ranges from m/z 350 to 1500 with resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3×106 and a maximum ion injection time was 80 ms. The 30 most abundant precursor ions from full scan were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in MS/MS, where resolution was 15000 (at m/z 200), the automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 5×104 and the maximum ion injection time was 100 ms, a normalized collision energy was set as 27%, an intensity threshold was 5×103, and the dynamic exclusion parameter was 30 s. Protein identification and quantification: The resulting spectra from each fraction were searched against UniProt database (Mus_musculus_uniprot_2020_1_8.fasta) by the search engines: Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD 2.4, Thermo). The searched parameters as follows: A mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ion scans and a mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for the product ion scans were used. Carbamidomethyl was specified in PD 2.4 as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine (M), GG of lysine (K) and acetylation of the N-terminus were specified in PD 2.4 as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 mis-cleavage sites were allowed. Proteins with at least 1 unique peptide were identified at FDR less than 1.0% on peptide and protein level, respectively. Proteins containing similar peptides and could not be distinguished based on MS/MS analysis were grouped separately as protein groups. Precursor quantification based on intensity was used for Label-free quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics; circadian rhythm; time-restricted feeding; inverted feeding; liver; ubiquitylation

### Affiliations
Southwest Hospital
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Center for Circadian Metabolism and Cardiovascular Disease, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University; Chongqing, China.

### Submitter
Min-Dian Li

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Dian Li
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Center for Circadian Metabolism and Cardiovascular Disease, Southwest Hospital, Army Medical University; Chongqing, China.


