### Accession
PXD028802

### Title
Deubiquitinase Vulnerabilities Identified through Activity Based Protein Profiling in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer

### Description
To aid in the prioritization of deubiquitinases (DUBs) as anticancer targets, we developed an approach combining activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) with mass spectrometry in both non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumor tissues and cell lines along with analysis of available RNA interference and CRISPR screens. We identified 67 DUBs in NSCLC tissues, 17 of which were overexpressed in adenocarcinoma or squamous cell histologies, and 12 scoring as affecting lung cancer cell viability in RNAi or CRISPR screens. We used the CSN5 inhibitor, which targets COPS5/ CSN5, as a tool to understand the biological significance of one of these 12 DUBs, COPS6, in lung cancer. Our study provides a powerful resource to interrogate the role of DUB signaling biology and nominates druggable targets for the treatment of lung cancer subtypes.

### Sample Protocol
ABPP sample preparation: For the tumor tissue cohort, ~25 mg frozen tissue from primary tumor samples taken from NSCLC patients with adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma at the time of surgical resection and normal tumor-adjacent lung tissues (NTA) was used in this study. All tissue samples were pulverized with liquid nitrogen cooling and processed for ABPP. For cell lines, pellets from one 150 mm cell culture dish (~1 mg total protein from 107 cells) were used to prepare samples.  The tumor or cell line samples were homogenized using glass beads (~2X the volume of the sample) in 500 µl glass bead lysis buffer (GLB) containing DTT (1 mM), Benzonase (25 units/ml) and PMSF (100 µM). Samples were sonicated 4-5 times for 10-20s and cooled on ice and vortexed 3 times between each cycle. Samples were then centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 30 minutes at 4°C. Supernatant containing protein was transferred to another tube and protein concentration was determined using Biorad Protein concentration assay. An aliquot (~1 mg) of protein lysate from tissues or cell lines was labeled with HA-tagged active site-directed ubiquitin-probes HA-Ub-VME / HA-Ub-PA (using 20 µg of each based on the probe titration to maximize DUB-ABP pull down) for 45 minutes, while incubating at 37°C. The samples were then cooled on ice and 100 µl of HA-agarose beads (previously washed three times with NP-40 lysis buffer) were added, and each sample was diluted using GLB to a final volume of 1,500 µl and allowed to gently shake on a rotator overnight at 4°C. The labeled DUB-ABP complexes were transferred to a Thermo Scientific™ HyperSep™ C18 Cartridges and washed 5 times with 5 column volumes of GLB. The beads containing DUB-ABP complexes were denatured by boiling in 50 µl of 2X SDS PAGE Laemmli sample buffer in the column for 5 minutes at 95°C.  DUB-ABP complexes were recovered by centrifugation into a new labelled tube. An aliquot (45 µl) of each sample was loaded on a precast gel (Bio-Rad) and a ran on SDS gel for approximately 3 cm to capture and clean up the eluted proteins, followed by in-gel digestion with trypsin, and peptide desalting with Ziptip C18. The remainder (5 µl) of each protein sample was saved for future validation experiments.  LC-MS/MS: A nanoflow ultra-high-performance liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an electrospray bench top orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive plus, Thermo, San Jose, CA) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments. The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 µm ID packed with C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile and 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid. The trapped peptides were eluted onto the analytical column, (C18 PepMap100, 75 µm ID x 25 cm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  The 90-minute gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (aqueous 2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (aqueous 90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 38.5% in 60 minutes, then solvent B from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes and held at 90% for 5 minutes, followed by solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and re-equilibrate for 10 minutes.  The flow rate on the analytical column was 300 nl/min. Sixteen tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan; 60 second exclusion eliminated duplicate analysis of previously sampled peptide peaks.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis for Upload:  Data were searched against human entries in the UniProt database using Mascot (Matrix Science).   Data Analysis in the Manuscript: MaxQuant was used for protein identification with Andromeda (2) and relative quantification of unmodified peptides using label free proteomics. Data were searched against human entries in the UniProt database.  Unprocessed data from the MaxQuant proteinGroups.txt file was loaded in to the R statistical programming environment (version 3.6.1) [PMID 19029910; R Core Team (2019). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/.']. Proteins that were identified but not quantified were removed and the remaining data were log2-transformed. Data was imputed with GMSimpute, a two-step lasso approach for imputing abundances from missing mass spectrometry data (3) Batches were corrected using ComBat from the sva R package (4), and data was then normalized using iterative rank-order normalization (IRON) (5). Pairwise Wilcoxon rank-sum tests were used to identify differential expression between the patient groups. False discovery rate was controlled using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Differentially-expressed proteins were defined as those with |log2 ratio| > 1 and an adjusted p-value < 0.25. Tab delimited BioGRID interaction data (version 3.5.177) was downloaded . The list of differentially-active DUBs from each patient group (adeno vs tumor-adjacent, squamous vs tumor-adjacent, adeno vs squamous) was used to filter BioGRID interaction data ("Interactor A" column) to produce a list of DUB interactors ("Interactor B" column). This list was used to identify differentially-expressed DUB interactors in the patient group comparisons. Statistical Considerations and Rigor: To avoid potential batch effects, randomization was performed so that each batch consist of similar proportion of lung tumor with histological subtypes (i.e., adenocarcinoma (KRAS mutant and wild types) and squamous cell carcinoma), and non-tumor tissues within the same mass spectrometry batch to avoid potential confounding. Peptides of DUB and other DUB binding proteins were quantified using ABPP ubiquitin-probes. The measurement is a continuous variable, and its sampling distributions were examined and visualized using histograms and boxplots after quantification. Log2  transformation were performed before applying parametric statistical tests. Internal controls within each sample (PRTC peptides) and external control sample which included a sample pooling of multiple patient samples into one sample equally divided between each batch of run between lung tissue samples were used to monitor potential batch effect and used for normalization as needed. PCA was performed to investigate any potential batch effects. COMBAT was used for de-batching.

### Publication Abstract
To aid in the prioritization of deubiquitinases (DUBs) as anticancer targets, we developed an approach combining activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) with mass spectrometry in both non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumor tissues and cell lines along with analysis of available RNA interference and CRISPR screens. We identified 67 DUBs in NSCLC tissues, 17 of which were overexpressed in adenocarcinoma or squamous cell histologies and 12 of which scored as affecting lung cancer cell viability in RNAi or CRISPR screens. We used the CSN5 inhibitor, which targets COPS5/CSN5, as a tool to understand the biological significance of one of these 12 DUBs, COPS6, in lung cancer. Our study provides a powerful resource to interrogate the role of DUB signaling biology and nominates druggable targets for the treatment of lung cancer subtypes.

### Keywords
Human, Deubiquitinase, Lung cancer, Activity-based protein profiling

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Thoracic Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Haura
Thoracic Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA


