### Accession
PXD021868

### Title
Bifidobacterium infantis metabolizes 2´fucosyllactose-derived and free fucose through a common catabolic pathway resulting in 1,2-propanediol secretion

### Description
Human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) are highly diverse complex carbohydrates secreted in human milk. HMOs are indigestible by the infant and instead are metabolized by bifidobacteria in the infant gut microbiome to produce molecules that promote infant health and development. 2´fucosyllactose (2´FL) is an abundant HMO and is utilized by Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis, a predominant member of the infant gut microbiome. Currently, there is not a scientific consensus on how or if bifidobacteria metabolize the fucose portion of 2´FL or free fucose. This proteomic analysis was conducted in order to characterize the metabolic pathway by which B. infantis utilizes fucose.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures were harvested at mid-exponential phase and the pellet was washed 3X with PBS buffer and stored at -80°C until further analysis. Cell pellet were suspended in 1X SDS lysis and solubilization buffer (Protifi LLC) and were sonicated using Bioruptor pico (Diagenode, USA) at high power for 10-15 min (sonication cycle: 30 sec ON, 30 sec OFF). The cell lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 13,000g for 8 min. Protein concentrations were measured using the Pierce BCA protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) on a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Sample preparation for mass spectrometer analysis was done using S-Trap micro universal MS sample prep kit (Protifi LLC, USA) according to the manufacturer instructions. Samples were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digestion and clean-up was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Tryptic digests were analyzed using a Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 nanoLC system coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).  Peptides were separated using a 90-minute gradient of increasing concentration of acetonitrile and infused into the mass spectrometer at 300 nl/min.  MS1 data was acquired at 60,000 resolution in the Orbitrap and MS/MS data were acquired in a data dependent manner selecting the top 5 most intense ions for fragmentation, using a nominal CID collision energy of 35%. Data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). MS/MS data was queried against a database constructed from the uniprot database (www.uniprot.org) containing Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis ATCC15697 (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001360, Proteome ID: UP000001360). Mass spectrometry data were obtained at the University of Massachusetts Amherst Mass Spectrometry Center.

### Data Protocol
Scaffold version 4.9.0 (Proteome Software Inc., USA) was used to validate peptide and protein calls. Peptide identifications at greater than 99.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted at greater than 99.0% probability and containing at least 2 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. In order to generate relative quantification results across samples, result files from Proteome Discoverer were imported into Scaffold and .sf3 files were exported for the qualitative and quantitative comparisons of different samples. Peptide and protein abundance were normalized based on total sum of peptide and protein abundances, respectively, and were log10 transformed before the analysis. Multivariate data analysis was carried out using MetaboAnalyst 4.0 (Chong et al., 2018) (www.metaboanalyst.ca).

### Publication Abstract
Human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) enrich beneficial bifidobacteria in the infant gut microbiome which produce molecules that impact development and physiology. 2'fucosyllactose (2'FL) is a highly abundant fucosylated HMO which is utilized by <i>Bifidobacterium longum</i> subsp. <i>infantis</i>, despite limited scientific understanding of the underlying mechanism. Moreover, there is not a current consensus on whether free fucose could be metabolized when not incorporated in a larger oligosaccharide structure. Based on metabolic and genomic analyses, we hypothesize that <i>B. infantis</i> catabolizes both free fucose and fucosyl oligosaccharide residues to produce 1,2-propanediol (1,2-PD). Accordingly, systems-level approaches including transcriptomics and proteomics support this metabolic path. Co-fermentation of fucose and limiting lactose or glucose was found to promote significantly higher biomass and 1,2-PD concentrations than individual substrates, suggesting a synergistic effect. In addition, and during growth on 2'FL, <i>B. infantis</i> achieves significantly higher biomass corresponding to increased 1,2-PD. These findings support a singular fucose catabolic pathway in <i>B. infantis</i> that is active on both free and HMO-derived fucose and intimately linked with central metabolism. The impact of fucose and 2'FL metabolism on <i>B. infantis</i> physiology provides insight into the role of fucosylated HMOs in influencing host- and microbe-microbe interactions within the infant gut microbiome.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Bifidobacteria, 2'fucosyllactose, Human milk oligosaccharides, Microbiome, Fucose

### Affiliations
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Associate Professor, Dept. of Food Science Adjunct Associate Professor, Dept. of Microbiology University of Massachusetts Amherst Adjunct Associate Professor, Dept. of Microbiology & Physiological Systems University of Massachusetts Medical School selalab.org  413.545.1010

### Submitter
Asha Rani

### Lab Head
Dr David A. Sela
Associate Professor, Dept. of Food Science Adjunct Associate Professor, Dept. of Microbiology University of Massachusetts Amherst Adjunct Associate Professor, Dept. of Microbiology & Physiological Systems University of Massachusetts Medical School selalab.org  413.545.1010


