### Accession
PXD001659

### Title
Elucidating the Linezolid response of Staphylococcus aureus USA300 (Hi3 quantification)

### Description
The translation inhibitor Linezolid is an important antibiotic of last resort against multiresistant gram-positive pathogens including MRSA. Linezolid is reported to specifically inhibit extracellular virulence factors, but the molecular cause is unknown. To elucidate the physiological response of S. aureus to Linezolid in general and the possible inhibition of virulence factors specifically we performed a holistic study. We added Linezolid to logarithmically growing S. aureus cells and analysed the Linezolid stress response with transcriptomics, quantitative proteomics and microscopy experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown aerobically at 37°C in LB medium (Invitrogen) or for creation of the labelled standard in 15N enriched BioExpress1000 medium (Cambridge Isotopes). All microbial, transcriptomics and proteomics experiments were performed in three biological replicates.For detailed proteomic, transcriptomic and microscopy experiments LZD was added to a final concentration of 5 mg l -1 at OD 0.5. Samples were harvested one hour after addition of LZD (III), at the beginning of the interim stationary phase (IV) and after the cells reentered the growth cycle (V). For comparison with logarithmically growing cells and transient cells control samples were harvested at OD 540 0.9 (I) and 3.4 (II).  Cells were harvested by centrifugation and washed two times with 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) (Fluka). Cell disruption was performed with a Precellys 24 homogenisator (PeqLab, Germany; 3 x 30 s at 6.5 m s-1). Glass beads and cell debris were removed by centrifugation. For analysis of extracellular proteins, the cell culture supernatant was sterile filtered, 1 µg bovine serum albumin was spiked in for normalization, and extracellular proteins were enriched with StrataClean beads (Bonn et al., 2014).  The cytosolic fraction was prepared and analysed as described before (Muntel el a., 2014) with minor modifications. In brief the trypsinized and desalted sample was analysed on a Synapt G2 (Waters) with activated iMSE mode, after separation on a nanoAcquity with a 90 minutes non-linear gradient. The iMS Wave Velocity was ramped from 1000 m s-1 to 800 m s-1. For precursor ion analysis the collision energy was 4 eV, for fragment ion analysis the collision energy was ramped from 25 to 45 eV. In both acquisition modes the ions were scanned for one second in a mass range from 50-2000 m z-1. The extracellular fraction was prepared as described before 31 and analysed the same way as the cytosolic fraction, but after separation with a 60 minutes gradient. Data analysis was done with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS) 2 (Waters).

### Data Protocol
All samples (five timepoints, three biological replicates) were analysed in three technical replicates. The datasets from the cytosolic and the extracellular proteome analysis were analysed independently. Hi3 quantification data was analysed with Protein Lynx Global Server (PLGS) 2 (Waters) by searching against a  target/decoy database consisting of the S. aureus USA300 FPR_3757 database downloaded from the ncbi  and common laboratory contaminants . Proteins were regarded identified in the original search (uploaded search data), when identified with at least 5 fragments. To overcome discrimination of high abundant proteins due to detector saturation Hi3 calculated protein abundances were corrected by a factor derived from the difference between the protein specific and mean intensity ratio of the fragment ions against the precursor intensity. Protein amount was normalized on the theoretical total protein amount on the column for the analysis of the cytosolic proteome and on the theoretical amount of Bovine Serum Albumin for the extracellular proteome. To ensure high quality proteins which were identified with only one peptide and/or a protein score of less than 300 were excluded from the analysis. Mean protein amounts were calculated for all samples from the technical replicates. The protein false discovery rate (FDR) was less than 0.5% on sample level. All proteins which were quantified in one or more timepoints after LZD stress in less than two biological replicates were excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The translation inhibitor linezolid is an antibiotic of last resort against Gram-positive pathogens including methicillin resistant strains of the nosocomial pathogen Staphylococcus aureus. Linezolid is reported to inhibit production of extracellular virulence factors, but the molecular cause is unknown. To elucidate the physiological response of S. aureus to linezolid in general and the inhibition of virulence factor synthesis in particular a holistic study was performed. Linezolid was added to exponentially growing S. aureus cells and the linezolid stress response was analyzed with transcriptomics and quantitative proteomics methods. In addition, scanning and transmission electron microscopy experiments as well as fluorescence microscopy analyses of the cellular DNA and membrane were performed. As previously observed in studies on other translation inhibitors, S. aureus adapts its protein biosynthesis machinery to the reduced translation efficiency. For example the synthesis of ribosomal proteins was induced. Also unexpected results like a decline in the amount of extracellular and membrane proteins were obtained. In addition, cell shape and size changed after linezolid stress and cell division was diminished. Finally, the chromosome was condensed after linezolid stress and lost contact to the membrane. These morphological changes cannot be explained by established theories. A new hypothesis is discussed, which suggests that the reduced amount of membrane and extracellular proteins and observed defects in cell division are due to the disintegration of transertion complexes by linezolid.

### Keywords
Linezolid, Absolute quantification

### Affiliations
Microbial Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry, Institute for Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Florian Bonn

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Microbial Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry, Institute for Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Germany


