### Accession
PXD034983

### Title
Dynamic interplay between Ydj1 and Hsp90 for interaction with nucleotide binding domain of Hsp70 regulates client maturation

### Description
Hsp90 constitutes one of the major chaperone machinery in the cell. The Hsp70 assists Hsp90 in its client maturation though the underlying basis of the Hsp70 role remains to be explored. In the present study we identified novel mutations in the nucleotide-binding domain of yeast Ssa1 Hsp70 (Ssa1-T175N and Ssa1-D158N) that adversely affect the maturation of Hsp90 clients v-Src and Ste11. The identified Ssa1 amino acids critical for Hsp90 function were also found to be conserved across species such as in E.coli DnaK and the constitutive Hsp70 isoform (HspA8) in humans. These mutations are distal to the C-terminus of Hsp70 that primarily mediates Hsp90 interaction through the bridge protein Sti1. Intriguingly, we found that the bridge protein Sti1 is critical for cellular viability in cells expressing Ssa1-T175N (A1-T175N) or Ssa1-D158N (A1-D158N) as sole Ssa Hsp70. The growth defect was specific for sti1Δ, as deletion of none of the other Hsp90 co-chaperones showed lethality in A1-T175N or A1-D158N. Mass-spectrometry based whole proteome analysis of A1-T175 cells lacking Sti1 showed an altered abundance of various kinases and transcription factors suggesting compromised Hsp90 activity. Further proteomic analysis showed that pathways involved in signaling, signal transduction, and protein phosphorylation are markedly downregulated in the A1-T175N upon repression of Sti1 under DOX regulated promoter. In contrast to Ssa1, the homologous mutations in Ssa4 (Ssa4-T175N/D158N) supported cell growth even in the absence of Sti1. Overall, our data suggest that Ydj1 competes with Hsp90 for binding to Hsp70, and thus regulates Hsp90 interaction with the nucleotide-binding domain of Hsp70. The study thus provides new insight into the Hsp70-mediated regulation of Hsp90 and broadens our understanding of the intricate complexities of the Hsp70-Hsp90 network. This project was done under Deepak Sharma, CSIR-IMTECH, deepaks@imtech.res.in as a PI of the project.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion and Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labelling:  Samples were reduced with 100 mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 30 min and processed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method[65]. In short, reduced samples were transferred to 30 kDa MWCO Pall Nanosep centrifugation filters (Pall Corporation) and washed twice with 8 M urea. Additional washes with digestion buffer (0.5% sodium deoxycholate in 50 mM TEAB) was performed before and after alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate for 20 min at room temperature. Protein digestions were performed using Trypsin (Pierce MS grade) in digestion buffer, first with 0.3 µg Trypsin at 37°C overnight followed by new addition of 0.3 µg trypsin and incubation at 37°C for three hours. Produced tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation and labelled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. Labelled samples were combined and sodium deoxycholate was removed by acidification with 10% TFA. Peptides were desalted using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  The combined desalted TMT-labeled sample was fractionated by basic reversed-phase chromatography (bRP-LC) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptide separations were performed using a reversed-phase XBridge BEH C18 column (3.5 μm, 3.0x150 mm, Waters Corporation) and a gradient from 3% to 100% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium formate buffer at pH 10.00 over 22 min. The fractions concatenated into 15 or 22 fractions that were evaporated and reconstituted in 20 μl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid for nLC-MS/MS analysis.  nLC-MS/MS: The fractions were analyzed on an orbitrap Lumos™ or Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 35 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a gradient from 3% to 100% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid over 85 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. MS scans were performed at 120 000 resolution. MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent, with top speed cycle of 3 s for the most intense doubly or multiply charged precursor ions. Precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole with a 0.7 m/z isolation window, with dynamic exclusion set to 10 ppm and duration of 45 seconds. Isolated precursor ions were subjected to collision induced dissociation (CID) at 35 collision energy. Produced MS2 fragment ions were detected in the ion trap followed by multinotch (simultaneous) isolation of the top 10 most abundant fragment ions for further fragmentation (MS3) by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 65% and detection in the Orbitrap at 50000 resolutions, m/z range 100-500.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic Data Analysis: Identification and relative quantification was performed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Swissprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database (December 2019) was used for the database search, using the Mascot search engine v. 2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) with MS peptide tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.6 Da. Tryptic peptides were accepted with 0 missed cleavage; methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification, cysteine methylthiolation, TMT-6 on lysine and peptide N-termini were set as fixed modifications. Percolator was used for PSM validation with the strict FDR threshold of 1%.TMT reporter ions were identified in the MS3 HCD spectra with 3 mmu mass tolerance, and the TMT reporter intensity values for each sample were normalized on the total peptide amount. Only the unique identified peptides were taken into account for the relative quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Hsp90 constitutes one of the major chaperone machinery in the cell. The Hsp70 assists Hsp90 in its client maturation though the underlying basis of the Hsp70 role remains to be explored. In the present study, using S. cerevisiae strain expressing Ssa1 as sole Ssa Hsp70, we identified novel mutations in the nucleotide-binding domain of yeast Ssa1 Hsp70 (Ssa1-T175N and Ssa1-D158N) that adversely affect the maturation of Hsp90 clients v-Src and Ste11. The identified Ssa1 amino acids critical for Hsp90 function were also found to be conserved across species such as in E.coli DnaK and the constitutive Hsp70 isoform (HspA8) in humans. These mutations are distal to the C-terminus of Hsp70, that primarily mediates Hsp90 interaction through the bridge protein Sti1, and proximal to Ydj1 (Hsp40 co-chaperone of Hsp70 family) binding region. Intriguingly, we found that the bridge protein Sti1 is critical for cellular viability in cells expressing Ssa1-T175N (A1-T175N) or Ssa1-D158N (A1-D158N) as sole Ssa Hsp70. The growth defect was specific for sti1&#x394;, as deletion of none of the other Hsp90 co-chaperones showed lethality in A1-T175N or A1-D158N. Mass-spectrometry based whole proteome analysis of A1-T175N cells lacking Sti1 showed an altered abundance of various kinases and transcription factors suggesting compromised Hsp90 activity. Further proteomic analysis showed that pathways involved in signaling, signal transduction, and protein phosphorylation are markedly downregulated in the A1-T175N upon repressing Sti1 expression using doxycycline regulatable promoter. In contrast to Ssa1, the homologous mutations in Ssa4 (Ssa4-T175N/D158N), the stress inducible Hsp70 isoform, supported cell growth even in the absence of Sti1. Overall, our data suggest that Ydj1 competes with Hsp90 for binding to Hsp70, and thus regulates Hsp90 interaction with the nucleotide-binding domain of Hsp70. The study thus provides new insight into the Hsp70-mediated regulation of Hsp90 and broadens our understanding of the intricate complexities of the Hsp70-Hsp90 network.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Aml, Hsp70, Oncogene, Client protein, Hsp40, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, T(7;12)

### Affiliations
Gothenburg University
CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology, Sector 39A, Chandigarh, India.

### Submitter
Johannes Fuchs

### Lab Head
Dr Deepika Gaur
CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology, Sector 39A, Chandigarh, India.


