### Accession
PXD044481

### Title
Macromolecular condensation buffers intracellular water potential

### Description
Optimum protein function and biochemical activity critically depends on water availability, because solvent thermodynamics drive protein folding and macromolecular interactions. Reciprocally, macromolecules restrict the movement of “structured” water molecules within their hydration layers, reducing the available “free” bulk solvent and therefore the total thermodynamic potential energy of water, or water potential. Within concentrated macromolecular solutions like the cytosol, we found modest changes in temperature greatly impact the water potential, and are counteracted by opposing changes in osmotic strength. Remarkably, this duality of temperature and osmotic strength allows simple manipulations of solvent thermodynamics to prevent cell death upon extreme cold or heat shock. Physiologically, cells must sustain their activity against fluctuating temperature, pressure and osmotic strength that impact water availability within seconds. Yet, established mechanisms of water homeostasis act over much slower timescales, so we postulated the existence of a rapid compensatory response. We find this function is performed by water potential-driven changes in macromolecular assembly, particularly biomolecular condensation of intrinsically-disordered proteins. Formation or dissolution of biomolecular condensates liberates and captures free water, respectively, quickly counteracting thermal or osmotic perturbations of water potential, which in consequence is robustly buffered in the cytoplasm. Our results indicate biomolecular condensation constitutes an intrinsic biophysical feedback response that rapidly compensates for intracellular osmotic and thermal fluctuations. We suggest preserving water availability within the concentrated cytosol is an overlooked evolutionary driver of protein (dis)order and function.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry Enzymatic Digestion Each sample (500 µg) was reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56°C for 30 min and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. They were then digested with mass spectrometry grade Lys-C (Promega) at a protein:Lys-C ratio of 100:1 (w/w) for 4 hours at 25°C. Next, the samples were diluted to 1.5 M urea using 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and digested at 30°C overnight with trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 70:1 (w/w). Digestion was quenched by the addition of formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 1%. The supernatants were desalted using homemade C18 stage tips containing 3M Empore extraction disks (Sigma) and 8 mg of Poros R3 resin (Thermo Fisher). Bound peptides were eluted with 30-80% acetonitrile (MeCN) in 0.5% FA and lyophilized.   TMT (Tandem mass tag) peptide labelling  The lyophilized peptides from each sample were resuspended in 100 µl of 2.5% MeCN, 250 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. 60 µl (1.2 mg) of each TMT 10plex reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), reconstituted in anhydrous MeCN according to manufacturer’s instructions was added.  Peptides from each time point were labelled with a distinct TMT tag for 60 min at room temperature. The labelling reaction was quenched by incubating with 5% hydroxylamine for 30 min. The set of 10 labelled peptides were combined into a single sample and partially dried in a SpeedVac (Savant).  Sample was then acidified and centrifuged at 16000 x g for 10 min. Supernatant was desalted using Sep-Pak Plus Short tC18 cartridges (Waters). Bound peptides were eluted with 60% acetonitrile in 0.5% acetic acid and lyophilized. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) – Enrichment of phosphopeptides Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 titansphere-chromatography (GL Science Inc. Japan). Lyophilized peptides were resolubilised in 50% MeCN containing 2 M lactic acid (loading buffer) and incubated with TiO2 beads (1: 4, peptides: TiO2, w/w) that were prewashed with loading buffer. After 1hr, the TiO2 beads were centrifuged at 10000g for 2 min, the supernatant was added to fresh TiO2 beads for a second round of enrichment, and the procedure was repeated for 3rd time.  After incubation, TiO2 beads with enriched phosphopeptides were loaded onto C8 stage tips (3M Empore) and washed twice with loading buffer and once with 50% MeCN, 0.1%TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted sequentially with 0.4 M ammonia solution, 30% MeCN in ¬0.4M ammonia solution and 50% MeCN in 0.1 % TFA. The eluates were acidified with FA, and partially dried down using a SpeedVac (Savant). Samples were then desalted using C18 Stage tips (3M Empore) and lyophilized.  Basic pH Reverse-Phase HPLC fractionation The TMT labelled peptides and phosphopeptides were subjected to off-line High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) fractionation, using an XBridge BEH130 C18, 5 μm, 2.1 mm x 150 mm column with an XBridge BEH C18 5 μm Van Guard cartridge (Waters), connected to an Ultimate 3000 Nano/Capillary LC System (Dionex). Peptide mixtures were resolubilized in solvent A (5% MeCN, 95% 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8) and separated with a gradient of 1-90% solvent B (90% MeCN, 10% 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8) over 60 min at a flow rate of 250 μl/min. Eluted peptides were collected at 1 min/fraction, combined into 18 fractions for proteomics experiment and 14 fractions for phosphoproteomics and lyophilized.  For proteomic experiments only, fractions were desalted using C18 stage tips and partially dried down by vacuum centrifugation prior to LCMS/MS. LC MS/MS The fractionated peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a fully automated Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Scientific) fitted with a 100 μm x 2 cm PepMap100 C18 nano trap column and a 75 μm × 25 cm nanoEase M/Z HSS C18 T3 column (Waters). Samples were separated using a binary gradient consisting of buffer A (2% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid), and eluted at 300 nL/min with an acetonitrile gradient. The outlet of the nano column was directly interfaced via a nanospray ion source to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in standard data-dependent mode, performing a MS full-scan in the m/z range of 380-1600, with a resolution of 70000. This was followed by MS2 acquisitions of the 15 most intense ions with a resolution of 35000 and Normalised Collision Energy (NCE) of 33%. The isolation window of precursor ion was set at 0.7 Da and sequenced peptides were excluded for 40 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Spectral processing and peptide and protein identification The acquired raw files from LC-MS/MS were processed using MaxQuant100 with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.6.6.0). MS/MS spectra were quantified with reporter ion MS2 from TMT 10plex experiments and searched against the Mus musculus UniProt Fasta database (March 2019). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation (STY) (for phosphoproteomics group only) were set as variable modifications. Protein quantification requirements were set at 1 unique and razor peptide. In the identification tab, second peptides and match between runs were not selected. Other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The MaxQuant output file was then processed with Perseus (v1.6.6.0). Reporter ion intensities for protein group table were uploaded to Perseus. The data was filtered: identifications from the reverse database were removed, only identified by site, potential contaminants were removed. Then all columns with an intensity “less or equal to zero” were converted to “NAN” (not a number) and exported. The MaxQuant output file with phospho (STY) sites table was also processed with Perseus software (v1.6.6.0). The data was filtered: identifications from the reverse database, potential contaminants were removed and we only considered phosphopeptides with localization probability ≥ 0.75. Then all columns with intensity “less or equal to zero” were converted to “NAN” and exported.  3) Mass spectrometry data analysis  Data processing was performed in R v3.6.1 with R Studio v1.2.  For proteomics data, reporter ion intensities were normalised for input (equalising total intensities) and log2-transformed. To determine proteins that change significantly with temperature or external osmolarity, linear model fitting with empirical Bayes method was performed using LIMMA package101, separately for temperature and osmolarity data, with predictors treated as continuous variables. Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value of 0.05 was used as significance threshold. GeneOverlap R package102 was used to aid determination of overlap significance between different protein groups. Gene Ontology enrichment was performed using GOrilla online tool103 with two unranked gene lists (overlaps vs all detected proteins). A list of phase-separating proteins was taken from PhaSepDB v131, using the list of proteins annotated as phase-separating and/or belonging to different membraneless organelles from high-throughput screens.   For phosphoproteomics data, reporter ion intensities for each phosphosites were normalised to its respective protein abundance (obtained from original proteomics data). LIMMA analysis was performed as above. D2P2 database104 was queried for all detected phosphoproteins to determine their predicted intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs), as a consensus between the different predictor algorithms used in the database; the position of each phosphosite was used to determine whether or not it is predicted to be in an IDR. Proportion z-test was then used to determine whether phopshopeptides that change significantly with extenal osmolarity and/or temperature have the same or different level of IDR phosphorylation compared to background. Prediction of kinases that might phosphorylate the detected phosphopeptides was done by counting predicted motifs for a panel of 25 kinases present in the PHOSIDA database105.

### Publication Abstract
Optimum protein function and biochemical activity critically depends on water availability because solvent thermodynamics drive protein folding and macromolecular interactions<sup>1</sup>. Reciprocally, macromolecules restrict the movement of 'structured' water molecules within their hydration layers, reducing the available 'free' bulk solvent and therefore the total thermodynamic potential energy of water, or water potential. Here, within concentrated macromolecular solutions such as the cytosol, we found that modest changes in temperature greatly affect the water potential, and are counteracted by opposing changes in osmotic strength. This duality of temperature and osmotic strength enables simple manipulations of solvent thermodynamics to prevent cell death after extreme cold or heat shock. Physiologically, cells must sustain their activity against fluctuating temperature, pressure and osmotic strength, which impact water availability within seconds. Yet, established mechanisms of water homeostasis act over much slower timescales<sup>2,3</sup>; we therefore postulated the existence of a rapid compensatory response. We find that this function is performed by water&#xa0;potential-driven changes in macromolecular assembly, particularly biomolecular condensation of intrinsically disordered proteins. The formation and dissolution of biomolecular condensates liberates and captures free water, respectively, quickly counteracting thermal or osmotic perturbations of water potential, which is consequently robustly buffered in the cytoplasm. Our results indicate that biomolecular condensation constitutes an intrinsic biophysical feedback response that rapidly compensates for intracellular osmotic and thermal fluctuations. We suggest that preserving water availability within the concentrated cytosol is an overlooked evolutionary driver of protein (dis)order and function.

### Keywords
Phase separation, Membraneless organelles, Water potential

### Affiliations
MRC-LMB
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue,Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Sew Peak-Chew

### Lab Head
Dr John S. O'Neill
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue,Cambridge, UK


