### Accession
PXD021015

### Title
Distinct roles for human mtIF2 and mtIF3 in non-canonical mitochondrial translation

### Description
The  production  of  mitochondrial  OXPHOS  complexes  is  central  to  cellular  metabolism, although the molecular details of mitochondrial translation remain enigmatic. It is widely held that translation initiation in human mitochondria proceeds similarly to bacterial systems, with mRNA binding the mitoribosomal small subunit in the presence of initiation factors, mtIF2and  mtIF3,  and  initiator  tRNA.  However,  unlike  in  bacteria,  most  human  mitochondrial mRNAs do not possess 5′ leader sequences that mediate binding to the small subunit. Thus, how leaderless mRNAs are recognized by the mitoribosome is not known. By developing a single-molecule,   fluorescence-based   in   vitro   translation   initiation   assay,   alongside   the biochemical and genetic characterization of cellular knockouts of mitochondrial translation factors,   we   describe   a   mechanism   for   non-canonical   translation   initiation   in   human mitochondria.  We  show  leaderless  mt-mRNAs  can  be  loaded  onto  55S  monosomes  and translated   independently   of   mtIF3   activity.   However,   in   the   case   of   the   bicistronic ATP8/ATP6 transcript, translation of the downstream open reading frame (ORF) is dependent upon mtIF3 and is uncoupled from the upstream leaderless ORF, highlighting distinct role for the human initiation factor. Furthermore, we found mtIF2 to be essential for mitochondrial protein synthesis, but not monosome formation, while mitoribosome recycling was important for  mitoribosome  homeostasis.  These  data  define  an  important  evolutionary  diversion  of mitochondrial  translation  system,  and  further  our  fundamental  understanding  of  a  process central to eukaryotic metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 μm internal diameter PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ media (Dr. Maisch,) using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was maintained at 50°C. Buffer A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on a segmented gradient from 6% to 31% buffer B for 45 min and from 31% to 50% buffer B for 5 min at 200 nl / min. Eluting peptides were analyzed on QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide precursor m/z measurements were carried out at 60000 resolution in the 300 to 1800 m/z range. The ten most intense precursors with charge state from 2 to 7 only were selected for HCD fragmentation using 25% normalized collision energy. The m/z values of the peptide fragments were measured at a resolution of 30000 using a minimum AGC target of 2e5 and 80 ms maximum injection time. Upon fragmentation, precursors were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 45 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification The raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Peptide fragmentation spectra were searched against the canonical sequences of the human reference proteome (proteome ID UP000005640, downloaded September 2018 from UniProt). Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. The digestion parameters were set to “specific” and “Trypsin/P,” The minimum number of peptides and razor peptides for protein identification was 1; the minimum number of unique peptides was 0. Protein identification was performed at a peptide spectrum matches and protein false discovery rate of 0.01. The “second peptide” option was on. Successful identifications were transferred between the different raw files using the “Match between runs” option. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using an LFQ minimum ratio count of two. LFQ intensities were filtered for at least two valid values in at least one group and imputed from a normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8. Protein quantification was performed using limma. Mitocarta annotations were added using the primary gene name and the first of the gene name synonyms of the oldest Uniprot ID with the highest number of peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translation, Mitochondrial, Lfq, Initiation

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Division of Molecular Metabolism, Karolinska Institutet, Biomedicum, 171 65 Solna, Sweden Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Joanna Rorbach
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Division of Molecular Metabolism, Karolinska Institutet, Biomedicum, 171 65 Solna, Sweden Max Planck Institute Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


