### Accession
PXD034355

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of neoadjuvant breast cancer reveals a subset of patients with increased sensitivity to paclitaxel driven by CDK4 and Filamin A.

### Description
Precision oncology research is challenging outside contexts of oncogenic addiction and/or targeted therapies. We previously showed that phosphoproteomics is a powerful approach to reveal patient subsets of interest characterized by the activity of a few kinases where the underlying genomics is complex. Here, we conducted a phosphoproteomic screening in a neoadjuvant trial of HER2-negative breast cancer patients (N=130) treated with paclitaxel or paclitaxel plus nintedanib, aiming to find candidate biomarkers of paclitaxel sensitivity. Filtering 15 candidate biomarkers through 2 independent patient sets (N=218) allowed finding a subgroup of patients characterized by high levels of CDK4 and Filamin-A, who had a 90% chance of achieving a pCR in response to paclitaxel. Mechanistically, CDK4 regulated Filamin-A transcription, which in turn formed a complex with Tubulin and CLIP-170, what elicited increased binding of paclitaxel to microtubules, microtubule acetylation and stabilization, and mitotic catastrophe. Thus, phosphoproteomics  allowed finding explainable predictive factors for paclitaxel.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Protein extraction from the frozen tumor samples was performed with a urea lysis buffer (8M urea, 50mM Tris.HCl pH8, 100mM NaCl, 1X Roche Protease inhibitor, 1X Roche PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor) and using mechanical disruption with a Next Advance Bullet Blender with 1.0mm glass beads and the following instrument settings: Speed 8, Time 3. Post disruption the buffer was removed and the beads discarded. The tissue extract was incubated at room temperature for 2h with mixing at 2000 rpm in an Eppendorf ThermoMixer. The extract was centrifuged for 10 minutes at 5,000xg and 4°C. The protein concentration of the cleared extract was determined using a Qubit protein assay (Invitrogen). Protein was reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 25°C for 30 minutes followed by alkylation with 15mM iodoacetamide at 25°C for 45 minutes in the dark. Proteins were concentrated by addition of 4x volumes of -20°C acetone and overnight incubation at -20°C. Precipitated protein was collected by centrifuging for 10 minutes at 5,000xg and 4°C. Protein pellets were washed twice with -20°C acetone. Pellets were air dried to remove residual acetone. The washed pellets were reconstituted in 400μL of urea lysis buffer the protein concentration was determined using a Qubit protein assay (Invitrogen). Protein digestion was performed by addition of 20μg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) to each sample and overnight incubation (16h) at 37°C. The final digest volume was 2mL adjusted with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. The digest was terminated with the addition of 10μL TFA. Mass spectrometry: Each digest sample was processed by solid phase extraction (SPE) using a Waters HLB PRiME 30mg capacity C18 cartridge and gravity flow. Firstly, samples were loaded under vacuum at 5inHg and the cartridge was washed twice with 1mL 0.1% TFA at 5inHg. Peptides were eluted with 2 X 500μL of 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA at 5inHg and peptide concentrations were determined by UV absorbance at 280nm. Phosphopeptides were enriched using Titansphere TiO2 tips from GL sciences using the vendor protocol. Brieftly, phosphopeptides were eluted from the tips using two eluents: 50μL 5% NH4OH in water and 50μL 5% Pyrrolidine in acetonitrile. The two elutions were pooled together and neutralized with acetic acid 50% and dried. Samples were reconstituted in 100μL 0.1% trifluoroacetic (TFA) acid. Each enriched sample was desalted using a StageTip (ThermoFisher P/N SP301) per the vendor protocol. Peptides were dried and reconstituted in 70μL of 0.1% TFA prior to analysis. Half of each enriched sample was analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75μm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with JupiterProteo resin (Phenomenex). The injection volume was 30μL. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with the Orbitrap operating at 60,000 FWHM and 17,500 FWHM for MS and MS/MS respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data processing: Data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.0.25 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the Pride partner repository with the dataset identifier (a dataset identifier will be made publicly available upon manuscript acceptance or upon reviewers request). The fragmentation spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens Uniprot database (downloaded on 23-12-2013), using Andromeda as the search engine. The precursor mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 for the main search. Also, 0.05 Da was used for FT detector. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered as fixed modifications, whereas oxidation of methionine (M); phosphorylation on serine (S), threonine (T) and tyrosine (Y); and protein N-terminal acetylation were chosen as a variable modification, and up to two tryptic missed cleavages were allowed. The match between run function was enabled. A target-decoy database searching strategy was used to evaluate the false-discovery rates (FDRs) at the peptide and protein level. The identification of kinase specific substrates was evaluated using linear sequence motifs analysis implemented in MaxQuant. For the identification of phosphorylated motifs Maxquant used the PhosphoMotif Finder search tool at Human Protein Reference Database was used (http://www.hprd.org/PhosphoMotif_finder).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Filamin a, Phosphoproteomics, Cdk4, Paclitaxel, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Breast Cancer Clinical Research Unit Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas – CNIO  Madrid, Spain.
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre, Spain

### Submitter
Miguel Quintela

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel Quintela-Fandino
Breast Cancer Clinical Research Unit Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas – CNIO  Madrid, Spain.


