### Accession
PXD004219

### Title
Identification of protein biomarkers for pneumococcal meningitis in children C4PR_LIV 

### Description
Bacterial meningitis is usually fatal without treatment. Prompt and accurate diagnosis coupled with the timely administration of parenteral antibiotics is necessary in order to save lives. We used label-free mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomics to identify specific protein signatures in cerebrospinal fluid from Malawian children with Streptococcus pneumoniae infection, the leading cause of bacterial meningitis in children, elderly and people infected with Human Immunodeficiency Virus. Samples were analysed in two independent cohorts (cases and controls, n=12 for the discovery cohort and n=16 for the verification cohort). The protein profiles clearly discriminated cases and controls. Proteins involved in the immune response and exosome cell signaling were significantly enriched in the infected samples. Several S. pneumoniae membrane proteins were identified suggesting these as potential therapeutic targets. For both cohorts, over 200 human proteins were up and down-regulated in children with confirmed S. pneumoniae infection in comparison with controls. Compiling proteins up- and down- regulated in both discovery and verification cohorts, we generated a comprehensive list of over 140 proteins from which diagnostic biomarkers could be nominated. For a panel of five selected proteins (cathelicidin, ceruloplasmin, myeloperoxidase, cystatin C and protein S100A8/S100 A9), we additionally verified the label-free results by automated quantitative western blot immunoassays (Simple Western™), with excellent agreement between the two experimental approaches. The proteins identified in our study could form the basis of development of a biomarker panel for rapid diagnosis. Our results could lead to the development of point-of-care assays to inform diagnosis, and to nominate new targets for drugs and vaccines to improve disease management and consequently to enhance the prognosis of children with bacterial meningitis.

### Sample Protocol
A complete proteome analysis was applied to 28 CSF samples (uninfected controls=12; S. pneumoniae positive (SPP)=16). We did not normalise the protein load, committing instead a constant volume of CSF to analysis, surmising that any point-of-care test would be applied to a fixed volume of CSF and thus, our analysis should take into account the natural variance in protein content between samples. For the same reason, we did not apply any depletion strategy. Samples (20 uL in all instances) were subjected to in-solution digestion and analysed using the ‘Top 20’ protocol on an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
We use the Report builder in mascot to compile identifications using a threshold of at least 2 significant peptides and FDR <1%.

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus pneumoniae is responsible for diseases causing major global public health problems, including meningitis, pneumonia and septicaemia. Despite recent advances in antimicrobial therapy, pneumococcal meningitis remains a life-threatening disease. Furthermore, long-term sequelae are a major concern for survivors. Hence, a better understanding of the processes occurring in the central nervous system is crucial to the development of more effective management strategies. We used mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomics to identify protein changes in cerebrospinal fluid from children with Streptococcus pneumoniae infection, compared with children admitted to hospital with bacterial meningitis symptoms but negative diagnosis. Samples were analysed, by label free proteomics, in two independent cohorts (cohort 1: cases (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8) and hospital controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4); cohort 2: cases (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8), hospital controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8)). Over 200 human proteins were differentially expressed in each cohort, of which 65% were common to both. Proteins involved in the immune response and exosome signalling were significantly enriched in the infected samples. For a subset of proteins derived from the proteome analysis, we corroborated the proteomics data in a third cohort (hospital controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;15), healthy controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5), cases (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;20)) by automated quantitative western blotting, with excellent agreement with our proteomics findings. Proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004219.

### Keywords
Bacterial meningitis, Protein quantification, Streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Guadalupe Gomez Baena

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Rob J. Beynon
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool


