### Accession
PXD029751

### Title
tRNA synthetases are recruited to yeast ribosomes by rRNA expansion segment 7L but do not require association for func-tionality

### Description
Ribosomes expanded during evolution on the protein and rRNA level. The expanded regions do not change the active sites of ribosomes and thus do not alter the peptide bond formation reaction catalysed by the ribosome. To what purpose these expansions were selected is not fully understood. Here, we deleted one rRNA expansion segment (ES7La) and addressed physiological consequences. We found a mild ribosome biogenesis defect accompanied by slightly reduced translation. On a molecular level, ribosomes displayed reduced association to three aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Loss of ribosome binding however did not alter synthetase activity suggesting, that tRNAs are not channelled for enhanced local translation in the case of these synthetases.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast total cell lysates were generated und conditions that preserve polysomes. Lysates were TCA precipitated to whole cell lysates (WCL). To obtain ribosome associated proteins, polysomes were purified using size exclusion chromatography and subsequent density gradient fractionation. Polysomal fractions were pelleted. WCL and polysomal fractions were digested using trypsin. Trypsinized peptides were analyzed by LC-MS with a Fusion Lumos ETD connected to a nano-UPLC column.

### Data Protocol
The peptide intensities were quantified by the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm. The fold changes were calculated as ratios of ΔES7La over wild type levels and log2-transformed to obtain log2-fold changes. GO-Term analysis was performed using the DAVID data base.

### Publication Abstract
Protein biosynthesis is essential for any organism, yet how this process is regulated is not fully understood at the molecular level. During evolution, ribosomal RNA expanded in specific regions, referred to as rRNA expansion segments (ES). First functional roles of these expansions have only recently been discovered. Here we address the role of ES7L<sub>a</sub> located in the large ribosomal subunit for factor recruitment to the yeast ribosome and the potential consequences for translation. Truncation of ES7L<sub>a</sub> has only minor effects on ribosome biogenesis, translation efficiency and cell doubling. Using yeast rRNA deletion strains coupled with ribosome-specific mass spectrometry we analyzed the interactome of ribosomes lacking ES7L<sub>a</sub>. Three aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases showed reduced ribosome association. Synthetase activities however remained unaltered suggesting that the pool of aminoacylated tRNAs is unaffected by the ES deletion. These results demonstrated that aminoacylation activities of tRNA synthetases <i>per se</i> do not rely on ribosome association. These findings suggest a role of ribosome-associated aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase beyond their core enzymatic functions.

### Keywords
Yeast, Aminoacyl-trna synthetases, Translation regulation, Rrna expansion segments, Ribosome biology

### Affiliations
University of Bern
Department for Chemistry, Biochemistry and pharmaceutical sciences University Of Bern Switzerland

### Submitter
Robert Rauscher

### Lab Head
Dr Norbert Polacek
Department for Chemistry, Biochemistry and pharmaceutical sciences University Of Bern Switzerland


