### Accession
PXD000907

### Title
Roasted English Walnut Label-Free LC-MS/MS Quantification

### Description
Thermal processing of allergenic foods has the potential to induce a number of changes in the constituent allergens, but many of the effects of heat treatment are poorly defined. Like numerous other commonly allergenic tree nuts, walnuts often undergo heat treatment, such as roasting, prior to consumption. This study evaluated the changes in solubility and detectability of allergens from roasted walnuts using tandem mass spectrometry methods. Walnuts were roasted at 132 °C or 180 °C for 5, 10, or 20 minutes prior to preparation for LC-MS/MS using sequential or simultaneous protocols for extraction and trypsin digestion. LC-MS/MS data analysis incorporated label-free quantification and Maillard adduct screening. Relatively minor changes in detection were demonstrated following roasting in some allergenic proteins (2S albumin, LTP, and the 7S vicilin N-terminal region) with the LC-MS/MS method. The mature 7S vicilin and 11S legumin, however, showed significantly increased detection in the highest heat treatment sample when using the simultaneous extraction/digestion protocol, an effect likely due to increased digestibility of the proteins following heating. The results of this study indicate that individual walnut allergens respond differently to thermal processing, and the detection of these proteins by LC-MS/MS is dependent on the protein in question, its susceptibility to proteolytic digestion, the degree of thermal processing, and the sample preparation methodology.

### Sample Protocol
Raw English walnuts (Juglans regia cv. Chandler) were roasted at 132 °C or 180 °C for 5, 10, or 20 minutes. Hexane defatted walnut flours (DWNF) were produced from the unheated and roasted walnuts. The DWNF samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS using either a high-salt buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 containing 1.5M NaCl and 3.5% (w/v) PVPP) extraction followed by trypsin digestion or a simultaneous extraction/trypsin digestion protocol. DWNF or DWNF extract from each processing condition was combined with an acid-labile surfactant in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 0.1% (w/v) surfactant. All samples were reduced (5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 30 minutes) and alkylated (15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark). The sample proteins were digested with trypsin (proteomics grade, dimethylated trypsin from porcine pancreas) at a 1:100 (w:w) trypsin to protein ratio at 37 °C for 3 hours, followed by digestion at a 1:50 (w:w) ratio at 31 °C overnight. Digestion was stopped and the acid-labile surfactant was hydrolyzed by combining equal volumes of digest and 1.0% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. The digests were heated at 37 °C for 45 minutes and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes, as directed by the surfactant manufacturer. The supernatant was carefully reserved and the sample was cleaned-up with commercial C18 spin columns. During clean-up, the sample loading was adjusted to uniform DWNF equivalents to account for the different levels of DWNF initially incorporated in the two different digestion techniques.  Following elution of peptides from the spin columns, the peptide solutions were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) prior to tandem mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS). Orbitrap-based LC-MS/MS was conducted with an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA), connected in-line to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. The liquid chromatography consisted of UPLC with a 75 mm x 250 μm i.d. 1.7 µM BEH C18 analytical column (Waters Corporation; Elstree, UK) and peptide separation over a gradient of 92% solution A (0.1% FA in water) and 8% solution B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 44 min at 300 nL min-1. Data-dependent acquisition mode and dynamic exclusion were enabled on the Orbitrap Elite. Precursor ions were analyzed in the Orbitrap with normal mass range (m/z 350-1500) and 120,000 resolution. CID was performed on the top six precursor ions, and the product ions were analyzed in the ion trap under normal mass range and rapid scan rate conditions. Quadruplicate samples, run in a randomized order, were analyzed for each roasting condition.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification analysis of the Orbitrap data was conducted with the Progenesis LC-MS software package (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). Automatic alignment of all sample runs was performed, with no data refinement. Default peak picking was also performed on all runs and all features were retained for quantification. Peptide and protein identification was performed with the compiled mgf file (generated by Progenesis) and a local Mascot server (version 2.2.06). Individual raw data files were also converted to individual mgf files (MSConvert; Proteowizard) and searched using the same parameters. The searches were performed against a custom, non-redundant protein database, which consisted of the following: all of the protein entries from the AllergenOnline database, version 12 (Food Allergy Research & Resource Program, www.allergenonline.org), all of the proteins from the Juglandaceae family-level taxonomy in UniProt, all of the proteins from the peanut (Arachis hypogaea) species-level taxonomy in UniProt, and a standard list of contaminants (e.g. keratin). The Mascot search parameters allowed for one missed tryptic cleavage and included carbamidomethyl (C) and oxidation (M) as fixed and variable modification, respectively. The peptide tolerance was set to 5 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance to 0.6 Da. Only peptides with charges of +2 or +3 were included in the search. Following feature identification, protein quantification was conducted in Progenesis based on all peptides assigned to each protein of interest. The software can also perform quantification based on unique peptides only, but the database used included a substantial number of proteins with very similar (up to 97% identical) protein sequences from other species (e.g. pecan and black walnut). For the purposes of quantification in this experiment, these conflicts perceived by the software are not relevant and so protein quantification was performed based on all peptides. The quantitative output from the roasted walnut experiments was analyzed in SAS 9.2 for Windows (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA), using a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Food allergens, Walnut, Thermal processing

### Affiliations
Institute of Inflammation and Repair Manchester Institute of Biotechnology University of Manchester
Food Allergy Research & Resource Program, Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln

### Submitter
Melanie Downs

### Lab Head
Dr Clare Mills
Institute of Inflammation and Repair Manchester Institute of Biotechnology University of Manchester


