### Accession
PXD038404

### Title
Male mammalian meiosis and spermiogenesis is critically dependent on the shared functions of the katanin proteins KATNA1 and KATNAL1

### Description
Katanin microtubule severing enzymes are potent M-phase regulators across eukaryotes. The requirement of katanin enzymatic A-subunits in male mammalian meiosis, however, remains untested. Here, using multiple single and double gene knockout mice, we reveal katanin A-subunits are essential for male meiosis, and in doing so demonstrate functional compensation exists among mammalian katanin A-subunit paralogs. We show KATNA1 and KATNAL1 collectively regulate the male meiotic spindle, germ cell microtubule bulk, in addition to diverse spermatid remodelling events, including Golgi organisation, pro-acrosomal vesicle trafficking and manchette formation. We also define KATNAL1-specific roles in sperm flagella development, manchette regulation, and sperm-epithelial disengagement. Finally, using immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry approaches we define the KATNA1, KATNAL1, and KATNB1 mammalian testis interactome, which includes a network of cytoskeletal and vesicle trafficking proteins. Collectively, we reveal the presence of multiple katanin A-subunit paralogs in mammalian spermatogenesis allows for both ‘customized cutting’ via neofunctionalization and protective buffering via gene redundancy.

### Sample Protocol
For IP assays, wild-type mouse testes (n=3 per IP assay) were lysed in 1% NP-40 (PBS) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem, 539134). KATNA1, KATNAL1 and KATNB1 and their binding partners were then co-immunoprecipitated using the Pierce Co-immunoprecipitation Kit (Thermo Scientific, 26149) as per the manufacturer’s instructions, in combination with either our KATNA1 (10g per IP column), KATNAL1 (5g) or KATNB1 (5g) inhouse antibody. Briefly, to reduce non-specific binding, testis protein lysates were first pre-cleared by incubation with 400μl of Pierce control agarose resin slurry for a 0.5-1 hour at 4°C with gently rocking. For each pre-cleared testis lysate, 5 mg was then loaded into two IP columns, one which contained the target antibody covalently coupled to the amine reactive Pierce AminoLink Plus Coupling Resin and one which contained the target antibody and a non-amine reactive Pierce Control Agarose Resin (negative control), and incubated overnight at 4°C. Lysate flow through was removed, columns were washed and bound protein eluted and collected as per the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted proteins were neutralised with 1.5M Tris-HCL (pH 8.8), reduced with TCEP, then digested by incubation with trypsin overnight at 37°C. Peptide samples were freeze dried and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% formic acid (FA) (diluted in MilliQ water) before concentrated FA was added to adjust the pH to <3. Samples were purified using reverse-phase chromatography C18 stage tips, which aim to desalt and fractionate in-solution peptides at an acidic pH. The tips were initially activated with 100% methanol and equilibrated with 0.1% FA, before samples were loaded into them and desalted with 0.1% FA. Peptides were eluted with 80% ACN/0.1% FA, freeze dried, resuspended in 2% ACN/0.1% FA and sonicated for 15 minutes in a water bath.  The purified peptide samples were analysed via nano liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were analysed with the MaxQuant software suite for the identification and quantification of peptides/proteins from the Mouse SwissProt database. Fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation of cysteine as well as variable oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were considered. Trypsin/P was set as the protease with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Statistical analysis was conducted with the Perseus software considering protein and PSM false discovery rates (FDR) both set at < 0.01.  For each IP assay, the majority UniProt ID(s) for each significantly enriched protein group were then analysed using PANTHER Gene Ontology and protein classification {Thomas, 2022 #14}.

### Publication Abstract
Katanins, a class of microtubule-severing enzymes, are potent M-phase regulators in oocytes and somatic cells. How the complex and evolutionarily crucial, male mammalian meiotic spindle is sculpted remains unknown. Here, using multiple single and double gene knockout mice, we reveal that the canonical katanin A-subunit KATNA1 and its close paralogue KATNAL1 together execute multiple aspects of meiosis. We show KATNA1 and KATNAL1 collectively regulate the male meiotic spindle, cytokinesis and midbody abscission, in addition to diverse spermatid remodelling events, including Golgi organisation, and acrosome and manchette formation. We also define KATNAL1-specific roles in sperm flagellum development, manchette regulation and sperm-epithelial disengagement. Finally, using proteomic approaches, we define the KATNA1, KATNAL1 and KATNB1 mammalian testis interactome, which includes a network of cytoskeletal and vesicle trafficking proteins. Collectively, we reveal that the presence of multiple katanin A-subunit paralogs in mammalian spermatogenesis allows for 'customised cutting' via neofunctionalisation and protective buffering via gene redundancy.

### Keywords
Microtubule severing, Spermiation, Manchette, Male fertility, Spermatogenesis, Htca, Acrosome, Meiotic spindle, Axoneme, Vesicle transport

### Affiliations
School of BioSciences and Bio21 Institute, Faculty of Science, The University of Melbourne, VIC, 3010, Australia.
Monash 

### Submitter
Joel Steele

### Lab Head
Dr Jessica Dunleavy
School of BioSciences and Bio21 Institute, Faculty of Science, The University of Melbourne, VIC, 3010, Australia.


