### Accession
PXD008192

### Title
Multi-omic biogeography of the gastrointestinal microbiota of a pre-weaned lamb

### Description
Here, we used reverse-phase liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry to study the pre-weaned lamb proteome and metaproteome in ten different gastrointestinal tracts: rumen, reticulum, omasum, abomasum, duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, colon, and rectum.

### Sample Protocol
One pre-weaned Sarda lamb (30 days of age) fed almost exclusively mother's milk was sacrificed, and ten different gastrointestinal (GI) tracts (rumen, reticulum, omasum, abomasum, duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, colon, and rectum) were collected. At necropsy, each tract was isolated with stitches to avoid the loss of the luminal content, cut, and gently washed externally with saline solution; then immediately frozen and stored at -80°C until use. Concerning the longest intestinal tracts, such as duodenum and jejunum, only the central section (measuring approximately 10-15 cm) was kept.  Luminal and mucosal contents were collected from GI tracts as follows: each tract was thawed at 4°C, washed externally with saline solution, unrolled, and opened by cutting an extremity on a clean petri dish to collect the possibly leaking luminal fluid. When contents were liquid, the external wall was "squeezed" by flattening with a glass slide. In case of too little amount of luminal material for the subsequent analyses (omasum, ileum and cecum), the inner part was delicately washed with saline and the obtained luminal rinse was collected. Moreover, as abomasum, colon and rectum presented a more compact content, a central portion of the solid matter was collected. Then, residual luminal material was carefully washed out with saline and tracts were opened longitudinally and stretched on a sterile petri dish to collect mucosal content by scraping with a glass slide. Luminal and mucosal samples were resuspended in an SDS-based, reducing extraction buffer and subjected to bead beating combined with freeze-heating. Extracted proteins were cleaned up, alkylated and digested with trypsin according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure, with minor modifications. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MS, US). The single-run 1D LC peptide separation was performed loading 4 μg of the peptide mixture obtained per each sample and applying a 247 min separation gradient. The mass spectrometer was set up in a data-dependent MS/MS mode, with Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) as the fragmentation method.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4), with a workflow consisting of the following nodes (and respective parameters): Spectrum Selector for spectra preprocessing (precursor mass range: 350–5000 Da; S/N threshold: 1.5), SEQUEST-HT as search engine (enzyme: trypsin; maximum missed cleavage sites: 2; peptide length range 5–50 amino acids; maximum delta Cn: 0.05; precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; static modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; dynamic modification: methionine oxidation), and percolator for peptide validation (false discovery rate, FDR, < 1% based on peptide q-value).  The first database was composed by the metagenomic sequences obtained in this study (3,474,764 sequences). Paired reads were merged, filtered and clustered using USEARCH (version 8.1.1.1861). In parallel, raw reads were also assembled into contigs using MetaVelvet (version 1.2.01), with 61 as k-mer length, 200 as insert length and 300 as minimum contig length. Finally, FragGeneScan (version 1.30) was used to find ORFs, with the training for Illumina sequencing reads with about 0.5% error rate. The second database was a selection of taxa on the base of 16S metagenomics analysis outputs (24,350,176 sequences). In detail, all sequences belonging to a microbial genus whose relative abundance was >0.1% in at least one of the samples were selected and downloaded from UniProtKB (2017_07 update). Metaproteomic data were obtained by merging results of searches against the two above mentioned databases. Finally, a third database (UniProtKB sequences belonging to the suborder Ruminantia, 2017_10 update, 115,553 sequences) was employed to achieve information concerning the host.

### Publication Abstract
The digestive functions of the pre-weaned lamb gastrointestinal tracts (GITs) have been the subject of much research in recent years, but the microbial and host functions underlying these complex processes remain largely unknown. Here, we undertook a proof-of-principle metaproteogenomic investigation on luminal and mucosal samples collected from 10 GITs of a 30-day-old pre-weaned lamb. We demonstrate that the analysis of the diverse ecological niches along the GITs can reveal microbiota composition and metabolic functions, although low amounts of microbial proteins could be identified in the small intestinal and mucosal samples. Our data suggest that a 30-day lamb has already developed mature microbial functions in the forestomachs, while the effect of the milky diet appears to be more evident in the remaining GITs. We also report the distribution and the relative abundance of the host functions, active at the GIT level, with a special focus on those involved in digestive processes. In conclusion, this pilot study supports the suitability of a metaproteogenomic approach to the characterization of microbial and host functions of the lamb GITs, opening the way to further studies aimed at investigating the impact of early dietary interventions on the GIT microbiota of small ruminants.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Mucosa, Sheep, Ruminant, Microbial community

### Affiliations
Porto Conte Ricerche, Science and Technology Park of Sardinia, Tramariglio, Alghero, Italy
Porto Conte Ricerche

### Submitter
Antonio Palomba

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Uzzau
Porto Conte Ricerche, Science and Technology Park of Sardinia, Tramariglio, Alghero, Italy


