### Accession
PXD002661

### Title
Global Metabonomic and Proteomic Analysis of Human Conjunctival Epithelial Cells (IOBA-NHC) in Response to Hyperosmotic Stress

### Description
“Dry eye” is a multi-factorial inflammatory disease affecting the ocular surface. Tear hyperosmolarity in dry eye contributes to inflammation and cell damage. Recent research efforts on dry eye have been directed towards biomarker discovery for diagnosis, response to treatment and disease mechanisms. This study employed a spontaneously immortalized normal human conjunctival cell line, IOBA-NHC as a model to investigate hyperosmotic stress-induced changes of metabolites and proteins. Global and targeted metabonomic analyses, as well as proteomic analysis were performed on IOBA-NHC cells incubated in serum-free media at 280 mOsm (control), 380 mOsm and 480 mOsm for 24 h. Twenty-one metabolites and seventy-six iTRAQ-identified proteins showed significant changes under at least one hyperosmotic stress treatment as compared to controls. SWATH-based proteomic analysis further confirmed the involvement of inflammatory pathways such as prostaglandin 2 synthesis in IOBA-NHC cells under hyperosmotic stress. This study is the first to identify glycerophosphocholine synthesis and O-linked β-N-acetylglucosamine glycosylation as key activated pathways in ocular surface cells under hyperosmotic stress. These findings extend the current knowledge in metabolite markers of dry eye and provide potential therapeutic targets for its treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) and iTRAQ kits were purchased from Protein Discovery and AB Sciex respectively. Cell lysates containing 50 µg of total protein  mass were reconstituted in 22 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution (FASP kit) and denatured with 6 μL of 10% SDS (Vivantis) and 2 μL of tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP; iTRAQ kit) at 60oC for 1 h. Reduced proteins were then transferred to a 30 kD cut-off membrane cartridge (FASP kit) and centrifuged twice with 200 µL of urea solution from the FASP kit at 14, 000g for 15 mins (25oC). The reduced proteins were then incubated with 10 µL of 10× iodoacetamide (IAA; FASP kit) for 20 min in the dark and centrifuged twice with 100 µL of urea solution, followed by ammonium bicarbonate solution. The samples were digested on-catridge with trypsin (AB Sciex) (1:25 trypsin/protein ratio) for 16 h at 37°C. Digested peptides were eluted by centrifugation with 40 µL of ammonium bicarbonate solution, then with 50 µL of sodium chloride solution (FASP kit). Digestion was quenched with 30 µL of 10% FA and samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator.  Samples were reconstituted in 20 µL of dissolution buffer (iTRAQ kit). iTRAQ reagents 114, 115 and 116 were added to control, T1 and T2 samples respectively. Each mixture was mixed for 2 hours at 25 °C. Labeled samples were then pooled together, dried and desalted on ultramicro spin columns (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.  Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were first loaded onto a 75 µm × 2 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min. After a 5 min wash with 0.1% FA and 2% acetonitrile in water, the system was switched into line with a 75 µm × 15 cm Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase was 0.1% FA in water (eluent A) and 0.1% FA in 98:2 v/v of acetonitrile/water (eluent B). The gradient profile was 5% B at 0 min, 7% B at 5 min, 60% B at 97 min, and 95% B from 100 to 105 min. The flow rate was 300 nL/min. The analytical column was connected to a spray tip (New Objectives), and the spray tip was coupled to the nano-spray interface of the 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer.  Data was acquired via IDA mode using the Analyst TF 1.6 software (AB Sciex). Key parameter settings for the TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer were as follow: ionspray voltage floating (ISVF) 2500 V, curtain gas (CUR) 30, interface heater temperature (IHT) 125, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 12, and declustering potential (DP) 100 V. The IDA parameters are as follow: 0.25 s of TOF MS survey scan (m/z range: 350–1250) was followed by thirty product ion scans of 75 ms each (m/z range: 100–1800). The switching criteria was set to include only ions with m/z between 350 and 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of over 100 counts. Former target ions were excluded for 12 s. CE was controlled by the IDA rolling CE parameter script.

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot (AB Sciex, version 4.5) was used to analyze MS/MS iTRAQ data output, and searched against the UniProt database (September 2010 release, 40516 proteins searched). Important settings in ProteinPilot were configured as follows: (i) sample type: iTRAQ 4plex (peptide labeled); (ii) cys alkylation: iodoacetamide; (iii) digestion: trypsin; (iv) instrument: TripleTOF 5600; (v) special factors: none; (vi) ID focus: biological modifications; (vii) search effort: thorough ID; (viii) bias correction and background correction. 95% confidence level was used at the peptide level. False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis in the ProteinPilot software was performed and FDR < 1% was set for protein identification. Reverse database search strategy was used to calculate FDR for peptide identification. The Pro Group algorithm in ProteinPilot was used to calculate peak areas of reporter ions. Auto bias correction was applied to eliminate possible pipetting errors in the combination of labeled samples.   Proteins were considered significantly up-regulated if their log-transformed iTRAQ ratios (treatment T1: controls and treatment T2: controls) were above one standard deviation (SD) of the global mean in at least two out of three replicates, and if their fold-changes were greater than 1.4. Proteins were considered significantly down-regulated if their iTRAQ ratios were below one SD of the global mean in at least two out of three replicates, and if their fold-changes were or less than 0.71. The average of the global mean iTRAQ ratios obtained in our experiments was 0.99. The average of the global SD of log-transformed iTRAQ ratios was 0.15. The average upper and lower thresholds were 1.4 and 0.71 respectively. Protein fold-changes between control and treatment groups were calculated using the geometric mean in the normal space.

### Publication Abstract
"Dry eye" is a multifactorial inflammatory disease affecting the ocular surface. Tear hyperosmolarity in dry eye contributes to inflammation and cell damage. Recent research efforts on dry eye have been directed toward biomarker discovery for diagnosis, response to treatment, and disease mechanisms. This study employed a spontaneously immortalized normal human conjunctival cell line, IOBA-NHC, as a model to investigate hyperosmotic stress-induced changes of metabolites and proteins. Global and targeted metabonomic analyses as well as proteomic analysis were performed on IOBA-NHC cells incubated in serum-free media at 280 (control), 380, and 480 mOsm for 24 h. Twenty-one metabolites and seventy-six iTRAQ-identified proteins showed significant changes under at least one hyperosmotic stress treatment as compared with controls. SWATH-based proteomic analysis further confirmed the involvement of inflammatory pathways such as prostaglandin 2 synthesis in IOBA-NHC cells under hyperosmotic stress. This study is the first to identify glycerophosphocholine synthesis and O-linked &#x3b2;-N-acetylglucosamine glycosylation as key activated pathways in ocular surface cells under hyperosmotic stress. These findings extend the current knowledge in metabolite markers of dry eye and provide potential therapeutic targets for its treatment.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Osmoprotectants, Dry eye, Metabonomics, Proteomics, Swath, Itraq, Osmostic stress, Hyperosmolarity

### Affiliations
Singapore Eye Research Institute
Senior Principal Research Scientist, Head, Ocular Proteomics Platform Singapore Eye Research Institute Singapore

### Submitter
Liyan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Zhou
Senior Principal Research Scientist, Head, Ocular Proteomics Platform Singapore Eye Research Institute Singapore


