### Accession
PXD023964

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics Analysis of Placenta from Zika Virus Infected Women

### Description
Zika Virus (ZIKV) infection has been associated with fetal abnormalities by compromising placental integrity. Flavivirus have shown deregulation of the host proteome, specially extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Our hypothesis is that ZIKV infection of placental tissue deregulates specific ECM proteome, allowing a mechanism of persistent infection and loss of placental integrity. Using nine different placental samples from Puerto Rico collected during 2016 ZIKV epidemic, we compared the proteome of five ZIKV infected samples with uninfected controls. Quantitative proteomics was performed using tandem mass tag TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set followed by Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap Mass Spectrometry. Identification of proteins was performed by Proteome Discover 2.1, and protein fold change in both groups was compared using Limma software. Differentially expressed proteins were analyzed with STRING and Ingenuity Pathway using both the fold change and p-value. TMT analysis showed that ZIKV infected placentas had 94 reviewed differentially abundant proteins, 32 More abundant and 62 Less abundant. STRING analysis results indicate that 45 of the deregulated proteins are cellular components of the ECM and 16 play a role in its structure and organization. Some of the significantly More abundant proteins were Fibrinogen, Vitronectin and Fibronectin. The results we observed in the samples from naturally infected pregnant women may contribute to the understanding of the mechanism (s) employed by ZIKV during placental infection and give insight on novel targets used to disrupt placental function.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction from Paraffinized Tissue: Protein was extracted from 3 slides from each sample using the Qproteome FFPE Tissue Kit (20) (# 37623 from Qiagen) to obtain enough quantity. We followed Qproteome® FFPE Tissue Handbook second edition guidelines to isolate proteins. Slides were deparaffinized in Xylene for 10 minutes at room temperature, rehydrated by incubations in 100%, 96% and 70% ethanol for 10 minutes at room temperature two times, followed by rehydration in ultra-pure water for 30 seconds. The whole tissue in the slide is scrapped of using a needle and transferred to a 1.5mL microtube containing 100 μl cold Extraction Buffer EXB Plus supplemented with βmercaptoethanol.. The samples were vortexed at RT to homogenize them and incubated in a heating block at 100°C for 20 min followed by a Thermomixer at 80°C for 2 h with agitation at 750 rpm. After heating, the tubes are put in 4°C for 1 min and centrifuged for 15 min at 14,000 x g at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and 1,000µL of cold acetone with 5% SDS added for protein precipitation and stored in the -20C freezer overnight. Thereafter samples were centrifuged at 12,000 x g at 4°C for 15 minutes to precipitate proteins. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was vacuum dried. Protein pellet was then resuspended in 100µL of phosphate buffer containing protease inhibitors. Protein concentrations were determined using DC Protein Assay (item # 5000111 from Bio-Rad). Aliquots of 30 µg were prepared by vacuum drying the samples and resuspended in 10µL of SDS-PAGE sample buffer.  Samples were loaded into precast polyacrylamide gel (item # 4568023 from Bio-Rad), run at 95 volts, and stained with Bio-safe Coomassie (item # 1610786 from Bio-Rad). Peptide Extraction for TMT-Labeling: Gel bands in each lane of the Coomassie stained gels, of 9 samples containing 30μg were cut, diced into 1mm cubes, and submitted for proteomic analysis. Gel pieces were destained (750μL destaining solution 50% acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate), reduced (25mM DTT in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate at 55 °C for 30 minutes), alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 minutes), and digested overnight (60μL modified trypsin solution in 180μL 50mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C). For peptide extraction, gel pieces were first treated with 150μL solution 50% acetonitrile and 2.5% formic acid in water, followed by 150μL of 100% acetonitrile. Samples were subsequently dried and stored at -80°C before undergoing TMT labeling procedure performed according to detailed manufacturer instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  TMT Labeling: As specified by the manufacturer’s protocol, dried extracted samples were reconstituted in 100 mM triethylammonium buffer (TEAB) and labeled with TMT10-plex labeling reagents (41μL, 0.8mg). Incubation for 1 hour at room temperature ensued, followed by a quenching step with 5% hydroxylamine for 15 minutes. A sample pool test using 5μL per sample and a ratio check analysis was performed using the Q-Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to obtain the sample volume for the final pool. Once the final sample volumes were mixed, they were dried in the Vacufuge Plus system for consequent LC-MS/MS analysis.  Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS: Samples were reconstituted in 20.8μL of 0.1% formic acid in water for Mass Spectrometry protein quantitation. For each sample, 3μL were transferred to sample vials for injection of 2μL into the instrument, and the remaining volume was stored at -80°C.  LC-MS/MS Analysis: For peptide separation, the Easy-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was employed, and peptides were loaded onto a PicoChip H354 REPROSIL-Pur C18-AQ 3μm 120 A (75μm x 105mm) chromatographic column (New Objective, MA, USA). Separation was obtained using 7-25% gradient Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 102 minutes, 25-60% of Buffer B for 20 minutes, and 60-95% Buffer B for 6 minutes, for a total gradient time of 128 minutes at a flow rate of 300nL/min, and an injection volume of 2μL per sample. Separated peptides were electrosprayed and analyzed using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, IL, USA), operated in positive polarity and data-dependent mode. The full scan/MS1 was measured over the range of 375 to 1400, while the MS2 (MS/MS) analysis was configured to select the 10 most intense ions for fragmentation with a dynamic exclusion parameter of 30.0 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification/Database Search: Following Mass Spectrometry analysis, raw data files were searched with a human database from UniProt (Universal Protein Resource) updated in November 2017. Samples were analyzed with Proteome Discover software version 2.1 using workflows configured for quantitative proteomics. Included in the search parameter was a static modification generated by the alkylation that was carried out during peptide processing. Statistical Analysis and Enrichment Analysis: The bioinformatic analysis was performed for the proteomic datasets related to ZIKV (+) and ZIKV (-) groups. The comparisons performed in this analysis were (including replicates for zika (+) group of 5 replicates and zika (-) group of 4 replicates). The datasets were processed with custom python and R scripts prior the statistical analysis for missing values, identification, and processing of replicates with outliers analysis using the Interquartile (IQR) mean imputation method. The statistical analysis was performed with the R-Bioconductor software limma. A single channel analysis was designed between cases (ZIKV (+)) vs controls (ZIKV (-)). As a result, the list of proteins with differential statistical abundance was obtained, considering a Fold Change (FC) greater or equal to |2| (i.e. FC ≥ |2|) and adjusted p-value using the Benjamini-Hochberg method with a value less or equal to 0.05 (i.e. p-value ≤ 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Zika virus (ZIKV) infection has been associated with fetal abnormalities by compromising placental integrity, but the mechanisms by which this occurs are unknown. Flavivirus can deregulate the host proteome, especially extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. We hypothesize that a deregulation of specific ECM proteins by ZIKV, affects placental integrity. Using twelve different placental samples collected during the 2016 ZIKV Puerto Rico epidemic, we compared the proteome of five ZIKV infected samples with four uninfected controls followed by validation of most significant proteins by immunohistochemistry. Quantitative proteomics was performed using tandem mass tag TMT10plex&#x2122; Isobaric Label Reagent Set followed by Q Exactive&#x2122; Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap Mass Spectrometry. Identification of proteins was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1. Proteins were compared based on the fold change and p value using Limma software. Significant proteins pathways were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway (IPA). TMT analysis showed that ZIKV infected placentas had 94 reviewed differentially abundant proteins, 32 more abundant, and 62 less abundant. IPA analysis results indicate that 45 of the deregulated proteins are cellular components of the ECM and 16 play a role in its structure and organization. Among the most significant proteins in ZIKV positive placenta were fibronectin, bone marrow proteoglycan, and fibrinogen. Of these, fibrinogen was further validated by immunohistochemistry in 12 additional placenta samples and found significantly increased in ZIKV infected placentas. The upregulation of this protein in the placental tissue suggests that ZIKV infection is promoting the coagulation of placental tissue and restructuration of ECM potentially affecting the integrity of the tissue and facilitating dissemination of the virus from mother to the fetus.

### Keywords
Congenital zika syndrome (czs), Tandem mass tagging (tmt), Zika virus (zikv)

### Affiliations
Abiel Roche-Lima, MSc., PhD.  Assistant Professor  Director, Integrated Informatics Services core  IIS-RCMI University of Puerto Rico Medical Science Campus RCMI Program PO Box 365067 San Juan, PR. 00936-5067 Phone: +1 787 758-2525 x 2194
UPR-MSC

### Submitter
Abiel Roche

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Abiel Roche-Lima
Abiel Roche-Lima, MSc., PhD.  Assistant Professor  Director, Integrated Informatics Services core  IIS-RCMI University of Puerto Rico Medical Science Campus RCMI Program PO Box 365067 San Juan, PR. 00936-5067 Phone: +1 787 758-2525 x 2194


