### Accession
PXD014986

### Title
Effect of ATG5 depletion on virus infection

### Description
Proteome analysis of wild-type and atg5-/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts infected with Japanese encephalitis virus

### Sample Protocol
Digestion was performed using LysC and trypsin, 75ug of peptides of each sample were labelled with TMT reagent. 12 fractions were analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Peptides were detected MS1 and quantified MS3 in the Orbitrap. Peptides were sequences MS2 in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
MS2 spectra were searched using SEQUEST alogrithm using a Uniprot composite database from the Mus musculus proteome. Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a 1% FDA using the target decoy strategy combined with linear discriminant analysis. Proteins were quantified only from peptides with a summed SN threshold of >=200 and isolation specificity of 0.5

### Publication Abstract
Basal autophagy is crucial for maintenance of cellular homeostasis. ATG5 is an essential protein for autophagosome formation, and its depletion has been extensively used as a tool to disrupt autophagy. Here, we characterize the impact of <i>Atg5</i> deficiency on the cellular proteome of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Using a tandem mass tagging (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics analysis, we observe that 14% of identified proteins show dysregulated levels in <i>atg5<sup>-/-</sup></i> MEFs. These proteins were distributed across diverse biological processes, such as cell adhesion, development, differentiation, transport, metabolism, and immune responses. Several of the upregulated proteins were receptors involved in transforming growth factor &#x3b2; (TGF-&#x3b2;) signaling, JAK-STAT signaling, junction adhesion, and interferon/cytokine-receptor interactions and were validated as autophagy substrates. Nearly equal numbers of proteins, including several lysosomal proteins and enzymes, were downregulated, suggesting a complex role of autophagy/ATG5 in regulating their levels. The <i>atg5<sup>-/-</sup></i> MEFs had lower levels of key immune sensors and effectors, including Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), IRF7, MLKL, and STAT1/3/5/6, which were restored by reexpression of ATG5. While these cells could efficiently mount a type I interferon response to the double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) mimic poly(I&#xb7;C), they were compromised in their inflammatory response to the bacterial pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and Pam3CSK4. Transcriptional activation and secretion of interleukin-6 (IL-6) in these cells could be recovered by ATG5 expression, supporting the role of autophagy in the TLR2-induced inflammatory response. This study provides a key resource for understanding the effect of autophagy/ATG5 deficiency on the fibroblast proteome.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Autophagy performs housekeeping functions for cells and maintains a functional mode by degrading damaged proteins and organelles and providing energy under starvation conditions. The process is tightly regulated by the evolutionarily conserved <i>Atg</i> genes, of which <i>Atg5</i> is one such crucial mediator. Here, we have done a comprehensive quantitative proteome analysis of mouse embryonic fibroblasts that lack a functional autophagy pathway (<i>Atg5</i> knockout). We observe that 14% of the identified cellular proteome is remodeled, and several proteins distributed across diverse cellular processes with functions in signaling, cell adhesion, development, and immunity show either higher or lower levels under autophagy-deficient conditions. These cells have lower levels of crucial immune proteins that are required to mount a protective inflammatory response. This study will serve as a valuable resource to determine the role of autophagy in modulating specific protein levels in cells.

### Keywords
Japanese encephalitis virus, Autophagy, Mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Atg5

### Affiliations
Regional Centre for Biotechnology
Virology Lab

### Submitter
Manjula Kalia

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.Manjula Kalia
Virology Lab


