### Accession
PXD024498

### Title
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens X030 LC-MSMS

### Description
iTRAQ were used to analyze the difference in total protein expression levels of cultured strains after culturing with sucrose or mannitol

### Sample Protocol
We took 100 µg of protein sample, 150 µL of lysate, and TCEP at a final concentration of 10 mM and reacted it at 37°C for 60 min; then, 40 mM iodoacetamide was added and reacted at room temperature for 40 min in the dark. Pre-cooled acetone (acetone:sample volume ratio = 6:1) was added to precipitate the sample at -20°C for 4 h, followed by centrifugation at 10000 g for 20 min and collection of the precipitate. The precipitate was fully dissolved with 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB, and trypsin was added according to the mass ratio of 1:50 (enzyme:protein) for enzymatic hydrolysis overnight at 37°C. The peptide was dried with a vacuum pump and reconstituted with 0.4 M TEAB. Then, one tube of iTRAQ reagent was added per 100 µg peptide (AB Sciex Catalogue No. 4390812), incubated at room temperature for 2 h, mixed with 50 µl ultrapure water and left at room temperature for 30 minutes; each group of labelled products was combined in one tube and then dried by vacuum concentrator. The peptide samples were reconstituted in UPLC loading buffer, and UPLC was performed on a Waters ACQUITY UPLC by using a reversed-phase C18 column (1.7 µm, 3 mm × 150 mm, Waters, USA). Phase A was 2% acetonitrile, phase B was 80% acetonitrile. The pH was adjusted to 10 with ammonia, the flow rate was set to 200 µL/min, and the time gradient was 50 min. According to the peak type and time, 36 fractions were collected and combined into 12 fractions. After concentration by vacuum centrifugation, the eluted peptides were dissolved in mass spectrometry loading buffer for second-dimensional analysis. The samples were separated on EASY-nanoLC 1000 and Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo, USA) by using a C18 column (75 µm × 25 cm, Thermo, USA). Phase A was 2% ACN with 0.1% formic acid, phase B was 90% ACN with 0.1% formic acid, the separation time was 120 min, the acquisition mode was DDA, and the data acquisition was performed by Thermo Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo, USA).

### Data Protocol
According to the BaX030 genome annotation, the SwissProt/UniProt database was used for protein identification and MS/MS data quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.05 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Beneficial microorganisms to control bacterial diseases has been widely used in aquaculture, <i>Bacillus amyloliquefaciens</i> (BaX030) as a probiotic feed additive was a commonly biological control method. Added sucrose promoted the growth of BaX030, and the yield of its antibacterial substance macrolactin A was enhanced by 1.46-fold. A total of 2055 proteins were screened through proteomics, with 143 upregulated and 307 downregulated. Differential protein expression analysis and qRT-PCR verification showed that the pentose phosphate pathway and the fatty acid synthesis pathway were upregulated, thereby providing sufficient energy and precursors for the synthesis of macrolactin A. The influence of some potential regulatory factors (SecG, LiaI, MecG and ComG) on macrolactin A was discovered. After grass carp were fed with BaX030, the abundance of probiotics (<i>Fusobacterium</i>, <i>Proteobacteria</i>, <i>Gemmobacter</i>) were higher than the control group, and the abundance of potential pathogenic bacteria (<i>Planctomycetes</i>, <i>Aeromonas</i>) were significantly lower than the control group. The cell and challenge experiments showed that BaX030 can significantly increase the expression of <i>C3</i> and <i>IL8</i> in the liver and kidney, which decreases the risk of immune organ disease. Moreover, BaX030 effectively reduced the mortality of grass carp. The results revealed that BaX030 can significantly improve the structure of the intestinal flora, enhance immunity and it is beneficial to the control of grass carp <i>Aeromonas</i>.

### Keywords
Sucrose, Lc-msms, Mannitol, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens x030

### Affiliations
Hunan Normal University
Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Microbial Molecular Biology, College of Life Science, Hunan Normal University. Changsha 410081, China.

### Submitter
Pengji Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Pengji Zhou
Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Microbial Molecular Biology, College of Life Science, Hunan Normal University. Changsha 410081, China.


