### Accession
PXD040190

### Title
Protein content and composition are excellent markers for the assessment of honey quality and the prediction of antibacterial properties

### Description
Honey promotes health and is an effective non-pharmacological home remedy against common respiratory infections. However, industrial processing and manipulation of raw honey can have a detrimental effect on its biological activities, including antibacterial ones, and hence its health-benefiting qualities. Therefore, this study aimed to compare the honey’s antibacterial activity, its total protein content, and the abundance of the most dominant bee-derived proteins in honey between raw (n=92) and supermarket (n=17) samples. We showed that raw honey samples were much more effective in inhibiting the growth of Staphylococcus aureus with a median minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) value of 4.5% compared to supermarket honey samples ceasing bacterial growth with a median MIC value of 36%. Moreover, raw honey samples contained significantly higher amounts of total protein as well as the content of particular bee-derived proteins (major royal jelly protein 1 (MRJP1), glucose oxidase (GOX), and α-glucosidase) in contrast to supermarket honey samples. These data hint that some marketed honey samples could be deliberately manipulated with syrup, especially those that exhibited low protein content. In addition, the supermarket honey sample with the lowest protein content contained α-amylase (diastase) from Aspergillus oryzae. Strikingly, the content of this foreign enzyme in honey was roughly 60 times higher than the naturally occurring bee α-amylase. Our findings highlight the burning need to refine and monitor the specific quality parameters, ensuring the authenticity of honey and maintaining its reputation as a functional food.

### Sample Protocol
Selected protein bands were excised from the gels and shredded into smaller pieces. Consequently, gel pieces were destained with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile and dehydrated with acetonitrile. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 50 °C for 30 min. Alkylation was performed with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in the dark for 30 min. Protein bands were digested overnight with 50 µL of 10 ng/µl trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10% acetonitrile at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted twice with 50 µL of 70% acetonitrile and 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Aliquots of honey samples containing 50 µg of proteins were diluted 5 times with 100 mM Tris pH 7.8. Proteins were precipitated with 10% trichloroacetic acid and washed 3 times with acetone. Consequently, pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea buffered with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide. The reaction was quenched by additional 5 mM dithiothreitol. After dilution in 4 volumes of 50 mM Tris pH 7.8, the proteins were digested overnight by trypsin with a ratio of 1:50. Peptide solutions, acidified by 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, were clarified by centrifugation and purified on custom-made microtips filled with LiChroprep RP-18 25–40-μm particles (Merck-Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Upon vacuum evaporation in Concentrator plus (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 2% acetonitrile, and their concentration was determined by optical absorbance at 215 nm using DS-11+ droplet spectrophotometer (DeNovix, Wilmington, DE, USA). For liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry, peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap100 C18, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5-μm particle size; Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and separated with an EASY-Spray C18 analytical column (75 μm × 500 mm, 5-μm particle size; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) on Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The linear gradient of 2.4–34.4% acetonitrile was applied for 1 h (gel bands) or 2 h (unfractionated samples) at a flow rate 250 nl/min. Spectra were collected by Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in the data-dependent top 15 mode. Precursors were measured in the mass range 300–1700 m/z with a resolution 120,000, fragmented by the HCD mechanism with normalised collision energy 25, and acquired at a resolution 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Datasets were processed by MaxQuant v1.6.17.0, having an Andromeda search engine. Proteins were identified by searching a honeybee (Apis mellifera) proteome (19,057 sequences) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants. Besides, using prior knowledge of honey origin, samples were queried against (i) sunflower (Helianthus annuus; 51,240 sequences)—bands #5-7 and honey ML224; (ii) rhododendron (Rhododendron simsii; 32,714 sequences)—band #8 and honey ML123; (iii) barrel medic (Medicago truncatula; 57,066 sequences)—band #9 and honey ML225; and (iv) koji mold (Aspergillus oryzae; 11,429 sequences)—all unfractionated honeys. All sequences were downloaded from uniport.org in February 2023. Precursor tolerance in the first search was set to 20 ppm, 4.5 ppm in the main search upon recalibration, and fragment tolerance was 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation was allowed as a variable modification. Up to two trypsin missed cleavages were tolerated, and the false discovery rate, empirically estimated by searching the reversed decoy database, was set to 1%. Technical replicates were combined in a single sample for increasing the depth and completeness of data. Protein quantification was done using iBAQ indices (raw intensities divided by the number of theoretical peptides), allowing the comparison of protein abundances within samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Food adulteration, Apis mellifera, Glucose oxidase, Α-amylase, Proteome, Major royal jelly protein 1

### Affiliations
Department of Glycobiology, Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Baráth
Department of Glycobiology, Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences


### SDRF
- organism: apis mellifera
- organism part: not applicable
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample
- instrument: ltq orbitrap elite

