### Accession
PXD029255

### Title
Chemoproteomic Profiling by Cysteine Fluoroalkylation Reveals the DNA Repair Protein XRCC5 as a Functional Target of Myrocin G

### Description
Chemoproteomic profiling of cysteines has emerged as a powerful method for screening the proteome-wide targets of cysteine-reactive frag-ments, drugs and natural products. Herein, we report the development and an in-depth evaluation of a tetrafluoroalkyl benziodoxole as a cyste-ine-selective chemoproteomic probe. We show that this probe features numerous key improvements compared to the traditionally used cyste-ine-reactive probes, including a superior target occupancy, faster labeling kinetics, and broader proteomic coverage thus enabling profiling of cysteines directly in live cells. Further, the fluorine ‘signature’ of probe 7 constitutes an additional advantage resulting in a more confident adduct-amino acid site assignment in mass spectrometry-based identification workflows. We demonstrate the utility of our new probe for proteome-wide target profiling by identifying the cellular targets of (−)-myrocin G, an antiproliferative fungal natural product with a to-date unknown mechanism of action. We show that this natural product and a simplified analog target the X-ray repair cross-complementing protein 5 (XRCC5), an ATP-dependent DNA helicase that primes DNA repair machinery for non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) upon DNA double strand breaks, making them the first reported inhibitors of this biomedically highly important protein. We further demonstrate that myrocins disrupt the interaction of XRCC5 with DNA leading to sensitization of cancer cells to the chemotherapeutic agent etoposide as well as UV-light induced DNA damage. Altogether, our next generation cysteine-reactive probe enables broader and deeper profiling of the cyste-inome rendering it a highly attractive tool for elucidation of targets of electrophilic small molecules.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were resuspended in water with 0.1% formic acid (FA) and analyzed using Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 nano-UHPLC coupled to QExactive HF-X Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The chromatography column consisted of a 50 cm long, 75 μm i.d. microcapillary capped by a 5 μm tip and packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 2.4 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH). LC solvents were 0.1% FA in H2O (Buffer A) and 0.1% FA in MeCN (Buffer B). Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. over a 240 minutes linear gradient (5-35% Buffer B) at 65 °C. Data was acquired in data-dependent mode (top-20, NCE 28, R = 7,500) after full MS scan (R = 60,000, m/z 400-1,300). Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 s, peptide match to prefer and isotope exclusion was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer analysis The MS data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (V2.1.1.21) using the Sequest HT algorithm5 and searched against the human proteome (Uniprot). Oxidized methionines and carbamidomethylation, 3 (+67.9874 Da), 4 (+117.9842 Da), 1-PC cleaved adduct (+195.1120 Da), 2-PC cleaved adduct (+148.0749 Da), 7-PC cleaved adduct (+224.0685 Da), 1-desthiobiotin (+320.1960 Da) or 7-desthiobiotin (+377.1838 Da) were set as dynamic modification on cysteine. For amino acid selectivity, 1-PC cleaved adduct, 2-PC cleaved adduct or 7-PC cleaved adduct were searched as dynamic modification on either Cys, Asp, Glu, His, Lys, Ser, Thr, Tyr together with methionines oxidation and carbamidomethylation of Cys. The minimum peptide length was set to six, maximum precursor mass to 5,000 Da, precursor mass tolerance to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Only peptide with PEP value ≤1% were considered.  MaxQuant analysis  The MaxQuant analysis was performed as previously described by us.4 The MS data was analyzed with MaxQuant6 (V1.6.1.0) and searched against the human proteome (Uniprot) and a common list of contaminants (included in MaxQuant). The first peptide search tolerance was set at 20 ppm, 10 ppm was used for the main peptide search and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The false discovery rate for peptides, proteins and sites identification was set to 1%. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and peptide re-quantification was enabled. The minimal number of peptides per protein was set to one. Methionine oxidation was searched as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was searched as a fixed modification. For competitive catch-and-release experiments, 1-desthiobiotin (+320.1960 Da), 7-desthiobiotin (+377.1838 Da) or carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionine were searched was variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Chemoproteomic profiling of cysteines has emerged as a powerful method for screening the proteome-wide targets of cysteine-reactive fragments, drugs, and natural products. Herein, we report the development and an in-depth evaluation of a tetrafluoroalkyl benziodoxole (TFBX) as a cysteine-selective chemoproteomic probe. We show that this probe features numerous key improvements compared to the traditionally used cysteine-reactive probes, including a superior target occupancy, faster labeling kinetics, and broader proteomic coverage, thus enabling profiling of cysteines directly in live cells. In addition, the fluorine "signature" of probe <b>7</b> constitutes an additional advantage resulting in a more confident adduct-amino acid site assignment in mass-spectrometry-based identification workflows. We demonstrate the utility of our new probe for proteome-wide target profiling by identifying the cellular targets of (-)-myrocin G, an antiproliferative fungal natural product with a to-date unknown mechanism of action. We show that this natural product and a simplified analogue target the X-ray repair cross-complementing protein <b>5</b> (XRCC5), an ATP-dependent DNA helicase that primes DNA repair machinery for nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) upon DNA double-strand breaks, making them the first reported inhibitors of this biomedically highly important protein. We further demonstrate that myrocins disrupt the interaction of XRCC5 with DNA leading to sensitization of cancer cells to the chemotherapeutic agent etoposide as well as UV-light-induced DNA damage. Altogether, our next-generation cysteine-reactive probe enables broader and deeper profiling of the cysteinome, rendering it a highly attractive tool for elucidation of targets of electrophilic small molecules.

### Keywords
Human, Q exactive hf-x, Natural product, Myrocin, Hypervalent iodine, Target id

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA

### Submitter
Daniel Abegg

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Adibekian
Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, FL 33458, USA


