### Accession
PXD020975

### Title
Small extracellular vesicles in human uterine fluid

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) released by endometrium into the uterine fluid are emerging as an important mediator of intercellular communication between mother and the embryo.  Here, we show that these EVs are dynamically regulated for their protein composition during the natural menstrual cycle, and transfer invasive properties and antioxidant function to trophectoderm cells. These EVs carry proteins that regulate embryo implantation and predict window of implantation, thus highlighting their potential as a minimally invasive biomarker.  Clinical applications could include use of nanoparticles engineered to contain the most relevant proteins and delivered at the time of embryo transfer, to improve implantation success. Alternatively, it could be applied to the development of a new class of non-steroidal once-a month contraceptive.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were digested with trypsin and peptide mixture was subjected to tandem mass tag (TMT) multiplexing using TMTsixplex™ Isobaric Label Reagent. Labelled peptides were analyzed on a nanoflow UPLC instrument (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described. Label-free MS-based validation study was performed on a separate cohort using single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample separation (SP3) and independently analyzed on an Q-Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.6.0) with its built-in search engine Andromeda. Perseus used to quantify proteins whose expression was identified in at least 70% in at least one group; normalized intensities were log2 transformed, with statistical analyses performed using Student’s T-test or ANOVA (P < 0.05 considered significant). For validation proteomic set, label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant was used to obtain quantification intensity values and processed using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryo implantation, Fertility, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Uterine fluid

### Affiliations
Baker Institute
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Institute


