### Accession
PXD006045

### Title
Cross-talk between PKA and PKG controls pH-dependent host cell egress of Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii encodes three Protein Kinase A catalytic (PKAc1-3) and one regulatory (PKAr) subunits to integrate cAMP-dependent signals. Here, we show that inactive PKAc1 is maintained at the parasite pellicle by interacting with dually acylated PKAr. Either a conditional knockdown of PKAr or the overexpression of PKAc1 results in a block in parasite division. In contrast, conditional expression of a dominant negative PKAr isoform unable to bind cAMP, triggers premature egress of parasites from infected cells. This untimely egress critically depends on parasite density and host cell acidification. A comparative phosphoproteome analysis reveals that PKA genetic inhibition significantly changed the phosphorylation profile of a putative cGMP-phosphodiesterase, PDE2. Consistently, the phenotype of PKA genetic inhibition is alleviated by chemical inhibition of the cGMP-dependent protein kinase G (PKG). A phosphodiesterase inhibitor is able to circumvent egress repression by PKA or pH neutralisation, indicating that environmental acidification and PKA signalling act as balancing regulators of cGMP degradation to control PKG-mediated egress. Collectively, these results reveal a cross-talk between PKA and PKG pathways to govern egress in T. gondii.

### Sample Protocol
To get a first insight into the pathways regulated by the genetic inhibition of PKA we quantitatively compared the phosphorylation events in DDmyc-PKArWT-Ty and DDmyc-PKArG321E-Ty parasites at 0, 20 and 60 minutes after Shld-1 addition.   Phosphoproteome analysis Confluent HFFs were heavily infected with the DDmyc-PKArWT-Ty or DDmyc-PKArG321E-Ty parasites. Parasites were grown for 26 hr before adding ± shield for 20min or 1 hr. Parasites were washed twice with prewarmed PBS to deplete residual serum-containing media. Parasites were lysed for 30 min on ice in 5ml lysis buffer (8 M urea, 25 mM Tris pH 8, 100 mM sodium chloride, containing HaltTMProtease & Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail from life technology). Samples were sonicated then centrifuged to remove cellular debris. The protein concentration was estimated using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit. 100 µg of proteins were reduced with 20 mM TCEP (Sigma) then alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma) to a final concentration of 30 mM.  Proteins were precipitated with 20% trichloroacetic acid to remove the detergent and the excess reagent.  Protein pellet were subsequently digested with 4 µg trypsin at 37°C in 100 mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate) for 12 hrs. The resulting tryptic peptides were labelled with TMT6plex (Life Technologies), then samples were pooled together and then fractionated on a 2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm XBridge BEH C18 column (130 Å, 3.5 µm, Waters) over a linear gradient of 5-35% ACN /0.1% NH3 in 30 min / 60 min cycle time. Fractions were collected every minute at the first 41min, and only first 6 min and last 8 min were pooled at 2 or 3 minutes intervals. Phosphopeptide were enriched by IMAC (PHOS-Select, Sigma) and TiO2 tips (Life Technology) sequentially, and then analysed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. Peptides from same fraction were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 100 µm i.d. x 20mm) then separated on a 75 µm i.d. x 500 mm column (Acclaim PepMap C18) with a linear gradient of 4-36% CH3CN/0.1% FA for 100 min and a total of 130 min per cycle. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated at a Top 10 method. The MS full scan was in Orbitrap (m/z 380 – 1580) with a lock mass at 445.120025, a resolution at 120,000 at m/z 200, and an AGC at 5x105 with a maximum injection time at 150 msec. The 10 most abundant multiply-charged precursor ions (2+ to 7+), with a minimal signal above 1000 counts, were dynamically selected for HCD fragmentation (MS/MS) and detected in Orbitrap with a resolution at 60,000 at m/z 200, and the AGC at 2x 105 with the maximum injection time at 100 msec. The isolation width was 1.2 Da in quadrupole, and the collision energy was set at 40%. The dynamic exclusion duration time was set for 30 sec with ± 10 ppm exclusion mass width.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with SequestHT search engine against a combined protein database of Toxoplasma gondii (ToxoDB-25_TgondiiGT1_AnnotatedProteins.fasta from Toxodb.org) and mouse (UniprotKB). Cambamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex were set as fixed modifications, and Deamidated (NQ) and Phospho (STY) were set as dynamic modifications.  Precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and fragment ions at 0.2 Da.  The search result was filtered with Percolator where the q-value was set at 0.01. Only unique peptides were used in quantification but normalisation was not applied, and co-isolation was set at 100%.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> encodes three protein kinase A catalytic (PKAc1-3) and one regulatory (PKAr) subunits to integrate cAMP-dependent signals. Here, we show that inactive PKAc1 is maintained at the parasite pellicle by interacting with acylated PKAr. Either a conditional knockdown of PKAr or the overexpression of PKAc1 blocks parasite division. Conversely, down-regulation of PKAc1 or stabilisation of a dominant-negative PKAr isoform that does not bind cAMP triggers premature parasite egress from infected cells followed by serial invasion attempts leading to host cell lysis. This untimely egress depends on host cell acidification. A phosphoproteome analysis suggested the interplay between cAMP and cGMP signalling as PKAc1 inactivation changes the phosphorylation profile of a putative cGMP-phosphodiesterase. Concordantly, inhibition of the cGMP-dependent protein kinase G (PKG) blocks egress induced by PKAc1 inactivation or environmental acidification, while a cGMP-phosphodiesterase inhibitor circumvents egress repression by PKAc1 or pH neutralisation. This indicates that pH and PKAc1 act as balancing regulators of cGMP metabolism to control egress. These results reveal a crosstalk between PKA and PKG pathways to govern egress in <i>T.&#xa0;gondii</i>.

### Keywords
T. gondii, Imac, Lc-msms, Phospho

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


