### Accession
PXD034343

### Title
eIF4A1 unwinding activity is RNA sequence-specifically deployed through eIF4A1-multimerisation to facilitate translation of mRNAs with local repressive RNA structure

### Description
Oncogenic translational programmes are an emerging hallmark of cancer and often driven by dysregulation of signaling pathways including KRAS and mTORC that converge on the eukaryotic translation initiation (eIF) 4F complex. Altered eIF4F activity promotes translation of oncogene mRNAs that typically contain highly structured 5’UTRs rendering their translation strongly dependent on RNA unwinding by DEAD-box helicase eIF4A1 subunit of the eIF4F complex. In addition, eIF4A1 separately functions to load mRNA into the 43S pre-initiation complex (PIC), an essential step for the translation of cellular mRNA. While eIF4A1-dependent mRNAs have been widely investigated, it is still unclear if highly structured mRNAs recruit and activate eIF4A1 unwinding specifically. Here, we uncover that unwinding by eIF4A1 is activated in an RNA sequence-dependent manner in cells. Our data demonstrate that eIF4A1-dependent mRNAs contain specific RNA sequences, particularly enriched for polypurine-motifs, in their 5’UTR which recruit and specifically stimulate unwinding of local repressive RNA structure by eIF4A1 in an RNA sequence-dependent manner to facilitate translation. Mechanistically, we show that polypurine-rich sequences trigger the formation of RNA sequence-specific multimeric eIF4A1-complexes, assembled of catalytically distinct eIF4A1 subunits, the joint activity of which enhances RNA unwinding activity. Together with our structural data, we describe a model in which conformational changes within eIF4A1 and the RNA through the process of eIF4A1 multimerisation, lead to an optimal interaction of eIF4A1-unwinding subunits with the structured RNA region which enhances unwinding. Hence, we conclude that RNA sequences in addition to protein cofactors contribute to the regulation of cellular eIF4A1 function and promotion of translation of eIF4A1-unwinding dependent mRNAs.

### Sample Protocol
MCF7 cells were cultivated in SILAC DMEM (Silantes) supplemented with 10 % dialysed FBS (Sigma), 2 mM L-glutamine (Gibco), 0.789 mM Lys-12C614N2 (Lys0) and 0.398 mM Arg-12C614N4 (Arg0), referred to as light-DMEM, for at least 5 doubling times. All isotope-labelled amino acids were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories with an isotope purity > 99%. For metabolic pulse-labelling, cells were then split using light-DMEM, allowing settling overnight, followed by treatment on the next day with either 150 nM hippuristanol (0.8% DMSO stock) or DMSO control for eight hours in SILAC DMEM (Silantes) supplemented with 10 % dialysed FBS (Sigma), 2 mM L-glutamine (Gibco), 0.789 mM Lys-13C615N2 (Lys8) and 0.398 mM Arg-13C615N4 (Arg10), referred to as heavy-DMEM. Samples were taken immediately at the beginning of treatment (time = 0 h) and after two, four and eight hours after medium swap and treatment. Cells were harvested, washed in PBS and lysed in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5, 75 mM NaCl using sonication, and cleared by centrifugation. Supernatants were stored at -80°C. For all time points a biological quadruplet was generated before submission to MS. 25µg protein lysate was reduced with 5 mM DTT, then alkylated in the dark with 50 mM IAA.  Samples were then subject to a two-step digestion, firstly with Endoproteinase Lys-C (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate) (Promega) for 1 hour at room temperature then with trypsin (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate) (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Once digested, peptide samples were labelled with TMT 16plex reagent kit (Thermo Scientific).  400 µg digested sample was fractionated using reverse phase chromatography at pH 10. Solvents A (98% water, 2% ACN) and B (90% ACN, 10% water) were pH adjusted to pH 10 using ammonium hydroxide. Samples were run on an Agilent 1260 Infinity II HPLC. Samples were manually injected using a Rheodyne valve. Once injected the samples were subject to a two-step gradient, 2-28% Solvent B in 39 mins then 28-46% Solvent B in 13 mins. The column was washed for 8 mins at 100% Solvent B followed by a re-equilibration for 7 mins. Total run time was 76 mins and flow rate was set to 200 µL/min. The samples were collected into 21 fractions. Peptide samples were run on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC II 1200 chromatography system (Agilent). Samples were loaded onto a 50 cm fused silica emitter (packed in-house with ReproSIL-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 µm resin) which was heated to 55°C using a column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over three optimised two-step gradient methods for fractions 1-7, 8-15 and 16-21. Step one was commenced for 75 mins and step two for 25 mins. For fractionated samples 1-7 the % of solvent B was 3-18% at step one and 30% at step two. For fractions 8-15 the % of B was 5-24% at step one and 38% at step two and for fractions 16-21 the % B was from 7-30% at step one and 47% at step two. Peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a nanoelectropsray ion source (Thermo Scientific). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD, ESI Source Solutions) was used to decrease air contaminants.

### Data Protocol
Data was acquired Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) in positive mode utilising data-dependent acquisition. Full scan mass (MS1) range was set to 350-1400m/z at 120,000 resolution. Injection time was set to 50 ms with a target value of 5E5 ions. HCD fragmentation was triggered at top speed [3 sec] for MS2 analysis. MS2 injection time was set to 175 ms with a target of 2E5 ions and resolution of 15,000. Ions that have already been selected for MS2 were dynamically excluded for 30 s.  Data were processed following recommendation from Zecha et al.70 MS raw data was processed using MaxQuant software71 version 1.6.14.0 and searched with the Andromeda search engine 72 against the Uniprot Homo Sapiens database(2018, 95,146 entries) . Data was searched with multiplicity set to MS2 level TMT16plex. First and main searches were done with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main. MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and trypsin cleavage was selected allowing up to 2 missed cleavage sites. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, SILAC Arg10, SILAC Lys8 were selected as variable modifications and Carbimidomethylation as a fixed modification. False discovery rate was set to 1%.  MaxQuant output was processed using Perseus software73 version 1.6.15.0. The MaxQuant Evidence.txt file was used to create a new protein groups file. In short, data was culled of contaminant, reverse and unique proteins only peptide identifications before identifying the TMT reporter ion intensities that contain the variable SILAC Arg10 & Lys8 modifications. Identical peptide sequences were combined by median. The data was then exported to R and a script run to combine the ‘TMT reporter intensity corrected’ peptide sequences that belong to the same protein into a ‘protein group’ TMT reporter intensity value (R script available upon request). Protein level data was normalised by LIMMA to account for batch effect differences.  Further data processing and analyses followed recommendation from Zecha et al.70 To normalise and focus on newly synthesised proteins, which contain the heavy-label (Arg10, Lys8) TMT intensity (ILys8,Arg10), custom R-scripts were used to convert the per-gene intensity data into fraction ‘heavy’ (FH) by dividing TMT-intensities from ‘heavy-labelled’ by the sum of light- and heavy-labelled TMT intensities (FH = ILys8,Arg10 / (ILys8,Arg10 + ILys0,Arg0). Considering the limited time points that were collected and to calculate the apparent translation rate of newly synthesised protein, a linearised first order equation for labelling kinetics (single exponential growth) was fit to the logarithmic data, which yields the apparent translation rate k as the slope of the fit (ln FH = k * t + offset). To remove poor quality fits, data for the rate k were filtered using a p-value cut-off of 0.1 (two-sided t-test, null-hypothesis of k = 0; input: 1337 proteins, p<0.1: 1270, p>0.1: 67). Next, difference and log2-fold change (hippuristanol/DMSO) and associated false discovery rates (FDR) were calculated using standard procedures. Proteins were categorised eIF4A1-dependent or-independent if their FDR of the difference between the apparent translational rate under hippuristanol and DMSO control was smaller than 0.1 or larger than 0.7 respectively. This resulted in 255 eIF4A1-dependent and 244 eIF4A1-independent genes. Motif identification for AG5- and GC5-motif has been done as described under the RNA structure-seq2 section. For Fig. 2H, the same DMS reactivity data as in Fig. 2G was used, and windows were categorised as decrease or increase in RNA structure if their change in DMS reactivity was lower or above 0. In all figures where applicable data is filtered for most abundant transcripts using RNAseq data from our previous study Waldron et al.12 Differential motif enrichment analysis was performed using the MEME suite. 74,75 MFEs were calculated by averaging the top five folding energies of the most abundant transcripts based on mfold prediction (RNA stabilities version 2.3).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pulse silac, Proteomics, Eif4a1, Tmt

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Head of Proteomics, Beatson Institute for Cancer Research

### Submitter
Kelly Hodge

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
Head of Proteomics, Beatson Institute for Cancer Research


