### Accession
PXD027215

### Title
Metabolic reprogramming: Targeting inhibition of osteoarthritis-induced pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase expression preserves mitochondrial respiration

### Description
Fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) maintain the structural and dynamic integrity of joints. Additionally, FLS have been identified as key drivers of joint destruction in osteoarthritis (OA). Pathogenic THY1+ FLS are classified as invasively proliferative cells. However, little is known about the metabolic changes of FLS in the pathogenesis of OA. Here, we demonstrate functional, proteomic, and metabolic characteristics of inflammation-exposed FLS compared with unexposed fibroblast-like mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) from patients with OA. Analysis of FLS and MSC proteomes revealed 592 differentially expressed proteins. Although both cell types were indistinguishable according to classical markers, pathway analysis revealed that pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) 3 is highly expressed only in proliferative FLS. Inhibition of PDKs by dichloroacetate significantly shifted glycolysis to oxidative phosphorylation while reducing proliferation without causing cell death. Therefore, reprogramming FLS metabolism from glycolysis to mitochondrial respiration by inhibiting PDK isoforms might be a new approach to treat transformed FLS in OA

### Sample Protocol
lysis in SDC buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 40 mM Chloroacetamide), heated for 10 minutes at 95C, incubated with 25 U Benzonase (Merck), protein extracts were subjected to tryptic digestion with sequence-grade Trypsin and Lysyl Endopeptidase LysC overnight at 37C. The digestion was stopped with trifluoroacetic acid and peptides were desalted and cleaned up using StageTips protocol. Peptides were separated on a 20 cm reversed-phase column (75 µm inner diameter, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ (1.9 µm) using a 200 min gradient with a 250 nl/min flow rate on a High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system. Peptides were measured on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap instrument in the data dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software package (v1.6.3.4) and a decoy human UniProt database (HUMAN.2019-07), containing forward and reverse sequences. The search included variable modifications of oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. The FDR was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification. MS2 identifications were transferred between runs with the ÒMatch between runsÓ option. The integrated LFQ (label-free) quantitation algorithm was applied

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synovial fibroblasts, Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase, Metabolism, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite
Berlin Institute of Health at Charité, Proteomics Platform, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Berlin Institute of Health at Charité, Proteomics Platform, Berlin, Germany


