### Accession
PXD027039

### Title
Effects of secretome derived from macrophages exposed to calcium oxalate crystals on renal fibroblast activation

### Description
The association between kidney stone disease and renal fibrosis has been widely explored in recent years but its underlying mechanisms remain far from complete understanding. Using label-free quantitative proteomics (nanoLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap MS/MS), this study identified 23 significantly altered secreted proteins from calcium oxalate monohydrate (COM)-exposed macrophages (COM-MP) compared with control macrophages (Ctrl-MP) secretome. Functional annotation and protein-protein interactions network analysis revealed that these altered secreted proteins were involved mainly in inflammatory response and fibroblast activation. BHK-21 renal fibroblasts treated with COM-MP secretome had more spindle-shaped morphology with greater spindle index. Immunofluorescence study and gelatin zymography revealed increased levels of fibroblast activation markers (α-smooth muscle actin and F-actin) and fibrotic factors (fibronectin and matrix metalloproteinase-9 and -2) in the COM-MP secretome-treated fibroblasts. Our findings indicate that proteins secreted from macrophages exposed to COM crystals induce renal fibroblast activation and may play important roles in renal fibrogenesis in kidney stone disease.

### Sample Protocol
Cell cultures Human monocyte cell line, U937 (ATCC; Manassas, VA) and baby hamster kidney fibroblast cell line, BHK-21 (ATCC) were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium and Eagle’s minimum essential medium (Gibco; Grand Island, NY), respectively. These cells were grown in corresponding growth medium supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Gibco), 60 U/ml penicillin G (Sigma-Aldrich; St. Louis, MO), and 60 µg/ml streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) in a humidified incubator at 37°C with 5% CO2.  COM crystal preparation COM crystals were generated using supersaturated solutions of CaCl2 and Na2C2O4. Briefly, 10 mM CaCl2·2H2O in a buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl and 90 mM NaCl (pH 7.4) was mixed 1:1 (v/v) with 1.0 mM Na2C2O4 in the same buffer to make their final concentrations at 5 mM and 0.5 mM, respectively. The mixture was incubated at 25°C overnight and the COM crystals were harvested by a centrifugation at 2,000 ×g for 5 min. The crystals were washed three times with methanol and air-dried overnight at 25°C. The typical morphology of COM crystal was confirmed under an inverted phase-contrast light microscope (Nikon; Tokyo, Japan). The crystals were decontaminated by UV radiation for 30 min before cell treatment.   Macrophage differentiation, COM crystal treatment, and secretome collection Differentiation was induced by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) (Fluka; St. Loius, MO). Briefly, U937 cells (5×105 cells/ml) were seeded in each 6-well and treated with 100 ng/ml PMA for 48 h. After removal of PMA and non-adherent cells by washing with PBS, the remaining adherent cells were recovered in growth medium for 48 h. After recovery, the macrophages were washed with PBS and incubated in serum-free medium with or without 100 µg/ml COM crystals for 16 h. The culture supernatant was collected from the control and the COM-exposed macrophages. All particulate matters were removed by a centrifugation at 2,000 ×g and 4°C for 5 min. The clear supernatant containing secretome was then subjected to quantitative proteomics.  In-solution tryptic digestion by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method Equal amount of total protein of each sample was digested by trypsin according to FASP protocol. Briefly, the protein mixture in SDT buffer was reduced by heating at 95°C for 5 min. After cooling down at 25°C, the sample was transferred to a Nanosep 10K device (Pall Corporation; Port Washington, NY), added with 200 µl of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), and then centrifuged at 14,000 ×g and 25°C for 15 min. This buffer exchange step was repeated once. The proteins were alkylated with 100 µl of 50 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) at 25°C in the dark using a ThermoMixer C (Eppendorf; Hauppauge, NY) for 20 min. Thereafter, buffer exchange was performed twice by centrifugation at 14,000 ×g and 25°C for 15 min each using 200 µl of 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). The proteins were finally exchanged into 50 mM NH4HCO3 and then digested with trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI) at 1:50 (w/w) trypsin/protein at 37°C for 16 h in a ThermoMixer C. The digested peptides were collected by a centrifugation at 14,000 ×g at 25°C for 15 min. Trypsin activity was stopped by adding 10 µl of 5% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (ACN), and the digested peptides were dried by a vacuum concentrator (ScanVac; Lynge, Denmark). The peptides were finally resuspended in 0.1% formic acid prior to MS/MS.  nanoLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap MS/MS  Peptide separation was performed using EASY-nLC II (Thermo Scientific; Waltham, MA). Briefly, peptides were loaded into an in-house, 3-cm-long pre-column containing 5-µm C18 resin (Dr.Maisch GmbH; Ammerbuch, Germany) and then to an in-house, 10-cm-long analytical column packed with 3-µm C18 resin (Dr.Maisch GmbH) using mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid). The peptides were separated by mobile phase B (ACN/0.1% formic acid) gradient elution with four steps as follows: 2-9% for 15 min, 9-35% for 85 min, 35-95% for 20 min, and then 95% for 10 min (flow rate = 200 nl/min). The peptides were analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap-XL (Thermo Scientific) in positive mode with nanospray ESI. Data were acquired in a collision-induced dissociation (CID) top-12 mode under the control of the Xcalibur 2.1.0 and LTQ Tune Plus 2.5.5 (Thermo Scientific). The cycle of one full scan was performed at a resolution of 30,000 (300-2,000 m/z) in the Orbitrap followed by 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap with enabled preview mode for FTMS master scan. The signal threshold of precursor ion at 1x105 was required for further fragmentation. Accumulation target values of full MS and MS/MS scan were 5x105 and 3x104 ions, respectively. Singly charged ions and unassigned charge states were excluded. Helium was used as a collision gas and the normalized collision energy was set at 35%. The activation time was 30 ms and the duration of dynamic exclusion was 180 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data analyses and quantitative analysis The MS/MS raw spectra were deconvoluted and then extracted into output searchable .mgf files using Proteome Discoverer v.1.4.1.14 software (Thermo Scientific). Mascot software version 2.4.0 (Matrix Science; London, UK) was used to search MS/MS spectra against SwissProt database of humans with the following standard Mascot parameters for CID: Enzyme = trypsin, maximal number of missed cleavages = 1, peptide tolerance = ±2 ppm, MS/MS tolerance = ±0.2 Da, fixed modification = carbamidomethyl (C), variable modification = oxidation (M), charge states = 2+ and 3+, and decoy database on FDR <1% 9,10. Quantitative data of each protein was obtained from averaging areas under curve (AUC) (or peak areas) of peptide precursor ion intensity of the three most abundant peptides identified from each protein. Note that background was subtracted from all peak areas.

### Publication Abstract
The association between kidney stone disease and renal fibrosis has been widely explored in recent years but its underlying mechanisms remain far from complete understanding. Using label-free quantitative proteomics (nanoLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap MS/MS), this study identified 23 significantly altered secreted proteins from calcium oxalate monohydrate (COM)-exposed macrophages (COM-MP) compared with control macrophages (Ctrl-MP) secretome. Functional annotation and protein-protein interactions network analysis revealed that these altered secreted proteins were involved mainly in inflammatory response and fibroblast activation. BHK-21 renal fibroblasts treated with COM-MP secretome had more spindle-shaped morphology with greater spindle index. Immunofluorescence study and gelatin zymography revealed increased levels of fibroblast activation markers (&#x3b1;-smooth muscle actin and F-actin) and fibrotic factors (fibronectin and matrix metalloproteinase-9 and -2) in the COM-MP secretome-treated fibroblasts. Our findings indicate that proteins secreted from macrophages exposed to COM crystals induce renal fibroblast activation and may play important roles in renal fibrogenesis in kidney stone disease.

### Keywords
Calcium oxalate; kidney stone; macrophage; renal fibrosis; secretome

### Affiliations
Mahidol University
Medical Proteomics Unit, Office for Research and Development, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

### Submitter
Visith Thongboonkerd

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Visith Thongboonkerd
Medical Proteomics Unit, Office for Research and Development, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand


