### Accession
PXD006042

### Title
Affinity proteomics targeting the meiotic chromosome axis protein, ASY1, from Brassica oleracea.

### Description
Meiosis is a highly complex process that underpins recombination in sexually reproducing organisms. Recent genomics studies suggest that up to several thousand genes/proteins contribute to the meiotic pathway, yet relatively few have been functionally characterised. Our understanding of the physical interactions between meiotic proteins and how the meiotic machinery interacts with other components of the cell is also limited. In this study, we used affinity proteomics targeting the meiotic chromosome axis protein, ASY1, to enrich for axis-associated proteins in Brassica oleracea anthers or meiocytes in prophase I of meiosis. LC-MS/MS analysis identified 540 proteins which co-immunoprecipitated with ASY1 in a sample-specific manner. These correspond to 485 Arabidopsis orthologues, 90% of which form a coherent predicted protein-protein interaction network which includes known and novel meiotic proteins, based on mutant analysis, but also proteins more usually associated with other cellular processes including replication and proteolysis. Our data provided new insights into the role of the chromosome axis in plant meiosis. We identified a novel axis-associated protein and showed that during prophase I, ASY1 and its interacting partner, ASY3, are extensively phosphorylated. Further studies targeting other meiotic proteins may ultimately enable the construction of a comprehensive meiosis protein-protein interaction network for higher plants.

### Sample Protocol
Brassica oleracea var. alboglabra A12DHd was used in this analysis. Anthers or meiocytes from 200 buds in prophase I were used for protein extraction under non-denaturing conditions. Extracts were pre-cleared and divided in two for parallel co-immunoprecipitation with anti-ASY1 antibody or control rabbit non-specific IgG cross-linked to Affi-Prep Protein A beads. Following extensive washing, bound proteins were glycine-eluted, reduced by dithiothreitol, alkylated with methyl methanethiosulfonate and digested in solution with trypsin. The generated peptides were analysed by nano-reversed phase-HPLC coupled online to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a Proxeon nanospray source (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). The nano HPLC system used was an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany, PepMap C18, 5 mm × 300 μm ID, 5 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 25 μL min-1 using 0.1% TFA as mobile phase. After 10 min, the trap column was switched in line with the analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany, PepMap C18, 500 mm × 75 μm ID, 3 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted using a flow rate of 230 nl min-1, and a binary 2h gradient. The gradient starts with the mobile phases: 98% A (water/formic acid, 99.9/0.1, v/v) and 2%B (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 19.92/80/0.08, v/v/v) increases to 35%B over the next 120min, followed by a gradient in 5 min to 90%B, stays there for five min and decreases in 5min back to the gradient 98%A and 2%B for equilibration at 30°C. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent mode, using a full scan in the Orbitrap (m/z range 350-2000, nominal resolution of 60 000, target value 1E6) followed by MS/MS scans of the 12 most abundant ions in the linear ion trap. MS/MS spectra (normalized collision energy 35%; activation value q 0.25; activation time 10 ms; isolation width 2, target value 1E4) were acquired and subsequent activation was performed on fragment ions through multistage activation. The neutral loss mass list was therefore set to -98, -49, and -32.6 m/z. Precursor ions selected for fragmentation (charge state 2 and higher) were put on a dynamic exclusion list for 60 s. Additionally, singly-charged parent ions were excluded from selection for MS/MS experiments and the monoisotopic precursor selection feature was enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were interpreted using Mascot (version 2.2.04, Matrix Science, London, UK) in conjunction with Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Peptides and proteins were identified by searching against a database containing B. rapa sequences (Brassica_rapa.20100830.pep,_version 1.2, 41173 sequences, downloaded from brassicadb.org) combined with Brassica sequences from NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, comprising 13230 sequences from Brassica rapa, napus and oleracea) as at 2010. Additionally, the data were searched against B. oleracea sequences (version 1, 58540 sequences, kindly provided pre-publication by Isobel Parkin, Agriculture and Agri-food Canada, Saskatoon, Canada). The following search parameters were used: a precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm; a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da; two missed cleavage sites for trypsin were permitted; fixed modification of cysteine with methyl methanethiosulfonate was specified and methionine oxidation and, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified as a variable modification. In some cases, pyroglutamate formation of glutamine at the peptide N-termini or acetylation on lysine and peptide N-termini was additionally specified as variable modifications. Scaffold 3 (Proteome Software, OR, USA) was used to compare the identified peptides from the control and the specific samples. A Mascot Ions Score cut-off of 20 was defined as the minimum acceptance threshold for the search results and a minimum of two unique peptides were required to positively identify a protein.

### Publication Abstract
During meiosis, the formation of crossovers (COs) generates genetic variation and provides physical links that are essential for accurate chromosome segregation. COs occur in the context of a proteinaceous chromosome axis. The transcriptomes and proteomes of anthers and meiocytes comprise several thousand genes and proteins, but because of the level of complexity relatively few have been functionally characterized. Our understanding of the physical and functional interactions between meiotic proteins is also limited. Here we use affinity proteomics to analyse the proteins that are associated with the meiotic chromosome axis protein, ASY1, in Brassica oleracea anthers and meiocytes. We show that during prophase&#xa0;I ASY1 and its interacting partner, ASY3, are extensively phosphorylated, and we precisely assign phosphorylation sites. We identify 589 proteins that co-immunoprecipitate with ASY1. These correspond to 492 Arabidopsis orthologues, over 90% of which form a coherent protein-protein interaction (PPI) network containing known and candidate meiotic proteins, including proteins more usually associated with other cellular processes such as DNA replication and proteolysis. Mutant analysis confirms that affinity proteomics is a viable strategy for revealing previously unknown meiotic proteins, and we show how the PPI network can be used to prioritise candidates for analysis. Finally, we identify another axis-associated protein with a role in meiotic recombination. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006042.

### Keywords
Brassica, Phosphorylation, Co-immunoprecipitation, Protein-protein interaction, Arabidopsis, Lc-ms/ms, Chromosome axis, Meiosis

### Affiliations
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology
School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, UK.

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr F. Chris H. Franklin
School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, UK.


