### Accession
PXD001579

### Title
Proteomic and morphological effect of nanosilver on soybean under flooding stress

### Description
Flooding stress has a negative impact on the soybean cultivation in early growth stages. In order to understand the effect of nanosilver on the soybean growth under flooding stress, quantitative proteomics technique was used.

### Sample Protocol
Two-day-old soybeans were treated without or with flooding 15 nm nanosilver with 2 ppm concentration for 2 and 4 days. Proteins were extracted from roots including hypocotyl and cotyledons of the soybean plant. For proteomics, protein samples were cleaned with chloroform/metahnol method and then subjected to in-solution digestion with trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Using an Ultimate 3,000 nanoLC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany), peptides in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a C18 PepMap trap column (300 µm ID x 5 mm, Dionex). The peptides were eluted from the trap column and were then separated using 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile at a flow rate of 200 nL/min on a C18 Tip column (75 µm 1D x 120 mm, NTTC-360/75-3 nanoLC capillary column; Nikkyo Technos) with a spray voltage of 1.5 kV. The peptides were analyzed on a nanospray LTQ XL Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cotyledon, Roots, Proteomics, Flooding stress, Nanosilver, Soybean

### Affiliations
NARO Institute of Crop Science
NARO Institute of Crop Science, University of Tsukuba

### Submitter
Ghazala Mustafa

### Lab Head
Dr Setsuko KOMATSU
NARO Institute of Crop Science


