### Accession
PXD027801

### Title
DNA-protein affinity precipitation to identify proteins interacting with the atpT promoter in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803

### Description
The small protein AtpΘ (encoded by gene atpT) identified in cyanobacteria becomes maximum expressed during low-energy conditions such as during darkness. In the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (Synechocystis 6803), AtpΘ was demonstrated to inhibit the ATP hydrolysis activity of the F0F1 ATP synthase. Here, the regulation of atpT gene expression was studied in greater detail. The darkness-induced activation of the atpT promoter indicated the existence of regulatory factors. To identify such factors, DNA-protein affinity precipitation was performed using biotinylated DNA fragments. These fragments contained either the promoter-5’UTR (PatpT66-5’UTR) as bait or, as negative control, only the 5’UTR (atpT 5’UTR). Each DNA fragment was incubated with total protein samples isolated from exponential phase Synechocystis 6803 which had been kept in the light or 12 h in darkness prior to protein preparation. The resulting protein samples were then analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of total protein lysate. Synechocystis strain PCC 6803-M cultures were grown in several 800 mL BG11 medium in 1 L Erlenmeyer flasks at an illumination of about 50 µmol photons m-2 s-1. Cells were collected at exponential phase (OD750 about 0.8) either directly (light protein sample) or after incubation in darkness for 12 h (dark protein sample). 3 L of light- or dark-incubated cultures were collected by centrifugation (7000 g, 10 min, room temperature), washed twice with PBS buffer (137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 1.8 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.5), resuspended in 4 ml BS/THES buffer (0.5 mM MgCl2, 50 μM ZnSO4, 50 μM FeCl2, 50 μM MnCl2, and 50 μM EDTA) supplemented with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, and lysed using a Precellys 24 homogenizer. Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 30 min at 4oC, and the resulted lysates were used for the pull-down assay. Preparation of biotinylated DNA fragments. The biotinylated PatpT66-5’UTR and the atpT 5’-UTR fragments were acquired by PCR amplification, with one of the primers biotinylated at its 5’-end. The amplified product was then purified with Macherey-Nagel™ NucleoSpin™ Gel and PCR Clean-up Kit. DNA affinity pull-down assay. Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin (ThermoFisher Scientific) were washed and prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each pull-down assay, 600 μl of the protein lysate was first incubated with 200 μl of uncharged Dynabeads for 20 min to minimize the non-specific binding of contaminants, then incubated with beads loaded with the biotinylated DNA bait for 1 h at room temperature. Then, beads charged with baits and bound proteins were washed with BS/THES buffer for 5 times, and proteins were eluted with elution buffer (25 mM Tris–HCl, 250 mM NaCl). Protein elution was precipitated overnight at 4oC by adding trichloroacetic acid to a final concentration of 15%. Proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 30 min at 4oC, and then analyzed on 16%/6 M urea Tricine-SDS gels. The gel was stained with InstantBlue (Expedeon). Then, each gel lane was cut into pieces, destained, desiccated and rehydrated in trypsin as previously described [Bonn et al., Anal. Chem. 2014, 86, 7421–7427]. In gel-digest was incubated at 37 °C overnight and peptides were eluted with water by sonication for 15 min. Samples were loaded on an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in-house built 20 cm column (inner diameter 100 µm, outer diameter 360 µm) filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ reversed-phase material (3 µm particles, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Elution of peptides was achieved with a nonlinear 77 min gradient from 1 to 99% solvent B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and injected online into an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The survey scan at a resolution of R=30,000 and 1 x 106 automatic gain control target in the Orbitrap with activated lock mass correction was followed by selection of the five most abundant precursor ions for fragmentation. Singly charged ions as well as ions without detected charge states were excluded from MS/MS analysis. Fragmented ions were dynamically excluded from fragmentation for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Database search with Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, USA) was performed against a Synechocystis 6803 database downloaded from Uniprot (Proteome-ID UP000001425) on 11/12/20, which was supplemented with common laboratory contaminants. After adding reverse entries the final database contained 7,098 entries. Database searches were based on a strict trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages permitted. No fixed modifications were considered and oxidation of methionine was considered as variable modification. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and the mass tolerance for fragment ions to 1.0 Da. Validation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identification was performed with Scaffold V4.8.7 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA), and peptide identifications were accepted if they exhibited at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.1 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.3 and 3.75 for doubly, triply and all higher charged peptides, respectively. Protein identifications were accepted if at least 2 unique peptides were identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna-protein affinity precipitation; atpt promoter; synechocystis sp. pcc 6803; cyabrb

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


