### Accession
PXD023431

### Title
Secretomic analysis of a novel strain SM1988

### Description
Strain SM1988T is a Gram-negative, aerobic, oxidase- and catalase-positive, unipolar flagellated, and rod-shaped bacterium capable of hydrolyzing casein, gelatin and collagens. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that strain SM1988T formed a distinct phylogenetic lineage along with known genera within the family Pseudoalteromonadaceae, with 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity being less than 93.3% to all known species in the family. Based on the phylogenetic, genomic, chemotaxonomic and phenotypic data, strain SM1988T was considered to represent a novel species in a novel genus in the family Pseudoalteromonadaceae, for which the name Flocculibacter collagenilyticus gen. nov., sp. nov. is proposed, with the type strain being SM1988T (= MCCC 1K04279T = KCTC 72761T). Strain SM1988T showed a high production (236 U/mL) of extracellular collagenases, which had high activity against both bovine collagen and codfish collagen. Biochemical tests combined with genomic and secretomic analyses indicated that the collagenases secreted by strain SM1988T are serine proteases from the S8 family. These data suggest that strain SM1988T acts as an important player in marine collagen degradation and recycling and may have a promising potential in collagen resource utilization.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were resuspended in a denaturing buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris.Cl, pH7.6), and centrifuged with 12,000 x g for 10 min to remove insoluble debris. The proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 ℃ for 1h and the SDS buffer was replaced with UA (8M Urea, 100mM Tris.Cl pH8.5) in the Microcon YM-30 centrifugal filter units. After reduced, the proteins were alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in UA at room temperature for 15min in the dark, and centrifuged with 12,000 x g for 10 min to remove the UA buffer. The UA buffer was replaced with the 1mM TEAB buffer, and then digested with sequencing grade trypsin (1:50 (w: w)) at 37℃ overnight. The digested peptides were desalted by StageTip before analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analyses, the peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid （FA） and  analyzed by LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the data-dependent mode. The peptides were separated by reverse phase LC with an150 μm (ID) ×250 mm (length) analytical column packed with C18 particles of 1.9 µm diameter in a 90-min gradient. All MS measurements were performed in the positive ion mode. Precursor ions were measured in the Orbitrap analyzer at 240,000 resolution (at 400 m/z) and a target value of 106 ions. The tweenty most intense ions from each MS scan were isolated, fragmented, and measured in the linear ion trap. The CID normalized collision energy was set to 35.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
The s8 family proteases, Flocculibacter gen. nov., Secretome analysis, Collagenase, Collagenase-secreting bacteria

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, Shandong University, China
Shandong University

### Submitter
Jian Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yuzhong Zhang
Institute of Microbiology, Shandong University, China


