### Accession
PXD027124

### Title
Human CK1 alpha (CK1α) 5'UTR-interacting proteins

### Description
We used tobramycin-affinity RNA-pulldown assays coupled with mass spectrometry to identify CK1α 5'-UTR-binding proteins.

### Sample Protocol
CK1α 5'-UTR was cloned into a tobramycin aptamer-encoding vector for the RNA-pulldown assay. Protein eluates were resolved on 10% SDS-PAGE gel, followed by Coomassie blue staining. Protein bands at 75 kDa and 40 kDa regions were excised and sent for mass spectrometry. The gel band was cut into small pieces of 1 mm3 and placed in a Sep-Pak tC18 96-well µElution Plate (Waters, Miltford, MA, USA). The gels were then washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% ethanol (v/v) and dehydrated using 100% ethanol and the step was repeated once. Subsequently, samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 60 min followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 60 min, in the dark, at room temperature. Following reduction and alkylation, the gel pieces were washed with 200 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min, 200 µL of 25mM ammonium bicarbonate/5% acetonitrile for 30 min and 200 µL of 25mM ammonium bicarbonate / 50% acetonitrile for 30 min. Following which, the gel pieces were dehydrated by adding 200 μl of acetonitrile (ACN) for 10 min. One μg of trypsin per 20 μg of protein was added and trypsin digestion was performed at 37°C for 18 h.  The gels were then washed with 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The digested peptides were extracted with 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA.  Peptide separation was carried out on an Eksigent nanolC Ultra and ChiPLC-nanoflex (Eksigent) in trap-elute configuration. The samples were desalted with Sep-Pak tC18 μElution Plate (Waters) and reconstituted with 20 ul of diluent (98% Water, 2% ACN, 0.05% Formic acid (FA)).  2ul of the sample was loaded on a 200 μm x 0.5mm trap column and separated on an analytical 75 μm×150mm column. Both trap and analytical columns were made of ChromXP C18-CL, 3 μm (Eksigent).  Peptides were separated by a gradient formed by 2% ACN, 0.1% FA (mobile phase A) and 98% ACN, 0.1% FA (mobile phase B): 5 to 5% of mobile phase B in 1min, 5 to 12% of mobile phase B in 19min, 12 to 30% of mobile phase B in 40min, 30 to 90% of mobile phase B in 2min, 90 to 90% of mobile phase B in 7min, 90 to 5% of mobile phase B in 3min and 5 to 5% of mobile phase B in 13min, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX) in Information Dependent Mode. MS spectra were acquired across the mass range of 400–1250 m/z in high resolution mode (>30000) using 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. Tandem mass spectra were recorded in high sensitivity mode (resolution >15000) with rolling collision energy and selecting precursors with charge state ranging from 2 to 4 and exceeding 125 cps.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was carried on the ProteinPilot 5.0 software Revision 4769 (AB SCIEX) using the Paragon database search algorithm (5.0.0.0.4767) and the integrated false discovery rate (FDR) analysis function. The data acquired was searched against the database consisting 2019_Aug_Uniprot_Sprot (total 40860 entries). The search parameters are as follows: Sample Type – Identification; Cys Alkylation – Iodoacetamide; Digestion – trypsin; Special Factors – None; Species – Homo sapiens. The processing specifications include: ID focus – Biological Modifications; Search Effort – Thorough; Detected Protein Threshold – 0.05 (10%).  For FDR determination, data were searched against a concatenated database with in silico on-the-fly reversal for decoy sequences automatically by the software. Only proteins with less than 1% global FDR and distinct peptides with less than 5% local FDR were used for further analysis. The concentrations of detected proteins were estimated in a two-step process. First, the weight fraction (weight %) of each protein was determined by its exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) score in MS profile, which was generated by the Mascot Server 2.6 software (where the data acquired was searched against the database consisting SwissProt_ID 2019_07 taxonomy: Homo sapiens (total: 20432 sequences)), and its molecular weight. Then, the weight fraction was multiplied by the total concentration of the respective samples. The search parameters for Mascot analysis are as follows: Type of search - MS/MS Ion Search; Enzyme -Trypsin; Variable modifications - Acetyl (N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C), Oxidation (M),]; Mass values - Monoisotopic; Protein mass - Unrestricted; Peptide mass tolerance - 100 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance - 0.4 Da; Max missed cleavages - 1; Instrument type - ESI-QUAD-TOF, Number of queries - 2,353; Significance threshold p<0.004257; Max. number of families – AUTO; Ions score or expect cut-off -1; Preferred taxonomy - All entries; Show Percolator scores? N.

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenic mutations in the RAS family of small GTPases are commonly found in human cancers and they promote tumorigenesis by altering gene expression networks. We previously demonstrated that Casein Kinase 1&#x3b1; (CK1&#x3b1;), a member of the CK1 family of serine/threonine kinases, is post-transcriptionally upregulated by oncogenic RAS signaling. Here, we report that the CK1&#x3b1; mRNA contains an exceptionally long 5'-untranslated region (UTR) harbouring several translational control elements, implicating its involvement in translational regulation. We demonstrate that the CK1&#x3b1; 5'-UTR functions as an IRES element in HCT-116 colon cancer cells to promote cap-independent translation. Using tobramycin-affinity RNA-pulldown assays coupled with identification via mass spectrometry, we identified several CK1&#x3b1; 5'-UTR-binding proteins, including SFPQ. We show that RNA interference targeting SFPQ reduced CK1&#x3b1; protein abundance and partially blocked RAS-mutant colon cancer cell growth. Importantly, transcript and protein levels of SFPQ and other CK1&#x3b1; 5'-UTR-associated RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are found to be elevated in early stages of RAS-mutant cancers, including colorectal and lung adenocarcinoma. Taken together, our study uncovers a previously unappreciated role of RBPs in promoting RAS-mutant cancer cell growth and their potential to serve as promising biomarkers as well as tractable therapeutic targets in cancers driven by oncogenic RAS.

### Keywords
Translation, Ras, Ck1a, Cancer

### Affiliations
1 Precision Medicine Programme, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine (YLLSoM), National University of Singapore, 2 NUS Centre for Cancer Research, National University of Singapore, 3 Department of Biochemistry, YLLSoM, National University of Singapore
Precision Medicine Translational Research Programme, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore; NUS Centre for Cancer Research, National University of Singapore; Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore.

### Submitter
Jit Kong Cheong

### Lab Head
Dr Jit Kong Cheong
1 Precision Medicine Programme, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine (YLLSoM), National University of Singapore, 2 NUS Centre for Cancer Research, National University of Singapore, 3 Department of Biochemistry, YLLSoM, National University of Singapore


