### Accession
PXD042142

### Title
Amplified fluorogenic immunoassay for early diagnosis and monitoring of Alzheimer’s disease from tear fluid

### Description
Accurate diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in its earliest stage can prevent the disease and delay the onset of symptoms by maintaining a healthy lifestyle and controlling modifiable risk factors. Therefore, more sensitive, relatively inexpensive, non-invasive, and simple screening tools are required for the early diagnosis and progression monitoring of AD. Here, we designed a self assembled nanoparticle-mediated amplified fluorogenic immunoassay (SNAFIA) consisting of magnetic and fluorophore-loaded polymeric nanoparticles. Multiple simultaneous captures and magnetic separation of biomarkers and target-specific fluorophore emission induced a one-tomulti signal, resulting in a low detection limit (236 aM), good reliability (R2 = 0.991), and wide analytical range (0.320–1000 fM) for APOE and CAP1 biomarkers in human serum and tear fluid. More importantly, SNAFIA successfully differentiated AD patients from healthy controls with 90% sensitivity and 100% specificity in less than 1 h in 39 clinical tear samples. As an easily accessible diagnostic tool with fast and accurate results, SNAFIA can help diagnose AD early to aid in long-term care planning, increase the efficiency of clinical trials, and dramatically accelerate therapeutic development.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins (100 μg) of the pooled tear fluids from each group were placed in duplicate in two tubes and digested into peptides by in-solution digestion. Each tube of tear peptide samples was labeled with tandem mass tag isobaric mass tagging reagents (126: HC_Replicate 1, 127: MCI_Replicate 1,128: AD_Replicate 1, 129: HC_Replicate 2, 130: MCI_Replicate 2, 131: AD_Replicate 2). The chemically tagged samples were pooled into one tube, and peptide separation was performed using high pH reverse-phase liquid chromatography fractionation using the Q Exactive Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer coupled with the nanoAQUITY UPLC system (Waters, CA, USA). Full mass spectrometry data were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 in a scan range of 400–2,000 Th with an automated gain control target value of 1.0 × 106 594 and a maximum ion injection of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) as biomarker candidates in MCI and AD compared with those in HC were defined as proteins with a fold change of greater than two and a p-value less than 0.01.  A gene ontology search was performed to explore the biological processes related to the tear DEPs associated with MCI and AD (p-value < 0.01). Protein–protein interactome information was collected from the STRING public database to build a network showing enriched processes. A network model was built from tear DEPs and interactome data using Cytoscape software.

### Publication Abstract
Accurate diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) in its earliest stage can prevent the disease and delay the symptoms. Therefore, more sensitive, non-invasive, and simple screening tools are required for the early diagnosis and monitoring of AD. Here, we design a self-assembled nanoparticle-mediated amplified fluorogenic immunoassay (SNAFIA) consisting of magnetic and fluorophore-loaded polymeric nanoparticles. Using a discovery cohort of 21 subjects, proteomic analysis identifies adenylyl cyclase-associated protein 1 (CAP1) as a potential tear biomarker. The SNAFIA demonstrates a low detection limit (236 aM), good reliability (R<sup>2</sup>&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.991), and a wide analytical range (0.320-1000&#x2009;fM) for CAP1 in tear fluid. Crucially, in the verification phase with 39 subjects, SNAFIA discriminates AD patients from healthy controls with 90% sensitivity and 100% specificity in under an hour. Utilizing tear fluid as a liquid biopsy, SNAFIA could potentially aid in long-term care planning, improve clinical trial efficiency, and accelerate therapeutic development for AD.

### Keywords
Tear fluid, Immunoassay, Alzheimer’s disease, Polymeric nanoprobes, Magnetic nanoparticles

### Affiliations
Yonsei University College of Medicine
SeRLab (Severance Eye Research Laboratory), Department of Ophthalmology, Yonsei University College of Medicine,  Yongin Severance Hospital

### Submitter
Chae Eun Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Woo Ji
SeRLab (Severance Eye Research Laboratory), Department of Ophthalmology, Yonsei University College of Medicine,  Yongin Severance Hospital


