### Accession
PXD014131

### Title
Human liver homogenate, liver microsomes, low-speed centrifugation pellet  and hepatocytes LC-MS/MS from 15 matched donors

### Description
LC-MS/MS-based label-free proteomics of human liver homogenate, human liver microsomes, and human hepatocytes from 15 matched donors used to compare and understand differences in two major in vitro systems used for drug metabolism studies

### Sample Protocol
Human hepatocytes were isolated form human liver of 15 donors using a two-step collagenase process. Human liver homogenate was obtained using a dounce homogenizer, and liver microsomes were isolated from the homogenate with a two step differential centrifugation. Low-speed pellet was obtained after 10 min 7 400 xg and microsomes were obtained after 60 min 104 000 xg centrifugation. Proteins were extracted and digested using the MED-FASP. MSMS was performed with a QExactive HF.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from intensities using MaxQuant, and protein concentrations were calculated using the Total Protein Approach

### Publication Abstract
Human liver microsomes (HLM) and human hepatocytes (HH) are important <i>in vitro</i> systems for studies of intrinsic drug clearance (CL<sub>int</sub>) in the liver. However, the CL<sub>int</sub> values are often in disagreement for these two systems. Here, we investigated these differences in a side-by-side comparison of drug metabolism in HLM and HH prepared from 15 matched donors. Protein expression and intracellular unbound drug concentration (Kp<sub>uu</sub>) effects on the CL<sub>int</sub> were investigated for five prototypical probe substrates (bupropion-CYP2B6, diclofenac-CYP2C9, omeprazole-CYP2C19, bufuralol-CYP2D6, and midazolam-CYP3A4). The samples were donor-matched to compensate for inter-individual variability but still showed systematic differences in CL<sub>int</sub>. Global proteomics analysis outlined differences in HLM from HH and homogenates of human liver (HL), indicating variable enrichment of ER-localized cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes in the HLM preparation. This suggests that the HLM may not equally and accurately capture metabolic capacity for all CYPs. Scaling CL<sub>int</sub> with CYP amounts and Kp<sub>uu</sub> could only partly explain the discordance in absolute values of CL<sub>int</sub> for the five substrates. Nevertheless, scaling with CYP amounts improved the agreement in rank order for the majority of the substrates. Other factors, such as contribution of additional enzymes and variability in the proportions of active and inactive CYP enzymes in HLM and HH, may have to be considered to avoid the use of empirical scaling factors for prediction of drug metabolism.

### Keywords
Human, Hepatocytes, Liver, Lc-ms/ms, Low-speed centrifugation pellet, Liver microsomes

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Christine Wegler

### Lab Head
Dr Per Artursson
Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University


