### Accession
PXD011869

### Title
Quantitative proteomic SILAC analysis of enteroids deleted for Hdac1 or Hdac2

### Description
We have exploited organoid SILAC approaches that we have previously developed (A SILAC-Based Method for Quantitative Proteomic Analysis of Intestinal Organoids.- Gonneaud A, Jones C, Turgeon N, Lévesque D, Asselin C, Boudreau F, Boisvert FM. -Sci Rep. 2016 Nov 30;6:38195. doi: 10.1038/srep38195) to investigate proteomic changes after deletion of epigenetic eraser genes Hdac1 and Hdac2 in enteroids. Both HDAC1 and HDAC2 are epigenetic erasers that drive specific and redundant gene expression patterns, in part by removing acetyl groups on histones. Deletion of these Hdac in intestinal epithelial cell (IEC) in vivo alters intestinal homeostasis, dependent on the Hdac deleted and the level of expression of both. To determine the intrinsic specific IEC function of HDAC1 and HDAC2, we have performed transcriptomic and quantitative proteomic approaches on enteroids deficient in Hdac1 or Hdac2. We have defined changes in both mRNA and protein expression patterns affecting IEC differentiation. We have identified IEC Hdac1- and Hdac2-dependent common as well as specific pathways and biological processes. These findings uncover unrecognized similarities and differences between Hdac1 and Hdac2 in IEC.

### Sample Protocol
Organoid culture. For each culture, jejunal crypts from one wild-type, Hdac1 or Hdac2 mutant mouse were isolated by EDTA fractionation and cultured according to previous publications. Briefly, for each culture, crypts were isolated from one mouse jejunum with EDTA. The jejunum was opened longitudinally and rinsed in a Petri dish with cold PBS 1X. The intestine was then cut into pieces of 5 mm in length and fragments washed by stirring in a 50 mL Falcon tube containing PBS 1X. Intestinal fragments were transferred in a 50 mL Falcon tube containing 20 mL of 30 mM EDTA and incubated for 5 min on ice with gentle stirring. Fresh EDTA was substituted and further incubation was done for 20 min on ice. EDTA was replaced with 40 mL of PBS 1X. The Falcon tube was shaken vigorously for 5-8 min or until a good amount of dissociated crypts was visualized in the solution, as observed under a microscope. The solution was filtered using a 70 µm cell strainer with crypts going through as opposed to residual villi retained by the filter. Crypts were then centrifuged at 150 x g for 5 min. The cell pellet was washed twice with 25 mL of Advanced DMEM/F-12 Media. A second centrifugation was performed at 150 x g for 5 min. The pellet was then resuspended in 1 mL of Matrigel (BD Corning) and plated in a 48-well plate (Corning Costar) (20 µL/well). Organoids were grown in SILAC Advanced DMEM/F-12 Flex Media (ThermoFisher) supplemented with n-acetylcystein (Sigma), 50 ng/mL EGF (Life Technologies), Noggin (10% final), and R-Spondin 1 (10% final) (Ad-DF+++). Wild-type, Hdac1- or Hdac2-deleted enteroids were grown for 6 passages in SILAC ENR medium supplemented with arginine and lysine, either the normal light isotopes of carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen (12C14N) (light - L), the medium L-arginine-13C614N4 and L-lysine-2H4 isotopes (medium - M) or the heavy L-arginine- 13C6-15N4 and L-lysine-13C6-15N2 isotopes (heavy -H). In-Solution digestion. Frozen organoid samples were resuspended in a fresh 10 mM HEPES (pH 8), 8M urea solution, and proteins were reduced in 3.24 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated in 13.5 mM iodoacetamide. The final concentration of urea was lowered to 2 M with the addition of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3). After BCA dosage, 15 µg of Light, Medium and Heavy condition samples were pooled and digested by trypsin prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Gel Electrophoresis and In-Gel Digestion. For each time point, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide prior to boiling in loading buffer, then separated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE (4–12% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel, Invitrogen) and visualized by colloidal Coomassie staining (SimplyBlue Safestain, Invitrogen). The entire protein gel lanes were excised and cut into 4 slices each. Every gel slice was subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (20). The resulting tryptic peptides were extracted by 1% formic acid, then 100% acetonitrile, lyophilized in a speedvac, and resuspended in 1% formic acid. Mass spectrometry analysis. Trypsin digested peptides were separated using an Ultimate U3000 (Dionex Corporation) nanoflow LC-system. Ten microliters of sample (a total of 2 μg peptides) were loaded with a constant flow of 4 μl/min onto a PepMap C18 trap column (0.3 mm id × 5 mm, Dionex Corporation). Peptides were then eluted onto a PepMap C18 nano column (75 μm × 50 cm, Dionex Corporation) with a linear gradient of 5–35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over 240 min with a constant flow of 200 nl/min. The performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system was coupled to an OrbiTrap Q Exactive, via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 1.5 kV and the temperature of the column was set to 40°C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350–1800) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35% with a resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 60 s and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. The lock mass option was enabled and data were acquired using the XCalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and SILAC quantitation was performed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 using the International Protein Index (IPI) mouse protein database version 3.68 containing 89,422 proteins, to which 175 commonly observed contaminants and all the reversed sequences had been added. The initial mass tolerance was set to 7 p.p.m. and MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. Enzyme was set to Trypsin/P with 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification, whereas N-acetyl protein and oxidation of methionine were searched as variable modifications. Identification was set to a false discovery rate of 5%. To achieve reliable identifications, all proteins were accepted based on the criteria that the number of forward hits in the database was at least 100-fold higher than the number of reverse database hits, thus resulting in a false discovery rate of less than 5%. A minimum of 2 peptides were quantified for each protein, and quantification performed only in the presence of 3 ratio counts.

### Publication Abstract
Both HDAC1 and HDAC2 are class I deacetylases acting as erasers of lysine-acetyl marks on histones and non-histone proteins. Several histone deacetylase inhibitors, either endogenous to the cell, such as the ketogenic &#x3b2;-hydroxybutyrate metabolite, or exogenous, such as butyrate, a microbial-derived metabolite, regulate HDAC activity. Different combinations of intestinal epithelial cell (IEC)-specific Hdac1 and/or Hdac2 deletion differentially alter mucosal homeostasis in mice. Thus, HDAC1 and HDAC2 could act as sensors and transmitters of environmental signals to the mucosa. In this study, enteroid culture models deleted for Hdac1 or Hdac2 were established to determine IEC-specific function as assessed by global transcriptomic and proteomic approaches. Results show that Hdac1 or Hdac2 deficiency altered differentiation of Paneth and goblet secretory cells, which sustain physical and chemical protection barriers, and increased intermediate secretory cell precursor numbers. Furthermore, IEC Hdac1- and Hdac2-dependent common and specific biological processes were identified, including oxidation-reduction, inflammatory responses, and lipid-related metabolic processes, as well as canonical pathways and upstream regulators related to environment-dependent signaling through steroid receptor pathways, among others. These findings uncover unrecognized regulatory similarities and differences between Hdac1 and Hdac2 in IEC, and demonstrate how HDAC1 and HDAC2 may complement each other to regulate the intrinsic IEC phenotype.

### Keywords
Hdac2, Intestin, Hdac1, Enteroid, Silac

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Alexis Gonneaud

### Lab Head
Dr Claude Asselin
Université de Sherbrooke


