### Accession
PXD037233

### Title
Engineered live bacteria suppress Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection in mouse and dissolve biofilm in endotracheal tubes from patients

### Description
Engineered live bacteria could provide a new modality for treating lung infections , a major cause of mortality worldwide. Here, we engineered a genome-reduced human lung bacterium, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, to treat ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), a disease with high hospital mortality when associated with Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms. After validating the biosafety of an attenuated M. pneumoniae chassis in mice, we introduced four transgenes in the chromosome by transposition, to implement bactericidal and biofilm degradation activities. We show that this engineered strain has high efficacy against an acute P. aeruginosa lung infection in a mouse model. In addition, we demonstrate that the engineered strain can dissolve biofilms formed in endotracheal tubes of VAP patients and can be combined with antibiotics targeting the peptidoglycan layer to increase efficacy against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. We expect that our

### Sample Protocol
For the proteome samples of different mutant strains, M. pneumoniae strains were grown to the exponential phase of growth. After a medium sample of 2 ml was removed, cells were washed three times with PBS and collected in 1 ml PBS by scraping. Cell samples were centrifuged at 14000 ×g for 15 min, and the pellet was resuspended in 50 µl of 6 M urea (in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate). The medium samples were centrifuged at 14000 ×g and then passed over a 0.1 μm filter. The 800 μl sample was concentrated to 50 μl using 3K MWCO columns, and 75 μl urea in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to a final concentration 6 M urea. After 15 min of sonication, all samples were quantified by BCA and then processed for MS. Samples were analysed by tandem mass spectrometry combined with liquid chromatography (LC–MS/MS). Briefly, in solution digestion samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (30 nmols, 1 h, 37°C) and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (60 nmol, 30 min, 25 ºC). The resulting protein extract was first diluted 1/3 with 200 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with 1 µg LysC (Wako, cat # 129-02541) overnight at 37ºC and then diluted 1/2 and digested with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega, cat # V5113) for eight hours at 37˚C. After digestion, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded onto the 2-cm Nano Trap column with an inner diameter of 100 μm packed with C18 particles of 5 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd. Japan). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 120 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.1 kV and source temperature at 300°C. Ultramark 1621 for the was used for external calibration of the FT mass analyzer prior the analyses, and an internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent adquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan, the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation. Fragment ion spectra were produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) at normalized collision energy of 35% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 1E4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, an activation time of 10 ms and a maximum injection time of 100 ms were used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2. Digested bovine serum albumin (New england biolabs cat # P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument and QCloud has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science). The data were searches against a Mycoplasma pneumoniae database plus list of common contaminants a (87070 entries) and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%.  Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.0) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). The obtained values were used to calculate protein top 3 area with the unique peptide for protein ungrouped

### Publication Abstract
Engineered live bacteria could provide a new modality for treating lung infections, a major cause of mortality worldwide. In the present study, we engineered a genome-reduced human lung bacterium, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, to treat ventilator-associated pneumonia, a disease with high hospital mortality when associated with Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms. After validating the biosafety of an attenuated M. pneumoniae chassis in mice, we introduced four transgenes into the chromosome by transposition to implement bactericidal and biofilm degradation activities. We show that this engineered strain has high efficacy against an acute P. aeruginosa lung infection in a mouse model. In addition, we demonstrated that the engineered strain could dissolve biofilms formed in endotracheal tubes of patients with ventilator-associated pneumonia and be combined with antibiotics targeting the peptidoglycan layer to increase efficacy against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. We expect our M. pneumoniae-engineered strain to be able to treat biofilm-associated infections in the respiratory tract.

### Keywords
Engineered live bacteria; pseudomonas aeruginosa; lung infection; mouse; biofilm; endotracheal tubes

### Affiliations
Pulmobiotics ltd
Pulmobiotics, LTD

### Submitter
Rocco Mazzolini

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Lluch-Senar
Pulmobiotics, LTD


