### Accession
PXD009278

### Title
Development of MS-based methods for identification and quantification of proteins altered during early pregnancy in dogs

### Description
Unlike the situation in humans, no specific biomarker has been related to early pregnancy in dogs. Such a biomarker would be beneficial for animal welfare reasons, e.g. in cases when the bitch has been mismated, and would also be of value for the breeder, to enable better planning for an expected litter. In the present study, a shotgun proteomic analysis based on nano-liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution MS was performed to identify differentially expressed proteins during canine pregnancy, and thereafter, a targeted PRM method was developed and applied to absolutely quantify the concentrations of a selection of them.

### Sample Protocol
For the shotgun proteomic analysis, the total protein concentration in each sample was determined using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay Dye Reagent Concentrate (Bio-Rad™ Laboratories, München, Germany). The samples were diluted to a concentration of 1 µg/µL in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 8M urea, and 20 µL were taken out for digestion. One µL of 45 mM DTT was added to each aliquot and then the aliquots were incubated for 15 minutes in 50 ºC. Afterwards, one µL of 100 mM IAA was added to each aliquot and the samples were incubated in darkness for 15 minutes at room temperature. Each sample was diluted 4 times in 50 mM NH4HCO3, and 15 µL of 0.1 µg/µL trypsin was added and incubated at 37 ºC overnight. The enzymatic digestion was quenched by addition of 30 µL 0.5% TFA in 5% ACN to each aliquot. For the PRM proteomics analysis, the same sample preparation procedure was followed as for the shotgun analyses, but heavy labeled synthetic peptides were spiked into the samples before the addition of DTT.

### Data Protocol
Data obtained from the shotgun analysis were processed using MaxQuant with Andromeda search engine against a FASTA database containing proteins from Canis familiaris extracted from the Uniprot database (2015). A decoy search database, including common contaminants and a reverse database, was used to estimate the identification false discovery rate (FDR). The first search was performed setting the precursor mass tolerance to 20 ppm, whereas in the second search it was lowered to 4.5 ppm, choosing a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da for the fragments. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme, allowing 2 maximum missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as static modification while oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminal were set as variable modification. For protein quantification, label free quantification (LFQ) intensities were used. Levene’s test was applied indicating unequal variance of some variables, and a two-tailed heteroscedastic Student's t-test was performed to compare the LFQ intensities in pregnant and control bitches. Statistical comparisons of LFQ intensities in the same dogs, sampled at day 15 vs day 1, respectively, were performed applying paired Student’s t-test. In both cases, p-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Based on the shotgun results, some proteins were selected for their quantification in control and pregnant bitches at days 1, 8 15, 22 and 29. The selection of the peptides used in the PRM method was performed after uploading the processed files obtained from MaxQuant analysis into Skyline software, to create a spectral library with the peptides used for protein identification in the shotgun analyses. Among all the peptides, only those without missed cleavages and with unique sequence for a specific protein were kept. Other criterions such as the peptide length (between 5 and 25 amino acids) or the detectability by LC-MS (based on the number of samples detected) were applied. In addition, both ends of the peptides should match tryptic cleavage sites and, when possible, frequently modified amino acids (Met oxidation, deamidation, alkylation, phosphorylation or glycosylation sites), and two enzymatic sites sequential to each other were avoided. In addition, when the peptides contain more than one charge, the most abundant charge (in terms of AUC) was used. Finally, the acquired MS/MS-fragments were evaluated in Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Increased knowledge on serum protein profiles during early pregnancy in dogs would be valuable for several reasons, including animal welfare. Inflammatory changes during this period have been described. Today, mass spectrometry (MS) is a well-established technique to perform unbiased qualitative and quantitative studies of proteins in body fluids regardless of species. In the present study, a shotgun proteomic analysis based on nano-liquid chromatography-MS was performed to identify proteins of altered abundance during canine pregnancy, and, thereafter, a targeted parallel reaction monitoring (PRM)-method was developed and applied to absolutely quantify the concentrations of a selection of these proteins. Among the 32 proteins found altered between pregnant and non-pregnant dogs in the initial analysis, 12 were selected based on their changes in concentration and known biological importance, and these were analyzed using the PRM method. The PRM method showed good linearity, repeatability and sensitivity, and confirmed the higher concentration of Fibrinogen A, protein S alpha and C-reactive protein at early time points in pregnant bitches. In conclusion, the combination of both methods allowed the identification of several altered proteins, and the quantification and description of the concentration patterns for a selection of them during the early stage of dog pregnancy. SIGNIFICANCE: MS is a powerful technique that allows the investigation of protein variations in samples from different origin, such as serum from dogs. The application of a shotgun proteomic analysis as a screening method has revealed the alteration of several proteins after fifteen days of pregnancy in dogs. The complementary development of a PRM MS-based method for several of these proteins has enabled the absolute quantification of their concentrations at five different time points during early pregnancy. With the MS technique, a combination of proteins can be studied with lower limits of detection than with immunoassays. Care should be taken not to interpret the observed changes in pregnant dogs as signs of disease.

### Keywords
Dog proteomics, Prm, Shotgun proteomics, Early pregnancy diagnosis

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.
Department of Chemistry-BMC, Analytical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden

### Submitter
Alberto Valdés

### Lab Head
Dr Bodil Ström Holst
Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.


