### Accession
PXD016476

### Title
A sensitive S-trap-based approach to the analysis of T-cell raft proteome

### Description
The development of sensitive technologies for T cell-raft proteomics is highly challenging. We explored an innovative strategy, based on suspension trapping (S-trap) sample preparation. Mouse splenocytes were subjected to negative immunoselection for T cell preparation. Rafts were isolated by a detergent-free method and Optiprep gradient ultracentrifugation. Flotillin-1-, LAT- and cholesterol-rich microdomains were subjected to proteomic analysis through an optimized protocol based on S-Trap and high pH fractionation, followed by nano-LC-MS/MS. We identified 2680 proteins in the raft-rich fraction and established a database of 894 bona fide T cell-raft proteins. We performed a differential analysis on the raft-rich fraction from non-stimulated vs. anti-CD3/CD28 TCR-stimulated T cells. Our results revealed 42 proteins present in one condition and absent in the other, such as Akt2 and Nck1. For the first time a proteomic analysis is performed on rafts from ex-vivo T cells obtained from individual mice, before and after TCR activation. Our results show an increased specificity and sensitivity of the proposed method.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture HEK 293 cells (American Type Culture Collection), were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing 10% fetal calf serum. Mouse podocytes were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% fetal calf serum, penicillin (100 U/ml), streptomycin (100 mg/ml), and interferon-g (IFN-g, 50 U/ml) at 33°C.   Mouse T-cell isolation and synchronization Balb/C mice were bred following the standards established by the local Ethical Committee. After sacrifice, spleens were harvested and T cells were isolated by negative immunoselection using the Pan T Cell isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, Germany). Before stimulation, T-cells were synchronized at the G1 phase of cell cycle by serum starvation in 2% fetal calf serum (FCS) for 6 hours. Synchronized T-cells were then activated for 15min with soluble 1 µg/ml anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 (eBiosciences, San Diego, CA, USA) in RPMI complete medium supplemented with 10% FCS.  Lipid raft preparation using OptiprepTM and sucrose gradients Lipid raft-like microdomains were obtained by a detergent-free method based on the one described by McDonald and Pike (Macdonald and Pike, 2005). Between 1 and 5 million cells per sample were washed twice in cold PBS, resuspended in 800μl of MBS/Na2CO3 buffer (25mM MES, 150mM NaCl, 250mM Na2CO3, pH6; supplemented with 1mM PMSF and phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktails), lysed and mixed with two volumes of either 60% OptiPrepTM (Axis Shield) or 60% sucrose for a final volume of 2ml of either 40% OptiPrepTM or 40% sucrose. A three-step discontinuous density gradient was made by sequentially placing 2ml of either 30% OptiPrepTM or 30% sucrose in MBS/Na2CO3 buffer, and 1ml of 5% OptiPrepTM or 5% sucrose sequencially on top of the homogenate. The mixture was spun in a TL-100 rotor at 268,000×g for 2h in an Optima MAX-XP ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter). After spinning, one fraction of 600µl followed by 5 fractions of 900µl were collected from top to bottom. Fraction 2 containing rafts was subjected to subsequent analysis. To analyze the distribution of flotillin-1 and actin, fractions were precipitated by addition of 10% trichloroacetic acid (final concentration), incubated overnight at -20°C and washed three times in cold ethanol. The resulting dry protein pellets were solubilized in equal volumes of 1× Laemmli buffer and analyzed by western blot. Filter aided sample preparation (FASP)  FASP was performed on OptiPrepTM raft fractions according to (Lipecka et al., 2016).  Suspension trapping (S-Trap) S-TrapTM micro spin column digestion was performed on OptiPrepTM raft fractions according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, proteins were precipitated overnight using a 10% TCA final concentration and washed four times with cold ethanol. Samples were digested with 2µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 1h. Peptides were eluted with 40µL of 50mM TEAB followed by 40µL of 0.2% aqueous formic acid and by 35µL 50% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid. Peptides were finally vacuum dried. High pH Fractionation For library building, samples were resuspended for high pH fractionation in 50µL of 0.1% TFA. Tips were homemade with one layer of empore disk C8 and 1mg of C18 (C18-AQ, Maisch). After washing and conditioning of C18, peptides were bound by centrifugation to C18 in acidic conditions. Peptides were sequentially eluted in 8 fractions at basic pH (5%, 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 50% ACN in triethylamine 0.1%). Eluted peptides were concatenated pairwise to obtain 4 final fractions (F1F5, F2F6, F3F7, F4F8). Samples were then vacuum dried. NanoLC-MS/MS protein identification and quantification Samples were resuspended in 35 µL of 1% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water. For each run, 5 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific, Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatography column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient: 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (5 minutes). At 125 minutes, the gradient returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using a top-10 acquisition method. Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. Each sample was analyzed in three technical triplicates by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing and bioinformatic analysis MS data processing and bioinformatics were done as previously described with some modifications (Tyanova et al., 2016). Briefly, raw MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 and searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human UniProt database (release May 2019, 20,199 entries). To search for parent mass and fragment ions, we set the mass deviation at 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Match between runs was allowed. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously (Tyanova et al., 2016).  Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps were performed with Perseus software (version 1.5.5.3) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org. GO annotation was performed on Perseus software. Proteins for GO analysis were selected if annotated with the terms membrane, mitochondrion and nucleus in the Gene Ontology Slim Cellular Component database. RaftProt comparison was performed with the mouse database freely available at raftprot.org. For the t-cell rafts analysis in resting vs activating conditions, we selected proteins based on the following criteria : proteins were detected in all 4 samples in one condition and completely absent in the other condition. Proteins only identified by site, matching the reverse database and the potential contaminant database were filtered out. Selected proteins were identified with at least 2 peptides and at least 5 MS/MS to ensure robust identification of the proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The analysis of T cell lipid raft proteome is challenging due to the highly dynamic nature of rafts and the hydrophobic character of raft-resident proteins. We explored an innovative strategy for bottom-up lipid raftomics based on suspension-trapping (S-Trap) sample preparation. Mouse T cells were prepared from splenocytes by negative immunoselection, and rafts were isolated by a detergent-free method and OptiPrep gradient ultracentrifugation. Microdomains enriched in flotillin-1, LAT, and cholesterol were subjected to proteomic analysis through an optimized protocol based on S-Trap and high pH fractionation, followed by nano-LC-MS/MS. Using this method, we identified 2,680 proteins in the raft-rich fraction and established a database of 894 T cell raft proteins. We then performed a differential analysis on the raft-rich fraction from nonstimulated versus anti-CD3/CD28 T cell receptor (TCR)-stimulated T cells. Our results revealed 42 proteins present in one condition and absent in the other. For the first time, we performed a proteomic analysis on rafts from ex vivo T cells obtained from individual mice, before and after TCR activation. This work demonstrates that the proposed method utilizing an S-Trap-based approach for sample preparation increases the specificity and sensitivity of lipid raftomics.

### Keywords
Raftomics, S-trap, T cell, Optiprep, Detergent-free, Fasp

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform Necker, PPN-3P5, Structure Fédérative de Recherche SFR Necker, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France
Proteomic Platform Necker, PPN-3P5, Structure Fédérative de Recherche SFR Necker US24, 75015, Paris, France

### Submitter
Cerina Chhuon

### Lab Head
Dr Ida Chiara Guerrera
Proteomic Platform Necker, PPN-3P5, Structure Fédérative de Recherche SFR Necker US24, 75015, Paris, France


