### Accession
PXD022474

### Title
RNA landscape of the emerging cancer bug Fusobacterium nucleatum

### Description
Analysis of the region of interest for total protein samples or the outer membrane fraction of Fusobacterium nucleatum subsp. nucleatum ATCC 23726. The bacteria carried either an empty vector control, or a plasmid for the overexpression of the FoxI sRNA or its mutant version FoxI-3C.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were alkylated, acetone precipitated and digested with trypsin. Peptides were desalted and MS performed using an Orbitrap Fusion/Velos Pro equipped with a PicoView Ion Source.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.7.4. Searches were performed against an internal database including all CDS of Fusobacterium nucleatum subsp. nucleatum ATCC 23726 and ATCC 25586. 3 miscleavages were allowed and false discovery rate was set to 1% on protein and peptide level. Proteins with less than 2 razor/unique peptides were not considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fusobacterium

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), D-97080 Würzburg, Germany Institute of Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany

### Submitter
Falk Ponath

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg Vogel
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), D-97080 Würzburg, Germany Institute of Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany


