### Accession
PXD011790

### Title
Woundhealing proteomic profile

### Description
Glycoproteomics was performed on plasma collected from mice 3 days after biopsy punch wound healing and 3 days after myocardial infarction (MI) wound healing.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma glycopeptides were isolated using a label-free method and identified as described previously.[9-12] Plasma proteins were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin-digested into peptides for glycoproteomic analysis.[10-12] The trypsinized peptide mixture was oxidized and conjugated to a solid support using hydrazide chemistry, and glycopeptides that were N-linked to the column were released using PNGase F treatment. The released peptides were cleaned using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) coupled with a 15 cm × 75 μm C18 column (5 μm particles with 100 Å pore size). Target values in MS were 1e6 ions at a resolution setting of 70,000 and in MS2 1e5 ions at a resolution setting of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher) against the human RefSeq database (November 3, 2013 version) containing 53,918 sequences. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 to eliminate low-probability protein identifications. Peptides were quantified using spectral counting and total spectral counts of each sample were used for normalization. Missing values were replaced with a small value (0.01) in order to calculate the ratio and p-value. Samples were run in duplicate and results combined for analysis. A total of 88 proteins were identified, of which 41% (36 proteins) were found in both runs.

### Publication Abstract
Both skin wound healing and the cardiac response to myocardial infarction (MI) progress through similar pathways involving inflammation, resolution, tissue repair, and scar formation. Due to the similarities, we hypothesized that the healing response to skin wounding would predict future response to MI. Mice were given a 3-mm skin wound using a disposable biopsy punch and the skin wound was imaged daily until closure. The same set of animals was given MI by permanent coronary artery ligation 28 days later and followed for 7 days. Cardiac physiology was measured by echocardiography at baseline and MI <i>days 3</i> and <i>7</i>. Animals that survived until <i>day 7</i> were grouped as survivors, and animals that died from MI were grouped as nonsurvivors. Survivors had faster skin wound healing than nonsurvivors. Faster skin wound healing predicted MI survival better than commonly used cardiac functional variables (e.g., infarct size, fractional shortening, and end diastolic dimension). <i>N</i>-glycoproteome profiling of MI <i>day 3</i> plasma revealed &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub>-macroglobulin and ELL-associated factor 1 as strong predictors of future MI death and progression to heart failure. A second cohort of MI mice validated these findings. To investigate the clinical relevance of &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub>-macroglobulin, we mapped the plasma glycoproteome in patients with MI 48 h after admission and in healthy controls. In patients, &#x3b1;<sub>2</sub>-macroglobulin was increased 48 h after MI. Apolipoprotein D, another plasma glycoprotein, detrimentally regulated both skin and cardiac wound healing in male but not female mice by promoting inflammation. Our results reveal that the skin is a mirror to the heart and common pathways link wound healing across organs.<b>NEW &amp; NOTEWORTHY</b> Faster skin wound healers had more efficient cardiac healing after myocardial infarction (MI). Two plasma proteins at <i>D3</i> MI, EAF1 and A2M, predicted MI death in 66% of cases. ApoD regulated both skin and cardiac wound healing in male mice by promoting inflammation. The skin was a mirror to the heart and common pathways linked wound healing across organs.

### Keywords
Heart, Woundhealing, Mi

### Affiliations
University of Mississippi Medical Center Director, Mississippi Center for Heart Research Professor, Department of Physiology and Biophysics Research Health Scientist, Research Service G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Veterans Affairs Medical Center. 2500 North State Street, Room G351-04 Jackson, MS 39216-4505
University of Mississippi Medical Center

### Submitter
Elizabeth Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Merry Lindsey
University of Mississippi Medical Center Director, Mississippi Center for Heart Research Professor, Department of Physiology and Biophysics Research Health Scientist, Research Service G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Veterans Affairs Medical Center. 2500 North State Street, Room G351-04 Jackson, MS 39216-4505


