### Accession
PXD016930

### Title
Towards reducing the immunogenic potential of wheat flour: silencing of alpha gliadin genes in a U.S. wheat cultivar

### Description
The alpha gliadins are a complex group of proteins with very similar sequences that comprise about 15-20% of the total flour protein and contribute to the functional properties of wheat flour dough.  Some alpha gliadins also contain immunodominant epitopes relevant to celiac disease, a chronic autoimmune disease that affects nearly 1.4% of the worldwide population. In an attempt to reduce the immunogenic potential of wheat flour in the U.S. spring wheat cultivar Butte 86, RNA interference was used to silence a subset of alpha gliadin genes encoding proteins containing celiac disease epitopes. Two of the resulting transgenic lines were analyzed in detail by quantitative two-dimensional gel electrophoresis combined with tandem mass spectrometry. Although only some genes were targeted by the RNA interference construct, all alpha gliadins were effectively silenced in the transgenic plants. Some off-target silencing of high molecular weight glutenin subunits also was detected in both transgenic lines even though there was no homology with the target sequence. Reactivities of IgG and IgA serum antibodies from a cohort of patients with confirmed cases of celiac disease were decreased in flour from the two transgenic lines relative to the non-transgenic line. However, functional properties of the flour were also altered in the transgenic lines as evidenced by decreases in both mixing times and SDS sedimentation values. Although it may be possible to reduce the immunogenic potential of the flour and retain the viscoelastic properties essential for the utilization of wheat by eliminating only the most immunogenic alpha gliadins, the data suggest that it will be very difficult to selectively silence specific genes within families as complex as the wheat alpha gliadins.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins were extracted from flour from non-transgenic and transgenic wheat lines, quantified using a modified Lowry assay and analyzed on triplicate 2-D gels as described in detail in Dupont et al. (Proteome Science 9,10. 2011). Selected protein spots from the alpha gliadin region of 2-D gels of non-transgenic and transgenic lines were excised from triplicate gels, placed in 96-well plates and digested with either chymotrypsin, thermolysin or trypsin using a DigestPro. The resulting samples were then analyzed using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) as described in Vensel et al., (Proteome Science 12, 8. 2014).

### Data Protocol
Two search engines, Mascot (www.matrixscience.com) and XTandem! (https://www.thegpm.org/TANDEM/), were used to interrogate a database of 125,400 protein sequences. The database included Triticeae sequences downloaded from NCBI on 06-18-2018 plus Chinese Spring sequences reported by Huo et al. (Scientific Reports 8, 5181. 2018; Frontiers in Plant Science 9,673. 2018); Butte 86 sequences from Dupont et al. (Proteome Science 9,10. 2011).) and Altenbach et al. (BMC Research Notes 4, 242. 2011); Xioayan 81 sequences from Wang et al. (Scientific Reports 7, 44609. 2017); and common mass spectrometry contaminant sequences contained in the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta). Data from the two searches and three enzymes were compiled and further validated using Scaffold version 4.7.5 (http://www.proteomesoftware.com/) using a protein threshold of 99%, peptide threshold of  95% and 20 ppm mass error, and a minimum of 4 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The alpha gliadins are a group of more than 20 proteins with very similar sequences that comprise about 15%-20% of the total flour protein and contribute to the functional properties of wheat flour dough. Some alpha gliadins also contain immunodominant epitopes that trigger celiac disease, a chronic autoimmune disease that affects approximately 1% of the worldwide population. In an attempt to reduce the immunogenic potential of wheat flour from the U.S. spring wheat cultivar Butte 86, RNA interference was used to silence a subset of alpha gliadin genes encoding proteins containing celiac disease epitopes. Two of the resulting transgenic lines were analyzed in detail by quantitative two-dimensional gel electrophoresis combined with tandem mass spectrometry. Although the RNA interference construct was designed to target only some alpha gliadin genes, all alpha gliadins were effectively silenced in the transgenic plants. In addition, some off-target silencing of high molecular weight glutenin subunits was detected in both transgenic lines. Compensatory effects were not observed within other gluten protein classes. Reactivities of IgG and IgA antibodies from a cohort of patients with celiac disease toward proteins from the transgenic lines were reduced significantly relative to the nontransgenic line. Both mixing properties and SDS sedimentation volumes suggested a decrease in dough strength in the transgenic lines when compared to the control. The data suggest that it will be difficult to selectively silence specific genes within families as complex as the wheat alpha gliadins. Nonetheless, it may be possible to reduce the immunogenic potential of the flour and still retain many of the functional properties essential for the utilization of wheat.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Immunogenic, Gliadin, Wheat, Triticum aestivum

### Affiliations
Western Regional Research Center, United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, Albany, CA, United States
Hamburg School of Food Science, Hamburg University

### Submitter
Annamaria Simon-Buss

### Lab Head
Dr dr Susan B. Altenbach
Western Regional Research Center, United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, Albany, CA, United States


