### Accession
PXD029028

### Title
Proteomic characterization of mesenchymal lung cells

### Description
Mesenchymal cells in human lung are heterogneous and can display a large variation in both functional properties and spatial localization. However it remain unclear to witch extent these observed cell population represent different cell types or just different cellular states. Furthermore, the lack of specific markers has hampered the progress within the field. In this study we aimed to investigate the proteome of mesenchymal cells derived from human lung as a starting point to learn more about mesenchymal subsets and identify novel markers.

### Sample Protocol
Mesenchymal cells were isolated from central airways and distal parenchymal of normal human lungs using two isolation protocols. Protocol 1 utilized a walk-out assay, in which cells were allowed to migrate out of small tissue pieced that had adhered to tissue culture plastic in DMEM with 10% FCS. In protocol 2, lung tissue was first enzymatically digested (collagenase, hyaluronidase and DNase) to generate single cell suspensions. Single cells were then plated at clonal density on tissue culture plastic in StemMACS MSC Expansion media and allowed to expand into colonies.  Cell lysates from cells in passage 4-5 were collected in a lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES (pH 8) containing 10 mM DTT and 4% SDS) using cell scrapers. Cell layers were heated at 95°C for 5 min and sonicated using a Bioruptor Plus for 10 min (cycles of 15 s on 15 s off) at high power. Protein lysates were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min. Tryptic digestion and desalting/clean-up was performed using Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample preparation (SP3) methodology with paramagnetic beads and 250 ng/uL trypsin (16 h incubation at 37°C).  To generate s spectral library for DIA analysis, four human cell types were cultured for analysis by DDA mass spectrometry. The cells used included a human neural epithelial-like stem cell line (Sai2, passage 33), a human fetal lung fibroblast cell line (HFL1, passage 18), primary human aortic smooth muscle cells  (HASMC, passage 11) and primary human lung microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC-L, passage 3). Samples for DDA were run on a gel and divided into 10 fractions.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a RP-HPLC (75µm x 25 cm) pre­column, followed by an EASY-spray PepMap C18 column (ID 75 pm x 25 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific). For data-independent acquisition (DIA), a 120-minute linear gradient was run from 5% to 35% ACN, followed by 5 minutes from 35% to 95% ACN and 10 minutes at 95% ACN, using solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1 % FA) and solvent B (100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a 300 nl/min flow rate. For DDA, a full MS scan at mass range 400–1600 m/z (resolution 70,000 at 200 m/z) was followed by MS/MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the top 15 most intense precursor ions fragmented by higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD). To trigger MS/MS scan of precursor ions a MS precursor intensity threshold was set to 1.7e4. The automatic gain control was 1e6 with an accumulation time of 100 ms for MS and 60 ms for MS/MS. For DIA, a full MS scan at mass range 400 to 1,200 m/z (resolution 70,000 at 200 m/z) was followed by 32 subsequent MS/MS full fragmentation scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) with an isolation window of 26 m/z and 1 m/z overlap between scans.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from DDA and DIA analysis were converted to mzML files using MSconvert. All data analysis and searches were processed through openBIS5. X!Tandem was used to search data against the human UniProt FASTA database (version November 2015) with reversed decoy sequences. Fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and proline hydroxylation were included in the searches. Mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions was set to 20 ppm and 50 ppm, respectively. The Generated files were subsequently analyzed using peptideProphet, iProphet and MAYU in the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, version 4.7). For quantification of DIA data a spectral library was created based on DDA data through workflows included in openBIS, applying spectraST to generate target assays, CLI to calculate 1% FDR for peptides and proteins and TRIC to perform feature alignment. Then, openSWATH was used to analyze DIA data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lung, Mesenchymal cell

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental Medical Science, Medical Faculty, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Måns Kadefors

### Lab Head
Dr Gunilla Westergren-Thorsson
Department of Experimental Medical Science, Medical Faculty, Lund University, Lund, Sweden


