### Accession
PXD030839

### Title
Data of chemical composition of the particles from OH-initiated oxidation of 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene

### Description
In this work, the chemical composition of the nascent particles from the oxidation reaction is measured on-line and the high mass O2-bridged bicyclic compounds in the particle phase are directly observed and determinedby using a home-made vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) photoionization aerosol mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
1,3,5-TMB (98%, Alfa Aesar) or 1,3,5-TMB-d12 (98 atom% D, Sigma Aldrich) was delivered into the Teflon bag via a heated injector port and zero air from a pure air generator (AADCO 737-series) was added into as bath gas. H2O2 (35%, Acros Organics) was injected into the Teflon bag as the precursor to produce the OH radical via the UV photolysis and then to initiate the reactions. The initial concentrations of 1,3,5-TMB and 1,3,5-TMB-d12 inside the Teflon bag are estimated at 800 ppb, and the experiments areperformed at room temperature.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra of the particle-phase products from OH oxidation reaction of 1,3,5-TMB were measured by using the VUV photoionization aerosol mass spectrometer.

### Publication Abstract
This paper presents the data of chemical composition of the particles from OH oxidation reaction of 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene (1,3,5-TMB). The particle-phase compositions are measured on-line by using a vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) photoionization aerosol mass spectrometer. The assignments of the major peaks of photoionization mass spectrum, as well as their molecular structures, are presented. The optimized structures of the reactants, intermediates and transition states involved in the reaction of the bicyclic peroxy radical with HO<sub>2</sub> are shown. The reaction routes of the OH-initiated oxidation of the deuterated 1,3,5-TMB sample are also calculated and displayed for comparison. The data presented here is related to the paper "Direct observation of the particle-phase bicyclic products from OH-initiated oxidation of 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene under NOx-free conditions" by Lin et&#xa0;al. (2022).

### Keywords
3, Particle-phase product; 1, 5-trimethylbenzene; secondary organic aerosol; molecular structures; vuv photoionization aerosol mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Atmospheric Physico-Chemistry, Anhui Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, HFIPS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 230031 Anhui, China
Laboratory of Atmospheric Physico-Chemistry, Anhui Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, HFIPS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 230031 Anhui

### Submitter
Xiaoxiao Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaofeng Tang
Laboratory of Atmospheric Physico-Chemistry, Anhui Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, HFIPS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 230031 Anhui, China


