### Accession
PXD002483

### Title
EV71 proteomics -  Analysis of EV71 infection progression using triple-SILAC-based proteomics approach

### Description
Enterovirus 71 (EV71), a member of Picornaviridae, causes severe neurological and systemic illness in children. To better understand the virus-host cell interactions, we performed a triple-SILAC-based quantitative proteomics study monitoring host cell proteome changes after EV71 infection. Based on the quantitative data for more than 4100 proteins, ~17% of the proteins were found as significantly changed (p<0.01) at either 8 or 20 hours post infection (h.p.i.). Five biological processes and seven protein classes showed significant differences. Functional screening of 9 regulated proteins discovered the regulatory role of CHCH2, a mitochondrial protein known as a transcriptional activator for cytochrome c oxidase (COX), in EV71 replication. Further studies showed that CHCH2 served as a negative regulator of innate immune responses.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in triple-SILAC media for at least 7 doublings to ensure maximum isotope incorporation efficiency. Then, RD cells were incubated with EV71 at an MOI of 1 for 8 h (“medium” labeled) or 20 h (“heavy” labeled) or mock treated (“light” labeled). After the various treatments, the cells were harvested and mixed at the ratio of 1:1:1 based on cell numbers. Proteins were extracted, reduced and alkylated and subsequently digested with trypsin. After peptide fractionation by SCX, LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600+ instrument.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the raw MS spectra generated by the TripleTOF 5600+ system was performed with Proteinpilot 4.5 software (AB SCIEX, USA) using the Paragon algorithm. The uniprot_2014_5 database was used, and the data analysis parameters were as follows: Sample type: SILAC; Cys Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF 5600; Special Factors: Urea denaturation; ID Focus: Biological modifications, Amino acid substitution; Search Effort: Thorough ID; Detected Protein Threshold [Unused ProtScore (Conf)]: 1.3 (95.0%). Protein ratio was calculated as the weighted average of the corresponding peptide ratios. A minimum of two quantitated peptides (confidence > 95%) was required for a protein to be considered as quantitated.

### Publication Abstract
Enterovirus 71 (EV71), a member of Picornaviridae, causes severe neurological and systemic illness in children. To better understand the virus-host cell interactions, we performed a triple-SILAC-based quantitative proteomics study monitoring host cell proteome changes after EV71 infection. Based on the quantitative data for more than 4100 proteins, &#x223c;17% of the proteins were found as significantly changed (p&lt;0.01) at either 8 or 20 hours post infection. Five biological processes and seven protein classes showed significant differences. Functional screening of nine regulated proteins discovered the regulatory role of CHCH2, a mitochondrial protein known as a transcriptional activator for cytochrome c oxidase, in EV71 replication. Further studies showed that CHCH2 served as a negative regulator of innate immune responses. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002483 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002483).

### Keywords
Enterovirus 71; tripletof 5600; triple silac; proteomics;

### Affiliations
Wuhan University
College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China

### Submitter
Haoyu Li

### Lab Head
Dr Lin Guo
College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China


