### Accession
PXD026506

### Title
Transforming growth factor receptor beta 3 (TGFBR3)-associated membranous nephropathy

### Description
We utilized mass spectrometry for protein discovery through enrichment of glomerular proteins by laser capture microdissection and through elution of immune complexes within MLN biopsies.

### Sample Protocol
Residual frozen kidney biopsy tissue was thawed and washed in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), followed by lysis with 300 µl Pierce IP lysis buffer (Thermo-Fisher scientific, catalog #87787) with addition of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Halt, Thermo-Fisher scientific, catalog #78429) and disaggregation by bead beating.  50 µl of PBS-washed Protein G Dynabeads (Thermo-Fisher scientific, catalog #10004D) were added to protein lysates and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature.  Beads were then washed three times in PBS prior to peptide digestion and preparation for mass spectrometry.  Kidney biopsy tissue from FFPE tissue was cut at a thickness of 10 µm onto Leica PET-membrane frame slides and stained with Mayer's hematoxylin. The glomeruli were microdissected into microcentrifuge tubes containing PBS using a Leica DM6000B microscope. At least 40 glomeruli were dissected per biopsy.  The microdissected glomeruli were lysed in 2% SDS and 0.1M DTT at 99°C for 1h and processed by filter assisted sample preparation (FASP)18.  The clarified lysate was transferred onto Vivacon 500 concentrators (MWCO of 30kDa; Sartorius: Goettingen, Germany, catalog #VN01H22). SDS was removed by repeat washes with 8M Urea in 0.1M Tris/Cl, pH 8.5, the samples then alkylated with 0.05M iodoacetamide. Iodoacetamide was removed by 3 washes with 8 M urea /0.1 M Tris/Cl, pH 8.5, followed by 3 washes with 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate.  Proteins were digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega catalog # V5111) at a 40:1 w/w ratio at 37°C for 16 hrs. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and desalted on C18-Stage tips (Thermo Scientific, catalog #87782).  Digested peptides were analyzed by NanoLC/MS/MS using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Integra-frit, New Objective, MA) containing 2.5 µm Waters XSelect CSH resin coupled to a 150 mm X 0.075 mm analytical column containing the same reverse phase resin as used in the trap. A nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters Corp, Milfrd, MA) was then used to generate a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio (Buffer A=0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; buffer B=0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). Peptides were eluted from the column with an integrated spray tip (picofrit, New Objective) and ionized by electrospray (2.0 kV) followed by MS/MS analysis using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD). Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed at 240K resolution (at 400 m/z) with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The obtained MS/MS data was searched against the most recent Uniprot human database containing both the Swiss Prot and the TREMBL entries using MaxQuant. Visualization of data was done using Scaffold v4.6.  The false discovery rate was set at 1% for the peptide-to-spectrum matches.   Normalized iBAQ values from MaxQuant were used for quantitation.  iBAQ distributions for each sample were median-adjusted to control for differences in loading.  iBAQ values equal to zero were removed from the data set.  For statistical hypothesis testing, a two-sample Welch's t-test was performed for each protein using normalized iBAQ values for the two groups.  If a protein was only detected in one group, a one-sample Welch's t-test was performed, using the smallest detected iBAQ value as the null hypothesis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pulldown, Lcms, Lcmd, Kidney

### Affiliations
Arkana Laboratories, 10810 Executive Center Drive, Little Rock, Arkansas 72211
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Aaron Storey

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Larsen
Arkana Laboratories, 10810 Executive Center Drive, Little Rock, Arkansas 72211


