### Accession
PXD031546

### Title
Whole proteome profiling of mouse cultured neurons transduced by N40K lentivirus

### Description
Analyzing and comparing proteome profiling N40K mouse cultured neurons will be beneficial to understand the contributing of RNA splicing dysfunction pathway to Alzheimer's Disease.

### Sample Protocol
The cultured neurons were lysed, digested and labeled with 18 different TMT tags. The TMT labeled peptides were equally mixed, desalted and fractionated into 80 fractions on a RP-HPLC column (4.6 mm x 250 mm) under basic pH condition. Each fraction was further separated on a reverse phase column (30 cm X 75 µm, 1.9 μm C18 resin) during a 2.5h gradient of 12-36% buffer B (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 3% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% ACN) and analyzed by Q exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) with one MS scan and up to 20 data-dependent high resolution MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files are processed using the JUMP searching engine against UniProt mouse database. Searches were performed using 6 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions due to JUMP’s auto mass correction function and 15ppm for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071453 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da). The assigned peptides are filtered by minimal peptide length, maximum mis-cleavages, mass-to-charge accuracy and matching scores. The peptides are then divided into groups according to peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein or phosphopeptide FDR to below 1%. Proteins or phosphopeptides were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Splicing, Neurons, Cell model, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
St jude Children's Research Hospital
St Jude Children's Research Hospital

### Submitter
Xian Han

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St jude Children's Research Hospital


