### Accession
PXD015455

### Title
Phosphoproteomics reveals novel modes of function and inter-relationships among PIKKs in response to genotoxic stress

### Description
The DNA damage response (DDR) is a complex signaling network that is robustly mobilized by double-strand breaks (DSBs) in the DNA. This network relies on extensive cascades of protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, which are initiated by three apical protein kinases that belong to the family of PI3-kinase-related protein kinases (PIKKs): ATM, ATR and DNA-PK. Loss of ATM leads to a prototypic genome instability syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). The relative shares of these PIKKs in the response to genotoxic stress and the functional relationships among them are central questions in the genome stability field. We conducted a comprehensive phosphoproteomic analysis in human wild-type and A-T cells treated with the DSB-inducing chemical, neocarzinostatin, and validated the results with the targeted proteomic technique selected reaction monitoring (SRM). We uncovered redundant as well as non-redundant roles of the PIKKs following genotoxic stress and obtained evidence of a DNA-PK-dependent attenuation of the ATM response. In A-T cells, partial compensation for ATM absence was provided by ATR and DNA-PK, with distinct roles and kinetics to each of them. Our results shed light on the intricate relationships between the three PIKKs in regulating the DDR.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Cells were collected at the indicated time points following NCS or HU treatment, washed twice in ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline and spun down for 5 min at 1,000g. Cell pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea solution containing 0.1 M ABC, 0.1% RapiGest, and cocktail 2 and 3 phosphatase inhibitors. Disulfide bonds were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at a final concentration of 10 mM at 37°C for 30 min. Free thiols were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The bicinchoninic acid protein assay was used to measure protein concentration. A volume corresponding to 1.1 mg total protein was subsequently diluted to a final concentration of 1 M urea and digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade modified trypsin at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 75:1. Peptides were desalted on a C18 Sep-Pak cartridge and dried under vacuum.  Phosphopeptides were isolated from digested lysates with titanium-di-oxide (TiO2) resin (GL Sciences) by a protocol modified from. The dried peptides were rigorously dissolved in a solution of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) and 6% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) solution, followed by incubation with the TiO2 resin in rotation for 1 hour at room temperature. The resin was washed twice with 80% ACN/6% TFA solution, twice with 80% ACN/0.1% TFA, and finally twice with 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with a 0.3 M NH4OH solution, and desalted using C18 ultramicrospin columns. Prior to sample injection, samples were re-suspended in a 2% ACN/0.1% FA buffer that contained the iRT retention time kit. LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system coupled to the Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an Acclaim PepMap 100 RSLC C18 column (150 x 0.075 mm, 2 Å particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1. Gradient elution was performed using mobile phases A (water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 98:2:0.15) and B (acetonitrile/water/formic acid, 98:2:0.15), with a gradient from 5 to 30% B in 180 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, with one full MS scan in the orbitrap analyzer (scan range 350-1,600 m/z, resolution 120,000) followed by 15 dependent MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap. Collision-induced dissociation was performed at 35% normalized collision energy, and singly charged precursors or precursors of unknown charge state were excluded for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.5) and the Andromeda search engine, with an FDR threshold of 0.01, against the complete human UniProt database. For in silico digestion, trypsin was used as the protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The minimal peptide length was set to eight amino acids. The peptide search included carbamidomethyl-cysteine as a fixed modification, and phosphorylation on serine/ threonine/ tyrosine, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 and 4.5 ppm for the first search and main search, respectively. A maximum of two gapped scans was allowed. The ‘match between runs’ feature was enabled.  Data-processing and peptide filtering  MS2 spectra of phosphopeptides do not always provide enough information to correctly localize the phosphate group. This poses an even greater problem in experiments with a large number of samples, which reduces the overlap of localized sites between samples. We therefore considered phosphopeptides with the same sequence and an identical number of phosphate groups and acetylations as a single entity, and in cases in which several different phosphate localizations were identified for this entity, we assigned to it the one with the highest probability. In cases in which the same sequence with the same amount of phosphate groups and acetylations appeared with different oxidation status, we considered the form with the lowest number of missing values.

### Publication Abstract
The DNA damage response (DDR) is a complex signaling network that relies on cascades of protein phosphorylation, which are initiated by three protein kinases of the family of PI3-kinase-related protein kinases (PIKKs): ATM, ATR, and DNA-PK. ATM is missing or inactivated in the genome instability syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T). The relative shares of these PIKKs in the response to genotoxic stress and the functional relationships among them are central questions in the genome stability field. We conducted a comprehensive phosphoproteomic analysis in human wild-type and A-T cells treated with the double-strand break-inducing chemical, neocarzinostatin, and validated the results with the targeted proteomic technique, selected reaction monitoring. We also matched our results with 34 published screens for DDR factors, creating a valuable resource for identifying strong candidates for novel DDR players. We uncovered fine-tuned dynamics between the PIKKs following genotoxic stress, such as DNA-PK-dependent attenuation of ATM. In A-T cells, partial compensation for ATM absence was provided by ATR and DNA-PK, with distinct roles and kinetics. The results highlight intricate relationships between these PIKKs in the DDR.

### Keywords
Human, Ddr, Dna-pk, Lc-ms/ms, Atm, Atr

### Affiliations
TAU
The David and Inez Myers Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Department  of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Tel Aviv University School of Medicine, Tel Aviv 69987, Israel.

### Submitter
Sapir Schlam

### Lab Head
Dr Yosef Shiloh
The David and Inez Myers Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Department  of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Tel Aviv University School of Medicine, Tel Aviv 69987, Israel.


