### Accession
PXD018298

### Title
The degradome of the human intervertebral disc

### Description
The intervertebral disc (IVD) is a joint in the spine that facilitates daily physical activity, comprising of the central nucleus pulposus (NP), surrounded by the annulus fibrosus (AF) and sandwiched between two cartilage endplates that function together as a unit. Changes to the IVD occur with aging, most drastically in the NP where it experiences dehydration and loss of cellularity, directly impacting on the integrity of the biomechanical functions of the IVD. We were interested in examining the types of degraded proteins in young and aged disc samples to further understand the protein turnover in aging and homeostasis.  We analysed the degradome for degraded proteins using terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates (TAILS) Clinical specimens from spine surgeries for scoliosis (young samples, n=3) or degeneration (aged samples, n=3) were used in this study.

### Sample Protocol
The TAILS approach was used for analyzing the degradome.  Frozen tissue was pulverized under liquid nitrogen and then extracted with SDS buffer (1% SDS, 100mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1X protease inhibitor in water) and sonicated for three cycles (15 seconds per cycle) with cooling on ice between cycles.  Samples were centrifuged at 14,000g for 15 min at 10⁰C and the supernatant (soluble fraction) underwent reduction at 37⁰C and alkylation with a final concentration of 15mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Samples subsequently underwent precipitation using the chloroform/methanol method. In brief, sample, ice cold water, methanol and chloroform were added at a 1:3:4:1 ratio and vortexed vigorously. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000g for 5 min at 4⁰C.  The top layer was carefully removed and ice cold methanol was added, vortexed and centrifuged as previous.  This was repeated for a total of three times.  The methanol was removed and the remaining pellet was air dried briefly and then resuspended in 1M NaOH.  Samples were quantified by nanodrop, diluted to 100mM HEPES and 4M GnHCl and pH adjusted to between 6.5 and 7.5. prior to TMT labelling as per manufacturers’ instructions (Sixplex TMT, Cat# 90061, ThermoFisher Scientific).  After incubation with the respective TMT labels for 1hr in the dark, the samples were quenched to a final concentration of 20mM for 30 min.  Each of the TMT-labelled samples were then pooled at an equal ratio and underwent methanol/chloroform precipitation as described above. Protein pellet was air-dried and resuspended in 200mM HEPES, pH8, and sonicated.  Samples were digested with trypsin at a 1:100 ratio for 16 hr at 37⁰C.  Samples were pH adjusted to 6.5 and a sample was taken for pre-TAILS.  Polymer was added at a ratio of 5:1 to sample.  Tris was added to a final concentration of 100mM and pH adjusted to 6.5, and incubated at 37⁰C for 30 min.  Samples underwent ultrafiltration using a MWCO of 10,000 and samples collected, desalted and acidified to 0.1% formic acid and dried, prior to analysis by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MGF files were extracted and searched using Mascot against  the Uniprot Homo sapiens database, semi-ArgC specificity, TMT6plex quantification, variable oxidation of methionine, variable acetylation of N termini, 20 ppm MS1 error tolerance, 0.05 Da MS2 error tolerance and 2 missed cleavages. Mascot .dat files were imported into Scaffold Q+S v4 .4.3 for peptide identification processing to a final FDR of 1%. Quantitative values were calculated through Scaffold and used for subsequent analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The spatiotemporal proteome of the intervertebral disc (IVD) underpins its integrity and function. We present DIPPER, a deep and comprehensive IVD proteomic resource comprising 94 genome-wide profiles from 17 individuals. To begin with, protein modules defining key directional trends spanning the lateral and anteroposterior axes were derived from high-resolution spatial proteomes of intact young cadaveric lumbar IVDs. They revealed novel region-specific profiles of regulatory activities and displayed potential paths of deconstruction in the level- and location-matched aged cadaveric discs. Machine learning methods predicted a 'hydration matrisome' that connects extracellular matrix with MRI intensity. Importantly, the static proteome used as point-references can be integrated with dynamic proteome (SILAC/degradome) and transcriptome data from multiple clinical samples, enhancing robustness and clinical relevance. The data, findings, and methodology, available on a web interface (http://www.sbms.hku.hk/dclab/DIPPER/), will be valuable references in the field of IVD biology and proteomic analytics.

### Keywords
Proteomic architecture, Intervertebral disc, Proteomics, Aging, Dynamic proteome, Degradome

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Vivian Tam

### Lab Head
Dr Danny Chan
The University of Hong Kong


