### Accession
PXD014121

### Title
time course of ATDC5 proteome regulation by insulin

### Description
aims at describing the mechanisms of ATDC5 chondrogenesis upon insulin stimulation

### Sample Protocol
secretomes were collected under serum free conditions; guanidine extracts were collected after removal of most cellular proteins by triton extraction; CNbr digestion was performed after guanidine extraction and demineralization; samples of each fraction were normalized to equivalent cell numbers and processed for label free relative quantification through LC-MALDI

### Data Protocol
Identifications were performed through Mascot searches of the mouse swissprot database, the PTMs to be taken into consideration differing depending on fractions and on the kind of data being searched, as described in the supplemental data of the corresponding paper. In particular, two distinct searches were performed for protein quantifications and collagen PTM quantification, respectively, from secretomes. As explained in the paper, the identification results of all LC-MALDI runs of a given experiment were merged into a single result file upon integration in proteinscape 4.0 server. However, as these result files can not be exported as MzidentML files, the individual MzidentML files obtained from original LC-MALDI runs were uploaded here. The proteinscape output data were exported to excel files provided as supplemental data in the paper.
Quantifications were performed based on MS signal from BAF files using profileanalysis 3.0 (bruker).  As the quantification results generated by this program can not be exported into single files, and also because most researchers do not use this program, the quantification files uploaded here are the original BAF files corresponding to all replicates. Quantifications were calculated mostly by comparing BAF files of a given fraction at a given time-point from insulin-stimulated cells to the equivalent unstimulated ones, using the filters indicated in the paper. The BAF files reported here as quantification files are those which were used only for quantification. However, each quantitative analysis included the replicates annotated as quantitation files plus those indicated as raw files (which also served for identification, contrarily to the prior). Files were given names as follows:

When starting with “CNBr”, they correspond to the CNBr extract
When starting with “Guanidine”, they correspond to the guanidine extract.
When starting with neither CNBr nor Guanidine, they correspond to secretomes.
When the name includes “PTM” (applies only to identification files), they took additional PTMs into account (as described in the supplemental data of the paper).
When the name includes “high scores”, peptides scores above 35 only were taken into account.
All files names (except MGC files) include “JX”, where X is a number, which indicates the time point of the experiment, expressed in days.
Files names include either “ITS” or “TS”, which indicate insulin-stimulated and control cells, respectively.
Quantifications were assigned to IDs in proteinscape 4.0 (bruker), also using the specific filters indicated in the paper.



### Publication Abstract
Fibrillar collagens and proteoglycans (PGs) are quantitatively the major constituents of extracellular matrices (ECM). They carry numerous crucial post-translational modifications (PTMs) that tune the resulting biomechanical properties of the corresponding tissues. The mechanisms determining these PTMs remain largely unknown, notably because available established cell lines do not recapitulate much of the complexity of the machineries involved. ATDC5 cells are a model of chondrogenesis widely used for decades, but it remains described mostly at histological and transcriptional levels. Here, we asked to what extent this model recapitulates the events of ECM synthesis and processing occurring in cartilage. Insulin-stimulated ATDC5 cells exhibit up- or down-regulation of more than one-hundred proteins, including a number of known participants in chondrogenesis and major markers thereof. However, they also lack several ECM components considered of significant, yet more subtle, function in cartilage. Still, they assemble the large PG aggrecan and type II collagen, both carrying most of their in vivo PTMs, into an ECM. Remarkably, collagen crosslinking is fully lysyl oxidase (LOX)-dependent. The ATDC5 model recapitulates critical aspects of the cartilage ECM-processing machinery and should be useful to decipher the mechanisms involved. Proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014121. SIGNIFICANCE: The present work provides the first proteome characterization of the ATDC5 chondrogenesis model, which has been used for decades in the field of cartilage biology. The results demonstrate the up- and down-regulation of more than one hundred proteins. Overall, specific drawbacks of the model are pointed out, that will be important to take into consideration for future studies. However, major cartilage components are massively assembled into an extracellular matrix and carry most of their post-translational modifications occurring in cartilage tissue. Unlike other available established cell lines, the ATDC5 model recapitulates major aspects of cartilage biosynthesis and should be useful in investigating the mechanisms that regulate collagen maturation events.

### Keywords
Chondrogenesis; collagen; post-translational modifications

### Affiliations
IBSLor_proteomics, UMS 2008 UL-CNRS-INSERM
UMR 7365 CNRS University of Lorraine, IMoPA and proteomics core facility of UMS 2008 University of Lorraine, CNRS, ISERM, IBSLor

### Submitter
JB Vincourt

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Baptiste Vincourt
UMR 7365 CNRS University of Lorraine, IMoPA and proteomics core facility of UMS 2008 University of Lorraine, CNRS, ISERM, IBSLor


