### Accession
PXD016406

### Title
Intact N-glycopeptides and proteomics from HCC tissue tumors with low and high AFP concentrations

### Description
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is still one of the malignant tumors with high morbidity and mortality in China and worldwide. Although AFP have been widely used as important biomarkers for HCC diagnosis and evaluation, the AFP level has a huge variation among HCC patient populations. Understanding the intrinsic heterogeneities of HCC associated with AFP levels is essential for the molecular mechanism studies of HCC with different AFP levels as well as for the potential early diagnosis and personalized treatment of HCC with AFP negative. Here, an integrated glycoproteomic and proteomic analysis of low and high AFP level of HCC tumors was performed to investigate the intrinsic heterogeneities of site-specific glycosylation associated with different AFP levels of HCC. we identified many commonly altered site-specific glycans from HCC tumors regardless of AFP levels, including decreased modifications by oligo-mannose and sialylated bi-antennary glycans, and increased modifications by bisecting glycans. By relative quantifying the intact glycopeptides between low and high AFP tumor groups, the great heterogeneities of site-specific N-glycans between two groups of HCC tumors were also uncovered. We found that several sialylated but not core fucosylated tri-antennary glycans were uniquely high-regulated in low AFP level of HCC tumors, while many core fucosylated bi-antennary or hybrid glycans as well as bisecting glycans were uniquely increased in high AFP tumors. The data provide a valuable resource for future HCC studies regarding the mechanism, heterogeneities and new biomarker discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissues were washed twice with PBS (precooled at 4°C) to remove serum. Then tissues were denatured in 8 M urea/1 M NH4HCO3 buffer, homogenized with a tissue homogenizer and sonicated by Ultrasonic Cell Distribution System until the upper solution was clear. The proteins were then reduced by 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C for 1h and alkylated by 15mM iodoacetamide at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 30 min. Another 2.5 mM DTT was added and incubated for 10 min at RT. Protein pellets solution was digested by sequencing grade trypsin (protein: enzyme, 100:1; Promega) overnight at 37°C in less than 2M urea/0.25M NH4HCO3 buffer. The pH of samples was adjusted to pH<2 with TFA and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 min to remove any particulate matter. The digested peptides were desalted with HLB column (Waters) and eluted with 1 mL solution of 60% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The peptide concentrations were measured by BCA reagent. Equal amounts of tryptic peptides from HCC tumors with low and high AFP , as well as their corresponding paracancerous tissues, were pooled into four samples, and they were labeled by four channels of 10-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocols for protein quantitation (TMT channels: HCC with high AFP and related paracancer: TMT 126 and 127N, respectively; HCC with low AFP and related paracancer: TMT 128C and 129N, respectively). The TMT labeled samples were pooled and purified by HLB columns. The intact glycopeptides were enriched from pooled peptide samples with TMT labels using Mixed Anion-Exchange (MAX) columns. The TMT-labeled peptide and intact glycopeptide samples were separated by an Easy-nLC™ 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the use of Acclaim PepMap100 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm) and Acclaim PepMap100 separating column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nL/min and consisted of 0.1% FA in water (A) and 0.1% FA in 80% ACN (B). A complete run of 120 min was set as follows: 3-7% B for 1 min, 7-35% B for 90 min, 35-68% B for 19 min, 68-100% B for 1 min and equilibrated in 100 B for 9 min.  MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The spray voltage was set at 2.4kV. Orbitrap MS1 spectra (AGC 4x105) were collected from 350-2000 m/z at a resolution of 60K followed by data-dependent HCD MS/MS (resolution 50K, collision energy 37%, activation time 0.1ms) of the 20 most abundant ions using an isolation width of 1.6 Da. Peptides with charge states from 2 to 8 were selected for MS/MS acquisition. A dynamic exclusion time of 25s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data of intact glycopeptides were searched using a glycopeptide analysis software, GPQuest 2.0, with the same parameters as mentioned above for proteomic data using the human UniProt database. For intact glycopeptide identification, the intact N-glycopeptide MS data were first converted to ‘mzML’ format using Trans-Proteome Pipline (TPP) and searched against by GPQuest 2.0. The search parameters were set as follows: at least two oxonium ions out of the top 10 fragment ions in the MS/MS spectra were used for extraction of intact glycopeptide MS/MS spectra. The identified N-linked glycans from human were used as N-glycan database and human protein database was downloaded from UniProt database. The mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 20 ppm were allowed for precursors and fragmentation ions. The FDR of identified intact glycopeptides was estimated by the decoy peptide method and 1% FDR was allowed for intact glycopeptide identification. The quantification information of intact glycopeptides were extracted from their identified MS/MS spectra based on intensities of their TMT reporter ions. The glycopeptide ratios among samples were normalized using the normalization factors obtained from the global proteomic results. After filtering the results by ≥ 5 PSMs per glycopeptide, the medium ratio of each glycopeptide was used for its quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is still one of the malignant tumors with high morbidity and mortality in China and worldwide. Although alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) as well as core fucosylated AFP-L3 have been widely used as important biomarkers for HCC diagnosis and evaluation, the AFP level shows a huge variation among HCC patient populations. In addition, the AFP level has also been proved to be associated with pathological grade, progression, and survival of HCC patients. Understanding the intrinsic heterogeneities of HCC associated with AFP levels is essential for the molecular mechanism studies of HCC with different AFP levels as well as for the potential early diagnosis and personalized treatment of HCC with AFP negative. In this study, an integrated <i>N</i>-glycoproteomic and proteomic analysis of low and high AFP levels of HCC tumors was performed to investigate the intrinsic heterogeneities of site-specific glycosylation associated with different AFP levels of HCC. By large-scale profiling and quantifying more than 4,700 intact <i>N</i>-glycopeptides from 20 HCC and 20 paired paracancer samples, we identified many commonly altered site-specific <i>N</i>-glycans from HCC tumors regardless of AFP levels, including decreased modifications by oligo-mannose and sialylated bi-antennary glycans, and increased modifications by bisecting glycans. By relative quantifying the intact <i>N</i>-glycopeptides between low and high AFP tumor groups, the great heterogeneities of site-specific <i>N</i>-glycans between two groups of HCC tumors were also uncovered. We found that several sialylated but not core fucosylated tri-antennary glycans were uniquely increased in low AFP level of HCC tumors, while many core fucosylated bi-antennary or hybrid glycans as well as bisecting glycans were uniquely increased in high AFP tumors. The data provide a valuable resource for future HCC studies regarding the mechanism, heterogeneities and new biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Intact glycopeptide, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
15891774008
College of Life Science, Northwest University

### Submitter
Ting Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Lab
College of Life Science, Northwest University


