### Accession
PXD047070

### Title
Proteomic analyses of Ca. Methylomirabilis

### Description
Proteomic analyses of Ca. Methylomirabilis performing methane-denpendent complete denitrification

### Sample Protocol
For protein analyses, applying the same sampling strategies mentioned above, three biological replicates from the enrichment stage (day 380) and the purification stage (day 1330) were collected, respectively. Then, these samples were frozen using liquid nitrogen and ground into powder. And the processed samples were transferred to the lysis buffer (Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 50:1) and homogenized in the tissue grinder for 60 s. Then, the samples were sonicated on ice for 120 s. The supernatant was obtained by centrifugation at 14000 g at 4 ℃ for 20 min. The protein concentration was determined by Bradford method according to instructions72. For digestion, we added 100 μg protein to 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1h at 30 ℃ and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 45min at room temperature. After 4-fold dilution with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, the sample was mixed with trypsin at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for digestion overnight at 37 ℃. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 50 μL 0.1% formic acid at the end of digestion. We collected 100 μL 100% acetonitrile to wash the C18 spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) with a centrifugation at 1200 rpm for 3 min. And the column was washed with 100 μL 0.1% formic acid as the same way again. The sample was added after replacing the EP tube and centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 3 min. Then the column was washed twice with 100 μL 0.1% formic acid and centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 3 min. We washed the column with 100 μL water (pH 10) and replaced the EP tube again. Finally, the sample was eluted with 70% acetonitrile and lyophilized.  The digested peptides were resuspended in 10 μL 2% methanol containing 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis on a Q Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo). The resuspended peptides were centrifuged at 14000 g for 20 min at 4 ℃ and 1 μg supernatant was loaded onto a precolumn (2 cm length, 100 μm, C18, 5 μm) at 3 μL min-1 for 8 min. Then, the peptides were resolved onto chromatographic column (12 cm length, 75 μm, C18, 3 μm). Peptide gradient separation was conducted at a flow rate of 600 nL/min for 80 min. A spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied to peptide ionization and data-dependent acquisition with full scans in a m/z 350-1200 range was carried out at a resolution of 120000 FWHM.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.4)73. The mass spectra were searched against the target proteomic database which was created by all protein sequences generated from metagenomic data and the genome of ‘M. sinica’. For input parameters, the precursor mass tolerance was set at 15.0 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.02 Da, with a maximum of three missed cleavages per peptide. Log10-transformed normalized abundance was applied to indicate the abundance of related proteins74,75. The contribution of functional enzymes in enrichment cultures were calculated by dividing the normalized abundance of each protein affiliated with Methylomirabilis bacteria by the sum of abundance of all related proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Methane-dependent nitrate and nitrite removal in anoxic environments is thought to rely on syntrophy between ANME-2d archaea and bacteria in the genus 'Candidatus Methylomirabilis'. Here we enriched and purified a single Methylomirabilis from paddy soil fed with nitrate and methane, which is capable of coupling methane oxidation to nitrate reduction via nitrite to dinitrogen independently. Isotope labelling showed that this bacterium we name 'Ca. Methylomirabilis sinica' stoichiometrically performed methane-dependent complete nitrate reduction to dinitrogen gas. Multi-omics analyses collectively demonstrated that 'M. sinica' actively expressed a well-established pathway for this process, especially including nitrate reductase Nap. Furthermore, 'M. sinica' exhibited a higher nitrate affinity than most denitrifiers, implying its competitive fitness under oligotrophic nitrogen-limited conditions. Our findings revise the paradigm of methane-dependent denitrification performed by two organisms, and the widespread presence of 'M. sinica' in public databases suggests that the coupling of methane oxidation and complete denitrification in single cells substantially contributes to global methane and nitrogen budgets.

### Keywords
Methane-dependent complete denitrification

### Affiliations
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Xiangwu Yao

### Lab Head
Dr Baolan Hu
Zhejiang University


