### Accession
PXD004713

### Title
Urinary proteome of a healthy human cohort aged 70 to 82

### Description
12 urine samples from 6 individuals (2 time points each) enrolled in a study on healthy aging were collected. Samples were frozen at -80⁰C prior to analysis. Samples were thawed, pH neutralized, separated into soluble urine (SU) and urinary pellet (UP) fractions, and subjected to filter aided sample preparation (FASP). FASP-processed samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive mass spec.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were processed following standard FASP protocol with minor modifications (PMID: 25820714). Briefly, 10k MWCO filters and double tryptic digestion were performed. RPLC was carried out using a PicoFrit C18 column (75 μm × 10 cm, 5 μm BetaBasic C18, 150 Å, New Objective, MA) with a 130-min gradient. MS/MS was performed with a top10 method.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Sequent HT and Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific). bioinformatics analyses were performed using Perseus software (version 1.5). Label free quantitation (LFQ) function in MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5) was used to determine the quantitative contributions of proteins in urine for the cohort under study. This dataset may serve as a healthy control urinary proteome dataset for diseases associated with high age and the aging process.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammation in the urinary tract results in a urinary proteome characterized by a high dynamic range of protein concentrations and high variability in protein content. This proteome encompasses plasma proteins not resorbed by renal tubular uptake, renal secretion products, proteins of immune cells and erythrocytes derived from trans-urothelial migration and vascular leakage, respectively, and exfoliating urothelial and squamous epithelial cells. We examined how such proteins partition into soluble urine (SU) and urinary pellet (UP) fractions by analyzing 33 urine specimens 12 of which were associated with a urinary tract infection (UTI). Using mass spectrometry-based metaproteomic approaches, we identified 5,327 non-redundant human proteins, 2,638 and 4,379 of which were associated with SU and UP fractions, respectively, and 1,206 non-redundant protein orthology groups derived from pathogenic and commensal organisms of the urogenital tract. Differences between the SU and UP proteomes were influenced by local inflammation, supported by respective comparisons with 12 healthy control urine proteomes. Clustering analyses showed that SU and UP fractions had proteomic signatures discerning UTIs, vascular injury, and epithelial cell exfoliation from the control group to varying degrees. Cases of UTI revealed clusters of proteins produced by activated neutrophils. Network analysis supported the central role of neutrophil effector proteins in the defense against invading pathogens associated with subsequent coagulation and wound repair processes. Our study expands the existing knowledge of the urinary proteome under perturbed conditions, and should be useful as reference dataset in the search of biomarkers.

### Keywords
Urine, Urinary sediment, Proteomics, Aging, Urinary proteome

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute  9714 Medical Center Dr. Rockville, MD 20850

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanbao Yu
J. Craig Venter Institute  9714 Medical Center Dr. Rockville, MD 20850


