### Accession
PXD016676

### Title
Thermosensation is linked to ubiquitin-dependent protein turnover via insulin and calcineurin signalling

### Description
Organismal physiology and survival are influenced by environmental conditions and linked to protein quality control. Proteome integrity is achieved by maintaining an intricate balance between protein folding and degradation. In Caenorhabditis elegans, acute heat stress determines cell non-autonomous regulation of chaperone levels. However, how the perception of environmental changes, including physiological temperature, affects protein degradation remains largely unexplored. Here, we show that loss-of-function of dyf-1 in Caenorhabditis elegans associated with dysfunctional sensory neurons leads to defects in both temperature perception and thermal adaptation of the ubiquitin/proteasome system centered on thermosensory AFD neurons. Impaired perception of moderate temperature changes worsens ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis in intestinal cells. Brain-gut communication regulating protein turnover is mediated by upregulation of the insulin-like peptide INS-5 and inhibition of the calcineurin-regulated forkhead-box transcription factor DAF-16/FOXO. Our data indicate that perception of ambient temperature and its neuronal integration is critical for the control of proteome integrity in complex organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Per condition 60 young adult hermaphrodite worms (PP563, PP915, PP1058, PP1716) were grown at 22°C and collected in 20 microL 1x M9 buffer, the buffer removed and worms shock frozen in liquid nitrogen. A total of 3 independent experiments were performed with all strains. Worms were lysed in 40 microL 6M Urea/2M Thiourea buffer with sonification at 4°C with 30 s intervals for 10 min. Samples were reduced in 50 mM DTT for 30 min at RT followed by alkylation using 13 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark, before digestion with 0.4 µg lysyl-endopeptidase for 3h at RT. The lysates were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to get a final urea concentration of 2 M and digested with 2 µg trypsin. One day later, the digest was stopped by acidification with an equal amount of buffer C (5% acetonitrile, 1% TFA) before peptides were cleaned up using stage tip extraction (Empore Disks, Sigma Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany). For separation of the peptides the stage tips were prepared by washing with methanol (2,600 rpm, 2 min) followed by washing with elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and two times with washing buffer (0.1% formic acid in ddH2O). The samples were loaded on the stage tip, cleared once more with washing buffer and dried until further processing.

LC-MS/MS
Eluted peptides were separated using a binary buffer system of A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O) and B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) on a nanoEasy HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A linear gradient from 7 to 35% B was applied within 220 min followed by 95% B for 10 min. Prior to the next run, the column was re- equilibrated to 5% B for 10 min.  The 50 cm column (75 μm ID) was packed in-house with 1.9 μm diameter C18 Reprosil resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). A custom-made column oven was used to control the temperature to 40°C. The HPLC was coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) to the quadrupole-based QExactive Plus benchtop mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). MS spectra were acquired using 3e6 as AGC target at a resolution of 70, 000 (200 m/z) in a mass range of 350−1650 m/z. A maximum injection time of 60 ms was used for ion accumulation. MS/MS events were measured in a data-dependent mode for the 10 most abundant peaks (Top10 method) in the high mass accuracy Orbitrap after HCD (Higher energy C-Trap Dissociation) fragmentation at 25 collision energy in a 100−1650 m/z mass range. The resolution was set to 17, 500 at 200 m/z and the injection time was set to 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were correlated to the Uniprot Caenorhabditis elegans reference proteome (Proteome ID: UP000001940, canonical protein sequences: 26196, downloaded 03.2015. ) using MaxQuant and the implemented Andromeda search engine. Searches were performed with tryptic digestion specificity allowing two missed cleavages and a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for MS and 6 ppm for MS/MS spectra. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and oxidation at methionine, and acetylation at the N-terminus were defined as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and the false discovery rate for proteins and peptides to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Organismal physiology and survival are influenced by environmental conditions and linked to protein quality control. Proteome integrity is achieved by maintaining an intricate balance between protein folding and degradation. In Caenorhabditis elegans, acute heat stress determines cell non-autonomous regulation of chaperone levels. However, how the perception of environmental changes, including physiological temperature, affects protein degradation remains largely unexplored. Here, we show that loss-of-function of dyf-1 in Caenorhabditis elegans associated with dysfunctional sensory neurons leads to defects in both temperature perception and thermal adaptation of the ubiquitin/proteasome system centered on thermosensory AFD neurons. Impaired perception of moderate temperature changes worsens ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis in intestinal cells. Brain-gut communication regulating protein turnover is mediated by upregulation of the insulin-like peptide INS-5 and inhibition of the calcineurin-regulated forkhead-box transcription factor DAF-16/FOXO. Our data indicate that perception of ambient temperature and its neuronal integration is important for the control of proteome integrity in complex organisms.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Aggregation, Proteostasis, Ageing, Calcineurin signaling, Ciliated neurons, Insulin signaling

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics and CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany
University of Cologne

### Submitter
Alexandra Segref

### Lab Head
Dr Thorsten Hoppe
Institute for Genetics and CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann Str. 26, 50931 Cologne, Germany


