### Accession
PXD030837

### Title
A G-protein-coupled receptor  modulates gametogenesis via PKG-mediated signaling cascade in Plasmodium berghei

### Description
Gametogenesis is essential for malaria parasite transmission, but the molecular mechanism of this process remains to be refined. Here, we identified a G-protein-coupled receptor 180 (GPR180) that plays a critical role in signal transduction during gametogenesis in Plasmodium. In the rodent parasite P. berghei, PbGPR180 was expressed during asexual and sexual development, with more prominent expression in gametocytes and ookinetes. While PbGPR180 was predominantly localized to cytoplasmic puncta in asexual stages and gametocytes, it became associated with the plasma membrane in female gametes and ookinetes. Knockout of pbgpr180 (Δpbgpr180) had no noticeable effect on asexual development or gametocytogenesis but impaired gamete formation and reduced transmission of the parasites to mosquitoes. Transcriptome analysis of the Δpbgpr180 gametocytes revealed a large proportion of the dysregulated genes with assigned functions in cyclic nucleotide signaling transduction, especially the cGMP-PKG-Ca2+ signaling cascade. Deletion of pbgpr180 resulted in a delay and reduction in cytosolic Ca2+ mobilization during the induction of gametogenesis. In addition, the intracellular cGMP level was significantly reduced in the Δpbgpr180 gametocytes, suggesting that PbGPR180 functions upstream of the cGMP-PKG-Ca2+ signaling pathway. In line with this function, PbGPR180 protein was found to interact with several transmembrane transporter proteins and a small GTPase, Rab6, in activated gametocytes. Allele replacement of pbgpr180 with the P. vivax ortholog pvgpr180 showed equal competence of the transgenic parasite in sexual development, suggesting functional conservation of this gene in Plasmodium spp . These results indicate that GPR180 is involved in cGMP-PKG-Ca2+ signal transduction to regulate gametogenesis in malaria parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Activated gametocytes from the PbGPR180HA and WT P. berghei parasite lines were first lysed in 0.15% (w/v) saponin in PBS and harvested by centrifugation. Proteins were extracted using 10 cell pellet volumes of ice-cold RIPA lysis and extraction buffer containing the HaltTM phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher). Samples were cleared by centrifugation at 130,000  g for 5 min. Parasite lysates containing the HA-tagged PbGPR180 protein were added into Pierce Anti-HA Magnetic Beads (ThermoFisher) and incubated at room temperature for 30 min with mixing. The beads were collected with a magnetic stand, washed using the IP Lysis/Wash Buffer twice, and followed by washing once with ultrapure water. Finally, the beads were resuspended in 5 volumes of Elution Buffer, and the supernatants were collected, neutralized the low pH by adding neutralization buffer, and stored at -80℃ for further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Eluted proteins were identified by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Proteins were run 4 mm into a 10% NuPAGE BisTris gel (ThermoFisher) and then excised. Proteins were reduced and alkylated prior to overnight trypsin digestion. The resulting digests were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC HPLC, equipped with a 50-cm 75-m Acclaim Pepmap C18 column, coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro equipped with a Nanoflex electrospray source (all ThermoFisher). A gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0), 0.1% formic acid over 60 min was used at a flow rate of 0.3l/min. The Orbitrap was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode with a survey scan at 60,000 resolution and up to the 10 most intense ions selected for MS/MS. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the First search and 5 ppm in the Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and the minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. For functional enrichment analysis, the identified proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cgmp-pkg- ca2+ signaling cascades, Malaria, Gametogenesis, G-protein-coupled receptors

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University
Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110122, China

### Submitter
Xiaotong Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaotong Zhu
Department of Immunology, College of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110122, China


