### Accession
PXD016003

### Title
Proteome analysis of skeletal muscle samples from a porcine model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy

### Description
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is caused by genetic deficiency of dystrophin and characterized by massive structural and functional changes of skeletal muscle tissue, leading to terminal muscle failure. In this project, proteomics data from skeletal muscle of a genetically engineered DMD pig model were investigated in order to confirm muscular fibrosis and MSOT signals.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue samples were cryopulverized using a cryoPREP hammer (Covaris, model no. CP02 cryoPREP Impactor) at an impact level of five. Tissue powder was homogenized in lysis buffer (8 M urea/0.4 M NH4HCO3) by ultrasonification (11 kJ, Sonopuls GM3200 equipped with a BR30 cup booster). Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for total protein quantification. 60 µg of protein was reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT, final concentration 4 mM) for 30 min at 56 °C and cysteines were alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, final concentration 8 mM) for 30 min in the dark. Residual IAA was quenched with DTT at a ﬁnal concentration of 10 mM during 15 min incubation in the dark. Proteins were digested with Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50 for 4 h at 37 °C. Samples were diluted with water to 0.8 M urea and digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (1:50; Promega). Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 1.5 µg of tryptic peptides were separated at 250 nL/min on a 50 cm column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm ID, 2 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) from 5% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 160 min and from 25% to 40% B in 10 min. Spectra were acquired by one full scan (350 to 1600 m/z) with a resolution of 60,000 and up to 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans with a resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.7.0) 57 with FDR < 0.01 at the peptide and protein level. For protein identification, the NCBI RefSeq Sus scrofa database (v. 3-5-2019) was used. Label-free peptide and protein quantifications were performed by MaxQuant with the normalization feature disabled.

### Publication Abstract
Biomarkers for monitoring of disease progression and response to therapy are lacking for muscle diseases such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Noninvasive in vivo molecular imaging with multispectral optoacoustic tomography (MSOT) uses pulsed laser light to induce acoustic pressure waves, enabling the visualization of endogenous chromophores. Here we describe an application of MSOT, in which illumination in the near- and extended near-infrared ranges from 680-1,100&#x2009;nm enables the visualization and quantification of collagen content. We first demonstrated the feasibility of this approach to noninvasive quantification of tissue fibrosis in longitudinal studies in a large-animal Duchenne muscular dystrophy model in pigs, and then applied this approach to pediatric patients. MSOT-derived collagen content measurements in skeletal muscle were highly correlated to the functional status of the patients and provided additional information on molecular features as compared to magnetic resonance imaging. This study highlights the potential of MSOT imaging as a noninvasive, age-independent biomarker for the implementation and monitoring of newly developed therapies in muscular diseases.

### Keywords
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Skeletal muscle, Pig

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Genzentrum Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Flenkenthaler

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis Genzentrum Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25 D-81377 München


