### Accession
PXD003627

### Title
SPATA2 links CYLD to the TNF-a receptor signaling complex and modulates the receptor signaling outcomes

### Description
TNF-a is a key regulator of innate immune and proinflammatory responses. However, the composition of the TNF-a receptor associated signaling complexes (TNF-RSC) and the architecture of the downstream signaling networks are incompletely understood. We employed quantitative mass spectrometry to demonstrate that TNF-a stimulation induces widespread protein phosphorylation and that the scope of phosphorylation expands in a temporal manner. TNF-a stimulation also induces rapid ubiquitylation of components of the TNF-RSC. Temporal analysis of the TNF-RSC composition identified SPATA2 as a novel component of the TNFRSC. The predicted PUB domain in the N-terminus of SPATA2 interacts with the USP domain of CYLD, whereas the C-terminus of SPATA2 interacts with HOIP. SPATA2 is required for recruitment of CYLD to the TNF-RSC. Downregulation of SPATA2 augments transcriptional activation of NF-jB and inhibits TNF-a-induced necroptosis, pointing to an important function of SPATA2 in modulating the outcomes of TNF-a signaling. Taken together, our study draws a detailed map of TNF-a signaling, identifies SPATA2 as a novel component of TNF-a signaling, and provides a rich resource for further functional investigations.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and stimulation A549, HEK293, and L929 cells were cultured in DMEM medium, and A20.2J cells were cultured in RPMI1640 medium, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, L-glutamine, penicillin and streptomycin. For SILAC labeling, cells were cultured in media containing either unlabeled L-arginine and L-lysine, or stable isotope labeled L-arginine [13C6] and L-lysine [2H4], or L-arginine [13C615N4] and L-lysine [13C6-15N2] (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) as described previously (Ong et al, 2002). Cells were cultured at 37 °C in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2. Cells were stimulated with 100 ng/ml of recombinant human TNF-α (Peprotech) for the indicated periods and were subsequently washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline. Cells were lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with protease inhibitors (complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablets, Roche Diagnostics), phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma), and 5 mM N-ethylmaleimide (Sigma). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000g. Protein concentrations were estimated using Bradford assay. Purification of the TNF-RSC A549 cells were stimulated with FLAG-tagged TNF-α (Enzo Life Sciences). Cells were lysed in modified RIPA buffer supplemented with protease, phosphates inhibitors and N-ethylmaleimide and cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation. For the control cells, FLAG-TNF-α was added directly to the lysate after cell lysis. The ligand-bound receptor complexes from 5 mg of protein were enriched using 100 µl of agarose-conjugated α-FLAG M2 antibody affinity matrix (Sigma) and washed five times with modified RIPA buffer. Subsequently, the bound proteins were eluted 4 times with 200 µg/ml of FLAG peptide (Sigma) and separated by SDS-PAGE. Proteins were digested in-gel and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. MS sample preparation Proteins from cell lysates were precipitated in acetone and subsequently re-dissolved in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide, and digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma). The proteases were inactivated by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (final concentration 1%) and precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters). For the enrichment of di-Gly modified peptides, 20 mg of peptides were re-dissolved in immunoprecipitation buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM sodium chloride, 50 mM MOPS pH 7.2), and precipitates were removed by centrifugation. The modified peptides were enriched using 40 µl of di-glycine-lysine antibody resin (Cell Signaling Technology). Peptides were incubated with the antibodies for 4 hours at 4°C on a rotation wheel. The beads were washed 3 times in ice-cold immunoprecipitation buffer followed by three washes in water. The enriched peptides were eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O, peptides were fractionated into 6 fractions using micro-column-based strong-cation exchange chromatography (SCX) and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips as described previously (Rappsilber et al, 2007; Weinert et al, 2013). For the enrichment of phosphorylated peptides, 5 mg of peptides in binding buffer (50% acetonitrile, 6% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O) (Zhou et al, 2013) were incubated with 10 mg of TiO2 spheres (GL sciences) for 1 hour. The beads were washed twice in binding buffer and subsequently peptides were eluted using elution buffer (10% NH4OH, 25% acetonitrile in H2O). The eluates were concentrated to remove NH4OH and the peptides were fractionated into 6 fractions using micro-column-based SCX and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips. MS analysis Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap (Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) as described (Kelstrup et al, 2012; Michalski et al, 2011). The samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter) and peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.5% acetic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300 – 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) (Olsen et al, 2007). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge state less than +2 (and for di-Gly samples less than +3) were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and computational analysis Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.3.9.21) (Cox & Mann, 2008). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 140,772 human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in February 2012 using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to 3 missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, N-ethylmaleimide modification of cysteines,di-glycine-lysine and phosphorylation of serines, thereonines or tyrosines were searched as variable modifications. Di-glycine modified lysines were required to be located internally in the peptide sequences. Site localization probabilities for the modifications were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm as described previously (Cox & Mann, 2008; Olsen et al, 2006). The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach (Elias & Gygi, 2007).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nf-kappab, Ubiquitin, Phosphorylation, Necroptosis, Tnf-alpha

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


