### Accession
PXD010472

### Title
Mucin-binding proteins of E. coli membrane

### Description
Proteins from E. coli outer membrane were extracted with carbonate method, separated in 2D-PAGE and transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane.  After incubation with flourescent-labelled mucin, mucin-binding protein spots were cut out, subjected to trypsinolysis and identified by protein analysis with HPLC-MS-MS.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing protocol E. coli isolate from Crohn's disease patient was cultivated in LB at 37oC (200 RPM) for 14 h. Bacterial cells were harvested by centrifugation (3 500 g, 15 min) and pellet was washed twice with PBS. Bacterial suspensions used in experiments, were normalized by absorbance at 540 nm (OD 540). 1 OD unit in 1 ml cuvette was equal to 0.2 mg/ml of dry weight of bacteria (DW) and contained 8∙108 CFU/ml.  Isolation of cell membrane proteins was performed with carbonate method (Fujiki, 1982). Bacteria culture in mid log-phase was harvested by centrifugation for 8 min at 2500 g. Pellet was washed once by with PBS and resuspended in 200 ul of Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.5 with 1 ul of nuclease mixture (Promega). Cells were lysed by ultrasonication for 1 min and centrifuged for 8 min at 2500 g. Supernatant was added to 1.5 ml of 100 mM Na2CO3 and incubated on ice with shaking for 1 h. Membrane proteins fraction was precipitated by ultracentrifugation at 115000 g for 30 min, pellet was washed with 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 7.5 and collected again by centrifugation at the same conditions. Membrane proteins from E. coli isolate SharL1 were separated by 2D-SDS-PAGE (2D phoresis protocol as in [Matyushkina 2016]) and transferred onto nitrocellulose filter Hybond-P with Bio-Rad MiniCell according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Active binding groups on filter were blocked by incubation for 1 h at 25oC in 3% BSA solution in PBS containing 300 mM NaCl. Binding with fluorescent mucin labeled with fluorescein isothiocianate was performed by 4 h incubation at at 25oC in binding buffer (5 mg/ml FITC-mucin, 300 mM NaCl, 3 мМ MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.05% tween-20). Filters were washed 3 times for 5 min in PBS and scanned on fluorescent scanner Typhoon, GE Healthcare (Blue laser, 520-nm band-pass filter). Mucin-binding protein spots were excised from filter and subjected to trypsinolysis for the consequent protein analysis with HPLC-MS-MS. Protein trypsinolysis on nitrocellulose filter was performed as follows. Fragments of nitrocellulose filter were covered with 100 мМ NH4HCO3 with 0.1% sodium deoxycholate (DCNa) (Sigma), incubated on ultrasonication bath for 10 min and heated for 5 min at 95oC. After cooling of samples 5 mM of  reducing agent tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) was added and samples were incubated at 37oC for 1 h. Then 30 mM of iodacetamide was added (IAA) and samples were kept at room temperature (RT) for 30 min. To avoid chemical modifications and remove the unreacted IAA, samples were treated with 2.5 mM TCEP and incubated for 30 min at RT. Protein hydrolysis was performed by trypsin (20 ug per sample, Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) for 16 h at 37oC. After that equal volume of ethylacetate and pH was adjusted to 2.0 with trichloroacetic acid (TCA). At this point trypsinolysis stopped and DCNa precipitated and moved to organic phase. After 5 min of intensive shaking and 5 min centrifugation at 16000 g at 20oC the lower water phase was collected and cleaned with cartridges C18 (Discovery DSC-18 Tube, (Supelco)) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Achieved peptide extracts were dried at SpeedVac (Labconco) and dissolved in 15 ul of LC-MS-MS sample buffer containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoracetic acid. HPLC-MS/MS analysis of tryptic peptides was carried out using Ultimate-3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a maXis qTOF after HDC-cell upgrade (Bruker) with a nano-electrospray source. Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed on a C-18 reversed phase column (Zorbax 300SB-C18, 150 mm x 75 um, particle diameter 3.5 um, Agilent). Gradient parameters were as follows: 5-35% acetonitrile in aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, column flow 0.3 ul/min. Gradient duration was 60 min (serum samples) or 5 min (proteins from nitrocellulose filters). Positive MS and MS/MS spectra were aquired using AutoMSMS mode (capillary voltage 1700, curtain gas flow and temperature 4 l and 170o C, spectra rate 4 Hz, 20 precursors, m/z range 200-1500, active exclusion after 2 spectra, release after 0.5 min).

### Data Protocol
Lists of compounds (mgf files) were generated after lockmass calibration on 445.1200 m/z ion with Compass DataAnalysis (Bruker). Protein identification was performed by peptide search with Mascot Data Search with the following parameters: Peptide Mass Tolerance 0,05 Da, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0,1 Da, variable modifications for samples from PAGE Propionamide (C),Oxidation (M), cutting enzyme trypsin, 1 missed cleavage per peptide is aalowed. For E coli samples database peptide search for protein identification was made from transltation of genes of genome of E. coli strain Nissle 1917, gut colonizing strain of B2 phylogroup, same phylogroup as SharL1. Number of sequences in database 5114. From 12 filter fragments 10 proteins were identified as mucin-binding (major protein in each spot was identified as having at least 2 unique peptides and with maximum emPAI coefficient).

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria colonizing human intestine adhere to the gut mucosa and avoid the innate immune system. We previously demonstrated that Escherichia&#xa0;coli isolates can adsorb mucin from a diluted solution in&#xa0;vitro. Here, we evaluated the effect of mucin adsorption by E.&#xa0;coli cells on neutrophil activation in&#xa0;vitro. Activation was evaluated based on the detection of reactive oxygen species production by a chemiluminescent reaction (ChL), observation of morphological alterations in neutrophils and detection of exocytosis of myeloperoxidase and lactoferrin. We report that mucin adsorbed by cells of SharL1 isolate from Crohn's disease patient's inflamed ileum suppressed the potential for the activation of neutrophils in whole blood. Also, the binding of plasma complement proteins and immunoglobulins to the bacteria was reduced. Desialylated mucin, despite having the same adsorption efficiency to bacteria, had no effect on the blood ChL response. The effect of mucin suggests that it shields epitopes that interact with neutrophils and plasma proteins on the bacterial outer membrane. Potential candidates for these epitopes were identified among the proteins within the bacterial outer membrane fraction by 2D-PAGE, fluorescent mucin binding on a blot and HPLC-MS/MS. In&#xa0;vitro, the following proteins demonstrated mucin adsorption: outer membrane porins (OmpA, OmpC, OmpD and OmpF), adhesin OmpX, the membrane assembly factor OmpW, cobalamine transporter, ferrum uptake protein and the elongation factor Ef Tu-1. In addition to their other functions, these proteins are known to be bacterial surface antigens. Therefore, the shielding of epitopes by mucin may affect the dynamics and intensity of an immune response.

### Keywords
Hplc-ms-ms, Mucin binding, Escherichia coli, Membrane

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Lab of Proteome Research, Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine, Malaya Pirogovskaya 1a, Moscow, 119992, Russia
Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow

### Submitter
Daria Rakitina

### Lab Head
Dr Gleb Yurievich Fisunov
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Lab of Proteome Research, Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine, Malaya Pirogovskaya 1a, Moscow, 119992, Russia


