### Accession
PXD036395

### Title
Early Signaling Events in Renal Compensatory Hypertrophy Revealed by Multi-Omics

### Description
Loss of a kidney results in compensatory growth of the remaining kidney, a phenomenon of considerable clinical importance. However, the mechanisms involved are largely unknown. Here, we used a multi-omic approach in a mouse unilateral nephrectomy model to identify signaling processes associated with compensatory hypertrophy of the renal proximal tubule. Morphometry applied to microdissected proximal tubules showed that growth of the proximal tubule involves a marked, rapid increase in cell volume rather than cell number. Measurements of DNA accessibility (ATAC-seq), transcriptome (RNA-seq) and proteome (quantitative protein mass spectrometry) independently identified patterns of change that are indicative of activation of the lipid-regulated transcription factor, PPARα. Activation of PPARα by fenofibrate administration increased proximal tubule cell size, while genetic deletion of PPARα in mice decreased it. The results indicate that PPARα is an important determinant of proximal tubule cell size and is a likely mediator of compensatory proximal tubule hypertrophy.

### Sample Protocol
A whole kidney from each mouse was collected and homogenized by polytron based homogenizer for 15 s three times in 1 ml of cold 100mM TEAB buffer with 1X HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, # 1861280). Lysates were centrifuged at 700 x G for 5 mins at 4 C. Supernatant were used for BCA Protein Assay. 700 ug (for total and phosphor-proteomics) of proteins from supernatant were transferred to a new tube for Reduction/Alkylation/Precipitation. Equal amounts (400 ug) of peptides from each sample were taken and the volume was adjusted to 100 ul of 100 mM TEAB, then labeled with TMT Isobaric Mass Tag (TMT11Plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. From each fraction, 5% was collected in a separated tube for “total” proteomics and the remaining 95% was further enriched for “phospho” proteomics by the Sequential Enrichment from Metal Oxide Affinity Chromatography protocol (SMOAC) from Thermo.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra were searched against the mouse UniProt reference proteome (UP000002494_10116.fasta, downloaded in August 2020) using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0, and lot-specific TMT isotopic impurity correction factors were used as recommended in the TMT product data sheets. “Trypsin/P” was set as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was configured as a fixed modification. Variable modifications included phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (S, T, Y), oxidation of methionine (M). The FDR was limited to 1% using the target-decoy algorithm. Other parameters were kept as the defaults. Results are reported as MS2 reporter ion intensity ratios between UNx samples and Sham controls.

### Publication Abstract
Indole alkaloids are one of the largest alkaloid classes, proving valuable structural moiety in pharmaceuticals. Although methods for the synthesis of indole alkaloids are constantly explored, the direct single-step synthesis of these chemical entities with broad structural diversity remains a formidable challenge. Herein, we report a modular assembly of tetrahydrocarboline type of indole alkaloids from simple building blocks in a single step while showing broad compatibility with medicinally relevant functionality. In this protocol, the 2-alkylated or 3-alkylated indoles, formaldehyde, and amine hydrochlorides could undergo a one-pot reaction to deliver &#x3b3;-tetrahydrocarbolines or &#x3b2;-tetrahydrocarbolines directly. A wide scope of these readily available starting materials is applicable in this process, and numerous structural divergent tetrahydrocarbolines could be achieved rapidly. The control reaction and deuterium-labelling reaction are conducted to probe the mechanism. And mechanistically, this multicomponent reaction relies on a multiple alkylamination cascade wherein an unusual C(sp<sup>3</sup>)-C(sp<sup>3</sup>) connection was involved in this process. This method could render rapid access to pharmaceutically interesting compounds, greatly enlarge the indole alkaloid library and accelerate the lead compound optimization thus facilitating drug discovery.

### Keywords
Proximal tubule, Unilateral nephrectomy, Transcriptome, Proteome, Pparα, Hypertrophy

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, USA
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center Division of Intramural Research National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute  Building 10, Room 6N307 Bethesda, Maryland 20895-1603

### Submitter
CHIN-RANG YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center Division of Intramural Research National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute  Building 10, Room 6N307 Bethesda, Maryland 20895-1603


