### Accession
PXD017332

### Title
CEP44 ensures the formation of bona fide centriole wall, a requirement for the centriole-to-centrosome conversion

### Description
The centriole-to-centrosome conversion is a mechanism of the centrosome maturation process that depends on the formation of a proper centriole wall structure. Beside the centriole wall biogenesis factors TUBD1 and TUBE1, CEP44 is involved in this process. Lack of CEP44 generates defects in the centriole wall structure and thus, it interferes with the centrosome maturation. POC1B was found to be an interactor of CEP44 in the immunoprecipitation and LC-MS experiment. The interaction and the function of this hit was validated with further independent biological experiments.

### Sample Protocol
CEP44-Flag was over-expressed under TetOn promoter by adding 2 μg/ml of doxycycline to the cell medium. Cells were collected, lysated and the lysate was incubated with M2 Flag Beads (M8823-1ML Sigma Aldrich). The samples were eluted with 3xFlag peptide (F4799-4MG Sigma Aldrich) and run 1 cm on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel.  The gel pieces were excised and subjected to protein reduction with 60 µL 40 mM dithiothreitol (DTT; Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5 at 57°C for 30 min and alkylated with 60 µL 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA; Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5 at 25°C for 20 min in dark. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 60 µL 100% ACN and washed with 60 µL 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. A total of 30 µL of 8 ng/µL in 50 mM TEAB trypsin solution (sequencing grade, Thermo-Fisher, Rockford, USA) was added to the dry gel pieces and incubated for 6h at 37°C. The reaction was quenched by addition of 20 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Biosolve, Valkenswaard, The Netherlands). The resulting peptides were extracted by dehydrating two times for 20 min each in 20 µL ACN and washing in 30 µL 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. The supernatant from each extraction step was collected and dried in a vacuum concentrator before dimethyl labeling reaction.  Dimethyl duplex labeling was performed according to standd protocol1. Briefly, digested peptides from samples were tagged in solution with stable-isotope dimethyl labels comprising regular formaldehyde and cyanoborohydride (28 Da shift, designated “light label”) or deuterated formaldehyde and regular cyanoborohydride (32 Da shift, designated “intermediate label”) (all reagents from Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany). Samples were acidified with TFA such that the pH<2 and desalted with C18 stagetips2. Samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and stored in -20°C until measurements. Samples were diluted in 15 µl 0,1% TFA, 99,9% water for LC-MS measurement.  1) Boersema, P. J.; Raijmakers, R.; Lemeer, S.; Mohammed, S.; Heck, A. J. Multiplex peptide stable isotope dimethyl labeling for quantitative proteomics. Nat. Protoc. 2009, 4 (4), 484−94ar 2) Juri Rappsilber, Matthias Mann & Yasushi Ishihama. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips, Nature Protocols volume 2, pages 1896–1906 (2007)

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant v1.5.3.301 for peptide identification and quantification. MS2 spectra were searched against the Human_201706_UP000005640_9606 (20147 sequences) and Human_201706_UP000005640_9606_additional  (122129 sequences) retrieved in June 2017 and  contaminants of Maxquant. We defined carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-term), oxidation of methionine, deamidation of aspartic and glutamic acid as variable modifications and trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. The maximum false discovery rate for proteins and peptides was 0.01 and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required. Match between run option was not activated. Quantification mode was with the dimethyl Lys 0 and N-term 0 as light labels and dimethyl Lys 4 and N-term 4 as intermediate labels. All other parameters were default parameters of MaxQuant. Quantitative normalized ratios were calculated by MaxQuant and used for further data analysis.  1) J. Cox, M. Mann, Nat Biotechnol 2008, 26, 1367

### Publication Abstract
Centrosomes are essential organelles with functions in microtubule organization that duplicate once per cell cycle. The first step of centrosome duplication is the daughter centriole formation followed by the pericentriolar material recruitment to this centriole. This maturation step was termed centriole-to-centrosome conversion. It was proposed that CEP295-dependent recruitment of pericentriolar proteins drives centriole conversion. Here we show, based on the analysis of proteins that promote centriole biogenesis, that the developing centriole structure helps drive centriole conversion. Depletion of the luminal centriole protein CEP44 that binds to the A-microtubules and interacts&#xa0;with POC1B affecting centriole structure and centriole conversion, despite CEP295 binding to centrioles. Impairment of POC1B, TUBE1 or TUBD1, which disturbs integrity of centriole microtubules, also prevents centriole-to-centrosome conversion. We propose that the CEP295, CEP44, POC1B, TUBE1 and TUBD1 centriole biogenesis pathway that functions in the centriole lumen and on the cytoplasmic side is essential for the centriole-to-centrosome conversion.

### Keywords
Human, Centriol-to-centrosome conversion, Cep44, Poc1b, Centrosome

### Affiliations
Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie, Universität Heidelberg, DKFZ-ZMBH Allianz, Heidelberg 69120, Germany
ZMBH Uni Heidelberg

### Submitter
elmar schiebel

### Lab Head
Dr Elmar Johannes Schiebel
Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie, Universität Heidelberg, DKFZ-ZMBH Allianz, Heidelberg 69120, Germany


