### Accession
PXD028799

### Title
Revisiting the Hayflick Limit: Insights from an Integrated Analysis of Changing Transcripts, Proteins, Metabolites and Chromatin.

### Description
Replicative senescence (RS) as a model has become the central focus of research into cellular aging in vitro. Despite decades of study, this process through which cells cease dividing is not fully understood in culture, and even much less so in vivo during development and with aging. Here, we revisit Hayflick’s original observation of RS in WI-38 human fetal lung fibroblasts equipped with a battery of high dimensional modern techniques and analytical methods to deeply profile the process of RS across each aspect of the central dogma and beyond. We applied and integrated RNA-seq, proteomics, metabolomics, and ATAC-seq to a high resolution RS time course. We found that the transcriptional changes that underlie RS manifest early, gradually increase, and correspond to a concomitant global increase in accessibility in nucleolar and lamin associated domains. During RS WI-38 fibroblast gene expression patterns acquire a striking resemblance to those of myofibroblasts in a process similar to the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT). This observation is supported at the transcriptional, proteomic, and metabolomic levels of cellular biology. In addition, we provide evidence suggesting that this conversion is regulated by the transcription factors YAP1/TEAD1 and the signaling molecule TGF-β2.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS grade organic solvents, water, and tandem mass tag (TMT) isobaric reagents were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Trypsin was ordered from Promega Corporation (Madison, WI) and Lys-C from Wako Chemicals USA (Richmond, VA). Sep-Pak C18 cartridges were from Waters Corporation (Milford, MA). Unless otherwise stated, all other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Cell pellets were resuspended in 450 µL of lysis buffer (75mM NaCl, 3% SDS, 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) and lysed by passage through a BD PrecisionGlide 21-gauge needle (20X). The lysate was sonicated for 5 minutes and then centrifuged (5 min, 16,000 x g) to remove cellular debris and the supernatant was collected. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at 56°C with shaking. Proteins were then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 30 minutes at room temperature (RT) in the dark, and excess IAM was quenched with 5 mM DTT for 20 minutes at RT in the dark. Protein purification was accomplished using a methanol-chloroform precipitation. Briefly, 800 µL methanol, 200 µL chloroform and 600 µL water were sequentially added to 200 µL of cell lysate, with 5 second intervals of vortexing between each addition. The samples were centrifuged for 30 minutes (16,000 x g at 4°C) to induce phase separation and both the top and bottom layers were removed. The precipitated protein pellet was washed with 600 µL methanol, vortexed briefly, then centrifuged for 10 minutes (16,000 x g at 4 °C). The methanol layer was removed and protein pellets were dried at RT for 10 minutes. Protein pellets were resuspended in digestion buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5). The urea concentration was diluted to 4 M, then proteins were digested with Lys-C overnight (10 ng/µL, 25 °C, 16 h). The urea concentration was further diluted to 1 M and samples were digested with trypsin (5 ng/µL) for 6 hours at 37°C. Following digestion, peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5% TFA. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) columns and samples were eluted sequentially, first with 40% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.5% acetic acid and then 80% ACN/0.5% acetic acid. Eluted peptides were dried in a CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco, Kansas City, MO) running at 30 °C. Peptide concentrations were measured using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit, then 50 µg aliquots of each samples were dried in the CentriVap for further processing.

### Data Protocol
An in-house software pipeline was used to process all proteomics data3. Raw files were converted to mzXML files and searched against a composite human UniProt database containing forward and reverse sequences using the Sequest algorithm. MS/MS spectra were matched with fully tryptic peptides from this composite dataset using a precursor ion tolerance of 20 ppm and a product ion tolerance of 0.6 Da. TMT modification of peptide N-termini and lysine residues (+229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using linear discriminant analysis (LDA) as previously described3. Non-unique peptides that matched to multiple proteins were assigned to proteins that contained the largest number of matched redundant peptides sequences using the principle of Occam’s razor3. Quantification of TMT reporter ion intensities was performed by extracting the most intense ion within a 0.003 m/z window at the predicted m/z value for each reporter ion. TMT spectra were used for quantification when the sum of the signal-to-noise for all the reporter ions was greater than 200 and the isolation specificity was greater than 0.754. Peptide level intensities were then used to fit a Bayesian model for protein quantification as previously described5. Posterior means and variances wer

### Publication Abstract
The process wherein dividing cells exhaust proliferative capacity and enter into replicative senescence has become a prominent model for cellular aging in vitro. Despite decades of study, this cellular state is not fully understood in culture and even much less so during aging. Here, we revisit Leonard Hayflick's original observation of replicative senescence in WI-38 human lung fibroblasts equipped with a battery of modern techniques including RNA-seq, single-cell RNA-seq, proteomics, metabolomics, and ATAC-seq. We find evidence that the transition to a senescent state manifests early, increases gradually, and corresponds to a concomitant global increase in DNA accessibility in nucleolar and lamin associated domains. Furthermore, we demonstrate that senescent WI-38 cells acquire a striking resemblance to myofibroblasts in a process similar to the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) that is regulated by t YAP1/TEAD1 and TGF-&#x3b2;2. Lastly, we show that verteporfin inhibition of YAP1/TEAD1 activity in aged WI-38 cells robustly attenuates this gene expression program.

### Keywords
Hayflick limit, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Calico Life Sciences LLC
Calico Life Sciences, CA, USA

### Submitter
Fiona McAllister

### Lab Head
Dr Fiona Elizabeth McAllister
Calico Life Sciences, CA, USA


