### Accession
PXD007781

### Title
Massively parallel genetic resistance screens

### Description
Here we describe the use of multiple forward genetic screens executed in parallel to identify those genes, and their cognate pathways, that when overexpressed, silenced or mutated confer resistance in BRAF mutant colon cancer to a BRAF/MEK/EGFR inhibitor combination. We demonstrate that this resistance landscape is finite, relatively constrained to a small number of pathways and that it is possible to exploit the evolutionary dynamics that underpins the clonal expansion of drug resistant cells therapeutically.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were lysed by probe sonication/boiling and protein extracts were subjected to trypsin digestion. The tryptic peptides were labelled with the TMT10plex reagents, combined at equal amounts and fractionated with high-pH C18 HPLC. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed with IMAC. LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 system coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer. MS3 level quantification with Synchronous Precursor Selection was used for total proteome measurements whereas phosphopeptide measurements were obtained with an HCD method at the MS2 level.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were subjected to database search and quantification in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 using the SequestHT node followed by Percolator validation. Protein and phosphopeptide quantification was obtained by the sum of column-normalized TMT spectrum S/N followed by row-mean scaling.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Tmt, Colon, Cancer

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


