### Accession
PXD022566

### Title
Human EDEM2 proteomics and glycoproteomics datasets

### Description
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) homeostasis is maintained by redirecting misfolded or unfolded polypeptide products towards the endoplasmic reticulum associated degradation (ERAD), where proteins are sent to degradation in the ubiquitin-proteasome system. One active–player in this process, is EDEM2 (ER degradation-enhancing alpha-mannosidase-like protein 2), presumably to be one of the first ER mannosidases to act in the early steps of ERAD. Here, we provide a full data set encoding a proteomic, affinity-proteomic and glycoproteomic analysis of melanoma cells with altered expression level of EDEM2. Our affinity-proteomics data are complemented by molecular mass separation of the identified complexes in sucrose fractionation experiments, while the glycoproteomic results allowed the identification of new glycosylation sites regulated by EDEM2 altered expression level. These results were also validated by alternative biochemical methods.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from A375 melanoma cells overexpressing the HA-tagged version of human EDEM2 or an empty vector (control cells) using 1% Digitonin. The samples were affinity-enriched in EDEM2 using an antibody recognizing the HA-tag and the resulting protein complexes were captured on protein A-Sepharose coated beads. These were recovered using Soft Elution Buffer (SEB) and separated in Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate PolyAcrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). The proteins were reduced, alkylated, in gel trypsin digested overnight and the isolated peptides were analyzed using LC-MS/MS. For sucrose fractionation experiments, the protein content from cells overexpressing EDEM2 was extracted in 1% Digitonin and the subsequent complexes were separated on a 14 fractions of 10-40% sucrose gradient, by overnight centrifugation at 30 000 rpm in a SW40Ti rotor. Proteins from each fraction were isolated using Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation and then underwent overnight trypsin digestion, before LC-MS/MS analysis. For glycoproteomic analysis, control and A375 melanoma cells with down regulated EDEM2 expression were subject to protein extraction and overnight protease digestion. The samples were enriched in glycopeptides using Concanavalin A and subsequent released by EndoH digestion. All the samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy-nanoLC II (Thermo Scientific) connected online to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For data acquisition various data-dependent methods were used, which included the fragmentation of top 5, 10 or 15 most abundant ions from the MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched against the human version of the UniProtKB database using either the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment or using the SEQUEST/SEQUESTHT algorithm integrated into Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The following settings were used for data analysis:  Trypsin/Glu C (depending on the experiment) as the selected protease with maximum two/four missed cleavages, Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.01 Da) as a fixed modification and Methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) as a variable modification and protein N-terminus acetylation (+42.01 Da) only for Andromeda search settings. For the MaxQuant first search the maximum precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm and for the second search a tolerance of no more than 7 ppm was used. All the SEQUEST/SEQUESTHT analysis was performed by using a 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance. For fragment ion mass deviation no more than 0.5 Da was allowed for ion trap acquired data and 0.02 Da for the data acquired in the orbital trap. For the glycoproteomics dataset the HexNAc (+203.08 Da) and dHexHexNAc (+349.14 Da) modifications were additionally included as variable modifications. To limit the false discovery identifications a second search was performed against the reversed sequences and the results were filtered using the target-decoy method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Edem2, Erad, Glycoproteomics, Melanoma, Lc-ms/ms, Affinity proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Splaiul Independentei 296, 060031 Bucharest 17, Romania
Institute of Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy (IBRA)

### Submitter
Cristian Munteanu

### Lab Head
Dr Stefana M. Petrescu
Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Splaiul Independentei 296, 060031 Bucharest 17, Romania


