### Accession
PXD036644

### Title
Targeting kinome reprogramming in ESR1 fusion-driven breast cancer

### Description
Multiplexed, deep-scale LC-MSMS analysis for proteome and phosphoproteome expression profile and the targeted LC-MSMS analysis for kinases in enriched kinome of the ER+ breast cancer patient-derived xenograft tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome and Phosphoproteome sample processing: Tumor tissues were pulverized in capped cryo-pulverization bags.  Cells from tissue powder were further lysed in 8M Urea lysis buffer.  Proteins were digested by LysC and Trypsin enzyme at 37ºC overnight.  Peptides were labeled with TMT and fractionated using offline high pH RP-HPLC to 96 fractions.  Collected fractions were combined in a box-car scheme to reduce the number of fractions to 25.  5% of peptides from these fractions were used for proteome LC-MSMS analysis using Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The remaining peptides were further pooled into 13 fractions for phosphopeptide enrichment.  The enrichment used iron conjugated to NTA Superflow Agarose beads (Qiagen, cat no 30410).  Fractions with enriched phosphopeptides were analyzed by the same LC-MSMS system above. SureKiP sample processing:  A Covaris CP02 Pulverizer was used to pulverized tissue which was separated into three tubes for RNA isolation, Urea based denatured protein extraction and a detergent based native protein lysate (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) 0.5% Triton X-100, 150mM NaCl). Both hm9KiP and 5KiPv2 kinobeads were washed in a high salt buffer and then equilibrated with lysis buffer. Lysates were incubated with kinobeads for 1 hour at 4 oC with rotation. Kinobeads were then washed with a high salt detergent buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 600 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA with 0.5% Triton X-100) and subsequently with lower salt and detergent until the final two washes with pure water. On-bead digestion was performed by adding 30 μL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 and heating at 65oC for 10 min followed by the addition of 250ng of Trypsin and an overnight incubation at 37 oC. A detergent removal kit (HiPPR Detergent Removal Kit (Thermo Scientific)) was used before samples were dried in a speed-vac.  One quarter of the peptides from hm9Kip samples were analyzed on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with an EASY- nLCTM 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a hybrid DDA/PRM method. Briefly, 4 min scan windows were defined for pre-selected targets which were isolated with the quadrupole and fragmented by HCD followed by a 30,000 resolution scan in the orbitrap. With the remaining duty-cycle time, a precursor scan was performed from 300-1200 m/z and a resolution of 120,000. A top-20 method was employed for DDA acquisition.  For 5KiPv2 kinobeads, one quarter or one sixth of peptides were loaded onto a EvoSep with a 8 cm column (EV 1109) and a 30 μm steel emitter. A 44minute gradient was used and custom SureQuant acquision scheme was used on an Exploris 480 (Thermo). 106 stable isotope labeled peptides were added at 10 fmol on column.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics and Phosphoproteomics data processing: Raw MS/MS data were processed using Philosopher developed by Nesvishskii’s lab (PMID: 32669682) using human plus mouse RefSeq database.  Digestion enzymes were set to trypsin and trypsin-P.  Maximum missed cleavage is 4.  Setting for variable modifications include: oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-term), Deamidation (N), PyroGlu (Q), and fixed modifications include: Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT-11 (peptide N-term, K).  The maximum charge was set at 5.  Precursor mass tolerance (p.p.m.) was 20.  Product mass tolerance (p.p.m.) was 20.  The FDR for peptide was set at 1%.  Search result files were further processed using gpGrouper (PMID: 30093420) to generate gene-level quantification data. Expression values were normalized against the RefMix channel TMT126 and then batch correct across all 5 plex using ComBat (PMID: 16632515). SureKiP data processing:  Raw files were analyzed using Skyline and a SureQuant generated analysis scheme. All peaks were checked manually to ensure accurate quantification. Ratios to heavy peptide standards were computed and reported. 3 fragment ions were required for quantification and interference ions were manually removed from analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Esr1 fusion, Breast cancer patient-derived xenograft (pdx) tumor, Proteome, Breast cancer, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Charles E. Foulds, Ph.D. Assistant Professor Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center Baylor College of Medicine
Baylor College of Medicine

### Submitter
Meggie Young

### Lab Head
Dr Charles E. Foulds
Charles E. Foulds, Ph.D. Assistant Professor Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center Baylor College of Medicine


