### Accession
PXD005360

### Title
Proteomic Profiling of mouse High Grade Glioma

### Description
High throughput proteomics profiling provide an unprecedented opportunity for dissecting molecular mechanisms in cancer biology. Here we present deep profiling of whole proteome and phosphoproteome in two high-grade glioma mouse models driven by mutated receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) oncogenes. Using multiplex isobaric labeling (10-plex TMT) coupled with extensive liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry, we analyzed ~ 12K genes and > 30K phosphosites by extensive mass spectrometry. Systematical reprogramming of the proteome and phosphoproteome were observed in HGG tumors compare to normal cortex.

### Sample Protocol
Snap frozen HGG tumors and normal cortex tissues were lysed, digested and labeled with 10 different TMT tags. The TMT labeled peptides were pooled with equal amount of each and fractionated into 30 fractions in a concatenated fashion on a RP-HPLC column (4.6 mm x 250 mm) under basic pH condition. Each fraction was subjected to whole proteome and phosphoproteome analysis on a second acid PH reverse phase column (110 cm X 75 µm, 1.9 μm C18 resin) during a long gradient (up to 9h) of ~ 10-55% buffer B (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 5% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% ACN). Q Exactive MS (Thermo Scientific) was used in the analysis.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files were processed using the newly developed hybrid JUMP searching engine against UniProt mouse database. Searches were performed using 6 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions and 10 ppm for product ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.162932 Da) were used for static modifications. Dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99491 Da) and Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation (+79.96633 Da) for phosphoproteome data. The assigned peptides were divided into groups by peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge state, and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein or phosphopeptide FDR to below 1%. Proteins or phosphopeptides were quantified by summing the quantification data of all matched PSMs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
High-grade glioma (hgg), Genomics, Transcriptome, Cancer driver, Proteome, Brain tumor, Rnaseq, Pdgfra, Proteomics, Phosphoproteome, Genome, Mass spectrometry, And ntrk

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Proteomics

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


