### Accession
PXD012873

### Title
Proteome changes to primary human MSCs subjected to high-intensity cyclic tensile strain (CTS) aligned to SUN2 overexpressing samples

### Description
Our current understanding of cellular mechano-signalling is based on static models, which do not replicate the dynamics of living tissues. Here, we examined the time-dependent response of primary human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) to cyclic tensile strain (CTS). At low-intensity strain (1 hour, 4% CTS at 1 Hz) morphological changes mimicked responses to increased substrate stiffness. As the strain regime was intensified (frequency increased to 5 Hz), we characterised rapid establishment of a broad, structured and reversible protein-level response, even as transcription was apparently downregulated. Protein abundance was regulated coincident with changes to protein conformation and post transcriptional modification. Furthermore, we characterised changes within the linker of nucleo- and cytoskeleton (LINC) complex of proteins that bridges the nuclear envelope, and specifically to levels of SUN domain-containing protein 2 (SUN2). The result of this regulation was to decouple mechano-transmission between the cytoskeleton and the nucleus, thus conferring protection to chromatin.

### Sample Protocol
Cyclic tensile strain (CTS) CTS was administered to cells using a FlexCell Tension Plus System (FlexCell International), as described previously. Briefly, cells were seeded onto type-I collagen coated BioFlex plates (FlexCell International) and cultured for 48 hours to ensure adhesion. Cells were strained for 1 or 2 hoursat, “low intensity” (0 –4% strain at 1 Hz), “intermediate intensity” (0 –4% strain at 2 Hz), or “high intensity” (2.6 –6.2% strain at 5 Hz). Cells were fixed or lysed for downstream analysis either immediately following straining, or having been maintained in culture for a further 3 or 24 hours.  Mass spectrometry (MS) sample preparation, analysis and data processing Six 1.6 mm steel beads (Next Advance) were added to the cell pellet tube with 30 μLSL-DOC (1.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (Sigma), 0.3% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma),25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB, Fluka),protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), sodium fluoride (Sigma), and sodium orthovanadate (Sigma)in de-ionised (DI) water). Cells were homogenized in a Bullet Blender (Next Advance) at maximum speed for 2 min. Homogenates were cleared by centrifugation (12°C, 10k rpm, 5 min).  Immobilized-trypsin beads (Perfinity Biosciences) were suspended in 150 μL of digest buffer (1.33 mM CaCl2(Sigma)in 25 mM AB) and 50 μL of protein lysate and shaken overnight at 37 °C. The resulting digest was then reduced (addition of 4μL x 500 mM DTT dithiothreitol (Sigma) in 25 mM AB; 10 min. shaking at 60 °C) and alkylated (addition of 12 μL x 500 mM iodoacetamide(Sigma)in 25 mM AB; 30 min. shaking at RT). Peptides were acidified by addition of 5 μL x 10% trifluoroacetic acid (Riedel-de Haën) in DI water, and cleaned by two-phase extraction (2 x addition of 200 μL ethyl acetate(Sigma)followed by vortexing and aspiration of the organic layer). Peptides were desalted, in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol, using POROS R3 beads (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized. Peptide concentrations (measured by Direct Detect spectrophotometer, Millipore) in injection buffer (5% HPLC grade acetonitrile(ACN, Fisher Scientific)0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in DIwater) were adjusted to 300 ng/μL. Digested samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 RSLC (Dionex Corporation) coupled to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer.Peptide mixtures were separated using a multistep gradient from 95% A (0.1% FA in water) and 5% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrileACN) to 7% B at 1 min, 18% B at 58 min, 27% B in 72 min and 60% B at 74 min at 300 nL/min, usinga 75 mm x 250 μm inner diameter1.7 M CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). In all MS experiments, peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra from multiple samples were aligned using Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) and searched using Mascot (Matrix Science UK), against the SWISS-Prot and TREMBL human databases. The peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues(monoisotopic mass change, 57.021 Da), oxidized methionine (15.995 Da), hydroxylation of asparagine, aspartic acid, proline or lysine (15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine, threonine, histidine or aspartate (79.966 Da). In experiments in which cysteine residues were labeled withmBBr, the modification was searched for in twopossible oxidationstates (133.053 Daand 150.056 Da). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed.Peptide detection intensities were exported from Progenesis QI as Excel spreadsheets (Microsoft) for further processing.

### Publication Abstract
Studies of cellular mechano-signaling have often utilized static models that do not fully replicate the dynamics of living tissues. Here, we examine the time-dependent response of primary human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) to cyclic tensile strain (CTS). At low-intensity strain (1&#x2009;h, 4% CTS at 1&#x2009;Hz), cell characteristics mimic responses to increased substrate stiffness. As the strain regime is intensified (frequency increased to 5&#x2009;Hz), we characterize rapid establishment of a broad, structured and reversible protein-level response, even as transcription is apparently downregulated. Protein abundance is quantified coincident with changes to protein conformation and post-translational modification (PTM). Furthermore, we characterize changes to the linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton (LINC) complex that bridges the nuclear envelope, and specifically to levels and PTMs of Sad1/UNC-84 (SUN) domain-containing protein 2 (SUN2). The result of this regulation is to decouple mechano-transmission between the cytoskeleton and the nucleus, thus conferring protection to chromatin.

### Keywords
Cts, Msc

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Venkatesh Mallikarjun

### Lab Head
Dr Joe Swift
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester


