### Accession
PXD023523

### Title
RNA antisnse puriification of Tau exon 10 pre-mRNA

### Description
In this study, we demonstrated the use of the RNA Antisense Purification by Mass Spectrometry (RAP-MS) method to identify proteins involved in specific alternative splicing events. Specifically, we applied the RAP-MS method to identify proteins that interact with the Tau pre-mRNA around its exon 10 region.

### Sample Protocol
UV cross linking: SH-SY5Y cells stably expressing the Tau-minigene were cultured in 150 mm plates. Cells were UV irradiated with 600 mJ/cm2 in ice cold PBS at 80% cell confluence. Cells were then scraped, washed twice with PBS, and pelleted at 800 g for 5 min at 4°C.  Total cell lysate preparation: About 240 million cells (12x 20 million) were lysed by completely resuspending frozen cell pellets in ice-cold detergent-based Cell Lysis Buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 500 mM LiCl, 0.5% dodecyl maltoside (DDM, Sigma), 0.2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Ambion), 0.1% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma), 1× Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and Murine RNase Inhibitor (New England Biolabs)). Samples were then incubated for 10 minutes on ice to allow lysis to proceed. During this incubation period, each cell sample was passed 5 times through a 26-gauge needle attached to a 1 mL syringe to disrupt the pellets and shear genomic DNA. Each sample was then sonicated at 20% pulse power for 3 times in intermittent pulses (1 second on, 2 seconds off). The samples were then treated for 10 minutes at 37 °C with 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM CaCl2, and 20 U of TURBO DNase (Ambion) to digest DNA. Samples were returned to ice and the reaction was immediately terminated by the addition of 10 mM EDTA and 5 mM EGTA. Disulfide bonds were reduced by addition of 2.5 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and samples were then mixed with twice the lysate volume of 1.5× LiCl/Urea Buffer (the final1 × Buffer contains 10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 500 mM LiCl, 0.5% DDM, 0.2% SDS, 0.1% deoxycholate, 4M urea, 2.5 mM TCEP). Lysates were incubated on ice for 10 minutes then cleared by centrifugation for 10 minutes at maximum speed. Supernatants were saved.  RNA Antisense Purification of crosslinked complexes: Lysate samples from 240 million cells (half lysate used for Tau minigene pre-mRNA pull-down, the other half lysate used for GAPDH mature transcript control pull-down) were pre-cleared with 500 µl Streptavidin coated Sepharose beads (GE) at 37 °C for 30 minutes. Biotinylated 90-mer DNA oligonucleotide probes specific for the RNA target of interest (12 µg Tau probes and 12 µg GAPDH probes) were heat-denatured at 85 °C for 3 minutes and then snap-cooled on ice. Probes and pre-cleared lysate were mixed and incubated at 67 °C using an Eppendorf thermomixer R with intermittent shaking (30 seconds shaking, 30 seconds off) for 2 hours. Hybrids of biotinylated DNA probes and target RNA were then bound to streptavidin beads at 67 °C for 30 minutes with intermittent shaking as above. Beads with captured hybrids were washed 5 times with LiCl/Urea Hybridization Buffer at 67 °C for 5 minutes to remove non-specifically associated proteins.   Elution and analysis of RNA samples: For qPCR examination of RNA captures, beads with hybrids were centrifuged at 500g for 2 minutes at 4 °C and then the supernatant was discarded. Beads were then resuspended by pipetting in 20 µL NLS RNA Elution Buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, 2% NLS, 2.5 mM TCEP). To release the target RNA, beads were heated for 2 minutes at 95 °C. Then eluted target RNA molecules were incubated with 1 µg Proteinase K for 1 hour at 55 °C to remove all proteins. The remaining nucleic acids were then purified by ethanol precipitation onto SILANE beads (Thermo Scientific). DNA probes were removed by digestion with TURBO DNase (Ambion). Further, qRT-PCR was performed to quantify RNA enrichment.  Elution and analysis of protein samples: For mass spectrometry analysis of captured protein contents, on beads trypsin digestion was performed. In brief, after oligo capturing, beads were further washed by 6 times of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH=8.0). 1.2 µg trypsin/ 120 million cells were added to the beads and incubated overnight at 37 °C. 0.8 µg trypsin/120 million cells were added the next day and incubated for another 2-4 hrs. Trypsin Supernatant was collected for mass spectrometry analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis: Peptide samples were resuspended in 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), loaded onto a home-made trap-column (5cm x 200 µm inner diameter; POROS 10um 10R2 C18 resin) and a home-made analytical column (50cm x 50µm inner diameter; Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 5µm resin), and eluted with a 120min reversed-phase gradient at 70nl/min on a Thermo Fisher Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano UPLC system coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. A parent ion scan was performed using a resolving power of 120,000 and then up to the 20 most intense peaks were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.2. For protein identification, search was against the SwissProt human proteome database (42,173 protein isoform entries), while the search parameters specified a parent ion mass tolerance of 10ppm, and an MS/MS fragment ion tolerance of 0.02Da, with up to two missed cleavages allowed for trypsin.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative splicing in Tau exon 10 generates 3&#xa0;R- and 4&#xa0;R-Tau proteoforms, which have equal abundance in healthy adult human brain. Aberrant alternative splicing in Tau exon 10 leads to distortion of the balanced 3&#xa0;R- and 4&#xa0;R-Tau expression levels, which is a causal factor to trigger toxic Tau aggregation, neuron dysfunction and patient death in a group of neurodegenerative diseases known as tauopathies. Hence, identification of regulators upstream of the Tau exon 10 splicing events are crucial to understanding pathogenic mechanisms driving tauopathies. In this study, we used RNA Antisense Purification with Mass Spectrometry (RAP-MS) analysis to identify RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) that interact with the Tau pre-mRNA near exon 10. Among the newly identified RBP candidates, we show that knockdown of hnRNPC induces Tau exon 10 skipping whereas overexpression of hnRNPC promotes Tau exon 10 inclusion. In addition, we show that hnRNPC interacts with the poly-uridine (U-tract) sequences in introns 9 and 10 of Tau pre-mRNA. Mutation of these U-tract motifs abolished binding of hnRNPC with Tau pre-mRNA fragment and blocked its impact on Tau exon 10 inclusion. These findings indicate that hnRNPC binds and utilizes these U-tract motifs located in introns 9 and 10 of Tau pre-mRNA to promote Tau exon 10 inclusion. Intriguingly, high hnRNPC expression level is associated with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), a sporadic tauopathy with pathological accumulation of Tau species that contain exon 10, which suggests a putative therapeutic role of hnRNPC for PSP treatment. [Figure: see text].

### Keywords
Human, Splicing, Rap-ms, Rna antisense purification, Tau

### Affiliations
McMaster University
Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences McMaster University

### Submitter
Yu Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Yu Lu
Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences McMaster University


