### Accession
PXD020086

### Title
Hypoxia inducible factors positively regulate hepatitis B virus replication by activating the basal core promoter

### Description
Background and Aims: Chronic HBV infection is a major cause of liver disease and cancer. Virus-host interactions and the pathogenesis of virus-induced liver disease are only partially understood. Hypoxia has been shown to play a major role in disease biology and carcinogenesis and HBV replicates a naturally hypoxic organ. In this study we aimed to investigate the role of liver hypoxia for HBV infection. Methods: Using cell culture, animal models and human tissues we investigated the impact of hyproxia on the HBV life cycle.   Results:  Establishing liver cell-based model systems that mimic hepatic oxygen, we uncover a major role of hypoxia in regulating HBV transcription. Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) perturb HBV replication and expression in cell-based and animal models. Conservation of hypoxia responsive elements in the viral basal core promoter uncover an essential role for HIFs in regulating the hepadnaviridae family of hepatotropic viruses.  Conclusions: Identifying a role for this conserved oxygen sensors in regulating HBV replication provides a new understanding of virus-host interactions and liver disease biology, improve state-of-the-art HBV model systems and unravels new opportunities for therapeutic targeting of chronic hepatitis B.

### Sample Protocol
TMT-based whole cell lysate proteomics Huh-7 cells were washed twice with PBS, and lysed in 150 µl of 6M Guanidine/50 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Samples were vortexed extensively then sonicated. Cell debris was removed by centrifuging at 13,000 g for 10 min twice. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and samples were incubated for 20 min. Cysteines were alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide and incubated 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with DTT for 15 min. Samples were diluted with 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 to 1.5 M Guanidine followed by digestion at room temperature for 3 hr with LysC protease at a 1:100 protease-to protein ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. The reaction was quenched with 1 % formic acid, samples were spun at 21,000 g for 10 min to remove debris and undigested protein, then subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (Sep-Pak, Waters) and vacuum centrifuged to near-dryness. In preparation for TMT labelling, desalted peptides were dissolved in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Peptide concentration was measured by micro BCA (Pierce), and 50 µg of peptide per sample was labelled with TMT reagent (control - TMT 126; hypoxia - TMT 127N). TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 43 L anhydrous acetonitrile and 5 l added to peptide sample at a final acetonitrile concentration of 30 % (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 hr, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5 % (v/v). TMT-labelled samples were combined at a 1:1 ratio. The sample was vacuum-centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Sep-Pak, Waters). Offline high pH reversed-phase fractionation of peptides was performed, with peptide fractions combined as described previously (Weekes et al., 2014).   Liquid Chromatography and Tandem Mass Spectrometry  An unfractionated singleshot was analysed initially to ensure similar peptide loading for both TMT channels, thus avoiding the need for excessive electronic normalization. As the sum signal:noise for the two channels was very similar, data from the unfractionated singleshot experiment was analysed with data for the corresponding fractions to increase the overall number of peptides quantified. Mass spectrometry data were acquired using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (unfractionated singleshot) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC II liquid chromatography (LC) pump or an Orbitrap Fusion (fractions) coupled with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 LC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method (McAlister et al., 2012; Ting, Rad, Gygi, & Haas, 2011).  For Orbitrap Elite Experiments Peptides were separated on a 100 mm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 0.5 cm of Magic C4 resin (5 mm, 100 Å, Michrom Bioresources) followed by approximately 20 cm of Maccel C18 resin (3 mm, 200 Å, Nest Group). Peptides were separated using a 3 hr gradient of 6 to 30 % acetonitrile in 0.125 % formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 60,000, 300-1500 Th, AGC target 1x106, maximum injection time 150 ms). The top ten precursors were then selected for MS2/MS3 analysis. MS2 analysis consisted of CID (quadrupole ion trap analysis, AGC 2x103, NCE 35, q-value 0.25, maximum injection time 100 ms). MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD prior to Orbitrap analysis (NCE 50, max AGC 1.5x105, maximum injection time 250 ms, isolation specificity 2.5 Th, resolution 30,000) (McAlister et al., 2012).  For Orbitrap Fusion Experiments Peptides were separated on a 75 mm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 0.5 cm of Magic C4 resin (5 mm, 100 Å, Michrom Bioresources) followed by approximately 20 cm of GP118 resin (1.8 mm, 120 Å, Sepax Technologies). Peptides were separated using a 3 hr gradient of 6 to 30 % acetonitrile in 0.125 % formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 400-1400 Th, AGC target 2x105, maximum injection time 200 ms). ‘Top speed’ (2 s) was selected for MS2 analysis, which consisted of CID (quadrupole ion trap analysis, AGC 4x103, NCE 35, maximum injection time 150 ms). The top ten precursors were selected for MS3 analysis, in which precursors were fragmented by HCD prior to Orbitrap analysis (NCE 55, max AGC 5x104, maximum injection time 250 ms, isolation specificity 0.5 Th, resolution 60,000) (McAlister et al., 2012).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline as described previously (Weekes et al., 2014). Briefly, MS spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. A combined database was constructed from a combined human Uniprot and Trembl database (February 4th, 2014) and common contaminants such as porcine trypsin and endoproteinase LysC. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance. Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, we used a target-decoy strategy (Elias & Gygi, 2007, 2010). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1%. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (Huttlin et al., 2010), considering the following parameters: XCorr, DCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using in-house software, as described previously (Pease et al., 2013). Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127N) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. We required every individual peptide used for quantitation to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions (minimum of 1,250 per spectrum) so that each on its own provided a representative picture of relative protein abundance (McAlister et al., 2012). We additionally employed an isolation specificity filter to minimize peptide co-isolation (Ting et al., 2011). Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (more than 9 TMT channels missing and/or a combined signal:noise ratio of less than 100 across all TMT reporter ions) or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Excel. Reverse and contaminant proteins were removed, then both reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming equal protein loading across samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hif, Hypoxia, Hepatitis b

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK


