### Accession
PXD016664

### Title
Proteomic analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid during invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in mice and humans

### Description
Comprehensive proteomic analysis of the protein expression landscape of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid during invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in murine and human samples. 38 murine BALF samples (10 Aspergillus fumigatus infected mice without immunosuppression and without invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA), 19 immunosuppressed and infected mice with IPA and 9 immunosuppressed animals without infection) were analysed for their global protein expression. In addition, 54 human BALF specimen from patients with probable IPA (23 samples), proven IPA (4 cases) and 27 control samples from patients with unrelated pulmonary diseases were analysed for their global protein composition. Host responses and Aspergillus fumigatus-specific proteins detectable in BALF were studied.

### Sample Protocol
BAL samples (50µl) were processed via the eFASP protocol using Microcon YM-30 centrifugal filter units.Peptides were generated with trypsin. SDC was removed by ethyl acetate.Tryptic peptides were analyzed with a Dionex UHPLC coupled by a nanaospray ion source to an Orbitarp Fusion. Samples were loaded on a 2 cm trap column and separated during a 150 min non-linear H2=/Acetonitril gradient (3-95%, supplemented with 0.1% Formic Acid).Full MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 120.000 in the Orbitarp analyzer (m/z 350-1550). Peptides were fragmented by HCD (30% activation energy) and fragment ion spectra were acquired in the ion trap in rapid mode using quadrupole isolation.The following conditions were used: spray voltage of 2.2 kV, heated capillary temperature of 275°C, S‐lens RF level of 60 %, a maximum automatic gain control (AGC) value of 1 × 106 counts for MS1 with a maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms and a maximum AGC value of 3 × 103 for MS2, with a maximum ion accumulation time of 250 ms. A dynamic mass exclusion time window of 30 seconds was set with a 10 ppm maximum mass window.

### Data Protocol
RAW files from mouse samples were searched against the UniProt mouse proteome and the Aspergillus fumigatus strain CEA10 proteome (versions March 2018 from UniProt). Patient samples were analyzed using the UniProt databases (homo sapiens version 05.2016, reviewed sequences) and an Aspergillus fumigatus Uniprot database (containing reviewed and unreviewed sequences from December 2016) with MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 . The parameters were set as follows: main search peptide tolerance: 4.5 ppm; enzyme: trypsin, max. 2 missed cleavages; static modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation; variable modification: methionine oxidation. PSM (peptide specific matches) and protein FDR was set to 0.01. For advanced identification the Second Peptide Search in MS2 spectra in both calculations and the Match Between Runs feature for mouse samples were enabled. Label-free quantification of proteins with normalization was done in MaxQuant. LFQ minimum ratio count was set to one. Only unique and razor peptides, unmodified or modified, were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bal fluid, Bronchoalveolar lavage, Proteomics, Invasive aspergillosis, Aspergillus fumigatus

### Affiliations
Host Septomics, ZIK Septomics, University Hospital Jena, Jena,Germany
Host Septomics - ZIK Septomics
Jena University Hosptial
Jena
Germany

### Submitter
Mario Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Hortense Slevogt
Host Septomics, ZIK Septomics, University Hospital Jena, Jena,Germany


