### Accession
PXD024627

### Title
Proteomic analysis of three medically important Nigerian Naja (Naja haje, Naja katiensis and Naja nigricollis) snake venoms

### Description
The venom proteomes of three medically important Nigerian Elapidae snakes Naja haje, Naja katiensis and Naja nigricollis was studied using Hydrophilic Interaction Liquid Chromatography (HILIC) coupled with LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides/Proteins were identified and characterised using the SEQUEST and X!Tandem algorithms incorporated on to the Scaffold proteome software version 4.10.0. The Nigerian elapid species studied displayed about 70% similarity in composition of their venoms.

### Sample Protocol
Adult snakes from each species (N. haje, N. katiensis, and N. nigricollis) were captured from different regions of Nigeria. Venoms were extracted from individual snakes of the same species, pooled together, lyophilised, and stored at -20oC until further use. Fifty micrograms (50 µg) of crude venom samples were suspended in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Sigma) before reduction with 10 mM (DTT; Sigma) in 50 mM TEAB for 40 min at 56°C. Cysteine residues were alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in 50 mM TEAB for 30 min at 20 to 25°C in the dark. After alkylation, two-fold dilutions of the samples were made with binding buffer (100 mM ammonium acetate, 30% acetonitrile, pH 4.5). The protein solution was added to MagResyn (Resyn Biosciences) HILIC magnetic particles prepared following the manufacturer’s instructions and incubated overnight at 4 °C After binding of the proteins, the supernatant was removed and magnetic particles were washed twice with washing buffer (95% acetonitrile). Then, the magnetic particles were suspended in 50 mM ammonium formate (pH 8.0) containing trypsin (Promega) to a final ratio of 1:10. After 4 h of incubation at 37°C, the peptides were collected and analysed using liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
The raw files generated by the mass spectrometer were imported into Proteome Discoverer v1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and processed using the Sequest and Amanda algorithms. Database interrogation was performed against a concatenated database created by concatenating all ‘snake protein’ entries in the Uniprot-Serpentes database with the cRAP contaminant database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Deamination (NQ), oxidation (M), and acetylation of the N-terminal protein were allowed as dynamic modifications and thiomethyl of C was used as a static modification. Peptide validation was performed using the Target-Decoy PSM validator node. The search results were imported into Scaffold Q+ for further validation (www.proteomesoftware.com).

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics technologies enable a comprehensive study of complex proteins and their functions. The venom proteomes of three medically important Nigerian Elapidae snakes Naja haje, Naja katiensis and Naja nigricollis was studied using HILIC coupled with LC-MS/MS analysis. Results revealed a total of 57, 55, and 46 proteins in the venoms of N. haje, N. katiensis, and N. nigricollis, respectively, with molecular mass ranging between 5 and 185 &#xa0;kDa. These snakes have 38 common proteins in addition to 3 uncommon proteins: actiflagelin, cathelicidin, and cystatin identified in their venoms. The identified proteins belonged to 14 protein families in N. haje and N. katiensis, and 12 protein families in N. nigricollis. Of the total venom proteins, 3FTx was the most abundant protein family, constituting 52% in N. haje and N. katiensis, and 41% in N. nigricollis, followed by PLA<sub>2</sub>, constituting 37% in N. nigricollis, 26% in N. haje, and 24% in N. katiensis. Other protein families, including LAAO, CRISPs, VEGF, PLB, CVF, SVMP, SVH, AMP, PI, Globin, Actin, and C-type lectins, were also detected, although, at very low abundances. Quantification of the relative abundance of each protein revealed that alpha and beta fibrinogenase and PLA<sub>2,</sub> which constituted 18-26% of the total proteome, were the most abundant. The 3 uncommon proteins have no known function in snake venom. However, actiflagelin activates sperm motility; cystatin inhibits angiogenesis, while cathelicidin exerts antimicrobial effects. The three Nigerian Naja genus proteomes displayed 70% similarity in composition, which suggests the possibility of formulating antivenom that may cross-neutralise the venoms of cobra species found in Nigeria. These data provide insights into clinically relevant peptides/proteins present in the venoms of these snakes. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier&#xa0;PXD024627.

### Keywords
Proteomics; nigerian elapidae; venom proteome; naja haje; naja katiensis; naja nigricollis; actiflagelin; cathelicidin; cystatin.

### Affiliations
Federal University of Lafia, Nasarawa State, Nigeria
Department of Biochemistry/ Venom, Antivenom and Natural Toxins Research Center, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria

### Submitter
Fatima Adamude Amin

### Lab Head
Dr Emeka John Dingwoke
Department of Biochemistry/ Venom, Antivenom and Natural Toxins Research Center, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria


