### Accession
PXD017393

### Title
proteome landscapes of pancreatic cancer human-in-mouse patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models.

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by the presence of relatively few tumor cells surrounded a heterocellular non-cancerous cell population embedded in extracellular matrix, collectively named stroma. Despite the recognition that the stroma is an important contributor to the typically poor outcome of PDAC, its analysis has been hampered by the analysis of bulk tissue. Here we present a landscape of human epithelial PDAC cells of primary tumors (n=6) and metastases (n=4) in a mouse stroma background.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen bulk tumors from 10 PDX models and one human PDAC cell line (HPAF-II) were used for proteome analysis. 20 µm cryosections were pooled in an Eppendorf tube and were mixed with reducing sample buffer (SB) and separated on NUpage 4-12% gradient gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA), fixed in a solution of 50% ethanol and 3% phosphoric acid and stained with a 0.1% Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 solution (containing 34% methanol, 3% phosphoric acid and 15% ammonium sulfate). Proteins were in-gel reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 54 mMIodoacetamide (Sigma, Missouri, USA), respectively. Resolved  lanes were cut in five fractions, and each fraction was cut to 1 mm3 cubes. Proteins were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (6.25 ng/ml) (Promega, WI, USA) overnight and extracted from the gel with 1%  formic acid and 2x with 5% formic acid in 50% ACN, pooled and stored at -20°C until measurement. Peptide extracts concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge, dissolved in 50µl 0.5% TFA + 4% ACN and filtered through 0.22 µm membrane spinfilters (Millipore, Burlington, MA) into autosampler vials and were kept at 5°C until LC-MS/MS measurement on the same day. LC-MS/MS Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) equipped with a 40 cm × 75 μm ID fused silica column custom packed with 1.9 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua in 0.05% formic acid. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% gradient (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid (Fischer Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.6 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 64 ms and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot FASTA file (release January 2014, 61522 entries, canonical and isoforms, no fragments) and Uniprot mouse FASTA file (release June 2016, 42296 entris, canonical and isoforms, no fragments) using MaxQuant 1.5.2.8. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected, but not using the match between runs option. Proteins were quantified by label-free quantitation (LFQ) using default settings in MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by a relative paucity of cancer cells that are surrounded by an abundance of nontumor cells and extracellular matrix, known as stroma. The interaction between stroma and cancer cells contributes to poor outcome, but how proteins from these individual compartments drive aggressive tumor behavior is not known. Here, we report the proteomic analysis of laser-capture microdissected (LCM) PDAC samples. We isolated stroma, tumor, and bulk samples from a cohort with long- and short-term survivors. Compartment-specific proteins were measured by mass spectrometry, yielding what we believe to be the largest PDAC proteome landscape to date. These analyses revealed that, in bulk analysis, tumor-derived proteins were typically masked and that LCM was required to reveal biology and prognostic markers. We validated tumor CALB2 and stromal COL11A1 expression as compartment-specific prognostic markers. We identified and functionally addressed the contributions of the tumor cell receptor EPHA2 to tumor cell viability and motility, underscoring the value of compartment-specific protein analysis in PDAC.

### Keywords
Human, Mouse, Pdx, Pancreatic cancer, Stroma, Patient-derived xenograft

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


