### Accession
PXD030744

### Title
Label-free Quantitative Proteomics Approach to Unravel the Jerusalem artichoke (Helianthus tuberosus L.) Tuber

### Description
The present research investigates a ‘medicinal’ plant Jerusalem artichoke (abbreviated as JA) (Helianthus tuberosus L.) tuber proteome with an aim to unravel its proteome using a high-throughput proteomics technique. Although JA has been historically know to the Native Americans, it was brought back and spread to Europe by the colonists and in the late 19th century early 20th century it began to regain importance including its use for health and as a folk remedy for diabetes. In Japan (referred to as ‘kiku-imo’) its cultivation became popular mostly for health-related benefits such as reducing the blood sugar level. The group of (Genboku Takahashi et al.) has been working on the cultivation and utilization of kiku-imo tuber as a traditional/alternative medicine in daily life, and thus the research progressed to deeply look into the protein components through proteomics as very less is known about the proteome of the tubers, especially in relation to its importance as a functional food in treating diseases health conditions like diabetes. Using three commercially processed JA tuber products we used total protein extraction on the powdered samples in conjunction with label-free quantitate proteomic approach (mass spectrometry) to identify for the first time a comprehensive protein list for the JA tuber. A total of 2967 high‐confidence proteins were identified and categorized into different protein classes through bioinformatics. We have discussed these proteins especially in relation to their association with health and disease regulatory metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
The JA tuber samples, as commercial products (shown in Figure 1-bottom left, and marked as 1, 2 and 3) used for consumption, were obtained from local agricultural communities as follows: 1) JA tuber powder from Oguni town in Kumamoto prefecture (the tubers were placed in a drying hut for local agricultural products where steam generated through a hot spring was piped to complete the natural drying process and then powdered); 2) JA tuber powder from Shima city, Mie prefecture (the sliced tuber was ordinarily warm-air dried and then powdered); and, 3) JA tuber also from Shima city (Mie prefecture) was sliced and sun-dried to produce the JA tuber chips. For protein extraction, 1 g of dried tuber powder (and finely powdered in liquid nitrogen) from three tuber samples was homogenized in 10 mL of Tris-Mg/NP-40 buffer [0.5 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 2% (v/v) NP-40, 20 mM MgCl2) followed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 15 min at 4ºC. Supernatant so obtained was subjected to methanol-chloroform precipitation method twice followed by final washing of pellet with 80% acetone containing 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant (ver. 1.5.3.30). MS/MS spectra were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the Helianthus protein database downloaded from UniProt and 248 common contaminant proteins. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Allowed mass deviation was 4.5 ppm for peptides and 20 ppm for fragments. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%. Statistical analysis were carried out using Perseus software (ver. 1.5.8.5). Hits were only retained if they were quantified in at least two of the three replicates in at least one experiment. Missing values imputation of protein intensities were performed from a normal distribution (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8). Multiple sample test (ANOVA), controlled by Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 0.01, was applied to identify the significant differences in the protein abundance. Functional annotation of the identified proteins was carried out by PANTHER and Gene Ontology tools. Further, Partial least squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) plots were generated by MetaboAnalyst online tool.

### Publication Abstract
The present research investigates the tuber proteome of the 'medicinal' plant <i>Jerusalem artichoke</i> (abbreviated as JA) (<i>Helianthus tuberosus</i> L.) using a high-throughput proteomics technique. Although JA has been historically known to the Native Americans, it was introduced to Europe in the late 19th century and later spread to Japan (referred to as 'kiku-imo') as a folk remedy for diabetes. Genboku Takahashi research group has been working on the cultivation and utilization of kiku-imo tuber as a traditional/alternative medicine in daily life and researched on the lowering of blood sugar level, HbA1c, etc., in human subjects (unpublished data). Understanding the protein components of the tuber may shed light on its healing properties, especially related to diabetes. Using three commercially processed JA tuber products (dried powder and dried chips) we performed total protein extraction on the powdered samples using a label-free quantitate proteomic approach (mass spectrometry) and catalogued for the first time a comprehensive protein list for the JA tuber. A total of 2967 protein groups were identified, statistically analyzed, and further categorized into different protein classes using bioinformatics techniques. We discussed the association of these proteins to health and disease regulatory metabolism. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD030744.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Type 2 diabetes mellitus, Jerusalem artichoke, Solid-phase extraction

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea
Pusan National University

### Submitter
Sun Tae Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Sun Tae Kim
Department of Plant Bioscience, Life and Industry Convergence Research Institute, Pusan National University, Miryang, 50463, Republic of Korea


