### Accession
PXD016339

### Title
An Integrative Transcriptome – Proteome Approach Reveals a Robust Expression Pattern of Small Intestinal Epithelial Organoids from Germ-Free and Microbiota Associated Donors

### Description
Intestinal epithelial organoids established from resected gut tissue have become a widely used research tool. However, it remains unclear how environmental cues and other sources of variation before, during and after establishment impact on organoid properties. Divergent microbiota composition in separately held mouse lines has been identified as a confounding factor in murine in vivo studies. To probe the effect of donor microbiota on organoids, we analyzed the proteomes and transcriptomes of primary organoid cultures established from colonized and germ-free mice, and further compared them to their tissue of origin and to commonly used cell lines. The long-term global impact of donor microbiota on organoid expression patterns was negligible. Instead, stochastic culture-to-culture differences accounted for a moderate variability between independently established organoids. Integration of transcriptome and proteome datasets revealed an organoid-typic expression signature comprising 14 transcripts and 10 proteins that distinguished organoids across all donors from murine epithelial cell lines and fibroblasts. This signature, which closely mimicked expression patterns in the gut epithelium, included high levels of the inflammasome scaffold protein ASC in organoids which was lacking in commonly used cell lines. Mining of the transcriptome dataset uncovered similar high expression of also other inflammasome components, including Naip1-6, Nlrc4, and Caspase-1 in all organoids compared to the reference cell lines. Taken together, these results reveal a robust global expression pattern in organoids established from colonized and germ-free animals and suggest that organoids represent a more suitable culture model than immortalized cell lines for studies of intestinal epithelial inflammasomes.

### Sample Protocol
All the biological samples were suspended in 10M Urea with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and ultrasonically lysed in a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology), as previously described (Collins et al, 2017; Liu et al, 2019). The mixtures were centrifuged at 21,000 g for 1 hour and the supernatant protein amount was quantified by Bio-Rad protein assay. Protein samples were reduced by 10mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP) for 1 hour at 37°C and 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 45 minutes at room temperature. All the samples were further diluted by 1:6 (v/v) with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and were digested with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega) at a protease/protein ratio of 1:25 overnight at 37°C. The amount of the purified peptides was determined using Nanodrop ND-1000 (Thermo Scientific) and 1.5 μg peptides were injected per a LC-MS run. The peptide samples were stored in -80°C before measurment. An SCIEX 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer was interfaced with an Eksigent NanoLC. Peptides were directly injected onto a 20-cm PicoFrit emitter (New Objective, self-packed to 20 cm), and then separated using a 90-min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min  (Gillet et al, 2012; Liu et al, 2019). For shotgun sequencing mode, MS1 spectra were collected in the range 360–1,460 m/z with 250ms per scan. The 20 most intense precursors triggered MS2 spectra were collected (50–2,000 m/z for 100 ms). For SWATH mode, 64-variable window schema was used(Ludwig et al, 2018) (Collins et al, 2017; Liu et al, 2019). An dwell time of 50 ms was used for all MS2 scans after a survey MS1 scan of 250 ms, resulting in a duty cycle of ~3.45 s.

### Data Protocol
OpenSWATH (Rost et al, 2014) was used to identify peptides from all SWATH maps with statistical control at 1% FDR (by searching aganist the shotgun analysis derived spectral library from these samples) and then to aligne between SWATH maps using a novel TRIC with requantification option enabled (TRansfer of Identification Confidence) (Rost et al, 2016). Because we have nine samples for tissue and epithelium type of samples analyzed in this dataset (20 samples for organoid type), to further increase the protein confidence, only those peptide signals identified in more than eight samples were accepted for protein identification and quantification.  To quantify the protein abundance levels across samples, we used Top3 method (Ludwig et al, 2012). The protein level data were log2- transformed for following up analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Intestinal epithelial organoids established from gut tissue have become a widely used research tool. However, it remains unclear how environmental cues, divergent microbiota composition and other sources of variation before, during and after establishment confound organoid properties, and how these properties relate to the original tissue. While environmental influences cannot be easily addressed in human organoids, mice offer a controlled assay-system. Here, we probed the effect of donor microbiota differences, previously identified as a confounding factor in murine in vivo studies, on organoids. We analysed the proteomes and transcriptomes of primary organoid cultures established from two colonised and one germ-free mouse colony of C57BL/6J genetic background, and compared them to their tissue of origin and commonly used cell lines. While an imprint of microbiota-exposure was observed on the proteome of epithelial samples, the long-term global impact of donor microbiota on organoid expression patterns was negligible. Instead, stochastic culture-to-culture differences accounted for a moderate variability between independently established organoids. Integration of transcriptome and proteome datasets revealed an organoid-typic expression signature comprising 14 transcripts and 10 proteins that distinguished organoids across all donors from murine epithelial cell lines and fibroblasts and closely mimicked expression patterns in the gut epithelium. This included the inflammasome components ASC, Naip1-6, Nlrc4 and Caspase-1, which were highly expressed in all organoids compared to the reference cell line m-IC<sub>c12</sub> or mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Taken together, these results reveal that the donor microbiota has little effect on the organoid phenotype and suggest that organoids represent a more suitable culture model than immortalised cell lines, in particular for studies of intestinal epithelial inflammasomes.

### Keywords
Intestinal epithelial organoids; swath; 5600

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences
Yale Cancer Biology Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT, 06516, USA

### Submitter
Barbora Salovska

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Yale Cancer Biology Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT, 06516, USA


