### Accession
PXD038790

### Title
Mislocalization of pathogenic RBM20 variants in dilated cardiomyopathy is caused by loss-of-interaction with Transportin-3

### Description
Severe forms of dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) are associated with point mutations in the alternative splicing regulator RBM20 that are frequently located in the arginine/serine-rich domain (RS-domain). Such mutations can cause defective splicing and cytoplasmic mislocalization, which leads to the formation of detrimental cytoplasmic granules. Successful development of personalized therapies requires identifying the direct mechanisms of pathogenic RBM20 variants. Here, we decipher the molecular mechanism of RBM20 mislocalization and its specific role in DCM pathogenesis. We demonstrate that mislocalized RBM20 variants retain their splice regulatory activity, which reveals that aberrant cellular localization drives the pathological phenotype. A genome-wide CRISPR knock-out screen combined with image-enabled cell sorting identified Transportin-3 (TNPO3) as the main nuclear importer of RBM20. We show that the direct RBM20-TNPO3 interaction involves the RS-domain, disrupted by pathogenic variants. Re-localization of pathogenic RBM20 variants to the nucleus restores alternative splicing and dissolves cytoplasmic granules in cell culture and animal models. These findings provide proof-of-principle for developing therapeutic strategies to restore RBM20’s nuclear localization in RBM20-DCM patients.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa reporter cells expressing eGFP-RBM20-WT, P633L, R634Q, or RSS were harvested together with the negative control cells not expressing the bait, and cell fractionation was performed as described in methods. For GFP immunoprecipitations, 1 mg of the whole cell extracts, cytoplasmic fraction or nuclear and insoluble fractions were incubated with 30 μl of GFP-Trap® Magnetic Particles M-270 (ChromoTek). Samples were subjected to an in-solution tryptic digest using a modified version of the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) protocol (PMID: 25358341, PMID: 29565595). Pull downs were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scentific) as previously described (PMID:30858367). For Inputs: Peptides were subjected to an off-line fractionation under high pH conditions (PMID: 25358341). The resulting 12 fractions were then analyzed on a QExactive plus.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed using IsobarQuant (PMID: 26379230) and Mascot V2.4 (Matrix Science) using a reverse UniProt FASTA Homo sapiens database (UP000005640) including common contaminants and the expressed bait sp|P2147_GFPflagRBM20WT|P2147_GFPflagRBM20WT. The following modifications were taken into account: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), TMT10plex (K, fixed), Acetyl (N-term, variable), Oxidation (M, variable) and TMT10plex (N-term, variable). The mass error tolerance for full scan MS spectra was set to 10 ppm and for MS/MS spectra to 0.02 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. A minimum of 2 unique peptides with a peptide length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate below 0.01 were required on the peptide and protein level (PMID: 25987413). The raw output files of IsobarQuant (protein.txt – files)  were processed using the R programming language (ISBN 3-900051-07-0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Heart, Splicing, Dilated cardiomyopathy

### Affiliations
EMBL
Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany; Genome Center, Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA, USA.

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Lars M. Steinmetz
Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany; Genome Center, Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA, USA.


