### Accession
PXD008280

### Title
Succession of proteomic, transcriptomic and exometabolomic signatures in Alteromonas macleodii degrading a mix of macroalgal polysaccharides

### Description
Polysaccharides from macroalgae are important bacterial nutrient source and central biogeochemical component in the oceans. To illuminate the cellular mechanisms of polysaccharide degradation by marine bacteria, growth of Alteromonas macleodii 83-1 on a mix of laminarin, alginate and pectin was characterized using transcriptomics, proteomics and exometabolomics. A. macleodii 83-1 showed two distinct growth stages, with exponential growth during laminarin utilization followed by maintenance during simultaneous alginate/pectin utilization. The biphasic growth coincided with major temporal shifts in gene expression and metabolite secretion, enabling to define major/accessory polysaccharide utilization loci, reconstruct the complete degradation pathways for each polysaccharide, as well as identify temporal phenotypes in other relevant traits. FT-ICR-MS revealed a distinct suite of secreted metabolites for each growth phase, with pyrroloquinoline quinone exclusively produced with alginate/pectin. The finding of substrate-unique phenotypes indicates an exquisite adaptation to polysaccharide utilization with probable relevance for the degradation of macroalgal biomass, which comprises a complex mix of polysaccharides. Moreover, substrate-unique exometabolomes possibly influence metabolic interactions with other community members. Overall, the presence of fine-tuned genetic machineries for polysaccharide degradation and the widespread detection of related CAZymes in global locations indicate an ecological relevance of A. macleodii in marine polysaccharide cycling and bacteria-algae interactions.

### Sample Protocol
At both T1 and T2, a 20 ml subsample from each replicate was centrifuged for 5 min at 6500 g and RT. Cell pellets were washed with PBS, centrifuged again (5 min at 6500 g and RT),  immediately flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at ⎼80°C until further analyses. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM TEAB, 4% SDS in dd-H2O) and incubated for 5 min at 600 rpm and 95 °C. After sonication for 5 min, suspensions were centrifuged for 10 min at 14000 g and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Kit (Thermo Fisher). Approximately 25 µg of protein extract were separated using one-dimensional SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (Laemmli, 1970). The protein lane of every sample was cut into 10 equal-sized pieces, which were washed (200 mM NH4HCO3, 30% acetonitrile at 37 °C) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. After overnight digestion at 37 °C with 2 µg mL-1 trypsin, peptides were eluted with dd-H2O in an ultrasonic bath for 15 min. Peptides were separated via liquid chromatography on an EASYnLC (Proxeon, Denmark) followed by MS/MS analysis in an online-coupled LTQ Orbitrap Classic mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) (Otto et al., 2010; Ponnudurai et al., 2017)

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were assigned to the corresponding peptides in a target-decoy database comprising all A. macleodii 83-1 protein sequences and common laboratory contaminants using the Sorcerer™-SEQUEST® system (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, CA) and Scaffold v4.7.5 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). At least two unique peptides were required for protein identification. Additionally, MS identifications were filtered so that the false discovery rate (FDR) on protein and peptide level were <1%, respectively. Normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) values were calculated for semi-quantitative analysis of protein abundances (Zybailov et al., 2006).

### Publication Abstract
Algal polysaccharides are an important bacterial nutrient source and central component of marine food webs. However, cellular and ecological aspects concerning the bacterial degradation of polysaccharide mixtures, as presumably abundant in natural habitats, are poorly understood. Here, we contextualize marine polysaccharide mixtures and their bacterial utilization in several ways using the model bacterium Alteromonas macleodii 83-1, which can degrade multiple algal polysaccharides and contributes to polysaccharide degradation in the oceans. Transcriptomic, proteomic and exometabolomic profiling revealed cellular adaptations of A. macleodii 83-1 when degrading a mix of laminarin, alginate and pectin. Strain 83-1 exhibited substrate prioritization driven by catabolite repression, with initial laminarin utilization followed by simultaneous alginate/pectin utilization. This biphasic phenotype coincided with pronounced shifts in gene expression, protein abundance and metabolite secretion, mainly involving CAZymes/polysaccharide utilization loci but also other functional traits. Distinct temporal changes in exometabolome composition, including the alginate/pectin-specific secretion of pyrroloquinoline quinone, suggest that substrate-dependent adaptations influence chemical interactions within the community. The ecological relevance of cellular adaptations was underlined by molecular evidence that common marine&#xa0;macroalgae, in particular Saccharina and Fucus, release mixtures of alginate and pectin-like rhamnogalacturonan. Moreover, CAZyme microdiversity and the genomic predisposition towards polysaccharide mixtures among Alteromonas spp. suggest polysaccharide-related traits as an ecophysiological factor, potentially relating to distinct 'carbohydrate utilization types' with different ecological strategies. Considering the substantial primary productivity of algae on global scales, these insights contribute to the understanding of bacteria-algae interactions and the remineralization of chemically diverse polysaccharide pools, a key step in marine carbon cycling.

### Keywords
Polysaccharide degradation, Catabolite repression, Alteromonas

### Affiliations
Uni-Greifswald
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Institute of Pharmacy, University of Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Alexandra Dürwald

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Schweder
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Institute of Pharmacy, University of Greifswald, Germany


