### Accession
PXD001602

### Title
Threonine concentration effect on L. lactis growth

### Description
L. lactis was grown in steady-state cultures at specific growth rate 0.2 h-1. The concentration of L-threonine in the growth environment was smoothly increased from 1.24mM to 4mM and proteome measurements were carried out to detect proteins involved in threonine metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were suspended in 100 µL SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS/100 mM TRIS-HCl pH 8/100 mM DTT) and heated at 95°C for 15 min. Cell lysates were sonicated with ultrasound for a few pulses and pelleted by centrifugation. Cell lysates were digested with trypsin according to Filter Aided Sample Preparation protocol (FASP) (Wiśniewski et al. 2009) and purified with C-18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al. 2007). Peptides were separated on a Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex; Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA, USA) using a cartridge trap-column in backflush configuration and an analytical 50 cm Easy-spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were eluted at 200 nl/min with a 8-40% B gradient (buffer B: 80% ACN + 0.1% FA, buffer A: 0.1% FA) to a Q Exactive MS/MS operating with a top-10 strategy and a maximum cycle time of 1 s. Briefly, one 350-1400 m/z MS scan at a resolution setting of R=70000 was followed by fragmentation of 10 most intense ions >+1 charge state at R=17500. Dynamic exclusion was set to 70 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analysed by the MaxQuant software package version 1.3.0.5 (Cox and Mann 2008). Peak lists were searched against L. lactis database (downloaded  in 2013 from http://www.uniprot.org/) which was supplemented with common contaminants (e.g. human keratin, trypsin). Full tryptic specificity, a maximum of two missed cleavages and a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da for fragment ions, was specified in the MaxQuant search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The required false discovery rate was set to 1 % for both peptide and protein levels and the minimum required peptide length was set to seven amino acids. “Match between runs” option with a time window of 2 min was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
Lactococcus lactis is an important lactic acid starter for food production as well as a cell factory for production of food grade additives, among which natural flavour production is one of the main interests of food producers. Flavour production is associated with the degradation of amino acids and comprehensive studies are required to elucidate mechanisms behind these pathways. In this study using chemically defined medium, labelled substrate and steady-state cultivation, new data for the catabolism of threonine in Lc. lactis have been obtained. The biosynthesis of glycine in this organism is associated with the catabolic pathways of glucose and serine. Nevertheless, if threonine concentration in the growth environment exceeds that of serine, threonine becomes the main source for glycine biosynthesis and the utilization of serine decreases. Also, the conversion of threonine to glycine was initiated by a threonine aldolase and this was the principal pathway used for threonine degradation. As in Streptococcus thermophilus, serine hydroxymethyltransferase in Lc. lactis may possess a secondary activity as threonine aldolase. Other catabolic pathways of threonine (e.g. threonine dehydrogenase and threonine dehydratase) were not detected.

### Keywords
Lactococcus lactis, Threonine metabolism, Silac

### Affiliations
Center of Food and Fermentation Technologies
Competence Center of Food and Fermentation Technology

### Submitter
Karl Peebo

### Lab Head
Dr Raivo Vilu
Competence Center of Food and Fermentation Technology


