### Accession
PXD021855

### Title
S. cerevisiae Nab2-PrA interactomes in exosome, transport and ribosome biogenesis mutant backgrounds

### Description
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are key mediators of RNAbiogenesis and metabolism. An RBP can be dedicated to a specific transcript class (e.g. mRNAs) or function broadly across both coding and non-coding RNAs. Consequently, nuclear RNA homeostasis requires maintenance of bothRBP binding specificity and the proper distribution of RBP activity across multiple transcript classes. In S. cerevisiae, mutation of an RBP that functions in ribosome biogenesis, Enp1, was previously found to have terminal phenotypes similar to exosome or TRAMP mutants that extended beyond ribosomal RNA processing defects. Here, we show through proteomicand RNomic analyses that enp1-1 cells have stabilized polyadenylated pre-rRNAs that bind and sequester RBPs in the nucleolus, including the poly(A)-binding protein (PABP) Nab2. Changes in nucleolar polyadenylated RNA levels and PABP availability are further accompanied by transcriptome-wide changes in RNA biogenesis in enp1-1 cells, including increased levels of pervasive transcripts and snoRNA processing defects. The observed changes in RNA processing can be mitigated if enp1-1 cells are provided excess PABP activity through overexpression of Nab2 or Pab1. Together, these findings indicate that generation of excess nucleolar poly(A)-RNA is toxic to the cell, disrupting nuclear RNA processing homeostasis through sequestering RBPs, including the PABP Nab2.

### Sample Protocol
All strains were harvested in log phase (OD600 = ~0.8), transferred to 37°C for 90 minutes if required, and cell pellets were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for grindate generation by cryo-milling (57). Nab2-PrA RNP purifications along with negative controls (PrA-tag expressed alone) were performed in RNP buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.4, 110 mM KOAc, 0.5% triton X-100, 0.1% Tween-20, 4 µg/ml pepstatin A, 180 µg/ml phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1:5000 antifoam A) supplemented with 100 mM NaCl (RNP100) as previously described (59). Briefly, 0.5 g of cell grindate was resuspended in 4.5 ml of RNP100 buffer and homogenized by polytron. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 2465 RCF, 4°C for 10 min and subsequently incubated with 3.75 mg IgG-conjugated Dynabeads, pre-washed in RNP100, for 30 min at 4°C on a rotating wheel. After ten washes in RNP100, detergents were removed by washing the bead-bound complexes in 0.1 M NH4OAc/0.1 mM MgCl2. After a final wash in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, on-bead digestion of the isolated complexes was performed in 20 mM Tris-HCl pH8.0 at 37°C (59). The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 2%. Tryptic peptides were cleaned using C18 ZipTips as per supplier recommendations (Millipore). For LC-MS, each sample was injected to near saturation of the signal, while an equivalent volume of their respective negative controls were injected.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification The peak list files were generated with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1.0.81) using the following parameters: minimum mass set to 500 Da, maximum mass set to 6000 Da, no grouping of MS/MS spectra, precursor charge set to auto, and minimum number of fragment ions set to 5. Protein database searching was performed with Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) against the NCBI S. cerevisiae protein database (20160802). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin was used as the enzyme allowing for up to 1 missed cleavage. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Data analysis was performed using Scaffold (version 4.8.4).   Mass spectrometry data analysis Protein and peptide identification thresholds in ScaffoldTM were set to 95 % and 90 % which resulted in respective decoy false discovery rates of 3.4 % and 0.59 %. Exclusive spectrum counts (ESC) were used for semi-quantification of protein preys, and mass spectrometry results were analyzed as previously described (60). Briefly, only Exclusive Spectral Counts (ESCs) above background detected in negative controls were retained (Tables S2 and S3). To take protein size into account in the quantification, preys with at least 5 ESCs in both replicates were normalized against the number of theoretical peptides each protein generate by in silico digest. The theoretical trypsin digestion was performed using MS-digest (http://prospector.ucsf.edu) with zero missed cleavages, no variable modifications, and a minimum of seven amino acids per peptide within a mass range of 718 to 4 000 Da. The obtained values were finally normalized against the value of the bait protein in each experiment (Tables S2 and S3). Low confidence interactors are listed as grey values (Table S3).

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are key mediators of RNA metabolism. Whereas some RBPs exhibit narrow transcript specificity, others function broadly across both coding and non-coding RNAs. Here, in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we demonstrate that changes in RBP availability caused by disruptions to distinct cellular processes promote a common global breakdown in RNA metabolism and nuclear RNA homeostasis. Our data shows that stabilization of aberrant ribosomal RNA (rRNA) precursors in an enp1-1 mutant causes phenotypes similar to RNA exosome mutants due to nucleolar sequestration of the poly(A)-binding protein (PABP) Nab2. Decreased nuclear PABP availability is accompanied by genome-wide changes in RNA metabolism, including increased pervasive transcripts levels and snoRNA processing defects. These phenotypes are mitigated by overexpression of PABPs, inhibition of rDNA transcription, or alterations in TRAMP activity. Our results highlight the need for cells to maintain poly(A)-RNA levels in balance with PABPs and other RBPs with mutable substrate specificity across nucleoplasmic and nucleolar RNA processes.

### Keywords
Ribosome biogenesis, Exosome, Polyadenylation, Rna homeostasis, Rna processing

### Affiliations
-Associate Research Professor, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), RNP Biochemistry laboratory -Professeure agrégée, Département de biochimie et médecine moléculaire, Université de Montréal -Associate Professor, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University
Institut de recherches cliniques Montreal (IRCM)
Universite de Montreal

### Submitter
Marlene Oeffinger

### Lab Head
Dr Marlene Heloise Oeffinger
-Associate Research Professor, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), RNP Biochemistry laboratory -Professeure agrégée, Département de biochimie et médecine moléculaire, Université de Montréal -Associate Professor, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University


