### Accession
PXD046611

### Title
RAD54L2 mediates a novel mechanism to counter TOP2-DNA adducts

### Description
The catalytic cycle of topoisomerase 2 (TOP2) enzymes proceeds via a transient DNA double-strand break (DSB) intermediate termed the TOP2 cleavage complex (TOP2cc), in which the TOP2 protein is covalently bound to DNA. Anti-cancer agents such as etoposide operate by stabilising TOP2ccs, ultimately generating genotoxic TOP2-DNA protein crosslinks that require processing and repair. Here, we identify RAD54L2 as a factor promoting TOP2cc resolution. We demonstrate that RAD54L2 acts through a novel mechanism together with ZNF451 and independent of TDP2. Our work suggests a model wherein RAD54L2 recognises sumoylated-TOP2 and, using its ATPase activity, promotes TOP2cc resolution and prevents DSB exposure. These findings suggest RAD54L2-mediated TOP2cc resolution as a potential mechanism for cancer-therapy resistance and highlight RAD54L2 as an attractive candidate for drug discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmid, siRNA transfection and viral transduction The mCherry plasmid was obtained from VectorBuilder (VB200726-1045daz).  Cloning of RAD54L2 cDNA into the mCherry vector was done by Gibson assembly (New England Biolabs) following PCR of RAD54L2 using the forward primer 5’AGGATGACGATGACAAGAGCTCAGACGAATCTGCCTCAGG and reverse primer 5’TCGAGGTCGACACGCGTGTTTTTCCCAGTGACCTCTATCAC and vector digestion with HpaI/AfeI (New England Biolabs) restriction enzymes. The synthesised ORF was then cloned into the mCherry vector by Gibson using same conditions as above with the reverse primer 5’CGAGGTCGACACGCGTGTTTTTCCCAGTGGCCTCTGCCGC. To generate stable cells, virus was first produced in LentiX 293T cells by co-transfecting the packaging constructs psPAX2 (Addgene #12260) and pMD2.G (Addgene #12259) with the plasmid of interest using TransIT-LT1 (Mirus Bio) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Viral titre was then incubated with cells in the presence of Polybrene (10ug/mL) (Merck), followed by positive selection with Geneticin (Gibco).  Immunoprecipitation  For immunoprecipitation, around 2 million RPE-1 cells were plated in 15cm dishes (2 per condition). 2 days later, cells were treated with 100µM etoposide for 1h. After treatment cells were washed twice with cold PBS and lysed in 1.5mL of IP buffer (20mM Tris HCL pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 2mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.5% NP40, 20mM NEM, and EDTA-free protease and phosphatase inhibitors) and 15uL benzonase (Millipore) for 45 minutes. Lysates were centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 10 min and supernatants were incubated with 20µL RFP trap magnetic beads (Cromoteck) for 2h at 4C. Samples were washed 4x with IP buffer and finally eluted in 40µL LDS buffer 2x +1mM DTT.  Mass spectrometry-based proteomics Bound proteins were eluted in NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1 mM DTT and boiled at 75°C for 15 min. The eluates were alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 minutes in the dark before being loaded onto 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE gels. Proteins were stained with the Life Technologies Colloidal Blue Staining Kit and digested in-gel using trypsin. Peptides were extracted from the gel and desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips. Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive or Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) as described. Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed-phase columns (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 1.9 µm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid over 2-hours. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge state less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS data Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.6.14.0). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database, peptide lists were searched against the human UniProt FASTA database released in 02/2021 using the Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to 3 miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach. The “match between run algorithm” in the MaxQuant quantification was enabled. The MaxLFQ protein groups data calculated by MaxQuant was further analyzed with the Perseus (v1.6.13.0) of the MaxQuant computational platform.

### Publication Abstract
The catalytic cycle of topoisomerase 2 (TOP2) enzymes proceeds via a transient DNA double-strand break (DSB) intermediate termed the TOP2 cleavage complex (TOP2cc), in which the TOP2 protein is covalently bound to DNA. Anticancer agents such as etoposide operate by stabilizing TOP2ccs, ultimately generating genotoxic TOP2-DNA protein cross-links that require processing and repair. Here, we identify RAD54 like 2 (RAD54L2) as a factor promoting TOP2cc resolution. We demonstrate that RAD54L2 acts through a novel mechanism together with zinc finger protein associated with tyrosyl-DNA phosphodiesterase 2 (TDP2) and TOP2 (ZATT/ZNF451) and independent of TDP2. Our work suggests a model wherein RAD54L2 recognizes sumoylated TOP2 and, using its ATPase activity, promotes TOP2cc resolution and prevents DSB exposure. These findings suggest RAD54L2-mediated TOP2cc resolution as a potential mechanism for cancer therapy resistance and highlight RAD54L2 as an attractive candidate for drug discovery.

### Keywords
Rad54l2, Etoposide, Cancer, Top2-dna adducts

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Chromatin Biology & Proteomics, Mainz, Germany Institute of Developmental Biology and Neurobiology (IDN), Johannes Gutenberg-Universität, Mainz, Germany
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Chromatin Biology & Proteomics, Mainz, Germany Institute of Developmental Biology and Neurobiology (IDN), Johannes Gutenberg-Universität, Mainz, Germany


