### Accession
PXD004143

### Title
Allele-Specific Protein Abundance in Human Brain

### Description
We describe a method for identifying peptides that result from missense changes and identify peptides among 2 human brains that would have otherwise not been detected. Next, we use this data to estimate of allele-specific protein abundance in human brain for an average per individual, and to estimate apolipoprotein E allele specific abundance in human brain across individuals. Finally, we estimate the heritability of allele-specific protein abundance.

### Sample Protocol
We obtained 2 pieces of human cortical tissue (broadman area 9) provided by the Emory Brain Bank. Each tissue was homogenized as described previously (ref). Briefly, each tissue chunk comprised mostly of grey matter was individually weighed (approximately 0.1 g) and homogenized (dounce homogenizer) in 500uL of urea lysis buffer (8M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8), including both Protease Inhibitors (Roche) and the HALT (Pierce) phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, 0.6% (v/v). Samples were sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific ) 5 times for 5 s with 15 s intervals of rest at 30% amplitude to disrupt nucleic acids and then centrifuged at 22,800 r.c.f at 4°C for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method, and then samples were frozen at -80°C. Protein samples (1 mg) were treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C for 30 minutes, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide (IAA) at 37°C for 30 minutes. Samples were first digested with 1:200 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (LysC; Wako) at 37°C for 4 hours and then diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 1.6 M urea and digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. For LysC digestion alone, samples were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 0.6 M urea and digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase. ERLIC fractionation was performed as previously described with slight modifications [refs]. Briefly, trypsin or LysC derived peptides from 1 mg of protein were dissolved in 100 uL of 80% (v/v) mobile phase A (10 mM NH4Ac, 85% ACN/1% acetic acid), injected completely with an auto-sampler and fractionated using a PolyWAX LP anion-exchange column (200 × 3.2 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å; PolyLC, Columbia, MD) on a Agilent 1100 HPLC system monitored at 280 nm. Forty fractions were collected with a 66 min gradient of 100% mobile phase A (85% ACN/0.1% acetic acid) for 3 min, 0%–20% mobile phase B (30% ACN/0.1% FA) for 50 min, 20%–100% B for 5 min, followed by 8 min at 100% B at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min. The forty fractions were pooled into 20 fractions by combining in the following manner (1, 40); (2, 39); (3, 38) and so on. All pooled peptide fractions were dried to completion under vacuum by a Savant speedvac (ThermoFisher Scientific) Each peptide fractions (LysC or tryspin) was re-suspended in 25 ul of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile) and 1ul (~2ug) from each fraction was loaded on to a 20 cm 1.9 μm (internal diameter) C18 (Dr. Maisch, High Performance LC GmbH, Germany) self-packed column (New Objective) by a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) and monitored on an Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Elution was performed over a 120-minute gradient at a rate of 325 nl/min with buffer B ranging from 5% to 90% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid and water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic and 80% acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect one full mass spectrometry (MS) scan followed by 20 data dependent MS/MS scans.  The MS scans were collected at a resolution of 60,000 (300-1800 m/z range, 1,000,000 AGC, 100 ms maximum ion time) and the MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (2 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 10,000 AGC target, 50 ms maximum ion time). Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced peaks for 30 seconds within a 10 ppm window. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
We developed the ProtGen software that creates the personal protein database. This software requires a list of variant sites; a list of user specified transcripts and reads a specially prepared database that enumerates the codon and reference amino acid for all transcripts at each site in the genome; and, a protease that will be used to digest the proteins in silico. It then determines all variant sites that change amino acid residues in each transcript, and permutes the variants in the transcript. Transcripts with variants are only retained if an in silico protease digestion generates novel peptides not previously generated in either the reference protein dataset or the growing variant transcript database. Transcripts that contain variant proteins are concatenated to the reference protein database to create a complete personalized protein database. MS/MS data obtained were searched against personal protein databases and the standard Uniprot database using SEQUEST algorithm with Proteome Discoverer 2.0 platform (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The parameters used for data analysis included trypsin or LysC alone as the protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.000) was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N termini and cyclization of N-terminal glutamine and were included as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was specified to be 6 amino acids. The mass error was set to 10 p.p.m. for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. The data was also searched against a decoy database and the results used to estimate values using the Percolator algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer suite. Peptides were considered identified at a q value <0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Gene expression contributes to phenotypic traits and human disease. To date, comparatively less is known about regulators of protein abundance, which is also under genetic control and likely influences clinical phenotypes. However, identifying and quantifying allele-specific protein abundance by bottom-up proteomics is challenging since single nucleotide variants (SNVs) that alter protein sequence are not considered in standard human protein databases. To address this, we developed the GenPro software and used it to create personalized protein databases (PPDs) to identify single amino acid variants (SAAVs) at the protein level from whole exome sequencing. In silico assessment of PPDs generated by GenPro revealed only a 1% increase in tryptic search space compared to a direct translation of all human transcripts and an equivalent search space compared to the UniProtKB reference database. To identify a large unbiased number of SAAV peptides, we performed high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics for two human post-mortem brain samples and searched the collected MS/MS spectra against their respective PPD. We found an average of &#x223c;117&#x202f;000 unique peptides mapping to &#x223c;9300 protein groups for each sample, and of these, 977 were unique variant peptides. We found that over 400 reference and SAAV peptide pairs were, on average, equally abundant in human brain by label-free ion intensity measurements and confirmed the absolute levels of three reference and SAAV peptide pairs using heavy labeled peptides standards coupled with parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). Our results highlight the utility of integrating genomic and proteomic sequencing data to identify sample-specific SAAV peptides and support the hypothesis that most alleles are equally expressed in human brain.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics genomics variants proteomics

### Affiliations
Emory University
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr NIcholas Seyfried
Emory University


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: normal
- instrument: Q Exactive
- label: label free sample
- modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl
- modification parameters: deamidated
- modification parameters: Oxidation, Oxidation, Oxidation, Oxidation
- modification parameters: Phospho
- Factor Value[organism part: dorsolateral prefrontal cortex

