### Accession
PXD016703

### Title
Potential ATF6 regulatory proteins were screened by proteomics using pancreatic tissues of PRSS1 transgenic mice treated with caerulein

### Description
Humanized PRSS1 transgenic mice were constructed and treated with caerulein to mimic the development of human AP and CP. Potential ATF6 regulatory proteins in pancreatitis were screened by proteomics using pancreatic tissues of PRSS1 AP mice.

### Sample Protocol
PRSS1 mice were treated with caerulein or saline for 24 h, the pancreatic tissues were harvested for proteomic analysis. The pancreatic tissue of mice was determined by DIA quantitative technique; the measurement results are classified into DDA10 components, and 9 samples are scanned separately by DIA.

### Data Protocol
In proteomics, tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data were usually collected for peptide identification through automated data-dependent acquisition (DDA). Using DDA, mass information on intact peptides in a full-scan mass spectrum (MS1) was used to determine which subset of mass signals should be targeted for the further acquisition of fragmentation (MS/MS) spectra to identify peptide sequences.    Extraction of protein, quality control of extraction and proteolysis. Then, DDA fractions and data independent acquisition (DIA) samples analysis were both performed on a Q Exactive HF X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). DDA data was identified by Andromeda search engine within MaxQuant, and Spectronaut™ used identification results for spectral library construction. For large-scale DIA data, Spectronaut™ used the constructed spectral library information to complete deconvolution and extraction, and uses the mProphet algorithm to complete analytical quality control, thus obtaining a large number of reliable quantitative results. This pipeline also performed GO, COG, pathway functional annotation analysis and time series analysis. Based on the quantitative results, the differential proteins between two groups were found, and finally function enrichment analysis, protein-protein interaction (PPI) and subcellular localization analysis of the differential proteins were performed.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Background:</b> There is no curative therapy for severe acute pancreatitis (SAP) due to poor understanding of its molecular mechanisms. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is involved in SAP and increased expression of ATF6 has been detected in SAP patients. Here, we aimed to investigate the role of ATF6 in a preclinical SAP mouse model and characterize its regulatory mechanism. <b>Methods:</b> Pancreatic tissues of healthy and SAP patients were collected during surgery. Humanized PRSS1 transgenic mice were treated with caerulein to mimic the SAP development, which was crossed to an ATF6 knockout mouse line, and pancreatic tissues from the resulting pups were screened by proteomics. Adenovirus-mediated delivery to the pancreas of SAP mice was used for shRNA-based knockdown or overexpression. The potential functions and mechanisms of ATF6 were clarified by immunofluorescence, immunoelectron microscopy, Western blotting, qRT-PCR, ChIP-qPCR and luciferase reporter assay. <b>Results:</b> Increased expression of ATF6 was associated with elevated apoptosis, ER and mitochondrial disorder in pancreatic tissues from SAP patients and PRSS1 mice. Knockout of ATF6 in SAP mice attenuated acinar injury, apoptosis and ER disorder. AIFM2, known as a p53 target gene, was identified as a downstream regulatory partner of ATF6, whose expression was increased in SAP. Functionally, AIFM2 could reestablish the pathological disorder in SAP tissues in the absence of ATF6. p53 expression was also increased in SAP mice, which was downregulated by ATF6 knockout. p53 knockout significantly suppressed acinar apoptosis and injury in SAP model. Mechanistically, ATF6 promoted AIFM2 transcription by binding to p53 and AIFM2 promoters. <b>Conclusion:</b> These results reveal that ATF6/p53/AIFM2 pathway plays a critical role in acinar apoptosis during SAP progression, highlighting novel therapeutic target molecules for SAP.

### Keywords
Prss1, Mouse, Pancreatitis, Atf6, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China
SMU

### Submitter
Zhang guowei

### Lab Head
Dr Guo-wei Zhang
Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China


