### Accession
PXD018061

### Title
Viral hijacking of the TENT4-ZCCHC14 complex protects viral RNAs via mixed tailing

### Description
TENT4 enzymes generate “mixed tails” on mRNAs by adding adenosines with intermittent non-adenosine residues, which protect mRNAs from deadenylation. Here we discover the extensive mixed tailing in the transcripts of two distinct DNA viruses, hepatitis B virus (HBV) and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), and their striking similarity in the mechanism to exploit the TENT4-ZCCHC14 complex. TAIL-seq analyses of HBV and HCMV RNAs revealed that TENT4A and TENT4B are responsible for the mixed tailing and protection of viral poly(A) tails. By fCLIP-seq on HBV-producing cells, we found that the HBV posttranscriptional regulatory element (PRE) is the primary site of the TENT4 interactome. A hairpin with a CNGGN-type pentaloop in the PRE is critical for TENT4-dependent regulation. Unexpectedly, HCMV also utilizes a similar pentaloop hairpin, an interesting example of convergent evolution. We further found that the CNGGN pentaloop is recognized by the SAM domain-containing ZCCHC14 protein which in turn recruits TENT4 to stabilize viral transcripts. Altogether, our study reveals the action mechanism of PRE that has been widely used to enhance gene expression, and introduces the TENT4-ZCCHC14 complex as the key host factor and a potential target for antiviral therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
The immunoprecipitated protein samples containing SDS were subjected to FASP digestion. Briefly, protein samples were first reduced and alkylated with denaturing ABC buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate [ABC]). The alkylated samples were placed on preconditioned 30 kDa MWCO Amicon filter (Millipore, UFC5030) and centrifuged for 30 min at 14,000 g. Serial washing was carried out with 200 μl of 8 M urea or 50 mM ABC buffer and centrifuging for 15 min at 14,000 g to remove SDS in the filter unit. Then, protein samples were digested with 2% (w/w) trypsin at 37 °C for overnight. The resulting peptide samples were subject to C18 ziptip clean-up (Millipore, Z720070) and LC-MS/MS analysis. In-house packed long capillary columns (100 cm x 75 µm i.d.) and trap columns (3 cm x 150 µm i.d) with 3 µm Jupiter C18 particles (Phenomenex) were used for peptide separation. A flow rate of 300 nl/min and a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (water with 0.1% formic acid) to 40% of solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) for 100 min were applied on nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters) coupled with Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), which was operated using the following parameters: m/z 300–1800 of precursor scan range, 1.4 Th of precursor isolation window, 30% of normalized collision energy (NCE) for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), 30 s of dynamic exclusion duration, 60k or 7.5k resolution at m/z 200 for full MS or MS/MS scan, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) searched using the built-in Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant against the human Uniprot database (version 12/5/2018) at default settings (20 ppm or 6 ppm of precursor ion mass tolerances for initial or main search, respectively, and 0.5 Da for fragment ion masses). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were selected as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. A 1% FDR was required at both the protein- and the peptide-level.

### Publication Abstract
TENT4 enzymes generate 'mixed tails' of diverse nucleotides at 3' ends of RNAs via nontemplated nucleotide addition to protect messenger RNAs from deadenylation. Here we discover extensive mixed tailing in transcripts of hepatitis B virus (HBV) and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), generated via a similar mechanism exploiting the TENT4-ZCCHC14 complex. TAIL-seq on HBV and HCMV RNAs revealed that TENT4A and TENT4B are responsible for mixed tailing and protection of viral poly(A) tails. We find that the HBV post-transcriptional regulatory element (PRE), specifically the CNGGN-type pentaloop, is critical for TENT4-dependent regulation. HCMV uses a similar pentaloop, an interesting example of convergent evolution. This pentaloop is recognized by the sterile alpha motif domain-containing ZCCHC14 protein, which in turn recruits TENT4. Overall, our study reveals the mechanism of action of PRE, which has been widely used to enhance gene expression, and identifies the TENT4-ZCCHC14 complex as a potential target for antiviral therapeutics.

### Keywords
Viral rna, Rna-protein interaction, Rna modification

### Affiliations
Institute of Basic Science
Institute for Basic Science and Seoul National University

### Submitter
Young-suk Lee

### Lab Head
Dr V. Narry Kim
Institute for Basic Science and Seoul National University


