### Accession
PXD027464

### Title
Integrated genomic and proteomic analyses identify stimulus-dependent molecular changes associated with distinct modes of skeletal muscle atrophy

### Description
Skeletal muscle atrophy is a debilitating condition that occurs with aging and disease but the underlying mechanisms are incompletely understood. Previous work determined that common transcriptional changes occur in muscle during atrophy induced by different stimuli. However, whether this holds true at the proteome level remains largely unexplored. Here, we find that, contrary to this earlier model, distinct atrophic stimuli (corticosteroids, cancer, and aging) induce largely different mRNA and protein changes during muscle atrophy in mice. Moreover, there is widespread transcriptome-proteome disconnect. Consequently, atrophy markers (atrogenes) identified in earlier microarray-based studies do not emerge from these proteomic surveys as the most relevantly associated with atrophy in all conditions. Rather, we identify proteins that are distinctly modulated by different types of atrophy (herein defined as “atroproteins”) such as the myokine CCN1/Cyr61, which regulates myofiber type switching during sarcopenia. Altogether, these integrated analyses indicate that different catabolic stimuli induce muscle atrophy via largely distinct mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
The tibialis anterior muscle from 6 and 24 month old C57BL6/J mice was excised and homogenized by mortar and pestle. Proteins were extracted from the resulting powdered tissue sample with 8M urea solution. In total, 10 samples were analyzed by the TMT 10-plex based LC-LC-MS/MS: 5 replicates of 6 and 24 months each. The TMT labeled tryptic peptides were mixed equally and eluted into ~40 fractions by basic pH RPLC. The amount of ~2 µg peptides from every other faction were analyzed by the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Scientific), for ~3 hours of acetonitrile gradient generated from buffer A (0.2% formic acid) and buffer B (0.2% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
The JUMP searching engine and the Swissprot mouse database were used.  Searches were performed using 15ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions due to JUMP’s auto mass correction function and 15ppm for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.16293 Da) was used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da). The assigned peptides are filtered by minimal peptide length, maximum miscleavages, mass-to-charge accuracy and matching scores. The peptides are then divided into groups according to peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein FDR to below 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
Skeletal muscle atrophy is a debilitating condition that occurs with aging and disease, but the underlying mechanisms are incompletely understood. Previous work determined that common transcriptional changes occur in muscle during atrophy induced by different stimuli. However, whether this holds true at the proteome level remains largely unexplored. Here, we find that, contrary to this earlier model, distinct atrophic stimuli (corticosteroids, cancer cachexia, and aging) induce largely different mRNA and protein changes during muscle atrophy in mice. Moreover, there is widespread transcriptome-proteome disconnect. Consequently, atrophy markers (atrogenes) identified in earlier microarray-based studies do not emerge from proteomics as generally induced by atrophy. Rather, we identify proteins that are distinctly modulated by different types of atrophy (herein defined as "atroproteins") such as the myokine CCN1/Cyr61, which regulates myofiber type switching during sarcopenia. Altogether, these integrated analyses indicate that different catabolic stimuli induce muscle atrophy via largely distinct mechanisms.

### Keywords
Atrophy, Sarcopenia, Proteomics, Aging, Cachexia, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Department of Developmental Neurobiology St. Jude Children's Research Hospital

### Submitter
Zuo-Fei Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Demontis
Department of Developmental Neurobiology St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


