### Accession
PXD009428

### Title
Comparison of ultracentrifugation and a commercial kit for isolation of exosomes derived from glioblastoma and breast cancer cells

### Description
Exosomes were isolated from cell culture media of patient derived primary glioblastoma multiforme cells by ultracentrifugation or with an isolation kit (Total Exosome Isolation Reagent from Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Sample Protocol
The exosome proteins were extracted with NP40 buffer. Prior to in-gel digestion, three isolate replicates were prepared and run using gel electrophoresis. The gel was covered by a fixation buffer (water/methanol/acetic acid, 40/50/10, v/v/v) overnight (18 hours at 4°C), stained with Coomassie brilliant blue for 4 hours at RT and destained overnight with water. The gel was cut to yield four fractions from each gel lane; approximately 0-25 kDa, 25-70 kDa, 70-130 and 130-up kDa. Each fraction was transferred to Protein LoBind tubes. The fractions were further reduced, alkylated and digested using the protocol of Shevchenko et al., with trypsin. The digested fractions were evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 15 µL water/formic acid (FA) (99.9/0.1, v/v). 10 µL was subjected for LC-MS/MS analysis (50 µm ID x 150 mm column, 2.6 µm (80 Å) solid core particles).  In-solution digestion with peptide desalting was performed for three isolate replicates. The isolates were evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 25 µL 6 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Subsequently, the isolates were reduced with 9.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, 30 minutes at 30 °C) and alkylated with 25 mM 2-iodoacetamide (IAM, 60 minutes, at RT and in the dark). The digests were diluted to a final concentration of 19 mM ABC. The trypsin digestion was performed with 1 µg trypsin (16 hours at 37 °C) and the protease activity was terminated with FA/water (1/99, v/v). Desalting and enrichment of the digests were performed using ZipTip® (silica particles with C18) from Millipore. The ZipTip was wetted with neat acetonitrile (ACN) and equilibrated with FA/water (0.1/99.9, v/v). The digests were desalted by pipetting through the ZipTip. Washing the ZipTip was performed with water/methanol-FA (94.9/5/0.1, v/v/v) and the peptides were eluted with 5 µL water/ACN/FA (29.9/70/0.1, v/v/v). All desalted digests were evaporated to dryness at 30 °C and dissolved in 10 µL water/FA (99.9/0.1, v/v). 5 µL was subjected for LC-MS/MS analysis (75 µm ID x 150 mm column, 3 µm (150 Å) porous particles).

### Data Protocol
XCaliburTM (version 2.1) was used to obtain chromatograms and mass spectra. The search engine Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.228) was used to identify the peptides and proteins. The proteins were identified using both SEQUEST and MASCOT algorithms searching the Swiss-Prot database (human). All searches were performed setting the digestion enzyme to trypsin with maximum one missed cleavage, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1 Da and a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Signal to noise (S/N) threshold was set to 1.5 and the minimum ion count to 1. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as static modification. Oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine were specified as dynamic modifications. The proteins were identified with high peptide confidence filter, and ≥1 signature peptide was required for all protein identifications. Proteins identified as keratin or trypsin were removed from the list, in addition to proteins found in the blank samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Exosomes, Glioblastoma multiforme

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
University of Oslo, Department of Chemistry, Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Henriette Engen Berg

### Lab Head
Dr Henriette Engen Berg
University of Oslo, Department of Chemistry, Oslo, Norway


