### Accession
PXD043352

### Title
Global quantitative proteomics of mouse hippocampus during ageing

### Description
Understanding the molecular changes associated with the aged brain forms the basis for developing potential strategies for slowing cognitive decline associated with normal aging. Focusing on the hippocampus, a critical brain region involved in learning and memory, we employed tandem mass tag methodology to investigate proteomic changes that occur in advanced aged (20-month) relative to young (3-month) C57BL/6 mice. Our analysis revealed a total of 324 proteins that were significantly altered in the old mice relative to the young mice. Upregulated proteins (236 total proteins) were enriched within several age-related processes, such as the adaptive immune response and molecular metabolic pathways, whereas downregulated proteins (88 total proteins) were mainly involved in axonogenesis and growth cone-related processes. By categorising proteins according to their cell-type enrichment in the brain, a general upregulation was observed in the level of proteins preferentially expressed in microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes. In contrast, proteins with neuron-specific expression display an overall age-related downregulation. By integrating our proteomic and transcriptomic data, we discovered a mild but significant positive correlation between mRNA and protein expression changes in the aged hippocampus. Therefore, this proteomic data is a valuable resource for age-related molecular studies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Individual hippocampal tissues from both hemisphere were homogenized in cold lysis buffer containing 2% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) , 50 mM N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N-2-ethane sulfonic acid (HEPES) pH 7.4, 2 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 2 mM ethylene glycol-bis(β-aminoethyl ether)-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid (EGTA), 2 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), protease inhibitor cocktails (complete, EDTA-free, Roche) and PhosSTOP (Roche). Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine was added to the lysates at a final concentration of 10 mM and the solution was incubated at 85 °C for 10 min. Alkylation was performed at 23 °C with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min. Protein was precipitated using the chloroform-methanol method. Each air-dried precipitate was resuspended in 15 µL of 7.8 M urea and 100 mM HEPES at pH 8 with 2 µg of Lys-C and incubated at 30 °C for 12 h.  Each solution was diluted 8-fold in 100 mM HEPES at pH 8 and digested twice with 2 ug of trypsin (TrypZean, Sigma) at 30 °C for 8 h. Approximately 50 µg of each of the ten samples were labelled with a TMTpro reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the following scheme: Sample  Reagent Young, replicate 1 134N Young, replicate 2 133C Young, replicate 3 133N Young, replicate 4 132C Young, replicate 5 132N Aged, replicate 1 131C Aged, replicate 2 131N Aged, replicate 3 130C Aged, replicate 4 130N Aged, replicate 5 129C After confirming high labelling efficiency, the samples were quenched with 5% hydroxylamine, mixed together, acidified and desalted with a solid phase extraction cartridge (Sep-Pak tC18 3cc Vac cartridge, 200 mg sorbent, Waters).  Forty percent of the purified peptide was applied to hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) as described previously {Engholm-Keller, 2019, PMID:30822303}, except that fractions were collected at 30 s intervals. Fractions with detectable peptide concentration, as determined by absorption of 214 nm light, were combined so that there were 15 fractions with approximately equal protein. These fractions were dried and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry The LC-MS/MS was performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system and Q Exactive Plus Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each HILIC peptide fraction was loaded directly onto an in-house 300 mm long 0.075 mm inside diameter column packed with ReproSil Pur C18 AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was heated to 50 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation lab solutions) integrated with the nano flex ion source with an electrospray operating at 2.3 kV. The S lens radio frequency level was 50 and capillary temperature was 250 °C. The 2 µL sample was injected into a 20 µL loop and loaded onto the column in 99% reversed phase buffer A (solution of 0.1% formic acid) and 1% buffer B (solution of 0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile). The loading was for 10 min at 300 nL/min using 1% buffer B. The gradient, at 250 nL/min, was from 1% buffer B to 6% buffer B in 1 min, to 28% buffer B in 74 min, to 35% buffer B in 8 min, to 99% buffer B in 1 min, held at 99% buffer B for 2 min, to 99% buffer A in 1 min and held for 8 min as the flow rate increased to 300 nL/min. MS acquisition was performed for the entire 105 min. All samples and fractions were analysed using data-dependent acquisition LC-MS/MS. The MS scans were at a resolution of 70,000 with an automatic gain control target of 1,000,000 for a maximum ion time of 100 ms from m/z 375 to 1500. The MS/MS scans were at a resolution of 35,000 with an automatic gain control target of 200,000 and maximum ion time of 115 ms. The loop count was 12, the isolation window was 1.1 m/z, the first mass was fixed at m/z 120 and the normalized collision energy was 30. Singly charged ions and those with charge >8 were excluded from MS/MS and dynamic exclusion was for 35 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.7.0. Variable modifications were oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-terminus) and deamidation (NQ). Carbamidomethyl (C) was a fixed modification. Digestion was set to trypsin/P with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages. The TMTpro correction factors were entered. Minimum reporter peptide ion fraction was 0.6. The Mus musculus reference proteome with canonical and isoform sequences was used, as downloaded Dec 26 2020 from UniProtKB. The inbuilt contaminants fasta file in MaxQuant was also used. Second peptides search was enabled. The peptide spectrum matching and protein false discovery rates were set at 1%. All modified peptides and counterpart non-modified peptides were excluded from protein quantification. All other settings were default.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the molecular changes associated with the aged brain forms the basis for developing potential strategies for slowing cognitive decline associated with normal aging. Focusing on the hippocampus, a critical brain region involved in learning and memory, we employed tandem mass tag methodology to investigate global proteomic changes that occur in advanced-aged (20-month) versus young (3-month) C57BL/6 male mice. Our analysis revealed the upregulation of 236 proteins in the old hippocampal proteome, including those enriched within several age-related processes, such as the adaptive immune response and molecular metabolic pathways, whereas downregulated proteins (88 in total) are mainly involved in axonogenesis and growth cone-related processes. Categorizing proteins by cell-type enrichment in the brain identified a general upregulation of proteins preferentially expressed in microglia, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes. In contrast, proteins with neuron-specific expression displayed an overall age-related downregulation. By integrating our proteomic with our previously published transcriptomic data, we discovered a mild but significant positive correlation between mRNA and protein expression changes in the aged hippocampus. Therefore, this proteomic data is a valuable additional resource for further understanding age-related molecular mechanisms.

### Keywords
Cognitive decline, Proteomics, Aging, Mass spectrometry, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland

### Submitter
Victor Anggono

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Anggono
The University of Queensland


