### Accession
PXD033368

### Title
Analysis of differential proteins in Colletotrichum falcatum during red rot infection in sugarcane

### Description
The project is aimed at analysing the comparitive proteomics of red rot pathogen, C. falcatum, during red rot infection in sugarcane. The differentially abundant proteins shall be used to identify the corresponding genes.

### Sample Protocol
To study the comparative proteomic profile of C. falcatum, the pathogen was co-cultured on potato dextrose broth with susceptible variety CoJ 64. A standard highly virulent pathotype of Colletotrichum falcatum Cf 08, isolated from variety CoJ 64 and maintained in plant pathology laboratory at IISR was used in the present study. Briefly, half strength and one fourth strength potato dextrose broth (PDB, Himedia) was prepared and poured in 150 ml flasks @ 50 ml PDB/ flask. For co-culture, apparently healthy stalks of variety CoJ 64 were selected, washed and the outer hard layer of the stalks was removed. The inner internodal stalk tissue was cut in small bits (0.5-1 cm) and added to flasks containing PDB @ 1.5 g bits/ flask. Control flasks without stalk tissue were maintained for both half strength and one fourth strength PDB. All the flasks were sterilized by autoclaving at 1210C for 15 minutes. For inoculation of in flasks, spore suspension of C. falcatum pathotype Cf 08 was prepared in sterile water from a 10 day old pure sporulating culture of Cf 08 grown on oat meal agar in petri plates. The cfu of the suspension was adjusted to 106 spores/ ml and each flask was inoculated with 1 ml of spore suspension with five replications each for half strength PDB, one fourth strength PDB and their respective controls. The inoculated flasks were incubated under stationary conditions at 28±20C for 7 days after which the mycelium was collected by filtration, rinsed with deionized water and stored at -800C for further studies. The co-cultured mycelium (with sugarcane stalks) along with control were used for extraction of proteins as follows: 1gm of Fungal mat is weighed and grinded in Urea lysis buffer + PIC + PMSF.  Homogenization of the sample was carried out. The samples are centrifuged at 14000rpm for 10min.  The supernatant obtained is collected into a separate tube (Supernatant-1).  To the pellet, 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate with 1% SDS buffer was added.  Vortexed and centrifuged the samples.  The resultant supernatant was taken (Supernatant-2). The supernatants from 1 and 2 extractions were mixed and was taken for LCMS analysis. In sample digestion of proteins samples was performed, followed by LCMS analysis as follows: 100 µg of the sample was taken for digestion. The sample is diluted with 50mM NH4HCO3. The sample was treated with 100mM DTT at 95oC for 1hr followed by 250mM IDA at room temperature in dark for 45min. The sample is then digested with Trypsin and incubated overnight at 37˚C. The resulting sample was vacuum dried and dissolved in 50µl of 0.1% formic acid in water. After centrifugation at 10000g the supernatant was collected into a separate tube. 10µL injection volume was used on BEH C18 UPLC column for separation of peptides. 3 runs per sample will be carried out for Label free quantitation. The peptides separated on the column were directed to Waters Synapt G2 Q-TOF instrument for MS and MSMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed by MassLynx 4.1 WATERS, peptide editor software to get the complete integrated sequence of the sample. The individual peptides MSMS spectra were matched to the database sequence with help of PLGS software, WATERS. The instrument used for acquiring Mass Spec Data is: UPLC connected with Waters Synapt G2 (QTOF). The Parameters used for identification are already mentioned like Peptide Mass Tolerance at MS1 level: 50ppm and Fragment Mass Tolerance at MS2 level: 100ppm. During processing of the Sample Cysteine Sites were modified to Carbamidomethylated Cysteine, and the Methionine sites being prone to Oxidation, was considered as a variable modification to the mass

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Lcms, Red rot of sugarcane, Colletotrichum falcatum

### Affiliations
Central Lab for Proteomics and Transcriptomics, Crop Improvement Division, ICAR-Indian Institite of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow, India 226002
Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow

### Submitter
Ranjit Singh Gujjar

### Lab Head
Dr Ranjit Singh Gujjar
Central Lab for Proteomics and Transcriptomics, Crop Improvement Division, ICAR-Indian Institite of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow, India 226002


