### Accession
PXD026785

### Title
Human cytomegalovirus protein RL1 degrades the antiviral factor SLFN11 via recruitment of the CRL4 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex

### Description
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is an important human pathogen and a paradigm of viral immune evasion, targeting intrinsic, innate and adaptive immunity. We have employed two novel, orthogonal multiplexed tandem mass tag-based proteomic screens to identify host proteins downregulated by viral factors expressed during the latest phases of viral infection. This approach revealed that the HIV-1 restriction factor Schlafen-11 (SLFN11) was degraded by the poorly characterised, late-expressed HCMV protein RL1, via recruitment of the Cullin4-RING E3 Ubiquitin Ligase (CRL4) complex. SLFN11 potently restricted HCMV infection, inhibiting the formation and spread of viral plaques. Overall, we show that a restriction factor previously thought only to inhibit RNA viruses additionally restricts HCMV. We define the mechanism of viral antagonism and also describe an important resource for revealing additional molecules of importance in antiviral innate immunity and viral immune evasion.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed twice with PBS, and 250 µl lysis buffer added (6M Guanidine/50 mM HEPES pH 8.5). Cell lifters (Corning) were used to scrape cells in lysis buffer, which was removed to an eppendorf tube, vortexed extensively then sonicated. Cell debris was removed by centrifuging at 21,000 g for 10 min twice. Half of each sample was kept for subsequent analysis by immunoblot where required. For the other half, dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and samples were incubated for 20 mins. Cysteines were alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide and incubated 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with DTT for 15 mins. Samples were diluted with 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 to 1.5 M Guanidine followed by digestion at room temperature for 3 h with LysC protease at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio. Samples were further diluted with 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5 to 0.5 M Guanidine. Trypsin was then added at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio followed by overnight incubation at 37°C. The reaction was quenched with 5% formic acid, then centrifuged at 21,000 g for 10 min to remove undigested protein. Peptides were subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE, Sep-Pak, Waters) and vacuum-centrifuged to near-dryness.  Peptide Labelling with Tandem Mass Tags In preparation for TMT labeling, desalted peptides were dissolved in 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Peptide concentration was measured by microBCA (Pierce). TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in 43 µl anhydrous acetonitrile and 3 µl added to 25 g of peptide at a final acetonitrile concentration of 30% (v/v). Sample labelling was as indicated in Table S7C. Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). TMT-labelled samples were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. The sample was vacuum-centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 SPE (Sep-Pak, Waters). An unfractionated singleshot was analysed initially to ensure similar peptide loading across each TMT channel and avoid the need for excessive electronic normalization. As all normalisation factors were >0.5 and <2, data for the PFA singleshot experiment was analysed with data for the corresponding fractions to increase the overall number of peptides quantified.   LC-MS3 Peptide fractionation is described in doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.14.444170. For Experiment 1, peptides were separated on a 75 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 0.5 cm of Magic C4 resin (5 μm, 100 Å, Michrom Bioresources) followed by ∼20 cm of GP118 resin (1.8 μm, 120 Å, Sepax Technologies). Peptides were separated using a 3 hr gradient of 6 to 30% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method {McAlister, 2012 #773; Ting, 2011 #401}. The scan sequence began with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 400−1400 Th, AGC target 2 × 105, maximum injection time 200 ms). ‘Top speed’ (2s) was selected for MS2 analysis, which consisted of CID (quadrupole ion trap analysis, AGC 4 × 103, NCE 35, maximum injection time 150 ms). The top ten precursors were selected for MS3 analysis, in which precursors were fragmented by HCD prior to Orbitrap analysis (NCE 55, max AGC 5 × 104, maximum injection time 250 ms, isolation specificity 0.5 Th, resolution 60,000) {McAlister, 2012 #773}. For Experiment 2, loading solvent was 0.1% TFA, analytical solvent A: 0.1% FA and B: MeCN + 0.1% FA. All separations were carried out at 55°C. Samples were loaded at 10 ml/minute for 5 minutes in loading solvent before beginning the analytical gradient. The following gradient was used: 3-5.6% B over 4 minutes, 5.6-32% B over 162 minutes, followed by a 5 minute wash at 80% B and a 5 minute wash at 90% B and equilibration at 3% B for 5 minutes. Each analysis used a MultiNotch MS3-based TMT method (McAlister et al., 2014). The following settings were used: MS1: 400-1400 Th, Quadrupole isolation, 120,000 Resolution, 2x105 AGC target, 50 ms maximum injection time, ions injected for all parallisable time. MS2: Quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of m/z 0.7, CID fragmentation (NCE 30) with ion trap scanning out in rapid mode from m/z 120, 1x104 AGC target, 70 ms maximum injection time, ions accumulated for all parallisable time in centroid mode. MS3: in Synchronous Precursor Selection mode the top 10 MS2 ions were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE 65) and scanned in the Orbitrap at 50,000 resolution with an AGC target of 5x104 and a maximum accumulation time of 150 ms, ions were not accumulated for all parallelisable time. The entire MS/MS/MS cycle had a target time of 3 s. Dynamic exclusion was set to +/- 10 ppm for 90 s. MS2 fragmentation was trigged on precursors 5x103 counts and above.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based software pipeline for quantitative proteomics, “MassPike”, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steven Gygi’s laboratory at Harvard Medical School. MS spectra were converted to mzXML using an extractor built upon Thermo Fisher’s RAW File Reader library (version 4.0.26). A combined database was constructed from (a) the human Uniprot database (26th January, 2017), (b) the HCMV strain Merlin Uniprot database, (c) all additional non-canonical human cytomegalovirus ORFs described by Stern-Ginossar et al. (11), (d) a six-frame translation of HCMV strain Merlin filtered to include all potential ORFs of ≥8 amino acids (delimited by stop-stop rather than requiring ATG-stop) and (e) common contaminants such as porcine trypsin and endoproteinase LysC. ORFs from the six-frame translation (6FT-ORFs) were named as follows: 6FT_Frame_ORFnumber_length, where Frame is numbered 1-6, and length is the length in amino acids. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 1.0 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification.  To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed {Huttlin, 2010 #528}. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1%. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously The following parameters were considered: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides (algorithm described in {Huttlin, 2010 #528}.  Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using ’’MassPike’’, as described previously (8). Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned for ions and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. The primary determinant of quantitation quality is the number of TMT reporter ions detected in each MS3 spectrum, which is directly proportional to the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio observed for each ion. Conservatively, every individual peptide used for quantitation was required to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions so that each on its own could be expected to provide a representative picture of relative protein abundance (8). An isolation specificity filter with a cut-off of 50% was additionally employed to minimise peptide co-isolation (8). Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (more than 9 TMT channels missing and/or a combined S:N ratio of less than 100 across all TMT reporter ions) or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation. Peptides meeting the stated criteria for reliable quantitation were then summed by parent protein, in effect weighting the contributions of individual peptides to the total protein signal based on their individual TMT reporter ion yields. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Excel. For protein quantitation, reverse and contaminant proteins were removed, then each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalised assuming equal protein loading across all channels. For further analysis and display in Figures, fractional TMT signals were used (i.e. reporting the fraction of maximal signal observed for each protein in each TMT channel, rather than the absolute normalized signal intensity). This effectively corrected for differences in the numbers of peptides observed per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is an important human pathogen and a paradigm of viral immune evasion, targeting intrinsic, innate, and adaptive immunity. We have employed two orthogonal multiplexed tandem mass tag-based proteomic screens to identify host proteins down-regulated by viral factors expressed during the latest phases of viral infection. This approach revealed that the HIV-1 restriction factor Schlafen-11 (SLFN11) was degraded by the poorly characterized, late-expressed HCMV protein RL1, via recruitment of the Cullin4-RING E3 Ubiquitin Ligase (CRL4) complex. SLFN11 potently restricted HCMV infection, inhibiting the formation and spread of viral plaques. Overall, we show that a restriction factor previously thought only to inhibit RNA viruses additionally restricts HCMV. We define the mechanism of viral antagonism and also describe an important resource for revealing additional molecules of importance in antiviral innate immunity and viral immune evasion.

### Keywords
Human cytomegalovirus; restriction factor; innate immunity; immune evasion; host-pathogen interaction; schlafen

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK


