### Accession
PXD030757

### Title
Integrative metabolomics, proteomics and transcriptomics analysis reveals liver toxicity of mesoporous silica nanoparticles

### Description
As pharmaceutical excipients, mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) have attracted considerable concern based on potential risks to the public. The impact of MSNs on biochemical metabolism is poorly understood, and few studies have compared the effects of MSNs administered via different routes. To evaluate the hepatotoxicity of MSNs, metabolomics, proteomics and transcriptomic analyses were performed in mice after intravenous (20 mg/kg/d) or oral ad-ministration (200 mg/kg/d) of MSNs for 10 days. Intravenous injection induced significant hepatic injury based on pathological inspection and increased the levels of AST/ALT and the inflammatory factors IL-6, IL-1β and TNF-a. Omics data suggested intravenous administration of MSNs perturbed the following metabolites: succinate, hypoxanthine, GSSG, NADP+, NADPH and 6-phosphogluconic acid. In addition, increases in GPX, SOD3, G6PD, HK, and PFK at proteomic and transcriptomic levels suggested elevation of glycolysis and pentose phosphate pathway, synthesis of glutathione and nucleotides, and antioxidative pathway activity, whereas oxidative phosphorylation, TCA and mitochondrial energy metabolism were reduced. On the other hand, oral administration of MSNs disturbed inflammatory factors and metabolites of ribose-5-phosphate, 6-phosphogluconate, GSSG, and NADP+ associated with the pentose phosphate pathway, glutathione synthesis and oxidative stress albeit to a lesser extent than intravenous injection despite the administration of a ten-fold greater dose. Overall, systematic biological data suggested that intravenous injection of nanoparticles of pharmaceutical excipients substantially affected hepatic metabolism function and induced oxidative stress and inflammation, whereas oral administration exhibited milder effects compared with intravenous injection.

### Sample Protocol
The cold acetone method was used to extract the total proteins. The mouse liver samples (n= 5 for each group) were homogenized in SDS protein lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2% SDS, 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche Ltd. Basel, Switzerland)) by vortex oscillation and passage through a high-throughput tissue grinding machine thrice. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 12000 g at 4 °C for 20 min. The concentrations of the protein extracts were determined using a BCA Protein Assay Kit. After trypsin digestion (Promega, Madison, WI), the peptide mixture was redissolved in 0.1% TFA and fractionated by high pH separation using a Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Product No. 84868, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Finally, eight fractions were collected and combined into six fractions; each fraction was dried in a vacuum concentrator for the next step.

### Data Protocol
nano-HPLC–MS/MS analysis was performed by online nanospray LC–MS/MS on an Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nanoLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Spectronaut 13 (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) was used to process and analyze the raw DIA data. Proteins were annotated using the GO, KEGG and COG/KOG databases (http://www.geneontology.org) to obtain their functions. After Student’s t test, proteins with a Q value <0.05 and absolute AVG log2 ratio>0.58 were filtered as differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Oxidative stress, Proteomics, Mesoporous silica nanoparticle, Inflammation, Transcriptomic, Hepatotoxicity, Oxidative phosphorylation.

### Affiliations
School of Physics and Electronics, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China

### Submitter
Jing Li

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Li
School of Physics and Electronics, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China


