### Accession
PXD006120

### Title
Extracellular matrix downregulation in the Drosophila heart preserves contractile function and improves lifespan

### Description
Aging is associated with extensive remodeling of the heart, including basement membrane (BM) components that surround cardiomyocytes. Remodeling is thought to impair cardiac mechanotransduction, but the contribution of specific BM components to age-related lateral communication between cardiomyocytes is unclear. Using a genetically tractable, rapidly aging model with sufficient cardiac genetic homology and morphology, e.g. Drosophila melanogaster, we observed differential regulation of BM collagens between laboratory strains, correlating with changes in muscle physiology leading to cardiac dysfunction. Therefore, we sought to understand the extent to which BM proteins modulate contractile function during aging. Cardiac-restricted knockdown of ECM genes Pericardin, Laminin A, and Viking in Drosophila prevented age-associated heart tube restriction and increased contractility, even under viscous load. Most notably, reduction of Laminin A expression correlated with an overall preservation of contractile velocity with age and extension of organismal lifespan. Global heterozygous knockdown confirmed these data, which provides new evidence of a direct link between BM homeostasis, contractility, and maintenance of lifespan.

### Sample Protocol
50 whole beating heart tubes corresponding to 80 μg of protein were cleaned, extracted and pooled into deionized water for each genotype at one week of age. Samples were washed 3 times in deionized water and then lyophilized. Lyophilized Drosophila hearts were solubilized in 25 μL of 9 M urea for 30 min at room temperature with agitation. Samples were diluted 1:5 (125 μL) with 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM TCEP for 30 min in the dark, and then alkylated with 15 mM Iodoacetamide for 20 min. A Trypsin/LysC solution was used to digest the samples at 60:1 ratio (protein:trypsin/lysC) overnight at 37 °C at pH 8 with constant agitation in the presence of 10% acetronitrile (ACN). After digestion, the peptide mixture was acidified with 10% Formic Acid FA to pH 2, partly dried on a speedvac to evaporate any acetonitrile, and desalted using a 30 μg microelution plate (Waters). 2 μg of peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS)

### Data Protocol
All raw data from the orbitrap elite were converted to centroided mzXML format for peaklist generation using proteowizard (Version 3.0.8990). The mzXML files were then searched using the Comet search algorithm running through the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP; Version 4.8.0) against Swiss-prot database of reviewed Drosophila protein FASTA sequences with randomized decoys appended. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidization of methionine set as a variable modification. Tolerance for mass error was set to 20 ppm for precursors and 1 da for fragments. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Peptide spectral match confidence was determined using the Peptide Prophet algorithm built into the xinteract tool on the TPP, using high accurate mass binning, retention time information, and non-parametric modeling settings. Peptides with > 95% probability were uploaded into Skyline Software to perform MS1 extraction and quantification as previously described [26]. We required all peptides to fit a retention time alignment with an r2 < 0.95 and to demonstrate an isotope dot product correlation scores > 0.8. Only proteotypic peptides were used for quantitative analysis. Results of the MS1 filtering were exported for input to msstats an R-based tool for proteomic data analysis [53]. Precursor intensities were median normalized and protein level inference computed using the linear mixed model.

### Publication Abstract
Aging is associated with extensive remodeling of the heart, including basement membrane (BM) components that surround cardiomyocytes. Remodeling is thought to impair cardiac mechanotransduction, but the contribution of specific BM components to age-related lateral communication between cardiomyocytes is unclear. Using a genetically tractable, rapidly aging model with sufficient cardiac genetic homology and morphology, e.g. Drosophila melanogaster, we observed differential regulation of BM collagens between laboratory strains, correlating with changes in muscle physiology leading to cardiac dysfunction. Therefore, we sought to understand the extent to which BM proteins modulate contractile function during aging. Cardiac-restricted knockdown of ECM genes Pericardin, Laminin A, and Viking in Drosophila prevented age-associated heart tube restriction and increased contractility, even under viscous load. Most notably, reduction of Laminin A expression correlated with an overall preservation of contractile velocity with age and extension of organismal lifespan. Global heterozygous knockdown confirmed these data, which provides new evidence of a direct link between BM homeostasis, contractility, and maintenance of lifespan.

### Keywords
Laminin a, Drosophila, Aging, Extracellular matrix, Basement membrane

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Heart Institute, Los Angeles, CA. United States of America
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Koen Raedschelders

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Van Eyk
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Heart Institute, Los Angeles, CA. United States of America


