### Accession
PXD032238

### Title
Operation of a TCA cycle subnetwork in the mammalian nucleus_mass4tox

### Description
Nucleic acid and histone modifications critically depend on central metabolism for substrates and co-factors. Although a few enzymes related to the formation of these required metabolites have been reported in the nucleus, the corresponding metabolic pathways are considered to function elsewhere in the cell. Here we show that a substantial part of the mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, the biosynthetic hub of epigenetic modification factors, is operational also in the nucleus. Using 13C-tracer analysis, we identified activity of glutamine-to-fumarate, citrate-to-succinate, and glutamine-to-aspartate routes in the nuclei of HeLa cells. Proximity labeling mass-spectrometry revealed a spatial vicinity of the involved enzymes with core nuclear proteins, supporting their nuclear location. We further show nuclear localization of aconitase 2 and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase in mouse embryonic stem cells. Together, our results demonstrate operation of an extended metabolic pathway in the nucleus warranting a revision of the canonical view on metabolic compartmentalization and gene expression regulation.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion  1. Proteins reduced with DTT: 5 µl of 11 mg/ml (72 mM) stock (4 mM Final) [60°C 10 min] 2. Put samples in the fridge for 5 minutes 3. Alkylated with Iodoacetamide: 5 µl of 46.6 mg/ml (266 mM) stock (14 mM Final) [RT dark 30 min] 4. IAA quenched with DTT: add 4.7 µl of 11 mg/ml (72 mM) stock (7 mM Final including amount added in step 10] 5. 1 µl Trypsin (0.2 mg/ml stock=1ug) added for 50:1 protein:trypsin ratio [37°C 500 rpm overnight]  LC-MS/MS   - To determine injection volumes of each sample (target of BPI of 1-2e9) 1 survey runs of 15 min gradient (30 min program) were performed on the samples. Based on the BPI obtained, sample final injection volumes were adjusted to individual samples  - Samples were injected in a randomised manner  - Injected samples were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC™ nano system (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equiped with FAIMS Pro for gas phase separation of peptides.  - The sample was loaded onto the trapping column (Thermo Scientific, PepMap100, C18, 300 μm X 5 mm), using partial loop injection, for three minutes at a flow rate of 15 μL/min with 0.1% (v/v) FA in 3% acetonitrile.  - The sample was resolved on the analytical column (Easy-Spray C18 75 µm x 500 mm 2 µm column) at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1 using a gradient of 97% A (0.1% formic acid) 3% B (80% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid) to 25% B over 52 minutes, then to 40% B for additional 8 minutes, then to 100% B for another 10 minute which remained at 100% B for 13 minutes, percentage of B was then lowered to 3.8% to allow the column to re-equilibrate for 15 minutes before next injection.  - Data was acquired using two FAIMS cv's (-50v and -70v) and each FAIMS experiment had a maximum cycle time of 1.5s.  - For both FAIMS experiments the data-dependent program used for data acquisition consisted of a 120,000 resolution full-scan MS scan (AGC set to 100% (4e5 ions)  with a maximum fill time of 50ms). MS/MS was perfomed at a resolution of 15,000   (AGC set to 100% (5e4 ions) with a maximum fill time of 22ms) with an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and an HCD collision energy of 30%.  - To avoid repeated selection of peptides for MSMS the program used a 40 second dynamic exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
- Raw data were imported and data processed in Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The raw files were submitted to an iterative database search using Proteome Discoverer with SequestHF and Inferis re-scoring algorithm against the Homo sapiens database containing human protein sequences from UniProt/Swiss-Prot. Common contaminant proteins (several types of human keratins, BSA and porcine trypsin) were added to the database. The spectra identification was performed with the following parameters: MS accuracy, 10 p.p.m.; MS/MS accuracy of 0.02 Da for spectra acquired in Orbitrap analyzer; up to two missed cleavage sites allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Percolator node was used for false discovery rate estimation and only rank 1 peptide identifications of high confidence (FDR<1%) were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleic acid and histone modifications critically depend on the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle for substrates and cofactors. Although a few TCA cycle enzymes have been reported in the nucleus, the corresponding pathways are considered to operate in mitochondria. Here, we show that a part of the TCA cycle is operational also in the nucleus. Using <sup>13</sup>C-tracer analysis, we identified activity of glutamine-to-fumarate, citrate-to-succinate, and glutamine-to-aspartate routes in the nuclei of <i>HeLa</i> cells. Proximity labeling mass spectrometry revealed a spatial vicinity of the involved enzymes with core nuclear proteins. We further show nuclear localization of aconitase 2 and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase in mouse embryonic stem cells. Nuclear localization of the latter enzyme, which produces succinyl-CoA, changed from pluripotency to a differentiated state with accompanying changes in the nuclear protein succinylation. Together, our results demonstrate operation of an extended metabolic pathway in the nucleus, warranting a revision of the canonical view on metabolic compartmentalization.

### Keywords
Nuclear proteins, Non canonical metabolism compartmentalization, Gene expression regulation, Tricarboxylic acid (tca) cycle

### Affiliations
MRC Toxicology Unit University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Catarina Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Kiran Raosaheb Patil
MRC Toxicology Unit University of Cambridge


