### Accession
PXD008005

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of AMBRA1

### Description
We sought to identify AMBRA1 interacting proteins and to profile its loss/gain of interactions by mutation using quantitative mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Purified protein eluates were digested with trypsin for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were denatured and reduced in 2 M urea, 10 mM NH4HCO3, and 2 mM DTT for 30 min at 60°C, then alkylated with 2 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature. Trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:100 enzyme:substrate ratio and digested overnight at 37°C. Following digestion, samples were concentrated using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer's specifications. Digested peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Scientific Velos Pro system equipped with a Proxeon Easy nLC high-pressure liquid chromatography and autosampler system. Samples were injected onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 um I.D. packed with ReproSil Pur C18 AQ 5 µm particles) in 0.1% formic acid and then separated with a 2-h gradient from 5% to 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid on an analytical column (10 cm x 75 um I.D. packed with ReproSil Pur C18 AQ 3 µm particles).

### Data Protocol
The raw data was matched to protein sequences by the Protein Prospector algorithm. Data were searched against a database containing SwissProt Human protein sequences (downloaded March 6, 2012) and concatenated to a decoy database in which each sequence was randomized to estimate the false positive rate. The searches considered a precursor mass tolerance of 1 Da and fragment ion tolerance of 0.8 Da, and considered variable modifications for protein N-terminal acetylation, protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation, glutamine to pyroglutamate conversion for peptide N-terminal glutamine residues, protein N-terminal methionine loss, protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine loss, methionine oxidation, and constant modification for carbamidomethyl cysteine. Prospector data was filtered using a maximum protein expectation value of 0.01 and a maximum peptide expectation value of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Multi-subunit cullin-RING ligases (CRLs) are the largest family of ubiquitin E3 ligases in humans. CRL activity is tightly regulated to prevent unintended substrate degradation or autocatalytic degradation of CRL subunits. Using a proteomics strategy, we discovered that CRL4<sup>AMBRA</sup><sup>1</sup> (CRL substrate receptor denoted in superscript) targets Elongin C (ELOC), the essential adapter protein of CRL5 complexes, for polyubiquitination and degradation. We showed that the ubiquitin ligase function of CRL4<sup>AMBRA</sup><sup>1</sup> is required to disrupt the assembly and attenuate the ligase activity of human CRL5<sup>SOCS</sup><sup>3</sup> and HIV-1 CRL5<sup>VIF</sup> complexes as AMBRA1 depletion leads to hyperactivation of both CRL5 complexes. Moreover, CRL4<sup>AMBRA</sup><sup>1</sup> modulates interleukin-6/STAT3 signaling and HIV-1 infectivity that are regulated by CRL5<sup>SOCS</sup><sup>3</sup> and CRL5<sup>VIF</sup>, respectively. Thus, by discovering a substrate of CRL4<sup>AMBRA</sup><sup>1</sup>, ELOC, the shared adapter of CRL5 ubiquitin ligases, we uncovered a novel CRL cross-regulation pathway.

### Keywords
Cullin-ring ubiquitin ligase, Ambra1, E3, Ddb1

### Affiliations
Genentech Inc.
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology University of California San Francisco

### Submitter
Si-Han Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology University of California San Francisco


