### Accession
PXD004798

### Title
Chemical proteomics to elucidate target proteins of cysteine-stabilized and circular peptides

### Description
Cyclotides are circular and cystine-rich peptides which are little amenable to chemical modifications for probe design in chemical biology. The cyclotide [T20K]kalata B1 is an immune system modulating drug reported for its therapeutic application in multiple sclerosis.

### Sample Protocol
In gel tryptic digets of photo affinity precipitated proteins via a cyclotide probe

### Data Protocol
Data were submitted Mascot and protein hits were used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Target deconvolution is one of the most challenging tasks in drug discovery, but a key step in drug development. In contrast to small molecules, there is a lack of validated and robust methodologies for target elucidation of peptides. In particular, it is difficult to apply these methods to cyclic and cysteine-stabilized peptides since they exhibit reduced amenability to chemical modification and affinity capture; however, such ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptide natural products are rich sources of promising drug candidates. For example, plant-derived circular peptides called cyclotides have recently attracted much attention due to their immunosuppressive effects and oral activity in the treatment of multiple sclerosis in mice, but their molecular target has hitherto not been reported. In this study, a chemical proteomics approach using photo-affinity crosslinking was developed to determine a target for the circular peptide [T20K]kalata B1. Using this prototypic nature-derived peptide enabled the identification of a possible functional modulation of 14-3-3 proteins. This biochemical interaction was validated via competition pull down assays as well as a cellular reporter assay indicating an effect on 14-3-3-dependent transcriptional activity. As proof of concept, the presented approach may be applicable for target elucidation of various cyclic peptides and mini-proteins, in particular cyclotides, which represent a promising class of molecules in drug discovery and development.

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis, Target identification, Peptide drug, Target deconvolution, Cyclotides

### Affiliations
Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Schwarzspanierstrasse 17, 1090 Vienna
Medical University of Vienna, Center for Pharmacology and Physiology

### Submitter
Roland  Hellinger

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Werner Gruber
Physiology and Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Schwarzspanierstrasse 17, 1090 Vienna


