### Accession
PXD004969

### Title
Molecular data integration reveals Growth Hormone Receptor as an alternative candidate oncogenic signaling pathway in glioblastoma

### Description
Our laboratory has identified the Growth Hormone Receptor (GHR) as a candidate oncogenic pathway involved in GBM oncogenicity. In order to study further the role of  GHR in GBM, we have generated GHR overexpressing patient-derived cell lines (PDCL) from PDCL established by GlioTEx team (Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle, Paris, France). An analysis of the global proteome of each variant was then undertaken. The wild-type (GHR WT) and constitutively activated (GHR CA) GHR expression vectors were generous gifts from Mike Waters and Peter Brooks  (University of Queensland, Australia). The constitutively activated GHR vector was generated by fusing the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of rabbit GHR (to ensure the absence of human GH stimulation) to Jun zippers in order to achieve GH-independent forced dimerization in absence of the extracellular domain. The control GFP vector was obtained from Addgene . These vectors were then inserted in lentiviral vectors. Cells were transduced with multiplicity of infection of 20 and transduced cells were selected with puromycin.

### Sample Protocol
A SILAC-based proteomic analysis was carried out to accurately quantify the proteomes of three following variants: 4339 GFP, 4339 GHR WT, 4339 GHR CA, derived from 4339 PDCL from GlioTEx. All cell populations were metabolically encoded by a 3-week exposure to one of the following SILAC labeling included in the culture medium: 1) light labeling: light L-Arginine and L-lysine; 2) medium labeling:  L-Arginine-HCl, 13C6 + L-Lysine-2HCl, 4,4,5,5-d4; 3) heavy labeling: L-Arginine-HCl, 13C6, 15N4  + L-Lysine-2HCl, 13C6, 15N2 (ThermoFisher). For each of the 3 replicates performed, labeling was inverted for each cell line variant. All three cell populations (heavy, medium and light) were mixed before proteomic analysis and lysed with RIPA buffer. Protein extracts were then separated on SDS–PAGE gels (10%, Invitrogen at 30mA during 1h30) and stained with colloidal blue staining (LabSafe GEL BlueTM GBiosciences). Gel slices were excised (12 bands) and proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT prior to alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After washing and shrinking the gel pieces with 100% MeCN, in-gel digestion was performed using trypsin (Promega) overnight in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 30 °C.  Peptides were then extracted from gel slices and analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded on a C18 precolumn (300 µm inner diameter x 5 mm; Thermo Scientific) at 20 µl/min in 2% MeCN, 0.1% HCOOH. After a desalting for 3 min, the precolumn was switched on the C18 column (75 μm i.d. x 50 cm, packed with C18 PepMap, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in solvent A (2% MeCN, 0.1% HCOOH). Bound peptides were eluted using a 163 min multistep linear gradient (from 1 to 6% (v/v) in 1 min, from 6 to 9% in 18 min, from 9 to 32% in 132 min and from 32 to 40% in 9 min) of solvent B (80% MeCN, 0.085% HCO2H) at a 400 nl/min flow rate and an oven temperature of 40°C Survey MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 400-1500 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 120,000 and a 4 × 105 ion count target. Each scan was recalibrated in real time by co-injecting an internal standard from ambient air (445.12003 m/z) into the C-trap. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 35, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 100 ms and only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (v 3.0) and the resulting spectra were interrogated by Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (v 1.4, Thermo Scientific) with the SwissProt Homo Sapiens database (032015). Carbamidomethyle cysteine, oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, heavy 13C615N2-Lysine (Lys8) and 13C615N4-Arginine (Arg10) and medium 2H4-Lysine (Lys4) and 13C6-Arginine (Arg6) were set as variable modifications. Specificity of digestion was set for trypsin and allowed 2 missed cleavage sites. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (ref Poullet et al., 2007 ). The Sequest HT target and decoy search result were validated at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) with Percolator. For SILAC-based protein quantification, peptides XICs (Extracted Ion Chromatograms) were retrieved from Proteome DiscovererTM. Scale normalization was applied to compensate for mixing errors of the different SILAC cultures. Protein ratios were computed as the geometrical mean of related peptides. To estimate ratio significance, a t-test was performed with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR control threshold set to 0.05. Analysis of biological replicates of all the samples identified a total of 9535 proteins at a FDR of 1% (5639 common proteins). Of the 8305 quantified proteins (WT/GFP and CA/GFP), 3188 of them were quantified with at least 3 peptides, the latter of which were used for all subsequent analysis in this study.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ghr, Gains of function, Socs2, Expression array, Cellular movement, Glioblastoma, Proteomic, Egfr

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Protéomique (LSMP)  Institut Curie

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Protéomique (LSMP)  Institut Curie


