### Accession
PXD003305

### Title
Bacillus subtilis ClpP degradome

### Description
To characterize the proteins substrates and the modifications of the ClpP protease of Bacillus subtilis.

### Sample Protocol
- Affinity proteomics of the ClpP protease of B. subtilis - Phosphoproteomic analysis of total cell extracts and aggregates of different B. subtilis strains

### Data Protocol
- Quantitative MS analysis of pull-down samples was performed by label free quantification using the MaxQuantLFQ software. - Phosphoproteomic analysis was performed using Mascot peptide identification, Percolator FDR analysis and PhosphoRS phosphosite localization, in the ProteomeDiscoverer platform.

### Publication Abstract
Protein turnover is a tightly controlled process that is crucial for the removal of aberrant polypeptides and for cellular signalling. Whereas ubiquitin marks eukaryotic proteins for proteasomal degradation, a general tagging system for the equivalent bacterial Clp proteases is not known. Here we describe the targeting mechanism of the ClpC-ClpP proteolytic complex from Bacillus subtilis. Quantitative affinity proteomics using a ClpP-trapping mutant show that proteins phosphorylated on arginine residues are selectively targeted to ClpC-ClpP. In vitro reconstitution experiments demonstrate that arginine phosphorylation by the McsB kinase is required and sufficient for the degradation of substrate proteins. The docking site for phosphoarginine is located in the amino-terminal domain of the ClpC ATPase, as resolved at high resolution in a co-crystal structure. Together, our data demonstrate that phosphoarginine functions as a bona fide degradation tag for the ClpC-ClpP protease. This system, which is widely distributed across Gram-positive bacteria, is functionally analogous to the eukaryotic ubiquitin-proteasome system.

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Clpp, Phosphoarginine

### Affiliations
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology – IMP, and Institute of Molecular Biotechnology – IMBA
Mass spectrometry

### Submitter
Debora Broch Trentini

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Research Institute of Molecular Pathology – IMP, and Institute of Molecular Biotechnology – IMBA


