### Accession
PXD007165

### Title
EASI-tag enables accurate multiplexed and interference-free MS2-based proteome quantification

### Description
We developed EASI-tag (Easily Abstractable Sulfoxide-based Isobaric tag), a new generation of amine-derivatizing and sulfoxide-containing isobaric labelling reagents, which dissociate at low collision energy and generate peptide-coupled, interference-free reporter ions with high yield. Efficient isolation of 12C precursors and quantification at the MS2 level enable accurate determination of quantitative differences between multiplexed samples. EASI-tag makes isobaric labeling applicable to any bottom up proteomics application and to benchtop mass spectrometers.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed, reduced and alkylated in SDC buffer as previously described (Kulak et al., Nature Methods 2014 (11), pp319-324). Briefly, the samples were boiled at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by sonication for 15 min in a water-bath sonicator (Bioruptor, model UCD-200, Diagenode) at maximum power. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C by adding the proteolytic enzymes LysC and trypsin in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio.  The digestion was quenched with 1% TFA and peptides were transferred to StageTips, containing two 14-gauge C18 solid-phase extraction disks. Peptides were de-salted and washed with 0.1% TFA, prior to elution with 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. The eluate was evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge and the peptides were re-constituted in 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5. Next, 20 ug peptides were labeled with 80 ug EASI-tag in a final concentration of 33% acetonitrile for 1 hour at 25 °C. Reaction was quenched by adding 10 volumes of 1% TFA and labeled peptides were mixed at the defined ratios. The peptide mixtures were transferred to StageTips, containing two 14-gauge C18 solid-phase extraction disks. Peptides were de-salted and washed with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA, prior to elution with 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. The eluate was evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge and the peptides were re-constituted in 2 % acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. The digests were either fractioned on a high-pH reverse-phase fractionator as previously described (Kulak et al., MCP 2017) or analyzed in single runs.  Nano-flow reverse-phase liquid chromatography was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure system coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF or Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer with a NanoFlex electrospray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Approximately 1-2 µg purified peptides were loaded on a 45 cm column (75 µm inner diameter), packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Standard LC-MS/MS experiments were performed with a data-dependent top10 method. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 300-1,650 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 with an AGC target of 3e6 charges and a maximum ion injection time of 20 ms. For higher energy collisional dissociation MS/MS scans, the normalized collision energy was set to 27 and the resolution to 30,000 or 60,000 at m/z 200. Precursor ions were isolated in a 0.4 Th window with a -0.15 Th offset and accumulated for a maximum of 110 ms or until the AGC target of 1E5 – 5E5 ions was reached. Precursors with unassigned charge states and charges states of 1+ or above 3+ were excluded from sequencing. 12C isotope peaks were preferred for MS/MS isolation even when other isotopic peaks were more abundant. Previously targeted precursors were dynamically excluded from re-sequencing for 30 s. For ramped normalized collision energy (NCE) experiments, the same precursor ion was selected multiple times and fragmented with increasing NCEs from 0 to 34 and analyzed with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200. Precursor ions were isolated with a 0.4 or 1.5 Th window and accumulated for a maximum of 60 ms or until the AGC target of 1E5 ions was reached. Precursor ions with unassigned charge states and singly charged species were excluded from sequencing. Previously targeted precursors were dynamically excluded from re-sequencing for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS Raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.1.1 and processed MS/MS spectra were matched by the Andromeda search engine against tryptic peptides (max. 2 missed cleavages) derived from human or yeast reference proteomes (Uniprot, version as of 02/2017) at a false discovery rate below 1% on both, peptide spectrum match and protein level. For the analysis of the ramped NCE experiments, MS/MS scans with an NCE of 0 were removed from raw files. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The required minimum peptide length was 6 amino acids and the maximum peptide mass was limited to 4600 Da. Mass tolerances were 4.5 ppm for precursor ions after non-linear recalibration and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Due to a software error, single acquisitions were recorded until the runs were stopped manually.

### Publication Abstract
We developed EASI-tag (easily abstractable sulfoxide-based isobaric-tag), a new type of amine-derivatizing and sulfoxide-containing isobaric labeling reagents for highly accurate quantitative proteomics analysis using mass spectrometry. We observed that EASI-tag labels dissociate at low collision energy and generate peptide-coupled, interference-free reporter ions with high yield. Efficient isolation of <sup>12</sup>C precursors and quantification at the MS2 level allowed accurate determination of quantitative differences between up to six multiplexed samples.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Isobaric labeling, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Sebastian Virreira Winter

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


