### Accession
PXD015002

### Title
Relief Food Subsistence Revealed by Microparticle and Proteomics Analyses of Dental Calculus From Victims of the Great Irish Famine

### Description
Food and diet were class markers in nineteenth-century Ireland, which became evident as nearly one million people, primarily the poor and destitute, died as a consequence of the notorious Great Famine of 1845–1852. Famine took hold after a blight (Phytophthora infestans) destroyed the only means of subsistence—the potato crop—for a significant proportion of the population. This study seeks to elucidate the variability of diet in mid-nineteenth-century Ireland through microparticle and proteomic analysis of human dental calculus samples (n = 42) from victims of the Famine. The sample derives from remains of people who died between August 1847 and March 1851 while receiving poor relief as inmates in the union workhouse in the city of Kilkenny (52°39’N, -7°15’W). The results corroborate the historical accounts of food provisions before and during the Famine, with evidence of corn (maize), potato and cereal starch granules from the microparticle analysis and milk proteins from the proteomic analysis. Unexpectedly, there is also evidence of egg proteins—a food source generally reserved only for export and the better-off social classes—which highlights the variability of the Famine experience for those who died. Through historical contextualisation, this study shows how the notoriously monotonous potato diet of the nineteenth-century Irish poor was supplemented by other foodstuffs on an opportunistic basis. While the Great Irish Famine was one of the worst subsistence crises in history, it was foremost a social disaster induced by the lack of access to food and not the lack of food availability.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, digestion, and LC-MS/MS. Proteins were extracted from decalcified dental calculus samples in an ancient protein clean lab at the Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History according to guidelines recommended by Hendy et al. (2018). Samples were extracted and digested using a modified version of filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), previously described by Jeong et al. (2018). Extracted peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class system (Waters AG, Baden-Dättwil, Switzerland) at the Functional Genomics Center Zurich of the University/ETH Zurich according to previously described protocols (104). In order to monitor any potential contamination, two negative extraction blanks were processed in parallel with experimental samples. No dietary proteins were identified in the blanks, which contained only laboratory reagents (trypsin) and common laboratory contaminants (keratin, serum albumin, and uncharacterized bacterial proteins). Injection blanks were additionally performed between each sample to monitor and reduce any potential carryover among samples.

### Data Protocol
Protein database searching. Tandem mass spectra were converted to Mascot generic files by MSConvert version 3.0.11781 with the 100 most intense peaks in each spectrum. All MS/MS samples were analysed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.0). Mascot was set up to search the databases SwissProt_2017_07.fasta (555,100 entries, 198,754,198 residues) and uniprot_trembl_2017_07 database (88,032,926 entries, 29,627,301,199 residues) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin and selecting the automatic decoy option. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.01 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Given treatment with IAA during protein extraction, carbamidomethyl of C was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidation of N and Q and oxidation of M and P were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Food and diet were class markers in 19th-century Ireland, which became evident as nearly 1 million people, primarily the poor and destitute, died as a consequence of the notorious Great Famine of 1845 to 1852. Famine took hold after a blight <i>(Phytophthora infestans)</i> destroyed virtually the only means of subsistence-the potato crop-for a significant proportion of the population. This study seeks to elucidate the variability of diet in mid-19th-century Ireland through microparticle and proteomic analysis of human dental calculus samples (<i>n</i> = 42) from victims of the famine. The samples derive from remains of people who died between August 1847 and March 1851 while receiving poor relief as inmates in the union workhouse in the city of Kilkenny (52&#xb0;39' N, -7&#xb0;15' W). The results corroborate the historical accounts of food provisions before and during the famine, with evidence of corn (maize), potato, and cereal starch granules from the microparticle analysis and milk protein from the proteomic analysis. Unexpectedly, there is also evidence of egg protein-a food source generally reserved only for export and the better-off social classes-which highlights the variability of the prefamine experience for those who died. Through historical contextualization, this study shows how the notoriously monotonous potato diet of the poor was opportunistically supplemented by other foodstuffs. While the Great Irish Famine was one of the worst subsistence crises in history, it was foremost a social disaster induced by the lack of access to food and not the lack of food availability.

### Keywords
Bioarchaeology; microparticle; lc-ms/ms; proteomics; starch; tartar; teeth; calculus

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institite for the Science of Human History, Department of Archaeogenetics
Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History

### Submitter
Ashley Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Warinner
Max Planck Institite for the Science of Human History, Department of Archaeogenetics


