### Accession
PXD010514

### Title
Differential view on the bile acids stress response of Clostridioides difficile

### Description
In this study, we aimed at the characterization of C. difficile’s stress response to the main four human bile acids. Although, a phenotypically description of growth differences upon challenge with different bile acids has been described (Lewis 2016, Thanissery 2017), there is no information on the adaptation of gene expression available. We employed a comprehensive proteomics approach to record stress signatures of the unconjugated bile acids CA, CDCA, DCA and LCA in shock experiments as well as during long-term-stress conditions and could depict a general stress response concerning all four bile acids, but also specific responses to only a single or a few of the different bile acids. Our results are a starting point for the understanding of how the individual bile acids cocktail of a patient can decide on the outcome of a C. difficile infection.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in 50 mM TrisHCl, pH 8 containing 8 M urea, 3 thiourea, 10 mM EDTA, 4% CHAPS and 20 mM TCEP. Cells were lyzed by 6 cycles of 1 min intervals of ultrasonication (Sonotrode MS73, Bandelin, Germany) with intermittent cooling. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation, supernatants mixed with water 1:1 and proteins precipitated overnight at -20 °C by adding 4 volumes of acetone. Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate) containing 0.1 % RapiGest SF (Waters, USA) and the protein concentration determined using Roti Nanoquant (Carl Roth, Germany). 500 µg of protein were reduced in 100 µl 50 mM TEAB, 0.1% RapiGest, 5 mM TCEP for 45 min at 60°C. Afterwards free thiols were alkylated for 15 min in the dark with 10 mM iodoacetamide. For an insolution digestion of proteins, trypsin was added in a ratio of 1:100 and digests incubated in a thermo mixer for 5 h at 37 °C and 900 rpm. Digestion was stopped and RapiGest removed as recommended by the manufacturer. Sample Peptides were cleaned via StageTipping as described elsewhere (Rappsilber 2007). Purified peptides were dissolved in 100 µl of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid containing 50 fmol/µl spiked-in yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed using a nanoACQUITYTM UPLCTM system (Waters) coupled to a Synapt G2 mass spectrometer (Waters). Details on liquid chromatography and IMSE (MSE with ion mobility separation) methods are described elsewhere (Muntel 2014 . Zühlke 2016). LC-IMSE data were processed using PLGS v3.0.1 Processing parameters were applied according to Schmidt et al. (Schmidt 2017). MS/MS raw data were searched against the randomized Clostridioides difficile 630 erm database published by Dannheim et al. (Dannheim 2017) containing 7648 protein entries including laboratory contaminants and the yeast ADH1 sequence. For a positive protein identification the following criteria had to be met: 1 fragment ion matched per peptide, 5 fragment ions matched per protein, 1 peptide matched per protein; 2 missed cleavages allowed, primary digest reagent: trypsin, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation C (+ 57.0215), variable modifications: deamidation N and Q, oxidation M, pyrrolidonecarboxylacid N-TERM. The protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 5% and only identifications based on at least two peptides were considered in the final analysis.Three biological replicates, each run in three technical replicates were conducted for shock experiments.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Clostridioides difficile</i> is an intestinal human pathogen that uses the opportunity of a depleted microbiota to cause an infection. It is known, that the composition of the intestinal bile acid cocktail has a great impact on the susceptibility toward a <i>C. difficile</i> infection. However, the specific response of growing <i>C. difficile</i> cells to diverse bile acids on the molecular level has not been described yet. In this study, we recorded proteome signatures of shock and long-term (LT) stress with the four main bile acids cholic acid (CA), chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), deoxycholic acid (DCA), and lithocholic acid (LCA). A general overlapping response to all tested bile acids could be determined particularly in shock experiments which appears plausible in the light of their common steroid structure. However, during LT stress several proteins showed an altered abundance in the presence of only a single or a few of the bile acids indicating the existence of specific adaptation mechanisms. Our results point at a differential induction of the groEL and dnaKJgrpE chaperone systems, both belonging to the class I heat shock genes. Additionally, central metabolic pathways involving butyrate fermentation and the reductive Stickland fermentation of leucine were effected, although CA caused a proteome signature different from the other three bile acids. Furthermore, quantitative proteomics revealed a loss of flagellar proteins in LT stress with LCA. The absence of flagella could be substantiated by electron microscopy which also indicated less flagellated cells in the presence of DCA and CDCA and no influence on flagella formation by CA. Our data break down the bile acid stress response of <i>C. difficile</i> into a general and a specific adaptation. The latter cannot simply be divided into a response to primary and secondary bile acids, but rather reflects a complex and variable adaptation process enabling <i>C. difficile</i> to survive and to cause an infection in the intestinal tract.

### Keywords
General and specific stress response, Motility, Bile acids, Proteomics, Differential analysis, Clostridioides difficile, Flagella

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Kathrin Riedel
Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology, Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald


