### Accession
PXD005729

### Title
Human Uirnary Extracellular vesicles Proteomics LC-MS

### Description
A proteomic analysis utilizing UDMSE was performed on exosomes and microvesicle fractions isolated from human urine. more than 2 unique peptides containing proteins were quantified (586). exosomes and microvesicles were compared to each other in a quantitative manner.

### Sample Protocol
Acetone precipitataion was perfomred on exosomes and microvesicles fration after resuspending the pellets coming from ultracentrifugation steps in MQ ultrapure water. The precipitated porteins were dissolved in 6M urea and after reduction and alkylation, they were trypsin digested. C18 cleanup was subsequently perfomred and resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MSE.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were imported into Progenesis QI for proteomics software and ions were lock mass corrected. The software facilitated the peptide identification with Protein Lynx Global Server and label-free quantification (3). The peptide identification was done against Uniprot human FASTA sequences (UniprotKB Release 2015_09, 20205 sequence entries) with (CLPB_ECOLI (P63285)), ClpB protein sequence inserted for label-free quantification. Modifications used were as follows: fixed at cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable in methionine (oxidation). Trypsin was used as digesting agent and one missed cleavage was allowed. Fragment and peptide error tolerances were set to auto and FDR to less than 4%. One or more ion fragments per peptide, three or more fragments per protein and one or more peptides per protein were required for ion matching. The identified proteins are grouped as one according to parsimony principle and also peptides unique to the protein are reported. Parsimony principle states that protein hits are reported as the minimum set that accounts for all observable peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Urinary exosomes, Microvesicles

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Transplantation laboratory, Univeristy of Helsinki and Helsinki Univeristy Central Hospital

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
Transplantation laboratory, Univeristy of Helsinki and Helsinki Univeristy Central Hospital


