### Accession
PXD022456

### Title
Confirmation of plant viral proteins and identification of specific viral strains by nanoLC-ESI-Q-TOF using single-leaf-tissue samples

### Description
An efficient protein extraction protocol without any precipitation steps was applied to plant samples from ten economically important plant hosts. Viral proteins from fourteen important viruses (WDV, BYDV/BYDV-PAV, BMV, TAV, CaMV, TMV, TVCV, PPV, TuMV, BCMV, SrMV, SCMV, TRSV, BBWV-2) from seven different families (Geminiviridae, Luteoviridae, Bromoviridae, Caulimoviridae, Virgaviridae, Potyviridae, Secoviridae) were detected in infected samples. Protein database of host proteins and potential pathogen proteins was assembled separately for each host and based on existing online plant virus pathogen lists. For PPV, WDV, BYDV a succesfull discrimination to virus strains (as demonstrated for PPV, WDV) or distinct disease species (BYDV) was also demonstrated.

### Sample Protocol
The plant tissue was disrupted in liquid nitrogen using mortar and pestle and dissolved in 5 mL of 0.4 M ammonium hydrogen carbonate, 8 M urea , pH 7.8-8.0. The diluted content was homogenized with roller ball crusher homogenizer in thick walled plastic bags and centrifuged at 5000 g. RuBisCO depletion step was applied (200 μl of supernatant was pipetted to a new tube, and 20 μl of 100 mM CaCl2 (dissolved in 8M urea) was added; subsequently, 20 μl of 100 mM phytate (dissolved in 8M urea) was added; the sample was left incubated for 10 min in a shaker (42 °C, 500 rpm) and centrifuged for 15 min (16 100 g, room temperature)). The protein content in the supernatant was quantified using BCA assay using 8 times diluted supernatant. The original supernatant (not the diluted one as for BCA) was treated with DTT (5 mM, 60°C, 30 min, 300 rpm), iodoacetamide (10 mM, room temperature, 30 min, in dark) and DTT again (5 mM, room temperature, 30 min). Aliquot of approximately 2 ug of protein was diluted 4 times by 50 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate and 1 ul of trypsin (0.1 ug/ul solution in 50 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate) was added. The reaction mixture was then incubated for 16 hours (overnight) at 37 °C and then concentrated using ZipTip (Millipore, USA) containing reverse phase C18. Please cite Cejnar et al.: Efficient confirmation of plant viral proteins and identification of specific viral strains by nanoLC-ESI-Q-TOF using single-leaf-tissue samples.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant software 1.6.7 with protein sequences assembled from UniProt Knowledgebase for host, potential virus pathogens (assembled using pathogen lists obtained from Plant Viruses Online and Descriptions of Plant Viruses), and a set of commonly observed contaminants (supplied with MaxQuant software).

### Publication Abstract
Plant viruses are important pathogens that cause significant crop losses. A plant protein extraction protocol that combines crushing the tissue by a pestle in liquid nitrogen with subsequent crushing by a roller-ball crusher in urea solution, followed by RuBisCO depletion, reduction, alkylation, protein digestion, and ZipTip purification allowed us to substantially simplify the sample preparation by removing any other precipitation steps and to detect viral proteins from samples, even with less than 0.2 g of leaf tissue, by a medium resolution nanoLC-ESI-Q-TOF. The presence of capsid proteins or polyproteins of fourteen important viruses from seven different families (Geminiviridae, Luteoviridae, Bromoviridae, Caulimoviridae, Virgaviridae, Potyviridae, and Secoviridae) isolated from ten different economically important plant hosts was confirmed through many identified pathogen-specific peptides from a protein database of host proteins and potential pathogen proteins assembled separately for each host and based on existing online plant virus pathogen databases. The presented extraction protocol, combined with a medium resolution LC-MS/MS, represents a cost-efficient virus protein confirmation method that proved to be effective at identifying virus strains (as demonstrated for PPV, WDV) and distinct disease species of BYDV, as well as putative new viral protein sequences from single-plant-leaf tissue samples. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD022456.

### Keywords
Trsv, Wdv, Tav, Bmv, Tumv, Srmv, Plant, Tvcv, Lc-msms, Viral proteins, Bcmv, Ppv, Camv, Bbwv-2, Bydv/bydv-pav, Tmv, Scmv

### Affiliations
Department of Computing and Control Engineering, University of Chemistry and Technology in Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 Praha 6, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Pavel Cejnar

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Cejnar
Department of Computing and Control Engineering, University of Chemistry and Technology in Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 Praha 6, Czech Republic


