### Accession
PXD034648

### Title
SARS-CoV-2 spike sequence dictates host TP53 activity and COVID-19 pathogenicity

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 induces widespread transcriptomic changes in host cells upon infection, in part through activation and modulation of innate immunity pathways and downstream gene regulation. However, the mechanisms by which SARS-CoV-2 and its evolutionary variants differentially affect host cell transcriptomic states remain largely unclear. Through chromatin proteomic (iDAPT-MS) analysis, we found that although SARS-CoV-2 and other pathogenic coronaviruses exhibit similar proteomic shifts on chromatin, SARS-CoV-2 uniquely promotes TP53 nuclear accumulation and activation. Parallel assessment of SARS-CoV-2 viral protein expression on host chromatin states (ATAC-seq) identifies intracellular spike protein as a key determinant of virus-mediated chromatin accessibility changes. Multilevel chromatin profiling reveals increased TP53 nuclear accumulation, TP53-associated chromatin accessibility changes, and TP53 target gene activation upon expression of SARS-CoV-2 alpha (B.1.1.7) and delta (B.1.617.2) spike variants relative to the ancestral spike sequence. TP53, ACE2, and furin cleavage are required for these changes, driving decreased cellular proliferation, increased cellular senescence, and increased cytokine release. Finally, BA.1 but not BA.2, BA.2.12.1, nor BA.4/BA.5 spike expression leads to attenuated TP53 activity and fusogenicity relative to ancestral spike. Our findings implicate spike-mediated host TP53 activation as a “rheostat” of COVID-19 pathogenicity.

### Sample Protocol
250 μg lysate was reduced with 5 mM DTT in 500 μL RIPA and then added to 60 μL Pierce streptavidin bead slurry equilibrated 2x with RIPA buffer. Lysate/bead mix was incubated with end-to-end rotation overnight at 4 °C. Beads were washed with RIPA 2x, 1 M KCl 1x, 0.1 M Na2CO3 (1x), 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 1x, and 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 3x prior to resuspension in 100 μL 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5, with beads resuspended and incubated with end-to-end rotation for 5 min per wash. 1 μL mass spectrometry-grade LysC (Wako) was added to each tube and incubated at 37 °C for 3 h with mixing, and an additional 1 μL mass spectrometry-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added, followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C with mixing. Beads were magnetized, and eluate was collected and subjected to downstream TMT labeling.   Peptides were processed using the SL-TMT method24. TMT reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (40 μL), of which 10 μL was added to each peptide suspension (100 μL) with 30 μL of acetonitrile to achieve a final acetonitrile concentration of approximately 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). The pooled sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Sep-Pak, Waters)We fractionated the pooled TMT-labeled peptide sample using BPRP HPLC.  Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 μm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 35 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 μm, 150 Å, ThermoFisher). For each analysis, approximately 2 μg of peptides were separated using a 150 min gradient of 8 to 28% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at a flow rate of 450-500 nL/min. Each analysis used an MS3-based TMT method. The data were collected as described previously using an SPS-MS3 method.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based pipeline75, as described previously. Database searching included all entries from the C. sabaeus and coronavirus UniProt database s, which was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification, and TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using a linear discriminant analysis (LDA), as described previously. For quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel and omitted PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise of less than 100, or isolation specificity < 0.7.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Spike, Idapt-ms, Covid-19, Tp53

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Frank J. Slack
Department of Pathology Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.


