### Accession
PXD018782

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis in Glioblastoma in response to AZD1775

### Description
The aim of this study was to characterize phosphoproteome in response to AZD1775 in patient derived xenografts (PDX) lines and clinical specimens in glioblastoma. Tyrosine and motif specific serine and threonine phosphorylation were measured using quantitative LC-MS/MS based on TMT labeling.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor tissues were homogenized in 8M urea, followed by reduction with DTT and alkylation with iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin and desalted with Waters C18 Sep Pak cartridges.  Peptides were labeled with TMT6 or TMT10plex reagents. Phosphopeptides were enriched by immunoprecipitation and Fe-NTA based spin columns. Phosphopeptides were directly loaded onto an in-house made analytical capillary column, separated onto Agilent 1200 LC system and analyzed in data dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the human SwissProt database using Mascot version 2.4 (Matrix Science). Spectra were searched with mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 20 mmu for fragment ions. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, TMT labeled lysine and TMT labeled peptide N termini were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were searched as dynamic modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Azd1775, Phosphoproteomics, Glioblastoma

### Affiliations
 Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 
Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States

### Submitter
Ishwar Kohale

### Lab Head
Dr Forest Michael White
Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States


