### Accession
PXD033639

### Title
Structure and mechanism of a novel cytomegaloviral DCAF mediating interferon antagonism

### Description
Human cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a highly relevant pathogen, and its rodent counterparts serve as common infection models. Global proteome profiling of rat CMV-infected cells uncovered a pronounced loss of the transcription factor STAT2, which is crucial for interferon signalling. Deletion mutagenesis documented that STAT2 is targeted by the viral protein E27. Cellular and in vitro analyses showed that E27 exploits host-derived Cullin4-RING ubiquitin ligases (CRL4) to induce poly-ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation of STAT2. Cryo-electron microscopic structure determination revealed how E27 mimics molecular surface properties of cellular CRL4 substrate receptors to displace them from DDB1. Moreover, structural analyses elucidated the mechanism of STAT2 recruitment and indicate that E27-binding additionally disturbs STAT2 activation by occupying the IRF9 binding interface. For the first time, these data provide structural insights into cytomegalovirus-encoded interferon antagonism and establish an atomic model for STAT2 counteraction by CRL4 misappropriation with important implications for viral immune evasion.

### Sample Protocol
BALB/c mice were obtained from Harlan and bred and housed in the animal facility of the Institute for Virology of the University Hospital Essen. Mice were maintained under selective pathogen-free conditions. Age (8-16 weeks) and sex-matched (male and female) groups of BALB/c mice were infected intraperitoneally with 2x 105 PFU of WT-MCMV or MCMV mutants per mouse. All procedures were performed in accordance with the guidelines of the University Hospital Essen, Germany, the national animal protection law (Tierschutzgesetz [TierSchG]) and the recommendations of the Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Association (FELASA). The study was approved by the Northrhine-Westphalia State Office for Nature, Environment and Consumer Protection (LANUV NRW, Düsseldorf, Northrhine-Westphalia, Germany; permit #84-02.04.2016.A441). Liquid chromatography couple to mass spectrometry analyses were performed as described previously (Megger et al., 2017). Briefly, cells were harvested and dissolved in 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonat containing 0.1% (w/v) Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters, Boston, MA, USA). Four µg proteins per sample were reduced with dithiothreitol for 30 min at 60°C and thereafter alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, the samples were digested using trypsin (SERVA Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany) in a ratio of 1:20 (w/w) for 16 h at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to final 1% (v/v) and the precipitated surfactant was removed by centrifugation at 16.000 x g for 10 min. The supernatants were dried by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 0.1 % TFA. An amount of 300 ng tryptic peptides per sample was used for LC-MS/MS analysis and injected into an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoLC online coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific). The peptides were concentrated for 7 min on the trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 µm × 2 cm, C18, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) using a flow rate of 30 µL/min. Subsequently, the samples were separated on the analytical column (Acclaim® PepMap RSLC, 75 µm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) by applying a gradient from 5 to 40% solvent B over 98 min (solvent A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid; solvent B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 84% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The column oven temperature was 60°C. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 60,000 (400 m/z) with a mass range from 350 to 2000 m/z. Tandem mass spectra of the 20 highest abundant precursors were acquired in the linear ion trap after fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The acquired spectra were searched against the UniProt reference proteome for Rattus norvegicus (UP000002494, release 2015_11, 29880 entries) and UniProt/TrEMBL sequences for Rat cytomegalovirus (RCMV-E, isolate England; release 2015_11, 208 entries) using Mascot (v.2.5; Matrix Science, London, UK). Trypsin was set as digesting enzyme and one missed cleavage site was considered as well as dynamic oxidation of methionine and static carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues. The mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.4 Da for fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using the percolator function and only identifications passing an FDR threshold of 1% were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Human cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a ubiquitously distributed pathogen whose rodent counterparts such as mouse and rat CMV serve as common infection models. Here, we conducted global proteome profiling of rat CMV-infected cells and uncovered a pronounced loss of the transcription factor STAT2, which is crucial for antiviral interferon signalling. Via deletion mutagenesis, we found that the viral protein E27 is required for CMV-induced STAT2 depletion. Cellular and in&#xa0;vitro analyses showed that E27 exploits host-cell Cullin4-RING ubiquitin ligase (CRL4) complexes to induce poly-ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation of STAT2. Cryo-electron microscopy revealed how E27 mimics molecular surface properties of cellular CRL4 substrate receptors called DCAFs (DDB1- and Cullin4-associated factors), thereby displacing them from the catalytic core of CRL4. Moreover, structural analyses showed that E27 recruits STAT2 through a bipartite binding interface, which partially overlaps with the IRF9 binding site. Structure-based mutations in M27, the murine CMV homologue of E27, impair the interferon-suppressing capacity and virus replication in mouse models, supporting the conserved importance of DCAF mimicry for CMV immune evasion.

### Keywords
Interferon; ubiquitin-proteasome system; cullin-ring ubiquitin ligases (crl); ddb1; dcafs; viral dcaf (vdcaf); antiviral; cytomegalovirus (cmv); stat2; irf9  

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Clinical Proteomics Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-University Bochum

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head
Dr Thilo Bracht
Clinical Proteomics Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-University Bochum


