### Accession
PXD032845

### Title
Proteases in Quercus ilex seeds

### Description
Proteases and protease inhibitors have been analyzed in the non-orthodox Quercus ilex forest tree by using in silico and wet approaches. The in silico analysis showed that the species-specific transcriptome database included 2240 and 97 transcripts annotated as, respectively, proteases and protease inhibitors, with members of the different families according to the MEROPS protease database (http://www.merops.ac.uk) classification, mostly of serine- and metallo-type. Data for Q. ilex are compared with those previously published for other Quercus species, namely, Q. suber, Q. lobata, and Q. robur. A second approach was performed to assess the evolution of proteases and protease inhibitors along with seed germination in cotyledon and embryo tissues by determining changes at proteomics and activity levels, the last by mean of in vitro and in gel assays. Shotgun (LC-MSMS) analysis of acorn embryos and cotyledons of three developmental stages (NV, non-viable; T1, mature; and T3 germinated) allowed the identification of a total of 177 proteases and 12 protease inhibitors. In vitro protease activity was determined by using azocasein as substrate; the total activity was higher in cotyledons than embryos, showing the latter significant differences throughout germination. Gel protease activity assays showed common and differential bands between tissues and developmental stages. Shotgun analysis of 10 differential activity bands supported the results obtained from the whole proteome analysis, with some proteins highly represented in the same tissues and stages by both strategies. In overall, the combination of shotgun proteomics and protease activity approaches allowed the identification of tissue-specific (such as cysteine protease inhibitors), and stage-specific proteins (such as those related to storage proteins mobilization), with others being present in all the analyzed organs. Some of the proteases and protease inhibitors differentially identified between tissues and stages in this study could be used as indicators of seed quality and viability.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extraction was performed using the TCA/acetone/phenol method. The obtained proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE electrophoresis, which was stopped when the samples went into separating gel. The bands was cut, and digested with Trypsin.   Peptide digests were applied to a Peptide C-18 column (75 μm x 50 Acclaim Pepmam, Thermo Scientific.) coupled to a one-dimensional nano LC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC, Thermo Scientific). The peptide mixture was pre-added to a precolumn 300 μm x 5 mm Acclaim Pepmap (Thermo Scientific) in 2% AcN / 0.05% TFA for 5 min at 5 μl/min. The mobile phase A was composed of 0.1% formic acid and the mobile phase B by 20% AcN, 0.1% formic acid. Samples were separated at 300 nl/min. The elution conditions were: 4-35% B for 120 min; 35-55% B for 6 min; 55-90% B for 3 min followed by 8 min washing with 90% B and 15 min re-equilibrated at 4% B. The total time of the chromatography was 150 min. MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Scanning of precursor peptides ranging from 400 to 1500 m/z was performed at a resolution of 120K with an ion count of 4×105. Tandem mass analysis was performed by isolation at 1.2 Da with quadrupole, CID fragmentation with a collision energy of 35, and MS analysis of rapid scanning in the ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The SEQUEST algorithm and the Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1.0.81, Thermo Scientific) were used to search MS. In-silico peptides list was generated with the following settings: trypsin as the digestion enzyme, a maximum of three missed cleavages and methionine oxidation as dynamic modification. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 5 ppm and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Only high confidence peptide identifications (FDR≤1%) with a minimum XCorr of 2 and proteins with at least four distinct peptides were considered and 15% of coverture. For relative quantification the normalized peak intensity of identified peptides was used.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases and protease inhibitors have been identified in the recalcitrant species <i>Quercus ilex</i> using <i>in silico</i> and wet methods, with focus on those present in seeds during germination. <i>In silico</i> analyses showed that the <i>Q. ilex</i> transcriptome database contained 2,240 and 97 transcripts annotated as proteases and protease inhibitors, respectively. They belonged to the different families according to MEROPS, being the serine and metallo ones the most represented. The data were compared with those previously reported for other <i>Quercus</i> species, including <i>Q. suber, Q. lobata,</i> and <i>Q. robur</i>. Changes in proteases and protease inhibitors alongside seed germination in cotyledon and embryo axis tissues were assessed using proteomics and <i>in vitro</i> and in gel activity assays. Shotgun (LC-MSMS) analysis of embryo axes and cotyledons in nonviable (NV), mature (T1) and germinated (T3) seeds allowed the identification of 177 proteases and 12 protease inhibitors, mostly represented by serine and metallo types. Total protease activity, as determined by <i>in vitro</i> assays using azocasein as substrate, was higher in cotyledons than in embryo axes. There were not differences in activity among cotyledon samples, while embryo axis peaked at germinated T4 stage. Gel assays revealed the presence of protease activities in at least 10 resolved bands, in the <i>Mr</i> range of 60-260&#x2009;kDa, being some of them common to cotyledons and embryo axes in either nonviable, mature, and germinated seeds. Bands showing quantitative or qualitative changes upon germination were observed in embryo axes but not in cotyledons at <i>Mr</i> values of 60-140&#x2009;kDa. Proteomics shotgun analysis of the 10 bands with protease activity supported the results obtained in the overall proteome analysis, with 227 proteases and 3 protease inhibitors identified mostly represented by the serine, cysteine, and metallo families. The combined use of shotgun proteomics and protease activity measurements allowed the identification of tissue-specific (e.g., cysteine protease inhibitors in embryo axes of mature acorns) and stage-specific proteins (e.g., those associated with mobilization of storage proteins accumulated in T3 stage). Those proteins showing differences between nonviable and viable seeds could be related to viability, and those variables between mature and germinated could be associated with the germination process. These differences are observed mostly in embryo axes but not in cotyledons. Among them, those implicated in mobilization of reserve proteins, such as the cathepsin H cysteine protease and Clp proteases, and also the large number of subunits of the CNS and 26S proteasome complex differentially identified in embryos of the several stages suggests that protein degradation <i>via</i> CNS/26S plays a major role early in germination. Conversely, aspartic proteases such as nepenthesins were exclusively identified in NV seeds, so their presence could be used as indicator of nonviability.

### Keywords
Protease inhibitors, Protease, Germination, Non-orthodox seed, Proteomics, Protease activity, Quercus ilex

### Affiliations
Agroforestry and Plant Biochemistry, Proteomics and Systems Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Cordoba, UCO-CeiA3, 14014 Córdoba, Spain
University of Cordoba

### Submitter
Maria Angeles Castillejo

### Lab Head
Dr María Angeles Castillejo Sanchez
Agroforestry and Plant Biochemistry, Proteomics and Systems Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Cordoba, UCO-CeiA3, 14014 Córdoba, Spain


