### Accession
PXD017414

### Title
Transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome of lens fiber cells from mice exposed to cigarette smoke

### Description
We adopted an omics (transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome) approach to characterize the lens fiber cells extracted from control (CT) and cigarette smoke (CS) exposed mouse (C57BL/6) eyes. The eight pregnant female mice (gestation days 19-20) were placed in a whole-body exposure smoking chamber and served as a CS-exposed group. The mothers and newborn pups were exposed to CS for five hours/day, five days/week for 110 days. In parallel, age-matched mice were kept in normal cages and served as a control group. The ophthalmic examination revealed no sign of cataracts in CS-exposed and aged-matched CT mice. The ocular lenses were extracted and fiber cells (FC) were separated from the lens epithelium under a microscope. The CT and CS fiber cells were maintained in four biological replicates each consisting of a pool of lens fiber cells from four eyes. The eight biological replicates including four CT and four CS-exposed fiber cells were used for the next-generation-based transcriptome (RNA-Seq), mass-spectrometry-based proteome, and metabolome profiling. RNA-Seq analysis identified the expression (≥1.0 FPKM) of 9,590 and 9,531 genes in CT and CS-exposed fiber cells, respectively. The analysis identified 348 differentially expressed genes, including 186 downregulated and 162 upregulated genes in CS-exposed fiber cells. Proteome profiling revealed a total of 2,424 proteins in CT and CS exposed fiber cells. The analysis identified 42 downregulated and 59 upregulated proteins in CS exposed fiber cells. Metabolome profiling identified a total of 280 metabolites, marked with decreased levels of branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs)-related metabolites in CS exposed fiber cells. In conclusion, we have established a comprehensive omics profile of fiber cells from CS-exposed mice. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report investigating a comprehensive omics profile of fiber cells from CS-exposed mice.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, whole proteome of lens fiber cells extracted from the control and CS-exposed mice was investigated through mass-spectrometry-based isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT) proteome profiling. Four biological replicates, each consisting of fiber cells from two mice (four eyes) for control and CS-exposed mice, were used in the 8-plex TMT experiment. Protein extraction, and digestion: Briefly, the frozen samples were homogenized using pestle and mortar and further lysed by sonicating in 8 M urea and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Protein lysate was centrifuged at 16,000g at 4 °C to exclude cell debris, and protein concentration was estimated using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. A total of 400 µg of each sample was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for one hour and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 20 minutes in the dark. The protein sample was digested with LysC (1:100) by incubating at room temperature for three hours followed by overnight digestion at 37 °C using sequencing-grade trypsin (1:50). The peptides were desalted and labeled with 10-plex TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the eight channels (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, and 130N) were used for labeling. The labeling reaction was performed for one hour at room temperature, followed by quenching with 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and desalted with C18 Sep-Pak (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). The peptides from the lentoid body at day 25 were fractionated by basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography into 96 fractions, followed by concatenation into 24 fractions by combining every 24th fraction and subjected to a mass spectrometry-based TMT proteomics.  Mass spectrometry analysis: The fractionated peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled with the Easy-nLC 1200 nano-flow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides from each fraction were reconstituted in 15 μl 0.1% formic acid and all the 15 μl were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap100 Nano-Trap Column (100 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 5 μm C18 particles at a flow rate of 5 μl per minute. Peptides were resolved at 250-nl per minute flow rate using a linear gradient of 10% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 95 minutes on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, Thermo Fisher Scientific) packed with 2 µm C18 particles, which was fitted with an EASY-Spray ion source that was operated at a voltage of 2.0 kV.  Mass spectrometry analysis was completed in a data-dependent manner with a full scan in the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 300 to 1800 in the “Top Speed” setting, three seconds per cycle. MS1 and MS2 were acquired for the precursor ions and peptide fragmentation ions and measured at a resolution of 120,000 at an m/z of 200. MS2 scan was acquired by fragmenting precursor ions using a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) method and detected at a mass resolution of 30,000, at an m/z of 200. Automatic gain control for MS1 was set to one million ions and MS2 was set to 0.05 million ions. A maximum ion injection time was set to 50 milliseconds for MS1 and 100 milliseconds for MS2 (HCD was set to 32 with a stepped collision energy of 5% for MS2). The precursor isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z with a 0.4 m/z offset. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds, and singly-charged ions were rejected. Internal calibration was carried out using the lock mass option (m/z 445.1200025) from ambient air.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (v 2.1; Thermo Scientific) suite was used for quantitation and identification. During MS/MS preprocessing, the top 10 peaks in each window of 100 m/z were selected for database search. The tandem mass spectrometry data were then searched using SEQUEST algorithms against a neXtProt database (Ver. 2.15.0; released on January 2018) with common contaminant proteins. The search parameters were used as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to two missed cleavages); b) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; and d) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) and TMT tags (+229.162932 Da) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and the minimum number of peptide sequences per protein was set to 2 peptides. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate. The protein quantification was performed with the following parameters and methods. For the integration mode, the most confident centroid option was used. Reporter ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. MS order was set to MS2. The activation type was set to HCD. The quantification value correction was disabled. Both unique and razor peptides were used for peptide quantification. Missing intensity values were replaced with the minimum value. Reporter ion abundance was computed based on the signal-to-noise ratio. Quantification value corrections for isobaric tags were disabled. Co-isolation threshold was set to 100%. The average reporter signal-to-noise threshold was disabled. Data normalization was disabled as well. Protein grouping was performed by applying strict parsimony principle as followings; 1) all proteins that share the same set or subset of identified peptides were grouped, 2) protein groups that have no unique peptides among the considered peptides were filtered out, 3) Proteome Discoverer iterated through all spectra and selected which PSM to use in ambiguous cases to make a protein group with the highest number of unambiguous and unique peptides, and 4) final protein groups were generated.  The Proteome Discoverer summed all the reporter ion intensities of PSMs for the corresponding proteins in TMT run. PSMs that had higher than 100% isolation purity were not included in this sum. Finally, the protein table was exported and imported into Perseus 1.5.2.6 software for the normalization. Proteins with reporter ion intensity higher than 2,500 for at least one of the six quantification channels were retained. To remove systemic deviation, each column was divided by the median value of the corresponding column.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we report a multi OMIC (transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome) approach to investigate molecular changes in lens fiber cells (FC) of mice&#xa0;exposed to cigarette smoke (CS). Pregnant mice were placed in a whole-body smoke chamber and a few days later pups were born, which were exposed to CS for 5 hours/day, 5 days/week for a total of 3&#xbd; months. We examined the mice exposed to CS&#xa0;for CS-related cataractogenesis after completion of&#xa0;the CS exposure&#xa0;but&#xa0;no cataracts&#xa0;were observed. Lenses of CS-exposed and age-matched, untreated control mice were extracted and lens FC were subjected to multi OMIC profiling. We identified 348 genes, 130 proteins, and 14 metabolites exhibiting significant (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05) differential levels&#xa0;in lens FC of mice exposed to&#xa0;CS, corresponding to 3.6%, 4.3%, and 5.0% of the total genes, protein, and metabolites, respectively&#xa0;identified in this&#xa0;study. Our multi OMIC approach confirmed that only a small fraction of the transcriptome, the proteome, and the metabolome was perturbed in the lens FC of mice exposed to&#xa0;CS, which suggests that exposure of CS had a minimal effect on the mouse lens. It is worth noting that while our results confirm that CS exposure does not have a substantial impact on the molecular landscape of the mouse lens&#xa0;FC, we cannot rule out that CS exposure for longer durations and/or in combination with other morbidities or environmental factors would have a more robust effect and/or result in cataractogenesis.

### Keywords
Mass spectromtery, Mouse, Transcriptome, Metabolome, Proteome

### Affiliations
The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287 USA
Johns Hopkins Wilmer Eye Institute

### Submitter
OM Genetics

### Lab Head
Dr S. Amer Riazuddin
The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287 USA


