### Accession
PXD033857

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of four translation initiation proteins, EIF4E3, EIF4E4, EIF4G3 and EIF4G4 in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Gene expression in pathogenic protozoans of the family Trypanosomatidae has several novel features, for example in protein synthesis there are multiple eIF4F-like complexes. The eukaryotic eIF4F complex, formed by the eIF4E, eIF4G and eIF4A subunits, is responsible for the canonical selection of mRNAs required for the initiation of mRNA translation. The best-known complexes implicated in translation in trypanosomatids are based on two related pairs of eIF4E and eIF4G subunits (EIF4E3/EIF4G4 and EIF4E4/EIF4G3), whose functional distinctions have yet to be properly identified. Here, to define the interactome associated with both complexes in Trypanosoma brucei procyclic forms, we performed parallel immunoprecipitation experiments followed by identification of proteins co-precipitated with the two sets of tagged eIF4E and eIF4G subunits. A number of different protein partners, including RBPs and RNA helicases, were found to specifically co-precipitate with each complex. Highlights with the EIF4E4/EIF4G3 pair include RBP23, PABP1, EIF4AI and the CRK1 kinase. Co-precipitated partners with the EIF4E3/EIF4G4 pair are more diverse and include DRBD2, PABP2 and different zinc-finger proteins and RNA helicases.EIF4E3/EIF4G4 are known to be essential for viability and to better define their role.

### Sample Protocol
For initial identification of proteins that co-precipitated with the target complexes we used a set of procyclic cell lines expressing N-terminal tagged EIF4E3eYFP/-, EIF4E4eYFP/-, EIF4G3eYFP/+ and EIF4G4eYFP/+. The cells were grown to mid log phase, harvested in 100 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 50 mM Hepes pH 7.2, 5% glycerol, then disrupted using cryogenic grinding and purified using nanobodies from llama (clone LaG-16–G4S–LaG-2) coupled to Dynabeads M-270 epoxy (Invitrogen). Lysates from a cell line expressing the nuclear protein eYFP-DRBD4 (Tb927.11.14100) was used as a negative control. The samples were loaded into 15% SDS-PAGE gels and allowed to migrate into the resolving gel, until interrupting before protein fractionation. Gel slices containing the whole IP products were then excised and submitted to an in-gel tryptic digestion.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant platform (version 1.5.8.3) was used for protein validation, quantification and identification, set to default parameters. Proteins were identified from the T. brucei protein sequence databases (T. brucei TREU927, version from March 29, 2016 available at TriTrypDB; https://tritrypdb.org/). Protein quantification was based on the unique peptide identified and on the protein intensity. The sample replicates of the EI4Fs were named E3IP, E4IP, G3IP and G4IP, the negative controls replicates were called IPneg.

### Publication Abstract
Gene expression in pathogenic protozoans of the family Trypanosomatidae has several novel features, including multiple eIF4F-like complexes involved in protein synthesis. The eukaryotic eIF4F complex, formed mainly by eIF4E and eIF4G subunits, is responsible for the canonical selection of mRNAs required for the initiation of mRNA translation. The best-known complexes implicated in translation in trypanosomatids are based on two related pairs of eIF4E and eIF4G subunits (EIF4E3/EIF4G4 and EIF4E4/EIF4G3), whose functional distinctions remain to be fully described. Here, to define interactomes associated with both complexes in <i>Trypanosoma brucei</i> procyclic forms, we performed parallel immunoprecipitation experiments followed by identification of proteins co-precipitated with the four tagged eIF4E and eIF4G subunits. A number of different protein partners, including RNA binding proteins and helicases, specifically co-precipitate with each complex. Highlights with the EIF4E4/EIF4G3 pair include RBP23, PABP1, EIF4AI and the CRK1 kinase. Co-precipitated partners with the EIF4E3/EIF4G4 pair are more diverse and include DRBD2, PABP2 and different zinc-finger proteins and RNA helicases. EIF4E3/EIF4G4 are essential for viability and to better define their role, we further investigated their phenotypes after knockdown. Depletion of either EIF4E3/EIF4G4 mRNAs lead to aberrant morphology with a more direct impact on events associated with cytokinesis. We also sought to identify those mRNAs differentially associated with each complex through CLIP-seq with the two eIF4E subunits. Predominant among EIF4E4-bound transcripts are those encoding ribosomal proteins, absent from those found with EIF4E3, which are generally more diverse. RNAi mediated depletion of EIF4E4, which does not affect proliferation, does not lead to changes in mRNAs or proteins associated with EIF4E3, confirming a lack of redundancy and distinct roles for the two complexes.

### Keywords
Trypanosoma brucei; eif4e; eif4g

### Affiliations
Microbiology Department, IAM-Fiocruz, Pernambuco-Brasil
Fiocruz Pernambuco

### Submitter
MARIA BEZERRA

### Lab Head
Dr Osvaldo Pompílio de Melo Neto
Microbiology Department, IAM-Fiocruz, Pernambuco-Brasil


