### Accession
PXD024425

### Title
putative K29-linked substrates identification using sAB-K29

### Description
We have identified K29-linked ubiquitination is involved in cell cycle regulation and enriched in midbody formation. To identify the substrates of K29-linked ubiquitination in the midbody, we soughtto perform immunoprecipitation (IP) under denaturing conditions to minimize the presence of noncovalently bound proteins. we synchronized HeLa cells to telophase to maximize the abundance of the midbody and lysed the cells using 8 M urea. The lysate was further diluted in 1 M urea, followed by IP using biotinylated sAB-K29. The enriched proteins were separated on an SDS-PAGE gel and subjected to label-free quantitative mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated sAB-K29 (100 µg) was incubated with 1 mL streptavidin-magnetic beads (Promega, Z5482) prewashed three times with PBS buffer in a thermo shaker for 3 h at 25 °C. The beads containing immobilized sAB-K29 were then incubated with 5 mg of HeLa cell lysate in 8 M Urea with protease inhibitor cocktail, and thenwas diluted by PBS buffer to a final urea concentration of 1 M before incubating with the conjugated beads on a rotation wheel at 4 °C overnight. The beads were washed 3 times with the wash buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, and 0.5 % Triton, followed by3 times with the wash buffer without Triton. The bound proteins were eluted with 100 µl 8M Urea for 1h at 25 °C in a thermo shaker.Eluted protein fractions by denature IP were incubated in 20 µl 4 × LDS loading buffer (NP0007, Thermo Fisher) for 5 min at 95 °C. Proteins were separated on 4%-12% gradient gels (NP0336Box, Thermo Fisher) and stained with Coomassie blue R-250 (161-0436, Bio-Rad). For in-gel digestion, each gel lane was cut into 6 bands which were then cut into smaller (around 1 cm) fragments. Gel pieces were de-stained in 50 mM NH4HCO3/ACN (1:1, v/v). After washing with 50 mM NH4HCO3, proteins were reduced by the addition of 25 mM DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at 55 °C followed by alkylation in 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at 37 °C. After washing in 50 mM NH4HCO3/ACN (1:1, v/v) and dehydration in ACN, proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin (1:50, w/w) (V5280, Promega). Peptides were extracted from the gel in 50% ACN/0.1% formic acid, followed by vacuum drying and re-dissolved by 20 µl 0.1 % formic acid for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were separated on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a 120 min gradient from 5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid to 45% ACN, 0.1% formic acid followed by a washing step at 100% ACN. Each of the 3 independent biological replicates was measured as technical duplicates. Mass spectra were collected on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For TMT-labeling, each analysis used the Multi-Notch MS3-based TMT method to reduce ion interference as compared to MS2 quantification. For label free, each analysis was operated in data dependent top-speed mode with dynamic exclusion set at 30 s and a total cycle time of 3 s. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120000 (at m/z 200) with an automatic gain control ion target value of 4e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The most intense precursors with charge states of 2-7 and intensities greater than 5e3 were selected for MS/MS experiments using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with 27 % collision energy. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole with an automatic gain control ion target value of 2e3 and a maximum injection time of 300 ms.Raw data from LC-MS/MS measurements were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.5.0 with default settings and label-free quantification (LFQ) enabled. For protein identification, the human reference proteome downloaded from the UniProt database (download date: 2019-07-01) and an integrated database of common contaminants was used. Identified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and common contaminants at a false discovery rate of 5%. Further data processing was performed using Perseus software (version 1.5.8.5) and R software (version 3.6.1).

### Publication Abstract
Protein ubiquitination shows remarkable topological and functional diversity through the polymerization of ubiquitin via different linkages. Deciphering the cellular ubiquitin code is of central importance to understand the physiology of the cell. However, our understanding of its function is rather limited due to the lack of specific binders as tools to detect K29-linked polyubiquitin. In this study, we screened and characterized a synthetic antigen-binding fragment, termed sAB-K29, that can specifically recognize K29-linked polyubiquitin using chemically synthesized K29-linked diubiquitin. We further determined the crystal structure of this fragment bound to the K29-linked diubiquitin, which revealed the molecular basis of specificity. Using sAB-K29 as a tool, we uncovered that K29-linked ubiquitination is involved in different kinds of cellular proteotoxic stress response as well as cell cycle regulation. In particular, we showed that K29-linked ubiquitination is enriched in the midbody and downregulation of the K29-linked ubiquitination signal arrests cells in G1/S phase.

### Keywords
K29-linked ubiquitination

### Affiliations
Tsinghua university, Department of chemistry
Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Qingyun Zheng

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Liu
Tsinghua university, Department of chemistry


