### Accession
PXD042004

### Title
TRIM21 enhances bortezomib sensitivity in multiple myeloma by halting pro-survival autophagy

### Description
Bortezomib (bort) is an effective therapeutic agent for multiple myeloma (MM) patients; however, the majority of patients develop drug resistance. Autophagy, a highly conserved process that recycles cytosol or entire organelles via lysosomal activity, is essential for the survival, homeostasis and drug resistance in MM. Growing evidence has highlighted that E3 ligase tripartite motif-containing protein 21 (TRIM21) not only interacts with multiple autophagy regulators but also participates in drug resistance in various cancers. However, to date, the direct substrates and additional roles of TRIM21 in MM remain unexplored. In this study, we demonstrated that low TRIM21 expression is a factor for relapse in MM. TRIM21 knockdown (KD) made MM cells more resistant to bort, while TRIM21 overexpression (OE) resulted in increased MM sensitivity to bort. Proteomic and phospho-proteomic studies of TRIM21 KD MM cells showed that bort resistance was associated with increased oxidative stress and elevated pro-survival autophagy. Our results provided that TRIM21 KD MM cell lines induced pro-survival autophagy after bort treatment, and suppressing autophagy by 3-methyladenine treatment or by the short hairpin RNA of ATG5 restored bort sensitivity. Indeed, autophagy-related gene 5 (ATG5) expression was increased and decreased by TRIM21 KD and OE, respectively. TRIM21 affected autophagy by ubiquitinating ATG5 through K48 for proteasomal degradation. Importantly, we confirmed that TRIM21 could potentiate the anti-myeloma effect of bort through in vitro and in vivo experiments. Overall, our findings define the key role of TRIM21 in MM bort resistance and provide a foundation for a novel targeted therapeutic approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation.) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.

### Data Protocol
For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.

### Publication Abstract
Bortezomib (bort) is an effective therapeutic agent for patients with multiple myeloma (MM); however, most patients develop drug resistance. Autophagy, a highly conserved process that recycles cytosol or entire organelles via lysosomal activity, is essential for the survival, homeostasis, and drug resistance in MM. Growing evidence has highlighted that E3 ligase tripartite motif-containing protein 21 (TRIM21) not only interacts with multiple autophagy regulators but also participates in drug resistance in various cancers. However, to date, the direct substrates and additional roles of TRIM21 in MM remain unexplored. In this study, we demonstrated that low TRIM21 expression is a factor for relapse in MM. TRIM21 knockdown (KD) made MM cells more resistant to bort, whereas TRIM21 overexpression (OE) resulted in increased MM sensitivity to bort. Proteomic and phosphoproteomic studies of TRIM21 KD MM cells showed that bort resistance was associated with increased oxidative stress and elevated prosurvival autophagy. Our results showed that TRIM21 KD MM cell lines induced prosurvival autophagy after bort treatment, suppressing autophagy by 3-methyladenine treatment or by the short hairpin RNA of autophagy-related gene 5 (ATG5)-restored-bort sensitivity. Indeed, ATG5 expression was increased and decreased by TRIM21 KD and OE, respectively. TRIM21 affected autophagy by ubiquitinating ATG5 through K48 for proteasomal degradation. Importantly, we confirmed that TRIM21 could potentiate the antimyeloma effect of bort through in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo experiments. Overall, our findings define the key role of TRIM21 in MM bort resistance and provide a foundation for a novel targeted therapeutic approach.

### Keywords
Trim21;multiple myeloma;bortezomib

### Affiliations
Bone Marrow Transplantation Center, Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine
Bone Marrow Transplantation Center, Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

### Submitter
Jing Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Jing Chen
Bone Marrow Transplantation Center, Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China


