### Accession
PXD009377

### Title
Dataset in support of Exploration of extracellular vesicles from Ascaris suum provides evidence of parasite-host cross talk

### Description
The highly prevalent gut helminth, Ascaris suum, compromise pigs health and reduce farm productivity worldwide. The closely related human parasite, A. lumbricoides, infects more than 800 million people and causes approximately 1.31 million disability-adjusted life years. The humaninfections are often chronic by nature and the parasites have a profound ability to modulate their hosts immune responses. This study provides the first in-depth characterization of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from different developmental stages and body parts of A. suum and their potential role in the host-parasite interplay. The release of EVs during the third larval stage (L3), L4 and adults was demonstrated by Transmission Electron Microscopy, and the uptake of EVs from adult A. suum in intestinal epithelial cells followed by accumulation of RNA in the nucleus by confocal microscopy. Next Generation Sequencing of EV-derived mi/m?RNA identified a number of micro(mi)RNAs from the different A. suum life stages and body parts and potential transcripts of potential host immune targets, such as IL-13, IL-25 and IL-33, were identified. Proteomics of EVs identified several proteins with immunomodulatory properties and other proteins previously shown to be associated with parasite EVs. Furthermore, EVs from A. suum body fluid stimulated the production of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF-α in dendritic cells in vitro. Taken together, these results suggest that A. suum EVs and their cargo may play a role in host-parasite interactions. This knowledge may pave the way for novel strategies for helminth infection control and knowledge of their immune modulatory role.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, to obtain A. suum L3, unembryonated eggs were isolated from the uterus of female worms and embryonated at 20 °C for two months. Eggs were mechanically stimulated to hatch according to in-house procedures and incubated for one day at 37 °C (5% CO2) in RPMI-1640 (Gibco®) containing Antibiotics-Antimycotics (RPMI+AA) (Gibco®). A. suum L4 were obtained from the small intestine of pigs, necropsied 14 days after inoculation with a single dose of 5,000 infective eggs by the agar migration method (Slotved et al., 1996). After collection, the larvae were washed four times in HBSS followed by four times in RPMI+AA and Gentamicin (Genta) (Gibco®). The larvae were then incubated for three days at 37 °C (5% CO2) and the RPMI-AA-Genta was exchanged and collected approximately every 24 hr. The Danish Animal Experiments Inspectorate (Permission 2015–15-0201-00760) approved the experiment and procedures. Live adult A. suum were collected from pigs at the Danish Crown slaughterhouses in Ringsted and Herning, Denmark. The worms were washed minimum six times (37 °C) and incubated at 37 °C (5% CO2) in RPMI-AA-Genta, which was exchanged and collected approximately every 24 hr. The collected culture media were kept at –80 °C until further processing. After one and three days of incubation a fraction of the worms were dissected and body fluid as well as intestinal tissue was collected. Proteomic analysis of EVs was initiated by a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) for tryptic digestion of proteins (ref 10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00598). The samples were analyzed using a UPLC-nanoESI MS/MS setup using Thermo Sci. QE HF coupled to a Dionex UPLC (nanoRSLC) using a precolumn system (75cm Dionex Pepmap)

### Data Protocol
The subsequent protein identification and quantitative analysis was performed in MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 by searching the data files against the A. suum reference proteome (Uniprot UP000017900; 9213 protein groups). The results from MaxQuant were statistically analyzed in Perseus v1.5.1.6.

### Publication Abstract
The prevalent porcine helminth, <i>Ascaris suum</i>, compromises pig health and reduces farm productivity worldwide. The closely related human parasite, <i>A. lumbricoides</i>, infects more than 800 million people representing a disease burden of 1.31 million disability-adjusted life years. The infections are often chronic in nature, and the parasites have a profound ability to modulate their hosts' immune responses. This study provides the first in-depth characterisation of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from different developmental stages and body parts of <i>A. suum</i> and proposes the role of these vesicles in the host-parasite interplay. The release of EVs from the third- (L3) and fourth-stage (L4) larvae and adults was demonstrated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and sequencing of EV-derived RNA identified a number of microRNAs (miRNAs) and transcripts of potential host immune targets, such as IL-13, IL-25 and IL-33, were identified. Furthermore, proteomics of EVs identified several proteins with immunomodulatory properties and other proteins previously shown to be associated with parasite EVs. Taken together, these results suggest that <i>A. suum</i> EVs and their cargo may play a role in host-parasite interactions. This knowledge may pave the way to novel strategies for helminth infection control and knowledge of their immune modulatory potential.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Mirna, Host-parasite interactions, Extracellular vesicles, Ascaris suum, Immunity

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Medical Massspectroemtry Aalborg University
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Laboratory for Medical Massspectroemtry Aalborg University


