### Accession
PXD031709

### Title
Database search engines and target database features impinge upon the identification of post-translationally cis-spliced peptides in HLA class I immunopeptidomes

### Description
Unconventional epitopes presented by HLA class I complexes are emerging targets for T cell targeted immunotherapies. Their identification by mass spectrometry required development of novel methods to cope with the large number of theoretical candidates. Methods to identify post-translationally spliced peptides led to a broad range of outcomes. We here investigated the impact of three common database search engines – i.e. Mascot, Mascot+Percolator and PEAKS DB – as final identification step, as well as the features of target database on the ability to correctly identify non-spliced and cis-spliced peptides. We used ground truth datasets measured by mass spectrometry to benchmark methods’ performance and extended the analysis to HLA class I immunopeptidomes. PEAKS DB showed better precision and recall of cis-spliced peptides and larger number of identified peptides in HLA class I immunopeptidomes than the other search engine strategies. The better performance of PEAKS DB appears to result from better discrimination between target and decoy hits and hence a more robust FDR estimation, and seems independent to peptide and spectrum features here investigated. Head of the research group Molecular Immunology at King’s College London and the Francis Crick Institute, London (UK). Email: michele.mishto@kcl.ac.uk,

### Sample Protocol
MS data generated for this project were collected using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano pump (both from ThermoFisherScientiﬁc). Briefly, peptides were loaded and separated by a nanoflow HPLC (RSLC Ultimate 3000) on an Easy-spray C18 nano column (50 cm length, 75 mm internal diameter; ThermoFisherScientific), coupled in-line to a nano-electrospray ionization Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisherScientific). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 5%–45% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 90 min at 50°C, with the exception of the MS file “PR487_Michele_20180604_B07.raw”, which was acquired under the same setting as above but over 60 min. The sample eluate was ionised by electrospray ionisation operating under Xcalibur v4.1. The instrument was first programmed to acquire using an Orbitrap-Ion Trap method by defining a 3 s cycle time between a full MS scan and MS2 fragmentation using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD). We acquired one full-scan MS spectrum at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 2x105 ions and a scan range of 350~1550 m/z. The MS/MS fragmentation was conducted using HCD collision energy (30%) with an orbitrap resolution of 30000 at 200m/z. The AGC target value was set up as 5x104 with a max injection time of 120ms.  A dynamic exclusion of 30s and 1-4 included charge states were defined within this method.  MS data previously published and derived from 721.221-A*02:01 cell line clone were generated using an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer, as described by Abelin et al. (Abelin et al., 2017). MS2 fragmentation spectra were recalibrated using the ‘Spectrum Files RC’ node in Proteome Discover. This calculates the PSM delta between theoretical and experimental mass in ppm and generates a mass shift curve. The optimal median value of calculated mass shift was then applied to the whole database search using either Mascot 2.7.01 or PEAKS X with a mass tolerance of either 5 ppm on precursor masses and 0.02 Da for fragment ions for the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer, or 6 ppm on precursor masses and 20 ppm (0.03 Da when using PEAKS) for Q-Exactive Hybrid-Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. In the analysis with Mascot+Percolator, we used Percolator 3.0.5. The feature set for Percolator was more limited for these datasets than for a standard tryptic digest due to the non-specific cleavage of proteasomes relative to trypsin and the fact that protein accession features were not applicable for de novo discoveries. The features used for Percolator were Mascot Ion Score, the percentage differences between the Ion Score of the PSM and the second and fifth highest ion scores for the same scan, the difference between the theoretical and experimental precursor mass and its absolute value, the length of the peptide, one hot encoding of the precursor charge, and one hot encoding of the post translational modifications which occurred in more than 10% of samples.

### Data Protocol
To determine the performance of Mascot, Mascot+Percolator and PEAKS DB within MBS and AP method framework, we applied the methods to ground truth datasets using constructed databases. The strategy for the generation of a ground truth dataset of MS1 and MS2 spectra, that resembled the characteristics of HLA-I bound peptides, followed the following steps:  we used the MS RAW datasets of HLA-I immunopeptidomes of two monoallelic cell lines (expressing either HLA-B*07:02 or HLA-A*02:01; three and six replicates, respectively) using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos and  of the monoallelic HLA-A*02:01 immunopeptidome dataset measured with Q Exactive Hybrid-Quadrupole (Abelin et al., 2017). The RAW MS data were analysed by both Mascot, Mascot+Percolator and PEAKS DB. The database used to obtain PSMs was the Uniprot reference proteome including isoforms (version 2016). Enzyme specificities were set to ‘unspecific’ in Mascot, Mascot+Percolator and PEAKS DB. Precursor mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm and 10 ppm for measurements on Fusion Lumos and Q Exactive Hybrid-Quadrupole, respectively. Fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 0.02 Da and 0.03 Da for measurements on Fusion Lumos and Q Exactive Hybrid-Quadrupole, respectively. PEAKS DB suggested peptides were filtered for 1% FDR using PEAKS’ internal decoy-fusion strategy. Mascot suggested peptides were retained if the ion score was at least 30 and the q-value was below 0.05. MS2 spectra assigned with the same sequence by both PEAKS and Mascot were extracted.  We then removed all peptides and MS2 spectra that were I/L redundant, thereby, we arrived at a final list of 1,546, 1,655 and 1,246 peptides in Orbitrap Fusion Lumos for K562-B:07*02 and K562-A*02:0 and Q Exactive Hybrid-Quadrupole 721.211-A*02:01 datasets, respectively. For each peptide, we selected exactly one MS2. If more than one MS2 spectrum was assigned to the same peptide sequence, we selected one MS2 spectrum randomly and discarded the remaining MS2 spectra. The selected MS2 spectra and their corresponding MS1 spectra were merged in the mzML format to a new constructed HLA-I immunopeptidome dataset. Resulting mzML files were tested for validity in both PEAKS DB and Mascot to check if all selected spectra were indeed correctly annotated (Table S1 of Mishto et al., Proteomics 2022). The resulting three datasets represent the constructed ground truth HLA-I immunopeptidome datasets and were employed in the benchmarking framework using constructed reference databases. The latter were generated by modifying the reference human proteome database so that the target sequences included in the benchmarking dataset could be identified only as one of the three categories: non-spliced peptides, cis-spliced peptides with intervening sequence shorter than 26 amino acids, or trans-spliced peptides. Since only non-spliced and cis-spliced peptides could be identified by MBS method and we aimed to focus our analysis of the search engine performance in the identification of cis-spliced peptides, we only considered non-spliced and cis-spliced peptides in the respective algorithm’s performance analysis. Thereby, in the constructed HLA-I immunopeptidome datasets, MS2 spectra derived from the pool of defined trans-spliced peptides represented potentially high-quality spectra, whose corresponding peptide sequence is not encoded in most database search strategies, and which could only be identified by exploring extremely large sequence search spaces. We considered those MS2 spectra as ‘trapping spectra’ and the corresponding peptides as ‘trapping peptides’. AP method may have an advantage when challenged with those trapping spectra, because it also considers the possible occurrence of trans-spliced peptides.   Whole HLA-I immunopeptidome datasets have been analysed with MBS and AP methods using Mascot, Mascot+Percolator and PEAKS as final search engine strategies.  Further detail about the data processing strategy and protocol can be found in the cognate paper (Mishto et al., Proteomics 2022).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hla-i, Peptide splicing, K562 cell line, Cis-spliced peptides, Immunopeptidome, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
King's College London
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Goettingen (D); Germany (lab head).

### Submitter
Michele Mishto

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane Liepe
Head of research group Quantitative and Systems Biology; Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences; Goettingen (D); Germany (lab head).


