### Accession
PXD003247

### Title
RSK feedback modulates initiation of embryonic stem cell differentiation

### Description
In this study we use a SILAC based quantitative proteomics approach to examine the ERK-responsive phosphoproteome in mouse embryonic stem cells.

### Sample Protocol
ES cells were metabolically labelled with Arg6/Lys6 and Arg0/Lys0 in 2iLIF. The MEK inhibitor was removed from the heavy culture for 24 hr and heavy and light cells were subfractionated into S1 and N1 fractions; S1 comprises all organelles, the cytoplasm and the plasma membrane; N1 is enriched for nuclei. Proteomes were extracted by cell lysis using RIPA lysis buffer and protein precipitation in 80% acetone. Proteins were mixed at a 1:1 ration from heavy and light cell populations from the S1 and N1 fractions and digested with trypsin. Phosphopeptides were enriched using strong cation exchange chromatography followed by titanium dioxide affinity purification. Samples were analysed on an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer using a data dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Data dependent acquisition were analysed with MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.3 using the program’s standard settings for protein identification and quantitation, except for the following: “maximum charge” state for proteins was set to 4; “MS/MS tolerance” for FTMS was set to 0.8 Da; “minimum razor + unique peptides” was set to 0 and “minimum unique peptides” was set to 1 for protein identification; “filter labelled amino acids” was deselected; “use unique peptides” was selected for protein. The data files were searched against the Uniprot mouse database (January 2012; 85,688 sequences) using Andromeda software within the MaxQuant software package.

### Publication Abstract
Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signalling is implicated in initiation of embryonic stem (ES) cell differentiation. The pathway is subject to complex feedback regulation. Here, we examined the ERK-responsive phosphoproteome in ES cells and identified the negative regulator RSK1 as a prominent target. We used CRISPR/Cas9 to create combinatorial mutations in <i>RSK</i> family genes. Genotypes that included homozygous null mutations in <i>Rps6ka1,</i> encoding RSK1, resulted in elevated ERK phosphorylation. These RSK-depleted ES cells exhibit altered kinetics of transition into differentiation, with accelerated downregulation of na&#xef;ve pluripotency factors, precocious expression of transitional epiblast markers and early onset of lineage specification. We further show that chemical inhibition of RSK increases ERK phosphorylation and expedites ES cell transition without compromising multilineage potential. These findings demonstrate that the ERK activation profile influences the dynamics of pluripotency progression and highlight the role of signalling feedback in temporal control of cell state transitions.

### Keywords
Mouse embryonic stem cells; silac; phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
Cambridge University
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, U.K.

### Submitter
Isabelle Nett

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn Lilley
Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Cambridge Systems Biology Centre, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QR, U.K.


