### Accession
PXD015689

### Title
Use of condensed tannins to improve dietary protein utilization in ruminant diets: effects on lamb tissue proteome

### Description
Cistus ladanifer L. is a common shrub endemic to the Mediterranean that is highly concentrated in condensed tannins (CT). CT form complexes with dietary protein that resist microbial degradation in the rumen, which enhances dietary protein utilization in ruminant diets. The objective of this study was to evaluate the utilization of CT in the diet of lambs on the proteomes of muscle, hepatic and adipose tissues. Twenty-four white merino ram lambs were divided in three groups (n=8) fed on different diets: control (16% crude protein - CP), reduced protein (12% CP) and reduced protein treated with CT extract. At the end of the trial, lambs were slaughtered and the longissimus lumborum muscle, hepatic and peri-renal adipose tissues sampled. A two-way approach was used for shotgun proteomic analysis: 2D-DIGE (gel-based) and nanoLC-MS (gel-free).  In the muscle, control lambs had lower abundance proteins that partake in the glycolysis pathway. With dietary 12 % CP, lambs had higher abundance of Fe-carrying proteins in the hepatic tissue. Lambs with dietary CT had higher abundance of hepatic flavin reductase. In the adipose tissue, control lambs had lower abundance of fatty-acid synthase. In conclusion, CT inclusion influences specific pathways in lamb tissues.

### Sample Protocol
For gel-free proteomics, 20µg of proteins were loaded on a 1D-Gel to fractionate each sample in two groups and to perform in-gel digestion. The extracted peptides were separated with a nanoLC425 Eksigent coupled to a TripleTOF MS 6600 Sciex onto C18 reverse phase column using a linear binary gradient.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was imported in Progenesis QIP v.4.1. The protein and peptide identification were searched on Mascot Daemon (v2.6.0, Matrix Science) with the Mascot research parameters following: peptide tolerance = 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.5 Da, max two missed cleavages, carbamido-methylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and tryptophan to kynurenine as variable modifications and a significance Mascot-calculated confidence of 95%. The researches were done in Ovis aries database on UniprotKB. Proteome interpretation and characterization (Gene Ontology categories: biological process, molecular function and cellular component) was performed using MIXED procedure of the SAS software and PANTHER online tool.

### Publication Abstract
Cistus ladanifer L. is a common shrub endemic to the Mediterranean region with high levels of condensed tannins (CT). CT form complexes with dietary protein resisting microbial degradation in the rumen, which enhances dietary protein utilization in ruminant diets. The objective of this study was to evaluate the utilization of CT in the diet of lambs on the proteomes of muscle, hepatic and adipose tissues. Twenty-four Merino Branco ram lambs were randomly allocated to three treatments (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;8): C - control (160&#xa0;g crude protein (CP)) per kg DM, RP - reduced protein (120&#xa0;g CP/kg DM); and RPCT - reduced protein (120&#xa0;g CP/kg DM) treated with CT extract. At the end of the trial, lambs were slaughtered and the longissimus lumborum muscle, hepatic and peri-renal adipose tissues sampled. A two-way approach was used for proteomic analysis: 2D-DIGE and nanoLC-MS. In the muscle, C lambs had lower abundance proteins that partake in the glycolysis pathway than the lambs of other treatments. Control lambs had lower abundance of Fe-carrying proteins in the hepatic tissue than RP and RPCT lambs. The latter lambs had highest abundance of hepatic flavin reductase. In the adipose tissue, C lambs had lowest abundance of fatty-acid synthase. SIGNIFICANCE: soybean meal is an expensive feedstuff in which intensive animal production systems heavily rely on. It is a source of protein extensively degraded in the rumen, leading to efficiency losses on dietary protein utilization during digestion. Protection of dietary protein from extensive ruminal degradation throughout the use of plants or extracts rich in CT allow an increase in the digestive utilization of feed proteins. In addition to enhance the protein digestive utilization, dietary CT may induce other beneficial effects in ruminants such as the improvement of the antioxidant status.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Hepatic, Peri-renal adipose tissues, Proteome, Longissimus lumborum muscle, 2d-dige, Condensed tannins

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-Green Tech Integrative Biology platform Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Celine LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-Green Tech Integrative Biology platform Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG


