### Accession
PXD028120

### Title
O-glycoproteome of Porphyromonas gingivalis

### Description
Porphyromonas gingivalis is an important human pathogen and also a model organism for the Bacteroidetes phylum. O-glycosylation has been reported in this phylum with findings that include the O-glycosylation motif, the structure of the O-glycans in a few species and an extensive O-glycoproteome analysis in Tannerella forsythia. However, O-glycosylation has not yet been confirmed in P. gingivalis. We therefore used glycoproteomics approaches including partial deglycosylation with trifluoromethanesulfonic acid as well as both HILIC and FAIMS based glycopeptide enrichment strategies leading to the identification of 257 putative glycosylation sites in 145 glycoproteins. The sequence of the major O-glycan was elucidated to be Hex-(dHex)-HexA-Hex-dHex-HexNAc-(P-Gro-[Ac]0-2)-HexNAc. Western blot analyses of mutants lacking the glycosyltransferases PGN_1134 and PGN_1135 demonstrated their involvement in the biosynthesis of the glycan while mass spectrometry analysis of the truncated O-glycans suggested that PGN_1134 and PGN_1135 transfer the two HexNAc sugars. Interestingly, a strong bias against the O-glycosylation of abundant proteins exposed to the cell surface such as abundant T9SS cargo proteins, surface lipoproteins and outer membrane β-barrel proteins was observed. In contrast, the great majority of proteins associated with the inner membrane or periplasm were glycosylated irrespective of their abundance. The P. gingivalis O-glycosylation system may therefore function to establish the desired physicochemical properties of the periplasm.

### Sample Protocol
Cell fractions of P. gingivalis were prepared and one portion was partially deglycosylated with trifluoromethanesulfonic acid. Proteins from both treated and untreated samples were separated by SDS-PAGE, excised into gel fractions, digested with trypsin and analysed by LC-MS/MS. One sample was also separated by HILIC to enrich for glycopeptides.

### Data Protocol
The data were analysed by Byonic v3.9.6 and the Byonic data is provided with the published paper. The data was also analysed with Mascot v2.6. Many manually defined modifications corresponding to the parts of the novel O-glycan were defined in the searches.

### Publication Abstract
Porphyromonas gingivalis is an important human pathogen and also a model organism for the Bacteroidetes phylum. O-glycosylation has been reported in this phylum with findings that include the O-glycosylation motif, the structure of the O-glycans in a few species, and an extensive O-glycoproteome analysis in Tannerella forsythia. However, O-glycosylation has not yet been confirmed in P. gingivalis. We therefore used glycoproteomics approaches including partial deglycosylation with trifluoromethanesulfonic acid as well as both HILIC and FAIMS based glycopeptide enrichment strategies leading to the identification of 257 putative glycosylation sites in 145 glycoproteins. The sequence of the major O-glycan was elucidated to be HexNAc-HexNAc(P-Gro-[Ac]<sub>0-2</sub>)-dHex-Hex-HexA-Hex(dHex). Western blot analyses of mutants lacking the glycosyltransferases PGN_1134 and PGN_1135 demonstrated their involvement in the biosynthesis of the glycan while mass spectrometry analysis of the truncated O-glycans suggested that PGN_1134 and PGN_1135 transfer the two HexNAc sugars. Interestingly, a strong bias against the O-glycosylation of abundant proteins exposed to the cell surface such as abundant T9SS cargo proteins, surface lipoproteins, and outer membrane &#x3b2;-barrel proteins was observed. In contrast, the great majority of proteins associated with the inner membrane or periplasm were glycosylated irrespective of their abundance. The P. gingivalis O-glycosylation system may therefore function to establish the desired physicochemical properties of the periplasm. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Porphyromonas gingivalis is an oral pathogen primarily associated with severe periodontal disease and further associated with rheumatoid arthritis, dementia, cardiovascular disease, and certain cancers. Protein glycosylation can be important for a variety of reasons including protein function, solubility, protease resistance, and thermodynamic stability. This study has for the first time demonstrated the presence of O-linked glycosylation in this organism by determining the basic structure of the O-glycans and identifying 257 glycosylation sites in 145 proteins. It was found that most proteins exposed to the periplasm were O-glycosylated; however, the abundant surface exposed proteins were not. The O-glycans consisted of seven monosaccharides and a glycerol phosphate with 0-2 acetyl groups. These glycans are likely to have a stabilizing role to the proteins that bear them and must be taken into account when the proteins are produced in heterologous organisms.

### Keywords
Porphyromonas gingivalis, Trifluoromethanesulfonic acid, O-glycosylation, Glycan biosynthesis

### Affiliations
Melbourne Dental School
Melbourne Dental School, Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Paul Veith

### Lab Head
Dr Eric C Reynolds
Melbourne Dental School, Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne


