### Accession
PXD030021

### Title
Neuronal and astrocytic contributions to Huntington’s disease dissected following mutant Huntingtin (mHTT) lowering

### Description
Huntington’s disease (HD) is caused by expanded CAG repeats in the Huntingtin gene (HTT) that results in expression of mutant HTT proteins (mHTT) with extended polyglutamine tracts in diverse cells of the body, including striatal neurons and astrocytes. The relative contributions of neurons and astrocytes to disease pathogenesis are unknown for HD and other neurodegenerative diseases. This is a critical issue to address since it has been proposed that neuronal loss in HD and other major neurodegenerative diseases is downstream of astrocytic dysfunction that drives neuronal death. Moreover, astrocyte-to-neuron conversion is considered a promising approach in HD and other neurodegenerative diseases with little reported detriment with regards to normal astrocytic physiological functions, which are varied and extensive in health and disease. Thus, astrocytes are considered both causative and also largely replaceable in neurodegeneration, and their basic contributions to disease pathophysiology relative to neurons remain undefined in vivo. We used genetically encoded and cell-specific zinc finger protein (ZFP) transcriptional repressors to lower mHTT and molecularly dissected neuronal and astrocytic influences on HD pathophysiology at molecular, cellular, and behavioral levels. We found that the major disease drivers were in fact neurons, with astrocytes displaying lesser loss of essential functions such as cholesterol metabolism that were downstream of greater neuronal dysfunction, which encompassed neuromodulation, synaptic, and intracellular signaling. We thus dissected the cell autonomous and non-cell autonomous mechanistic and causal contributions of both neurons and astrocytes to a complex neurodegenerative disease in vivo with wider implications for rescue and repair strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by the addition of 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and incubation at room temperature for 30 min. The free cysteine residues were alkylated by the addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide and incubation at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Multi enzymatic digestion overnight at 37°C were successfully performed using LysC/trypsin.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) run in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. Label-free intensity-based quantitation (LFQ) of the LC-MS/MS data was carried out by MS1 feature detection using chromatographic peak areas for peptide abundance through MaxQuant software package

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intracellular signaling, Proteomics, Huntington disease, Mass spectrometry, Cholesterol metabolism, Neuronal and astrocyte, Mhtt

### Affiliations
UCLA
Department of Physiology, Department of Neurobiology, University of California Los Angeles. Los Angeles, CA 90095-1751, USA

### Submitter
Yasaman Jami-Alahmadi

### Lab Head
Dr Baljit S. Khakh
Department of Physiology, Department of Neurobiology, University of California Los Angeles. Los Angeles, CA 90095-1751, USA


