### Accession
PXD013450

### Title
Circadian Clock Regulation of the Secretory Pathway

### Description
Proteins destined for secretion move from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER, the site of synthesis) to Golgi cisternae then onto the cell surface in transport vesicles. Although the mechanism of anterograde and retrograde transport via vesicles is well understood the temporal coordination of transport between organelles has not been studied. Here we show that the extracellular levels of collagen-I (the most abundant protein in vertebrates) are 24-h rhythmic in tendon, which is the richest source of collagen-I.  Rhythmicity is the result of circadian clock control of the secretory pathway via ER-ribosome docking, Tango1-dependent ER export, phosphodiesterase-dependent Golgi-ER retrograde transport of Hsp47 (a collagen molecular chaperone), and Vps33b-dependent post Golgi export, which pause collagen-I transport at each node in the pathway during a 24-hour cycle. The structure and mechanical properties of tendon are also 24-hourly rhythmic. Thus, the circadian clock is a master logistic operator of the secretory pathway in mammalian cells.

### Sample Protocol
All reagents were of mass spectrometry grade. Tail tendons were homogenized with a bullet blender (with 1.6 mm steel beads; Next Advance) at maximum speed at 4 °C for 5 min in 200μl of SL-DOC buffer (1.1% SL (sodium laurate), 0.3% DOC (sodium deoxycholate), 0.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 25 mM AB (ammonium bicarbonate)), supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche). Samples were incubated at 4 °C for 5 min, alkylated with 12μl of 30 mM of IAM (iodoacetamide) for 20 min at RT, followed by quenching with 12 μL of 30 mM DTT. Samples were centrifuged at maximum speed for 10 min. Supernatants were transferred into LoBind tubes (Eppendorf) and protein concentrations measured using a Millipore Direct Detect spectrometer. A total of 2 μg protein per sample was digested using trypsin beads (SMART digestion kit, Thermo Scientific) with rapid agitation (1400 rpm) at 37 °C overnight. Peptide/bead mixtures were centrifuged at 12000 xg for 5 min and supernatants transferred into new tubes. The pH was adjusted to < 3 by addition of 10% FA (formic acid, Sigma Aldrich) and 400 μL of EA (ethylacetate, Sigma Aldrich). Samples were then spun for 5 min at 16000 xg, and the upper layer of solvent (EA) was discarded. EA extraction was repeated twice and samples were lyophilized in a speed-vac centrifuge (Heto). Samples were desalted, in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol, using POROS R3 beads (Thermo Fisher) and lyophilized. The resulting peptides were dissolved in 15 μL of 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Digested samples were analyzed using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatography system (RSLC, Dionex Corporation) coupled to either an Orbitrap Elite (for quality control assessment; Thermo Fisher Scientific) or Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Briefly, for the Orbitrap Elite, peptides were separated using a 75 mm x 250 μm inner diameter 1.7 μM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters) with a gradient from 92% A (0.1% formic acid, FA, Sigma, in deionized water) and 8% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 33% B, in 104 min at 300 nL/min. For the Q Exactive HF, peptides were separated in a gradient of 95% A and 5% B to 7% B at 1 min, 18% B at 58 min, 27% B in 72 min and 60% B at 74 min at 300 nL/min using a 75 mm x 250 μm inner diameter 1.7 μM CSH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis and protein quantification Spectra from multiple samples were automatically aligned using Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) with manual placement of vectors where necessary. Peak-picking sensitivity was set to 4/5 and all other parameters were left as defaults. Only peptides with charge between +1 to +4, with 2 or more isotopes were taken for further analysis. Filtered peptides were identified using Mascot (Matrix Science UK), by searching against the SwissProt and TREMBL mouse databases. The peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues (monoisotopic mass change, 57.021 Da), oxidized methionine (15.995 Da), hydroxylation of asparagine, aspartic acid, proline or lysine (15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine, threonine, histidine or aspartate (79.966 Da). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Peptide detection intensities were exported from Progenesis QI as Excel (Microsoft) spread sheets for further processing. Peptide identifications were filtered via Mascot scores so that only those with a Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR)-adjusted p-value < 0.05 remained. FDR filtering was performed as described in (48). Raw ion intensities from peptides belonging to proteins with fewer than 2 unique peptides (by sequence) per protein in the dataset were excluded from quantification. Remaining intensities were logged and normalized per MS run by the median logged peptide intensity. Peptides assigned to different isoforms were grouped into a single “protein group” by gene name. Only peptides observed in at least 2 samples were used in quantification. Missing values were assumed as missing due to low abundance, an assumption others have shown is justified (49). Imputation was performed at the peptide level following normalization using a method similar to that employed by Perseus (50) whereby missing values were imputed randomly from a normal distribution centered on the apparent limit of detection for this experiment. The limit of detection in this instance was determined by taking the mean of all minimum logged peptide intensities and down-shifting it by 1.6σ, where σ is the standard deviation of minimum logged peptide intensities. The width of this normal distribution was set to 0.3σ as described in (50). Fold-change differences in the quantity of proteins detected in different time-points were calculated by fitting a mixed-effects linear regression model for each protein with Huber weighting of residuals (51) as described in (49) using the fitglme Matlab (The MathWorks, USA) function with the formula:  y_iptb= β_t+ β_p+ β_b  Where y_iptb represents the log2(intensity) of peptide p belonging to protein i, at time-point t, in batch b. βs represent effect sizes for the indicated coefficients. Batch and peptide were entered as random effects whereas time-point was entered as a fixed effect. Standard error estimates were adjusted with Empirical Bayes variance correction according to (52, 53). Conditions were compared with Student’s t-tests with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for false positives (54).   Periodicity analysis Periodicity analysis was performed using the MetaCycle package (55) in the R computing environment (56) using the default parameters. A Benjamini-Hochberg FDR<0.2 was used to detect rhythmic proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Collagen, Tendon, Protein trafficking

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT UK
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Venkatesh Mallikarjun

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Kadler
Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT UK


