### Accession
PXD031779

### Title
Meiotic DNA breaks activate a streamlined response that largely avoids protein level changes-DDA

### Description
To understand the proteome and phosphoproteome level responses to meiotic DNA breaks, we have compared protein phosphorylation and protein levels in cells spo11-YF (cannot form meiotic DNA breaks) cells to SPO11 (can form meiotic breaks) cells.

### Sample Protocol
We extracted proteins from meiotic samples using 8M Urea lysis buffer(8M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl, 75mM NaCl, 1x Calbiochem protease inhibitor, 1mM PMSF, 1x Thermo Fisher halt phosphatase and protease inhibitor). Samples were reduced using DTT(5mM) and alkylated with iodoacetamide(15mM). Then, we digested proteins with Trypsin(Trypsin Gold, Promega) overnight at 37C. We cleaned the samples using HyperSep(ThermoFisher) tips. For phosphoproteome samples, phosphopeptides were enriched using High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment(ThermoFisher) kit according to the manufacturer`s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The spectra from the RAW data files were matched to the S288C Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome downloaded from Uniprot in MaxQuant(1.5.5.1) using the default settings, with 20 ppm MS/MS tolerance and 1% FDR based on the reserve yeast proteome, and carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification. For phosphoproteome samples, Phospho(STY) was selected as a variable modification. We used the LFQ intensity values from the proteinGroups.txt file to assess protein level changes. We used the intensity values from the Phospho (STY)Sites.txt file to assess protein phosphorylation changes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Spo11, Dna damage, Meiosis

### Affiliations
New York University, Department of Biology, New York, USA
NYU

### Submitter
Funda Kar

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Vogel
New York University, Department of Biology, New York, USA


