### Accession
PXD017592

### Title
Proteomics of Hypnale hypnale (Hump-nosed pit viper) venom from the Western Ghats of India

### Description
Hypnale hypnale (hump-nosed pit viper) is considered to be one among the medically important venomous snake species of India and Sri Lanka. In the present study, venom proteome profiling of a single Hypnale hypnale from Western Ghats of India was achieved using SDS-PAGE based protein separation followed by LC-MS/MS analysis

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 1.5 mg of HPV venom was dissolved in 100 μL of water and an aliquot (~20 μL) of the crude venom sample was separated on a 12% SDS gel under reducing conditions. The obtained bands were then stained and visualized using coomassie brilliant blue R-250. The gels were subsequently scanned by a gel doc system and the images were processed by Image-Lab software from Bio-Rad.  The gel bands were then sliced into small pieces of approximately 2-3 mm width and were subjected to destaining using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 50% acetonitrile, until the gel pieces were clear. Followed by the washing steps, the slices were subjected to reduction with 10 mM DTT and incubated at 56 °C for 45 min. Subsequently, the gel pieces were alkylated with55 mM IAm and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The gel pieces were washed using 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer for removing the residual DTT and IAm followed by dehydration using 100% acetonitrile. The gel pieces were then treated with 25 μL of 13 ng/μL trypsin or chymotrypsin (prepared in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer; pH 8.0) followed by overnight incubation (16 hrs) at 37°C. The peptides were then extracted out using an extraction buffer (1:1, acetonitrile: water containing 0.1 % TFA). The extraction process was repeated twice. The pooled extracts were subsequently dried using a vacuum concentrator and kept for Q-TOF LC-MS/MS analysis.  After reconstituting the dried peptide preparations in 5% ACN with 0.1% FA, 3 µl of the aliquots were infused to an LC-MS system consisting of an 1260 series nano-flow HPLC, Chip Cube interface and a 6540 series UHD Q-TOF mass spectrometer  (all Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA). The Chip Cube interface was equipped with an integrated reversed-phase chip (Zorbax 300 SB-C18, 5 µ) containing a 40 nL enrichment column, a 150 mm x 75 µm analytical column and a nanospray emitter. The samples were loaded to the enrichment column, that is connected to a capillary pump delivering solvents A (water with 0.1% formic acid) and B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 3 µL/min. After the sample enrichment, separation of the digested peptides was achieved using the analytical column coupled with a nano pump that is set to deliver solvents at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient conditions are mentioned as followed: initial equilibration of the column with 5% B followed by 5-8% B in 3 min, 8-45 % B in 32 min, 45-90% B in 15 min, 90% B for 2 min and 90-5% for 1 minute. The MS data were acquired over 250 – 3000, m/z and MS/MS data over 50-3000, m/z in a data dependent mode. Peptide fragmentation was achieved through collision induced dissociation using nitrogen as the collision gas. The MS and MS/MS conditions applied were: Capillary voltage: 2000 V; Fragmentation voltage: 150 V; Dry gas flow: 4 L/min; Dry gas temperature: 325 oC; MS scan speed: 4 spectra/sec; MS/MS scan speed: 3 spectra/sec; Precursor selection: maximum 5 precursors; Preferred charges for tryptic digests: 2,3, >3; Preferred charges for chymotrypsin digests: 1,2, 3, >3; Active exclusion: After 3 spectra for 0.5 min [24]. All the mass spectrometric data were acquired in positive ionization mode using Agilent Mass Hunter data acquisition software, Version B.05.01 and the results were analyzed using Agilent Mass Hunter quantitative analysis software, Version B.07.00. The acquired MS raw data were converted to Mascot generic format file (.mgf) using Mass Hunter software and searched against the respective database as described.

### Data Protocol
All the mgf data were merged to create a single mgf file using Mascot Daemon (version2.5.0) and searched against the NCBI Serpentes database (Taxonomy ID:8570). The MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively with carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) as fixed and oxidation of methionine (M), deamidation of asparagine (N) and glutamine (Q) as variable modifications. The number of missed cleavages for trypsin and chymotrypsin was set as 2 for all the identifications. All the search results were decoy enabled. The obtained proteins represented by a minimum of 2 unique peptide having satisfying the minimum threshold score and with a good MS/MS spectrum were considered for the venom protein identification and classification process.

### Publication Abstract
Hypnale hypnale (hump-nosed pit viper) is considered to be one among the medically important venomous snake species of India and Sri Lanka. In the present study, venom proteome profiling of a single Hypnale hypnale from Western Ghats of India was achieved using SDS-PAGE based protein separation followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. The identities of the proteins that were not established using the Mascot search were determined through de novo sequencing tools such as Novor followed by MS-BLAST based sequence similarity search algorithm and PEAKS proteomics software. The combined proteomics analysis revealed a total of 37 proteins belonging to nine different snake venom families, in which 7 proteins were exclusively identified through de novo strategies. The enzymatic and non-enzymatic venom protein families identified include serine proteases, metalloproteases, phospholipase A<sub>2</sub>, thrombin-like enzymes, phospholipase B, C-type lectins/snaclecs, disintegrins, cysteine rich secretory proteins and nerve growth factor. Among these, disintegrins, nerve growth factor, phospholipase B and cysteine rich secretory protein families were identified for the first time in HPV venom. This could possibly explain the regiospecific venom variation seen across snake species. Taken together, the venom proteome profiling on Indian Hypnale hypnale venom correlates with the clinical manifestations often seen in the envenomed victims.

### Keywords
Venom, Proteomics, Hypnale hypnale

### Affiliations
Amrita Vishwa VIdyapeetham
Associate Professor and Head-Proteomics Research, School of Biotechnology, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Amritapuri Campus, Clappana PO., Kollam-690525, Kerala, India, Phone- 0476 2803119, 2803110 (lab head)

### Submitter
Sudarslal Sadasivan Nair

### Lab Head
Dr Sudarslal Sadasivan Nair
Associate Professor and Head-Proteomics Research, School of Biotechnology, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Amritapuri Campus, Clappana PO., Kollam-690525, Kerala, India, Phone- 0476 2803119, 2803110 (lab head)


