### Accession
PXD033943

### Title
Proteomics of valve silica deposition vesicles from the diatom Thalassiosira pseudonana

### Description
Biomineral forming organisms produce inorganic materials with complex, genetically encoded morphologies that are inaccessible by current synthetic chemistry. It is poorly understood which genes are involved in biomineral morphogenesis and how the encoded proteins guide this process. We addressed these questions using diatoms, which are paradigms for the self-assembly of hierarchically meso- and macroporous silica under mild reaction conditions. By isolating the intracellular organelle for silica biosynthesis, we identified a suite of new biomineralization proteins. Three of these, dAnk1-3, are specific to diatoms and contain a common protein-protein interaction domain indicating a role in coordinating assembly of the silica biomineralization machinery. Knocking out individual dank genes led to characteristic structural aberrations in silica biogenesis that point to a liquid-liquid phase separation process as underlying mechanism for pore pattern morphogenesis. Our work provides an unprecedented path for the synthesis of tailored meso- and macroporous silicas using Synthetic Biology.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomics analysis of SF2 was done with two biological replicates each with two technical replicates. The pelleted SF2 fraction was resuspended in 100 µL of 2% SDS so-lution and incubated at 37 °C for 20 min. The sample was centrifuged for 1 hour at 5000g in a fixed angle rotor, 50 ng BSA were added to the supernatant as internal standard for sample quantity, and the sample was stored at room temperature overnight. For gel electrophoresis 48 µL (equivalent to 34 µg, quantified by the BCA method) of sample were mixed with 12 µL 5x SDS sample buffer and heated at 85 °C for 2 min. The sample was separated on a 10% Bis-Tris SDS gel (two lanes per sample) at 180 V for 6 min resulting in separation distance of approximately 2 cm. Proteins were visualized by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Each lane was sliced into four areas of approximately 5 mm length. After in gel digestion, the peptides were extracted from the gel slices, fractions were combined and analyzed by nanoLC MS/MS. Digestion of proteins in gel and the ex-traction and analysis of the peptides by GeLC MS/MS was performed according to procedures described previously with slight modifications 52,53. In brief, gel pieces were destained and proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodacetamide. Digestion was performed with trypsin at a final enzyme concentration of 10 ng·µL-1 overnight in 10mM NH4HCO3. Peptides were extracted, subsequently dried and stored until analysis at -20 °C. For LC-MS/MS analyses the peptides were recovered in 5 µL 30% formic acid, diluted with 20 µL of water and 5 µL were injected. NanoLC MS/MS analyses were per-formed with a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer hyphenated to nanoflow LC system (Dionex3000 RSLC). Peptides were separated in a linear gradient of 0.1% aqueous formic acid for 120 min (eluent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile (eluent B) and the mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA, TopN 10).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were loaded into the Progenesis QIP V4.2 software (Nonlinear Dynamics) for peak picking. Peptide and protein identification was performed with Mascot V2.8 (Matrix-science) using the UniProt database UP000001449 (02/2022) and custom contaminant databases (proteolytic enzymes, human keratins, standard proteins). Only protein hits with at least two significant peptide hits in every replicate were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thalassiosira pseudonana ccmp1335, Silica deposition vesicles (sdv)

### Affiliations
B CUBE Technische Universität Dresden Tatzberg 41 03107 Dresden
Molecular Analysis - Mass Spectrometry,
Center for Molecular and Cellular Bioengineering (CMCB), TU Dresden

### Submitter
Marc Gentzel

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Nils Kröger
B CUBE Technische Universität Dresden Tatzberg 41 03107 Dresden


