### Accession
PXD041240

### Title
A translational regulator MHZ9 modulates ethylene signaling in rice

### Description
In this project, we identified a novel RNA-binding protein, MHZ9. And we analyzed the potential proteins interacted with MHZ9 through immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry (IP-MS). The N-terminal domain of MHZ9 (MHZ9-N) contains a putative RNA splicing and modification domain PRP4. To identify RNA binding sites in the MHZ9-N. We performed XRNAX-IP-MS assay.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of MHZ9 interaction protein assays. The 2-d-old etiolated 35S::GFP-MHZ9 transgenic rice seedlings after treatment with 10 μL/L of ethylene for 8 h were used (n = 1). The wild type (Nipponbare) rice seedlings under the same condition was used as negative control (n = 1). For XRNAX-IP-MS, the etiolated 35S::MHZ9-N-GFP seedlings were treated with 10 μL/L of ethylene.Then the samples were UV-crosslinked with 600 mJ/cm2 at 254 nm for three times, using a UVP CX-2000 Shortwave Ultraviolet Crosslinker (Upland, CA, USA). Add 1 mL of TRIzol per 100 mg powdered tissue sample and Lyselyse the samples in TRIzol by votexing and incubating for 5 min at room tempuraturetemperature (RT). Add 0.2 mL of chloroform per 1 mL of TRIzol reagent used for lysis to induce phase separation. After centrifuging at 7,000 g for 10 min at 4ºC, the aqueous phase was removed and the interphase was transferred into a fresh 1.5 mL tube. The interphase was washedsuspended with 1 mL of low-SDS buffer [50 mM TRIS (pH 7.4), 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% (w/v) SDS]. Then the interphase was resuspended with 1 mL of low-SDS buffer. After centrifuging at 5,000 g for 2 min at RT, the aqueous phase was harvested as elution-1. Repeat washing with the low-SDS buffer and keep the second aqueous phase as elution-2. Then the interphase was washed again with 1 mL of high-SDS buffer [50 mM TRIS (pH 7.4), 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% (w/v) SDS]. After centrifuging at 5,000 g for 2 min at RT, the aqueous phase was harvested as elution-3. Repeat washing with the high-SDS buffer and keep the last aqueous phase as elution-4. The 4 four tubes of elution were collected into a fresh 10 mL tube and mixed with equal amount of isopropanol. After centrifuging at 18,000 g for 15 min at 4ºC, the pellet was washed with 1 mL of 70% ethanol twice. The pellet was resuspended with RNase-free water and treated with DNase I to remove DNA contamination. Then Tthe RNA and protein complex was harvested by alcohol precipitation and washed with 1 mL of 70% ethanol twice. The andpellet was resuspended in 1 mL of IP buffer [50 mM TRIS (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40]. The complex was incubated with 25 μL equilibrated GFP-Trap_A (gta-20, Chromotek) beads for 4 h at 4ºC. Then the beads and were  washed 4 times with the IP buffer. The beads were treated with 2.5 µL RNase I (Thermo Scientifc, EN0601) and 2.5 µL RNase A (Sigma, R6148). RNase I (Thermo ScientifcTM, EN0601) for 24 h. The beads were washed for 4 times with IP buffer. Then the beads were mixed with 25 µL elution buffer [5 µL of SDS loading buffer (5 × ), 5 µL of DTT (1M) and 15 µL of RNase-free water] and heated at 70ºC for 15 min. After centrifuging at 2,500 g for 5 min at RT, the supernatants were harvested and analyzed with MS by Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co. Ltd. The RNA-bound peptides in MHZ9 were detected according to the mass shift via mass spectrometry. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 120 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched using Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science) against the uniprot_Oryza_sativa_168248_20180102.fasta. For protein identification, the following options were used: peptide mass tolerance = 20 ppm; MS/MS tolerance = 0.1 Da; enzyme = trypsin; missed cleavage = 2; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modification: oxidation (M);  minimum number of unique peptides for protein identification is 1. For identification of mononucleotide-peptide in XRNAX-IP-MS, the mass shifts were set as 324.18, 347.22, 323.2, 363.22 Dalton for uridine monophosphate (U), adenosine monophosphate (A), cytidine monophosphate (C), guanosine monophosphate (G), respectively.And the modification sites at MHZ9-N were set at F, K, V,or Y amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-crosslinked peptide, Gyf-domain, Oryza_sativa, Q exactive mass spectrometer (thermo scientific)

### Affiliations
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
State Key Lab of Plant Genomics Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China Chaoyang District, Beichen West Road, Campus #1, No. 2

### Submitter
Yi-Hua Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Jin-Song Zhang
State Key Lab of Plant Genomics Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China Chaoyang District, Beichen West Road, Campus #1, No. 2


