### Accession
PXD006990

### Title
Comparative and Network-based Proteomic Analysis of Ethanol-treated and Lipopolysaccharide-induced Macrophages

### Description
Macrophages are specialized phagocytes that play an essential role in inflammation, immunity, and tissue repair. Profiling the global proteomic response of macrophages to microbial molecules such as bacterial lipopolysaccharide is key to understanding fundamental mechanisms of inflammatory disease. Ethanol is a widely abused substance that has complex effects on inflammation. Reports have indicated that ethanol can activate or inhibit the lipopolysaccharide receptor, Toll-like Receptor 4, in different settings, with important consequences for liver and neurologic inflammation, but the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. To profile the ethanol and lipopolysaccharide responsive proteins on the macrophages, a gel-free proteomic technique was applied to RAW 264.7 macrophages. Five hundred four differentially expressed proteins were identified and quantified with high confidence using ≥ 5 peptide spectral matches. Among these, 319 proteins were shared across all treatment conditions, and 69 proteins were exclusively identified in ethanol-treated or lipopolysaccharide-stimulated cells. The interactive impact of ethanol and lipopolysaccharide on the macrophage proteome was evaluated using bioinformatics tools, enabling identification of differentially responsive proteins, protein interaction networks, disease- and function-based networks, canonical pathways, and upstream regulators. Pathway analysis revealed that differential proteins are involved in cell-cell signaling, cell death and survival, and injury, and, notably, are enriched for regulators of liver disease. Taken together, this study describes for the first time at a systems level the interaction between ethanol and lipopolysaccharide in the proteomic programming of macrophages, and offers new mechanistic insights into the biology that may underlie the impact of ethanol on infectious and inflammatory disease in humans.

### Sample Protocol
Protein preparation, purification, and digestion The cells were lysed in RIPA buffer with protease inhibitors at 4°C for 15 mins. The cell suspension was then sonicated for another 15 mins. Finally, the suspended cells were incubated an additional 30 mins at 4°C, then centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 30 mins at 4°C. The supernatant was collected into a new tube and the proteins were measured with a BCA protein assay kit using bovine serum albumin as a standard. The extracted proteins (150 μg) were purified using a methanol-chloroform method according to Kamal et al. [28]. The dried pellet was resuspended in 50 mM NH4CO3. According to Chakrabarty et al. [29], proteins was reduced and alkylated, then digested with trypsin (MS Grade) at a 1:50 enzyme/protein concentration for 16h at 37°C. Formic acid to pH < 3 was added to the consequential peptides for acidifying the sample and desalted with a C18 desalting column (Thermo scientific, IL, USA). After completely drying by speed vacuum, peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, and stored at -20°C before LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass analysis (nano-LC-MS/MS) Digested peptides were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a Velos Pro Dual-Pressure Linear Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA) coupled to a UHPLC (UltiMate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA). Peptides were loaded onto the analytical column, and separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 15-cm column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC) with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA). Nano column was eluted with multi-step gradient of 4-90% solvent B (A: 0.1% formic acid in 18 Mohm Milli-Q water; B: 95% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in 18 Mohm Milli-Q water) over 70 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a total run time of 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nano-spray voltage set at 2.50 kV and source temperature at 275°C. The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode in which the three precursor ions with the most intense signal in a full MS scan were consecutively isolated and fragmented to acquire their corresponding MS2 scans. Full MS scans with 1 micro scan (µs) were at a resolution of 3,000, and a mass range of m/z 350-1500. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was used at 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via high-energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) was acquired in the Linear Ion Trap mass analyzer with the resolution of 0.05 FWHM (full-width half maximum) with Ultra ZoomScan between m/z 50-2000. A maximum injection volume of 5 µl was used during data acquisition with partial injection mode. The mass spectrometer was controlled in a data-dependent mode that toggled automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. MS/MS data acquisition and processing were performed by XcaliburTM software (ThermoFisher Scientific, MA).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Proteins were identified through Proteome Discoverer software (ver. 2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a mouse (Mus musculus) UniProt protein sequence database (75568 sequences, and 32232886 residues). The reviewed protein sequences of mouse were downloaded from UniProt protein database (www.uniprot.org) January 15, 2016. The considerations in SEQUEST searches for normal peptides were used carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification and oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification. Trypsin was indicated as the proteolytic enzyme with two missed cleavages. Peptide and fragment mass tolerance were set at ± 1.6 and 0.6 Da and precursor mass range of 350-5000 Da, and peptide charges were set excluding +1. SEQUEST HT results were filtered with the Percolator-based scoring to improve the sensitivity and accuracy of the peptide identification. Using a decoy search strategy, target false discovery rates for peptide identification of all searches were used at less than 1% with at least two peptides per protein, and the results were strictly filtered by ΔCn (˂0.01), Xcorr (≥ 1.5) for peptides, and peptide spectral matches (PSMs ≥ 5) with high confidence with q value (<0.05). Protein quantification was conducted using the total spectrum count of identified proteins. Additional criteria were applied to increase confidence that PSMs must be present in all three biological replicate samples. Normalization of identified PSMs among LC-MS/MS runs was done dividing individual PSMs of proteins by total PSMs and average of %PSM count was utilized for calculating fold changes for different treatment conditions. For contrasting relative intensities of proteins between control, LPS, ethanol-LPS, and ethanol groups, samples were evaluated using cumulative confident normalized PSMs value

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are specialized phagocytes that play an essential role in inflammation, immunity, and tissue repair. Profiling the global proteomic response of macrophages to microbial molecules such as bacterial lipopolysaccharide is key to understanding fundamental mechanisms of inflammatory disease. Ethanol is a widely abused substance that has complex effects on inflammation. Reports have indicated that ethanol can activate or inhibit the lipopolysaccharide receptor, Toll-like Receptor 4, in different settings, with important consequences for liver and neurologic inflammation, but the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. To profile the sequential effect of low dose ethanol and lipopolysaccharide on macrophages, a gel-free proteomic technique was applied to RAW 264.7 macrophages. Five hundred four differentially expressed proteins were identified and quantified with high confidence using &#x2265; 5 peptide spectral matches. Among these, 319 proteins were shared across all treatment conditions, and 69 proteins were exclusively identified in ethanol-treated or lipopolysaccharide-stimulated cells. The interactive impact of ethanol and lipopolysaccharide on the macrophage proteome was evaluated using bioinformatics tools, enabling identification of differentially responsive proteins, protein interaction networks, disease- and function-based networks, canonical pathways, and upstream regulators. Five candidate protein coding genes (PGM2, ISYNA1, PARP1, and PSAP) were further validated by qRT-PCR that mostly related to glucose metabolism and fatty acid synthesis pathways. Taken together, this study describes for the first time at a systems level the interaction between ethanol and lipopolysaccharide in the proteomic programming of macrophages, and offers new mechanistic insights into the biology that may underlie the impact of ethanol on infectious and inflammatory disease in humans.

### Keywords
Ingenuity pathway analysis, Ethanol, Gel-free quantitative proteomics, Lipopolysaccharide, Raw 264.7 macrophages

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor  Chemistry and Biochemistry  University of Texas at Arlington  Box 19065  700 Planetarium Place, Room 130  Arlington, TX 76019  United States
University of Texas at Arlington

### Submitter
Abu Hena Kamal

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Saiful M. Chowdhury
Assistant Professor  Chemistry and Biochemistry  University of Texas at Arlington  Box 19065  700 Planetarium Place, Room 130  Arlington, TX 76019  United States


