### Accession
PXD014445

### Title
System-wide identification of enzyme substrates by thermal analysis (SIESTA)

### Description
Despite the immense importance of enzyme-substrate reactions, there is a lack of generic and unbiased tools for identifying the molecular components participating in these reactions on a cellular level. Here we developed a universal method called System-wide Identification of Enzyme Substrates by Thermal Analysis (SIESTA). The approach assumes that enzymatic post-translational modification of substrate proteins changes their thermal stability, and applies the concept of specificity to reveal potential substrates. We have already shown the applicability of SIESTA in substrate discovery for TXNRD1 and PARP10 enzymes. SIESTA successfully identified several known and novel substrate candidates for protein kinase B (AKT1). A number of putative substrates were confirmed by functional assays. Wider application of SIESTA can enhance our understanding of the role of enzymes in homeostasis and disease, open new opportunities in investigating the effect of PTMs on protein stability, and facilitate drug discovery.

### Sample Protocol
HELA cells were cultured in 175 cm2 flasks, and were then trypsinized, washed twice with PBS, counted, resuspended in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.5 with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP, Sigma) for AKT1 experiment. The cells were then freeze-thawed 5 times. The cell lysates were centrifuged at 21,000 g for 20 min and the soluble fraction was collected. The protein concentration in the lysate was measured using Pierce BCA assay (Thermo) and equally distributed into 8 aliquots (1 mL each). For AKT1, each pair of samples were incubated with vehicle (AKT1 buffer), 500 µM ATP (CAT# GE27-2056-01, sigma), 500 nM AKT1 or with AKT1+ATP at 37 °C for 30 min. Each replicate was then aliquoted into 10 PCR microtubes and incubated for 3 min in SimpliAmp Thermal Cycler (Thermo) at temperature points of 37, 41, 44, 47, 50, 53, 56, 59, 63, and 67 °C. Samples were cooled for 3 min at room temperature and afterwards kept on ice. Samples were then transferred into polycarbonate thickwall tubes and centrifuged at 100,000 g and 4 °C for 20 min.  The soluble protein fraction was carefully transferred to new Eppendorf tubes. Protein concentration was measured in the samples treated at lowest temperature points (37 and 41° C) using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo), the same volume corresponding to 50 µg of protein at lowest temperature points was transferred from each sample to new tubes and urea was added to a final concentration of 4 M. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Subsequently, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and samples were incubated in room temperature for 1 h in the dark. The reaction was quenched by adding an additional 10 mM of DTT. Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. The dry protein pellet was dissolved in 8 M urea, 20 mM EPPS (pH=8.5) and diluted to 4 M urea. LysC was added at a 1 : 100 w/w ratio at room temperature overnight. Samples were diluted with 20mM EPPS to the final urea concentration of 1M, and trypsin was added at a 1 : 100 w/w ratio, followed by incubation for 6 h at room temperature. Acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 20% and TMT reagents were added 4x by weight to each sample, followed by incubation for 2 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by addition of 0.5% hydroxylamine. Samples were combined, acidified by TFA, cleaned using Sep-PaK cartridges (Waters) and dried using DNA 120 SpeedVac™ Concentrator (Thermo). Samples were were resuspended in 20 mM ammonium hydroxide and separated into 96 fractions on an XBrigde BEH C18 2.1x150 mm column (Waters; Cat#186003023), using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 2DLC system (Thermo Scientific) over a 48 min gradient of 1-63%B (B=20 mM ammonium hydroxide in acetonitrile) in three steps (1-23.5%B in 42 min, 23.5-54%B in 4 min and then 54-63%B in 2 min) at 200 µL/min flow. Fractions were then concatenated into 24 samples in sequential order (e.g. 1,25,49,73).  The AKT1 samples were loaded with buffer A onto a 50 cm EASY-Spray column connected to a nanoflow Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo) and eluted in an increasing organic solvent  gradient from 4% to 26% (B: 98% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2% H2O) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 95 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS data (SIESTA) were analyzed by MaxQuant, version 1.5.6.5 70. The Andromeda search engine matched MS/MS data against the Uniprot complete proteome database (human, version UP000005640_9606, 92957 entries). TMT10-plex on the MS/MS level was used for quantification of protein abundances. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation was selected as a variable modification. Phosphorylation on serine and threonine was selected as variable modification, and used in quantification. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. For all other parameters, the default settings were used. Contaminants were removed from the dataset. In the datasets, "CoFa" headers refer to ATP treatment and "Enzy" refers to AKT1 enzyme.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the immense importance of enzyme-substrate reactions, there is a lack of general and unbiased tools for identifying and prioritizing substrate proteins that are modified by the enzyme on the structural level. Here we describe a high-throughput unbiased proteomics method called System-wide Identification and prioritization of Enzyme Substrates by Thermal Analysis (SIESTA). The approach assumes that the enzymatic post-translational modification of substrate proteins is likely to change their thermal stability. In our proof-of-concept studies, SIESTA successfully identifies several known and novel substrate candidates for selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase 1, protein kinase B (AKT1) and poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase-10 systems. Wider application of SIESTA can enhance our understanding of the role of enzymes in homeostasis and disease, opening opportunities to investigate the effect of post-translational modifications on signal transduction and facilitate drug discovery.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Txnrd1, Target, Lc/ms, Proteomics, Artd10, Rac-alpha serine threonine protein kinase, Akt1, Trxr1, Thermal stability, Parp10

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, STOCKHOLM, Sweden

### Submitter
Amir Ata Saei 

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, STOCKHOLM, Sweden


