### Accession
PXD029849

### Title
Clues from the intestinal mucus proteome of Atlantic salmon to counter inflammation

### Description
Intestinal inflammation in Atlantic salmon was studied by profiling the intestine mucus proteome, employing isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification and 2D LC-MS/MS approach. Two fish groups were fed soy saponin-containing (inflammation inducer, SO) or devoid (CO) diets for 36 days. Two more fish groups were fed each of the aforementioned diets with a health additive (CP, SP). Inflammation characteristics in the intestine were milder in the SP-fed fish compared to the SO-fed fish, based on histology results. The fish that had intestinal inflammation (SO) was characterised by alterations of many proteins. Based on the enriched KEGG pathways and GO terms of the SO vs CO comparison pathways such as phagosome and lipid binding were affected due to upregulation of protein like Integrin beta 2 precursor, Coronin 1A, Cathepsin S precursor, Vesicle-trafficking protein, and Neutrophil cytosol factors. On the other hand, the SP group had fewer inflammation characteristics and altered proteins; this fish group had higher abundance of protein linked to the pathways aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis and ribosome due to the higher abundance of many large and small subunit of ribosomes. The alteration of Glycogen phosphorylase and Glutamin synthetase could also have alleviated intestinal inflammation in the SP group. Elevating the abundance of ribosomal proteins, aminoacyl-tRNA ligases, and lowering the abundance of Glycogen phosphorylase and Glutamine synthetase could be effective to alleviate intestinal inflammation. The proteins described here can be exploited to alleviate intestinal inflammation in fish and higher vertebrates.

### Sample Protocol
Equal total protein aliquots from each sample were digested using the S-Trap mini column (Protifi) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.

### Data Protocol
Acquired SWATH data were analysed using the DirectDIA workflow in Spectronaut 15 (Biognosys). Full analysis parameters are deposited with the raw data. Briefly, Pulsar library search was performed using Trypsin/P with specific digestion, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. MMTS was specified as a fixed modification, while acetyl (protein N-term) and oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. FDR was controlled at 1% for protein, peptide and PSM levels. DIA data extraction was performed at maximum intensity with dynamic mass tolerance and chromatography window extraction. Protein and peptide identifications were filtered using a q-value cut-off of 0.01, while at least two and up to 10 proteotypic peptides for each protein were used for quantification. A global normalization strategy on median was employed. Differential abundance was determined using unpaired t-tests.

### Publication Abstract
Intestinal inflammation in Atlantic salmon was studied by profiling the intestine mucus proteome, employing iTRAQ and 2D LC-MS/MS approach. Two fish groups were fed soy saponin-containing (inflammation inducer) diets (SO and SP) and two control fish groups were fed diets devoid of soy saponin (CO and CP) for 36&#xa0;days. The CP and SP diets contained a health additive. Inflammation characteristics in the intestine were milder in the SP-fed fish compared to the SO-fed fish. The SO group was characterised by alterations of many proteins. KEGG pathways such as phagosome and lipid binding were possibly affected in the SO group due to the higher abundant proteins like Integrin beta 2 precursor, Coronin 1A, Cathepsin S precursor, Vesicle-trafficking protein, and Neutrophil cytosol factors. On the other hand, the SP group had fewer altered proteins and inflammation characteristics; aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis and ribosome in the fish group were plausibly changed due to the higher abundance of many large and small subunit of ribosomes. Elevation of the abundance of ribosomal proteins, aminoacyl-tRNA ligases, and appropriate abundance of Glycogen phosphorylase and Glutamine synthetase could possibly alleviate intestinal inflammation. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD027922 and PXD029849. SIGNIFICANCE: Intestinal inflammation, caused by dietary factors, can be considered as a non-infectious disease. Hence, researchers are gathering clues to avert the associated health issues. The present study was conducted to infer the alterations in the intestine mucus proteome induced by a dietary health additive to counter intestinal inflammation in farmed Atlantic salmon. The reduction in the number of affected proteins and their alterations point to mechanisms evoked by the premix. Our knowledge on inflammation associated proteome in fish is limited and the present study not only highlights the changes, but also opens the possibility to avert the dysfunction of the organ through a dietary approach.

### Keywords
Mucus proteome, Ribosomal proteins, Aminacyl-trna ligases, Glycogen phosphorylase, Intestinal inflammation, Glutamine synthetase, Atlantic salmon, Soy saponin

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biosciences and Aquaculture, Nord University, Bodø, Norway
Nord University

### Submitter
Kiron Viswanath

### Lab Head
Dr Kiron Viswanath
Faculty of Biosciences and Aquaculture, Nord University, Bodø, Norway


