### Accession
PXD021916

### Title
System-wide identification and prioritization of enzyme substrates by thermal analysis (SIESTA)

### Description
Despite the immense importance of enzyme-substrate reactions, there is a lack of generic and unbiased tools for identifying and prioritizing substrate proteins which are modulated in the structural and functional levels through modification. Here we describe a high-throughput unbiased proteomic method called System-wide Identification and prioritization of Enzyme Substrates by Thermal Analysis (SIESTA). The approach assumes that enzymatic post-translational modification of substrate proteins might change their thermal stability. SIESTA successfully identifies several known and novel substrate candidates for selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase 1, protein kinase B (AKT1) and poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase-10 systems in up to a depth of 7,179 proteins. Wider application of SIESTA can enhance our understanding of the role of enzymes in homeostasis and disease, open new opportunities in investigating the effect of PTMs on signal transduction and facilitate drug discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were seeded in 25 cm2 flasks and 24 h later treated with AKT1/2 inhibitor and Ipatasertib at 2.5 and 10 µM for 2 h. Cells were then lysed with 50 mM Tris containing 8 M urea and 1% SDS with phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (PhosSTOP, Sigma). Protein concentration was measured using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo) and 500 µg protein was taken. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Subsequently, iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and samples were incubated in room temperature for 1 h in the dark. The reaction was quenched by adding an additional 10 mM of DTT. Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform. The dry protein pellet was dissolved in 8 M urea, 20 mM EPPS (pH=8.5) and diluted to 4 M urea. LysC was added at a 1 : 100 w/w ratio at room temperature overnight. Samples were diluted with 20 mM EPPS to the final urea concentration of 1M, and trypsin was added at a 1 : 100 w/w ratio, followed by incubation for 6 h at room temperature. Phosphopeptides were then enriched using the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo) according to manufacturer protocol and dried. Acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 20% and TMT reagents were added 4x by weight to each sample, followed by incubation for 2 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by addition of 0.5% hydroxylamine. Samples were combined, acidified by TFA, cleaned using Sep-PaK cartridges (Waters) and dried using DNA 120 SpeedVac™ Concentrator (Thermo). The samples were then resuspended in 0.1% TFA, separated into 8 fractions using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo). The fractionation was performed twice, generating 16 samples to boost identification. The phosphoproteomics samples were loaded with buffer A onto a 50 cm EASY-Spray column connected to a nanoflow Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) and eluted in an organic solvent gradient increasing from 4% to 32% (B: 98% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2% H2O) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over a total of 110 min.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant, version 1.6.2. The Andromeda search engine matched MS/MS data against the UniProt complete proteome database (human, version UP000005640_9606, 92957 entries). TMT16-plex on the MS/MS level was used for quantification of protein abundances. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation was selected as a variable modification. Phosphorylation on serine and threonine was selected as variable modification. Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme specificity. No more than two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% false discovery rate was used as a filter at both protein and peptide levels. For all other parameters, the default settings were used.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the immense importance of enzyme-substrate reactions, there is a lack of general and unbiased tools for identifying and prioritizing substrate proteins that are modified by the enzyme on the structural level. Here we describe a high-throughput unbiased proteomics method called System-wide Identification and prioritization of Enzyme Substrates by Thermal Analysis (SIESTA). The approach assumes that the enzymatic post-translational modification of substrate proteins is likely to change their thermal stability. In our proof-of-concept studies, SIESTA successfully identifies several known and novel substrate candidates for selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase 1, protein kinase B (AKT1) and poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase-10 systems. Wider application of SIESTA can enhance our understanding of the role of enzymes in homeostasis and disease, opening opportunities to investigate the effect of post-translational modifications on signal transduction and facilitate drug discovery.

### Keywords
Hela, Phpsphoproteomics, Thermal profiling, Enzyme, Siesta, Akt1

### Affiliations
MBB, Karolinska Institutet
Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Amir Ata Saei 

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Roman A. Zubarev
MBB, Karolinska Institutet


