### Accession
PXD023685

### Title
SEVERE CONSEQUENCES OF A HIGH-LIPID DIET INCLUDE HYDROGEN SULFIDE DYSFUNCTION AND DISEASE AGGRESSION IN GLIOBLASTOMA

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) remains among the deadliest of human malignancies, and the emergence of the cancer stem cell (CSC) phenotype represents a major challenge to durable treatment response. Because the environmental and lifestyle factors that impact CSC populations are not clear, we sought to understand the consequences of diet on CSC enrichment. We evaluated disease progression in mice fed an obesity-inducing high-fat diet (HFD) versus a low-fat, control diet. HFD resulted in hyper-aggressive disease accompanied by CSC enrichment and shortened survival. HFD drove intracerebral accumulation of saturated fats, which inhibited the production of the cysteine metabolite and gasotransmitter, hydrogen sulfide (H2S). H2S functions principally through protein S-sulfhydration and regulates multiple programs including bioenergetics and metabolism. Inhibition of H2S increased proliferation and chemotherapy resistance, whereas treatment with H2S donors led to death of cultured GBM cells and stasis of GBM tumors in vivo. GBM specimens present an overall reduction in protein S-sulfhydration, primarily associated with proteins regulating cellular metabolism. These findings provide new evidence that diet modifiable H2S signaling serves to suppress GBM by restricting metabolic fitness, while its loss triggers CSC enrichment and disease acceleration. Interventions augmenting H2S bioavailability concurrent with GBM standard of care may improve outcomes for GBM patients.

### Sample Protocol
Glioblastoma (GBM) remains among the deadliest of human malignancies, and the emergence of the cancer stem cell (CSC) phenotype represents a major challenge to durable treatment response. Because the environmental and lifestyle factors that impact CSC populations are not clear, we sought to understand the consequences of diet on CSC enrichment. We evaluated disease progression in mice fed an obesity-inducing high-fat diet (HFD) versus a low-fat, control diet. HFD resulted in hyper-aggressive disease accompanied by CSC enrichment and shortened survival. HFD drove intracerebral accumulation of saturated fats, which inhibited the production of the cysteine metabolite and gasotransmitter, hydrogen sulfide (H2S). H2S functions principally through protein S-sulfhydration and regulates multiple programs including bioenergetics and metabolism. Inhibition of H2S increased proliferation and chemotherapy resistance, whereas treatment with H2S donors led to death of cultured GBM cells and stasis of GBM tumors in vivo. GBM specimens present an overall reduction in protein S-sulfhydration, primarily associated with proteins regulating cellular metabolism. These findings provide new evidence that diet modifiable H2S signaling serves to suppress GBM by restricting metabolic fitness, while its loss triggers CSC enrichment and disease acceleration. Interventions augmenting H2S bioavailability concurrent with GBM standard of care may improve outcomes for GBM patients.After obtaining these final eluates, subsequent gel electrophoresis analysis and mass spectrometry-based label-free protein identification is commenced to visualize, identify, and quantify the persulfidated proteins.

### Data Protocol
Mascot, SEQUEST and Scaffold software packages were used for label-free quantitative and qualitative proteomics analysis. These software were used for protein identification by converting raw spectrometric data into protein IDs and for relative quantification of protein abundance via label-free spectral counting. For protein identification, three search engines were used including Mascot, Sequest which is bundled into Proteome Discoverer 1.4, and X!Tandem which is bundled into Scaffold 4.8.7. For the Mascot searches, primary raw MS/MS data were converted into its MGF (Mascot Generic File) format files by using Discoverer Daemon 1.4 software (Licensed under Cleveland Clinic Proteomics Core). The parameters selected for these searches include the following: Database: SwissProt, Taxonomy: Mus Musculus, Enzyme: Trypsin, Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl(C), Variable modification: Oxidation of Methionine, Precursor Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.8 Da, Peptide charge: 2+, 3+ and 4+, with the monoisotopic and decoy database present. Scaffold software (version Scaffold_4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) 84 was used to validate peptide and protein identifications and create comprehensive lists of target proteins. Protein and peptide identifications were validated using a decoy database strategy (reverse sequence of each protein for use as a decoy) and the decoy rate was set to zero, which may limit the total number of proteins identified but enables a higher confidence in protein identity for those that do meet all stringent criteria. Other settings for Scaffold included only allowing positive IDs if they could be established at greater than 99.9% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides by the Peptide Prophet algorithm 85,86 with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Additionally, to remove any false positive hits, we individually analyzed all of the proteins identified to ensure each one contained at least one cysteine residue by using the mouse protein amino acid sequences from UniProt Knowledgebase protein database (Proteome_ID/Tax_ID: UP000000589/10090). Those that did not contain at least one cysteine residue, and thus could not theoretically be sulfhydrated (approx. ~ 2-4% of our initial findings), were removed from our database and from further analysis. Peptide identifications were also required to exceed specific database search engine thresholds, including Mascot identifications required at least 40 ion score, Sequest identifications required at least XCorr (+1) is 1.5, XCorr (+2) is 2, XCorr (+3) is 2.25, and XCorr(+4) is 2.5, and X!Tandem identifications required at least 2. 28 Label-free spectral counting was used to determine relative differences in sulfhydrated protein abundance between AL versus DR fed groups within a specific tissue 87. The spectral counts, defined as the total number of spectra identified for a specific protein, have integer values ranging from 0 for proteins below the level of detection up to 753. Theoretically, higher spectral counts for a given protein equates to higher abundance of that protein in a given tissue sample, where the number of spectra matched to peptides from a specific protein are used as a surrogate measure of protein abundance

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hydrogen sulfide, Diet, Glioblastoma, Metabolism, Cancer stem cells

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute 
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute

### Submitter
Nazmin Bithi

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Hine
Cleveland Clinic Lerner Research Institute


