### Accession
PXD002076

### Title
A piRNA like small RNA interacts with and modulates p-ERM proteins in human somatic cells

### Description
PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are thought to silence transposon and gene expression during development. However, the roles of piRNAs in somatic tissues are largely unknown. Here we report the identification of 555 piRNAs in human lung bronchial epithelial (HBE) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, including 295 that don’t exist in databases termed as piRNA-Like sncRNAs or piRNA-Ls. Distinctive piRNA/piRNA-L expression patterns are observed between HBE and NSCLC cells. piRNA-L-163 (piR-L-163), the top down-regulated piRNA-L in NSCLC cells, binds directly to phosphorylated ERM proteins (p-ERM), which is dependent on the central part of UUNNUUUNNUU motif in piR-L-163 and the RRRKPDT element in ERM, and. The piR-L-163/p-ERM interaction is critical for p-ERM’s binding capability to filamentous actin (F-actin) and ERM-binding phosphoprotein 50 (EBP50). Thus, piRNA/piRNA-L may play a regulatory role through direct interaction with proteins in physiological and pathophysiological conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were separated via SDS-PAGE and select bands excised. After band destaining, in-gel digestion was performed using trypsin. Peptides were extracted and desalted using C-18 Stage Tips prior to ESI LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry data were searched against the UniProtKB human protein database (version 5 October 2010; 20 259 reviewed sequences; 75 498 non-reviewed sequences) using Bioworks 3.3.1 SP1 with the SEQUEST algorithm. Search parameters included 1.5 Da peptide mass tolerance, 1.0 Da fragment tolerance, static Cys+57.02510 (carbamidomethylation) modification and differential modification Met+15.99492. Fully tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages and charge-state-dependent cross-correlation scores greater than or equal to2.5, 3.0 and 3.5 for 2+, 3+ and 4+ peptides, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are thought to silence transposon and gene expression during development. However, the roles of piRNAs in somatic tissues are largely unknown. Here we report the identification of 555 piRNAs in human lung bronchial epithelial (HBE) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, including 295 that do not exist in databases termed as piRNA-like sncRNAs or piRNA-Ls. Distinctive piRNA/piRNA-L expression patterns are observed between HBE and NSCLC cells. piRNA-like-163 (piR-L-163), the top downregulated piRNA-L in NSCLC cells, binds directly to phosphorylated ERM proteins (p-ERM), which is dependent on the central part of UUNNUUUNNUU motif in piR-L-163 and the RRRKPDT element in ERM. The piR-L-163/p-ERM interaction is critical for p-ERM's binding capability to filamentous actin (F-actin) and ERM-binding phosphoprotein 50 (EBP50). Thus, piRNA/piRNA-L may play a regulatory role through direct interaction with proteins in physiological and pathophysiological conditions.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Pull-down

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology and Diagnostic Sciences, University of Maryland School of Dentistry, Baltimore MD
The Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
David Clark

### Lab Head
Dr Li Mao
Department of Oncology and Diagnostic Sciences, University of Maryland School of Dentistry, Baltimore MD


