### Accession
PXD013944

### Title
: Integration of genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic insights into evolved dependence of deep-sea tubeworm holobiont

### Description
The first integrated genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of this methane-seep tubeworm decipher the interdependency between the host and symbionts, with an aim to reveal the molecular mechanisms enabling this worm to survive and thrive in chemosynthetic habitats.

### Sample Protocol
Specific details of protein extraction, SDS-PAGE, in-gel trypsin digesion, LC-MS/MS, protein identification and quantitation can be found in the Supplementary Information Methods. In brief, the protein of trophosome region from three P. echinospica were extracted respectively, after protein purification and quantification, the protein was separated using SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested with trypsin. Resulting peptides were separated and analysed by a liquid chromatography system coupled with a Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For host and symbiont protein identification and quantification through Mascot (http://www.matrixscience.com/), all converted mass spectrometry data were searched against the translated protein databases of P. echinospica and its endosymbiont.

### Publication Abstract
Deep-sea hydrothermal vents and methane seeps are often densely populated by animals that host chemosynthetic symbiotic bacteria, but the molecular mechanisms of such host-symbiont relationship remain largely unclear. We characterized the symbiont genome of the seep-living siboglinid Paraescarpia echinospica and compared seven siboglinid-symbiont genomes. Our comparative analyses indicate that seep-living siboglinid endosymbionts have more virulence traits for establishing infections and modulating host-bacterium interaction than the vent-dwelling species, and have a high potential to resist environmental hazards. Metatranscriptome and metaproteome analyses of the Paraescarpia holobiont reveal that the symbiont is highly versatile in its energy use and efficient in carbon fixation. There is close cooperation within the holobiont in production and supply of nutrients, and the symbiont may be able to obtain nutrients from host cells using virulence factors. Moreover, the symbiont is speculated to have evolved strategies to mediate host protective immunity, resulting in weak expression of host innate immunity genes in the trophosome. Overall, our results reveal the interdependence of the tubeworm holobiont through mutual nutrient supply, a pathogen-type regulatory mechanism, and host-symbiont cooperation in energy utilization and nutrient production, which is a key adaptation allowing the tubeworm to thrive in deep-sea chemosynthetic environments.

### Keywords
Symbiosis, Deep sea, Holobiont, Chemosynthesis

### Affiliations
HKUST
Ocean Science Department, Hkust

### Submitter
Yi YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Pei-Yuan QIAN
Ocean Science Department, Hkust


