### Accession
PXD035354

### Title
Effects of the differential K+ diets on mouse kidney cortex tissue

### Description
In this project, we investigated the global proteome alteration in mouse kidney cortex tissues after differential K+ diet treatments.  TMTpro labeling strategy was used to obtain protein quantification information from LC-MS based proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from mouse kidney cortex tissues. 150 ug of protein extracts were subsequently digested using the filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Digested peptide samples were labelled individually using the TMTpro™ Label Reagent (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The TMTpro labeling will allow protein quantification in mouse cortex tissues upon differential K+ diet treatments.  TMTpro labeled samples were finally analyzed by LC-MS using the Tribrid Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) for protein identification and quantification.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using SEQUEST and MASCOT against the reviewed uniprot mouse protein database (dated 13-01-2022) and quantified using Proteome discoverer, version 2.4. The parameters for Proteome Discoverer were: precursor mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.02 Da; maximum miss cleavage, 2; static modification: cysteine carbamidomethylation, TMTpro modification on peptide N-terminal and lysine; variable modification: N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation. Percolator was used to calculate false discovery rate (FDR). Only rank 1 and high confidence (with a target false discovery rate (FDR) q-value below 0.01) peptides were included in the final results. Protein quantification was based on normalized relative TMT reporter ion intensities. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. Proteins with a P value lower than 0.05 are considered significant changed and subjected to further downstream analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Dietary potassium (K+) supplementation is associated with a lowering effect in blood pressure (BP), but not all studies agree. Here, we examined the effects of short- and long-term K+ supplementation on BP in mice, whether differences depend on the accompanying anion or the sodium (Na+) intake and molecular alterations in the kidney that may underlie BP changes. Relative to the control diet, BP was higher in mice fed a high NaCl (1.57% Na+) diet for 7 weeks or fed a K+-free diet for 2 weeks. BP was highest on a K+-free/high NaCl diet. Commensurate with increased abundance and phosphorylation of the thiazide sensitive sodium-chloride-cotransporter (NCC) on the K+-free/high NaCl diet, BP returned to normal with thiazides. Three weeks of a high K+ diet (5% K+) increased BP (predominantly during the night) independently of dietary Na+ or anion intake. Conversely, 4 days of KCl feeding reduced BP. Both feeding periods resulted in lower NCC levels but in increased levels of cleaved (active) &#x3b1; and &#x3b3; subunits of the epithelial Na+ channel ENaC. The elevated BP after chronic K+ feeding was reduced by amiloride but not thiazide. Our results suggest that dietary K+ has an optimal threshold where it may be most effective for cardiovascular health.

### Keywords
Mouse, Potassium, Kidney

### Affiliations
Institute of biomedicine, AU
Department of Biomedicine Aarhus University

### Submitter
Lei Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Robert A. Fenton
Department of Biomedicine Aarhus University


