### Accession
PXD033388

### Title
ClpP-deletion causes azoospermia, with meiosis-I delay and insufficient biosynthesis of spermatid factors, due to mitochondrial dysfunction with accumulation of Perrault proteins ERAL1, PEO1, and HARS2.

### Description
Human Perrault syndrome (PRLTS) is defined by autosomal recessive inheritance with primary ovarian insufficiency and early hearing loss. Most PRLTS disease proteins modulate mitochondrial transcription or translation. Among the genetic causes are ClpP mutations, which trigger also complete azoospermia, whose cellular and molecular underpinnings are unknown. Here, the ClpP-null mouse model was studied by global transcriptomics, proteomics, RT-qPCR, immunoblots, tissue fractionation, testis histology, and was crossed with STING/IFNAR mutants. Spermatogenesis showed accumulated early spermatocytes, versus deficits of desynapsis and kinetochore factors; excess Dazl/Stra8 and acetylSMC3, versus deficient SHCBP1L, were molecular correlates. Spermiogenesis showed few round spermatids, tsHMG/TFAM in elongated spermatids was absent; transcripts for tail/acrosome factors were downregulated from start. Nuclear anomalies included a failed Rec8 induction, early BRDT deficiency, histone H3 cleavage, and cGAMP increase, as antiviral responses typical of ClpP-mutants. However, deletion of downstream innate immune signals STING/IFNAR failed to reestablish fertility. As mitochondrial triggers, we observed accumulation of ClpX, with PTCD1, POLDIP2, GRSF1, ALKBH7, DNAJA3, AURKAIP1, VWA8, and Perrault proteins ERAL1, PEO1, HARS2, partially showing nuclear redistribution. ClpP-depletion is known to cause extra-mitochondrial release of mispacked mtDNA/mtRNA/protein complexes. Now we define nuclear inflammatory responses and meiotic arrest as consequences, similar to observations in mito-mice and mutator mice.

### Sample Protocol
Testes from WT and KO mice collected at postnatal days P17, P21 and P27 were washed with ice-cold PBS before being resuspended in hot lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM 2-chloracetamide, and protease inhibitor cocktail tablet [EDTA-free, Roche]). Lysates were incubated for 10 min at 95°C, sonicated for 30 s with 1 s ON/1 s OFF pulse at 30% amplitude using Sonic Vibra Cell, and incubated for another 10 min at 95°C. Sample lysates were methanol-chloroform precipitated and the protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M Urea/10 mM EPPS pH 8.2. Protein concentration was determined using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were diluted to 2 M Urea using 10 mM EPPS pH 8.2, and digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) ratio of LysC (Wako Chemicals) at 37°C. Samples were further diluted to 1 M Urea and digested with 1:100 (w/w) ratio of sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega) for additional 6 h at 37°C. Digests were acidified using trifluoroacetic acid to obtain a pH < 3 and purified using tC18 SepPak columns (50 mg, Waters). Peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.2 M EPPS pH 8.2, and 10% acetonitrile (ACN). Peptide concentration was determined using Micro BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 55 μg peptide per sample was labeled with 1:2.5 (w/w) ratio of TMT10plex labelling reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A bridge channel was prepared with equimolar amounts of all 18 samples TMT-labeled together and split into three for each plex. Each plex corresponded to one postnatal day and contained the three WT and KO replicates as well as a bridge channel. The ratios between all channels were normalized following a single injection measurement of each plex by LC-MS/MS and used to confirm the labeling efficiency (>99% labeling of all peptide sequences for all plexes). All samples were pooled in equimolar ratio within each plex and acidified before desalting and removal of excess TMT using tC18 SepPak columns (50 mg; Waters). Peptides were dried and Dionex Ultimate 3000 analytical HPLC was used to perform high pH reverse phase fractionation. For each plex, 385 μg of pooled and purified TMT-labeled samples were resuspended in 10 mM ammonium-bicarbonate (ABC), 5% ACN, and separated on a 250 mm long C18 column (X-Bridge, 4.6 mm ID, 3.5-μm particle size; Waters) using a multistep gradient from 100% Solvent A (5% ACN, 10 mM ABC in water) to 60% Solvent B (90% ACN, 10 mM ABC in water) over 70 min. Eluting peptides were collected every 45 s. The resulting 96 fractions were cross-concatenated into 24 fractions and subsequently dried before LC-MS analysis. 5 μg of dried peptides from each fraction were resuspended in 2% (vol/vol) ACN/1% (vol/vol) formic acid (FA) solution and 1 μg was shot. Data acquisition was performed using centroid mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer hyphenated to an easy-nLC 1200 nano HPLC system with a nanoFlex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A spray voltage of 2.6 kV was applied with the transfer tube heated to 300°C and a funnel RF of 30%. Internal mass calibration was enabled (lock mass 445.12003 m/z). Peptides were separated on a self-made, 30 cm long, 75 μm ID fused-silica column, packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch) and heated to 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). HPLC solvents consisted of 0.1% FA in water (Buffer A) and 0.1% FA, 80% ACN in water (Buffer B). Individual peptide fractions were eluted by a nonlinear gradient from 5 to 60% B over 155 min followed by an increase to 95% B in 1 min and held for another 9 min. Full scan MS spectra (350–1,400 m/z) were acquired using the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 100 ms and automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 400,000 at m/z 200. The precursors with a charge state between 2 and 5 per full scan were selected and dependent scans were set to 10. To limit repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors a dynamic exclusion of 45 s and 7 ppm was set and advanced peak determination was deactivated. MS2 precursors were selected with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% and 10 ms activation time. MS2-analysis was performed in the iron trap with a rapid scan rate using a maximum injection time of 85 ms and an AGC target value of 20,000. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, a synchronous-precursor-selection MS3 scan was collected on the top 10 most intense ions in the MS2 spectrum. MS3 precursors were selected with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7 Th with multi-notch isolation. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) with an NCE of 65% and analyzed using the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000 at m/z 200 with a scan range of 110-500 m/z, a maximum injection time of 86 ms, an AGC target value of 100,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) individually for each plex. Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches were performed using the Sequest HT node in PD against trypsin digested Mus musculus reference isoform FASTA (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and UniProtKB/TrEMBL; 62,309 sequences; version 10 December 2018) and MaxQuant contaminants FASTA. Static modifications were set as TMT6 (+229.163 Da) at the N-terminus and carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) at cysteine residues. Methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) was set as a dynamic modification. Search was performed using Sequest HT taking the above mentioned modifications into account and additionally with Acetyl (+42.011 Da) modification of the N-Terminus set as dynamic modification. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Default Percolator settings in PD were used to filter peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs). Reporter ion quantifications were achieved using default settings in the consensus workflow. Protein files were exported to Microsoft Excel and the unnormalized abundance values were used for further processing. Sample loading and trimmed mean of M values normalizations were performed consecutively to correct small sample loading and labeling reaction efficiency differences. This is done by multiplying the global scaling factors to each grand total reporter ion intensity of each channel to adjust its total intensity to the average total intensity across the channels using a custom script. The mean log2 fold-changes were calculated for all quantified proteins in KO samples with respect to their corresponding WT controls (n = 3 independent biological replicates each). Statistical significance was assessed using a two-sided, unpaired t test assuming equal variance. All contaminants were removed before further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Human Perrault syndrome (PRLTS) is autosomal, recessively inherited, and characterized by ovarian insufficiency with hearing loss. Among the genetic causes are mutations of matrix peptidase CLPP, which trigger additional azoospermia. Here, we analyzed the impact of CLPP deficiency on male mouse meiosis stages. Histology, immunocytology, different OMICS and biochemical approaches, and RT-qPCR were employed in CLPP-null mouse testis. Meiotic chromosome pairing and synapsis proceeded normally. However, the foci number of the crossover marker MLH1 was slightly reduced, and foci persisted in diplotene, most likely due to premature desynapsis, associated with an accumulation of the DNA damage marker &#x3b3;H2AX. No meiotic M-phase cells were detected. Proteome profiles identified strong deficits of proteins involved in male meiotic prophase (HSPA2, SHCBP1L, DMRT7, and HSF5), versus an accumulation of AURKAIP1. Histone H3 cleavage, mtDNA extrusion, and cGAMP increase suggested innate immunity activation. However, the deletion of downstream STING/IFNAR failed to alleviate pathology. As markers of underlying mitochondrial pathology, we observed an accumulation of PRLTS proteins ERAL1, PEO1, and HARS2. We propose that the loss of CLPP leads to the extrusion of mitochondrial nucleotide-binding proteins to cytosol and nucleus, affecting late meiotic prophase progression, and causing cell death prior to M-phase entry. This phenotype is more severe than in mito-mice or mutator-mice.

### Keywords
Meiosis-i; zygotene-pachytene; homologous recombination; h3k9ac; acetyl-tubulin; twinkle helicase; rmnd1; trna /rrna processing; cgas-sting signaling

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
Aneesha Kohli

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


