### Accession
PXD001356

### Title
The zinc repository of Cupriavidus metallidurans

### Description
Zinc is a central player in the metalloproteomes of prokaryotes and eukaryotes. We used a top-down quantitative proteomic approach to reveal the repository of the zinc pools in the proteobacterium Cupriavidus metallidurans. About 60% of the theoretical proteome of C. metallidurans were identified, quantified, and compared between a ΔzupT mutant defect in zinc allocation and its parent strain. In both strains, the number of zinc-binding proteins and their binding sites exceeded that of the zinc ions per cell, indicating that the totality of the zinc proteome provides empty binding sites for incoming zinc ions. This zinc repository plays a central role in zinc homeostasis in C. metallidurans and probably also in other organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Strains used for the experiments were Cupriavidus metallidurans CH34(pMOL28, pMOL30) wild type stain, its plasmid-free derivative strain AE104 34, the AE104 ΔzupT deletion mutant 10, and the Δe4 (ΔzntA ΔcadA ΔdmeF ΔfieF) quadruple deletion mutant. The bacteria were cultivated in Tris-buffered mineral salts medium 34 containing 2 g sodium gluconate L-1 (TMM) aerobically with shaking at 30°C. TMM contained 34 nM zinc chloride as part of an added trace element solution. Solid Trisbuffered media contained 20 g agar L-1.

### Data Protocol
was carried out by ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS 3.0, Apex3D algorithm v. 2.128.5.0, 64 bit, Waters, Eschborn, Germany) with automated determination of chromatographic peak width as well as MS TOF resolution with following values: Lock mass: 785.8426 Da/e, Lock mass window: 0.25 Da, Low/high energy threshold: 200/20 counts, elution start time: 5 min, intensity threshold: 750 counts. Databank search query (PLGS workflow) was carried out as follows: Peptide and fragment tolerances was set to automatic, two fragment ions match per peptide, at least five fragment ions for protein identification, and min 2 peptides per protein. A maximum protein mass was set to 250 kDa. Primary digest reagent was trypsin with one missed cleavage allowed. According to digest protocol fixed (carbamidomethyl on Cys) as well as variable (oxidation on Met) modifications were set. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 4% at the protein level. Rabbit glycogen phosphorylase B (P00489, 10 fmol/injection) was defined as internal calibration standard. The modified NCBI data base (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) to identify proteins contained 5804 proteins encoded by the open reading frames Rmet_0001 to Rmet_5941 of the two chromosomes of C. metallidurans, glycogen phosphorylase B (P00489, added as internal standard at a concentration of 10 fmol, Waters, Eschborn, Germany) as well as common contaminants (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta).

### Publication Abstract
Zinc is a central player in the metalloproteomes of prokaryotes and eukaryotes. We used a bottom-up quantitative proteomic approach to reveal the repository of the zinc pools in the proteobacterium Cupriavidus metallidurans. About 60% of the theoretical proteome of C. metallidurans was identified, quantified, and the defect in zinc allocation was compared between a &#x394;zupT mutant and its parent strain. In both strains, the number of zinc-binding proteins and their binding sites exceeded that of the zinc ions per cell, indicating that the totality of the zinc proteome provides empty binding sites for the incoming zinc ions. This zinc repository plays a central role in zinc homeostasis in C. metallidurans and probably also in other organisms.

### Keywords
Zinc cupriavidus

### Affiliations
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Plant Biochemistry
Institut fuer Biochemie und Biotechnologie

### Submitter
Sacha Baginsky

### Lab Head
Dr Baginsky, Sacha
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Plant Biochemistry


