### Accession
PXD011122

### Title
Gene expression changes in liver upon LCMV Cl13 infection.

### Description
2-3 month old female C57Bl/6J mice  were intravenously infected with 2x10^6 focus forming units of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus strain Clone-13. Whole liver tissue was harvested in duplicated from uninfected control mice, uninfected 123d old mice, and from infected at 2, 8, 30, 60, and 123 days post infection. Three TMT 6-plex runs were carried out to monitor the changes in liver protein abundance during the entire course of infection. The first run included samples from day 2 and day 8 after infection along with the uninfected controls. Similarly, the second run included uninfected controls and samples from day 30 and day 60 after infection. The third run included samples day 123 after infection, the corresponding age matched control that was left uninfected for 123 days and the uninfected controls used in the other two runs. The uninfected controls were included in all the three runs as an internal control to monitor reproducibility between the runs.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissues were lysed in 1.5 mL 50 mM HEPES buffer, pH 8.5 supplemented with 2% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS). To aid tissue lysis, metal beads were added to the lysis buffer containing the liver tissue and ground by mechanical force using the TissueLyser II (QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden, DE). The protein concentration in each sample was determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA, Pierce Biotechnology, Thermo Scientific, IL). The further processing of the samples following this step was adapted from the filter-aided sample preparation method already described (FASP) (Manza et al, 2005, Wisniewski et al, 2009). Briefly, each sample containing 100 µg of the liver tissue lysate were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and transferred into VIVACON 500 filter units (Vivaproucts Inc., Littleton, MA). SDS-containing buffer was removed from the sample by centrifugation and exchanged with 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer. Proteins were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide and washed with 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Finally, porcine trypsin (Promega Corp., Madison, WI) was used for protein digestion in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 w/w. For relative protein quantitation, six samples from each run were separately derivatised with TMT 6-plex reagents (ABI, Framingham, MA) according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer. The combination of the TMT 6-plex labels was as follows: (i) Run 1: day 0 uninfected (TMT 126 and 127), day 2 infected (TMT 128 and 129) and day 8 infected (TMT 130 and 131); (ii) Run 2: day 0 uninfected (126 and 127), day 30 infected (128 and 129) and day 60 infected (130 and 131); and (iii) Run 3: day 0 (126 and 127), day 123 uninfected (128 and 129) and day 123 infected (130 and 131). For each run, the TMT-labelled tryptic digests were pooled and concentrated by solid phase extraction (SPE) (MacroSpin columns 30-300 µg capacity, The Nest Group Inc., Southborough, MA, USA). Samples were treated with 20 mM ammonium formate prior to injection onto a Phenomenex column (150×2.0 mm Gemini®NX-C18 3 µm 110Å; Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) in an Agilent 1200 series HPLC (Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, CA) with UV detection at 214 nm. HPLC solvent A consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 in 5% acetonitrile and solvent B consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 in 90% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated at flow rate of 100 µL/min and eluted from the column with a non- linear gradient ranging from 0 to 100% solvent B. Seventy two time-based fractions were collected, acidified and pooled into 50 HPLC vials based on the UV trace. After removal of organic solvent in a vacuum centrifuge, samples were reconstituted to 10 µL with 5% formic acid (Bennett et al, 2011). Individual fractions were further analyzed at pH 2.4 by Agilent 1200 nano-HPLC system (Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, CA) coupled to a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Data was acquired utilising the Xcalibur software version 2.1. Briefly, single fractions were loaded onto a trap column (Zorbax 300SB-C18 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, CA) with a binary pump at a flow rate of 45 μL/min. Solvents for LCMS separation were composed of 0.1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) in water (solvent A) and 0.1% TFA in 70% methanol and 20% isopropanol (solvent B). The peptides were eluted by back-flushing from the trap column onto a 16 cm fused silica analytical column with an inner diameter of 50 μm packed with C18 reversed-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Elution was achieved with a 27 min gradient ranging from 3 to 30% solvent B, followed by a 25 min gradient from 30 to 70% solvent B and, finally, a 7 min gradient from 70 to 100% solvent B at a constant flow rate of 100 nL/min.  The analysis was performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode. The 10 most intense ions were isolated and fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) for peptide identification and relative quantitation of TMT reporter ions. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 60 s and a single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 (Si(CH3)2O)6)20 (Olsen et al, 2005) was used for internal mass calibration with the target loss mass abundance of 0%. Maximal ion accumulation time allowed was 500 ms and overfilling of the C-trap was prevented by automatic gain control set to 106 ions for a full FTMS scan and 5×105 ions for MSn HCD. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap mass analyser at resolution of 30,000 with the signal threshold of 2,000 counts for triggering an MSMS event. The maximum ion scan time was set to 200 ms for acquiring 1 microscan at a resolution of 7,500.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data files were processed with msconvert (ProteoWizard Library v2.1.2708) and converted into MASCOT generic format (mgf) files. Peptides were identified by searching the resultant peak lists against the SwissProt mouse database version v2013.01_20130110 (24615 sequences; 14280050 residues) with the search engines MASCOT (v2.3.02, MatrixScience, London, UK) and Phenyx (v2.5.14, GeneBio, Geneva, Switzerland) (Colinge et al, 2003). Submission to the search engines was done via a Perl script that performs an initial search with relatively broad mass tolerances (MASCOT only) on both the precursor and fragment ions (±10 ppm and ±0.6 Da, respectively). High-confidence peptide identifications were used to recalibrate all precursors and fragment ion masses prior to a second search with narrower mass tolerances (±4 ppm and ±0.025 Da). Trypsin was chosen as cleavage specificity with the maximum of 1 miscleavage site allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine, N-terminal and lysine-modified TMT 6-plex were set as fixed modifications, whereas oxidized methionine was set as a variable modification. To validate the proteins, MASCOT and Phenyx output files were processed by internally developed parsers. Proteins with ≥2 unique peptides above a score T1, or with a single peptide above a score T2, were selected as unambiguous identifications. Additional peptides for these validated proteins with score >T3 were also accepted. For MASCOT and Phenyx, T1, T2, and T3 peptide scores were equal to 16, 40, 10 and 5.5, 9.5, 3.5, respectively (P-value <10−3). The validated proteins retrieved by the two algorithms were merged, any spectral conflicts discarded, and grouped according to shared peptides. A false positive detection rate (FDR) of <1% and <0.1% was determined for proteins and peptides, respectively, by applying the same procedure against a reversed database.

### Publication Abstract
Infections induce complex host responses linked to antiviral defense, inflammation, and tissue damage and repair. We hypothesized that the liver, as a central metabolic hub, may orchestrate systemic metabolic changes during infection. We infected mice with chronic lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), performed RNA sequencing and proteomics of liver tissue, and integrated these data with serum metabolomics at different infection phases. Widespread reprogramming of liver metabolism occurred&#xa0;early after infection, correlating with type I interferon (IFN-I) responses. Viral infection induced metabolic alterations of the liver&#xa0;that depended on the interferon alpha/beta receptor (IFNAR1). Hepatocyte-intrinsic IFNAR1 repressed the transcription of metabolic genes, including Otc and Ass1, which encode urea cycle enzymes. This led to decreased arginine and increased ornithine concentrations in the circulation, resulting in suppressed virus-specific CD8<sup>+</sup> T&#xa0;cell responses and ameliorated liver pathology. These findings establish IFN-I-induced&#xa0;modulation of hepatic metabolism and the&#xa0;urea cycle as an endogenous mechanism of immunoregulation. VIDEO ABSTRACT.

### Keywords
Virus, Infection, Lcmv, Liver

### Affiliations
Dr. Andreas Bergthaler Principal Investigator CeMM  Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Lazarettgasse 14, AKH BT 25.3 1090 Vienna, Austria
CeMM

### Submitter
Alexandra Popa

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Andreas Bergthaler
Dr. Andreas Bergthaler Principal Investigator CeMM  Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences Lazarettgasse 14, AKH BT 25.3 1090 Vienna, Austria


