### Accession
PXD022285

### Title
Nanoparticle Protein Coronas Differentially Interrogate Proteomes with Superior Performance Compared to Conventional Deep Proteome Workflows

### Description
The superior performance of a multiple NP workflow was shown compared to high-complexity, state-of-the-art, high-pH fractionation strategies in terms of depth and precision. We also evaluate the link between the physicochemical properties of NPs and their differential protein selectivity.

### Sample Protocol
We compared a panel of 5 nanoparticles to a high-pH fractionation of plasma depleted for high-abundance proteins (deep fractionation) in which 19 fractions were concatenated to 9 final fractions, depleted plasma (without any fractionation), and neat plasma using 30-min gradients and data-independent acquisition (DIA). we performed additional comparisons using the same pooled plasma and longer gradients with DDA as well as a commercially available deep DDA LC-MS/MS pipeline.

### Data Protocol
The SWATH data was processed using the Spectronaut analytical software (version 13.8.190930.43655). The default settings were used for the analysis except for quantification, for which no cross-run normalization was chosen. The Q-value cutoff at precursor and protein level was set to 0.01. The DDA data was processed by maxQuant using the default settings and 0.01 FDR at protein and peptide level. Statistical analysis and visualization were performed using R (v3.5.2) with appropriate packages.

### Publication Abstract
SignificanceDeep profiling of the plasma proteome at scale has been a challenge for traditional approaches. We achieve superior performance across the dimensions of precision, depth, and throughput using a panel of surface-functionalized superparamagnetic nanoparticles in comparison to conventional workflows for deep proteomics interrogation. Our automated workflow leverages competitive nanoparticle-protein binding equilibria that quantitatively compress the large dynamic range of proteomes to an accessible scale. Using machine learning, we dissect the contribution of individual physicochemical properties of nanoparticles to the composition of protein coronas. Our results suggest that nanoparticle functionalization can be tailored to protein sets. This work demonstrates the feasibility of deep, precise, unbiased plasma proteomics at a scale compatible with large-scale genomics enabling multiomic studies.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry, Protein corona

### Affiliations
1Seer, Inc., Redwood City, CA 94065, USA; 4Center for Nanomedicine and Department of Anesthesiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Seer

### Submitter
Theo Platt

### Lab Head
Dr Omid C. Farokhzad
1Seer, Inc., Redwood City, CA 94065, USA; 4Center for Nanomedicine and Department of Anesthesiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA


