### Accession
PXD035760

### Title
MitoStores: Chaperone-controlled protein granules store mitochondrial precursors in the cytosol  - Data Set 1: Global Proteome TMT

### Description
Hundreds of mitochondrial precursor proteins are synthesized in the cytosol and imported into mitochondria in a post-translational reaction. The early stages in mitochondrial protein targeting are poorly understood. Here we show that in baker’s yeast, the cytosol has the capacity to transiently store matrix-destined precursors in dedicated deposits which we named MitoStores. MitoStores are strongly induced when the import into mitochondria is competitively inhibited by clogging the mitochondrial import sites, but also found under physiological conditions when cells grow on non-fermentable carbon sources. MitoStores contain a specific subset of nuclear encoded mitochondrial proteins, in particular those with N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequences. The cytosolic heat shock proteins Hsp42 and Hsp104 control MitoStore formation, thereby suppressing the toxic potential of accumulating mitochondrial precursor proteins. Thus, the cytosolic protein quality system plays an active role during early stages in mitochondrial protein targeting by the coordinated localized sequestration of mitochondrial precursor proteins.

### Sample Protocol
For the quantitative comparison of proteomes of rpn4 and WT cells expressing the clogger, expression of b2-DHFR was induced for 6 h and compared to control cells expressing cytosolic DHFR. 10 OD600 of cells were harvested at each time point by centrifugation (17,000 g, 3 min, 2°C), washed with prechilled water, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Cells lysates were prepared in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 2% (w/v) SDS, Tablets mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche)) using a FastPrep-24 5G homogenizer (MP Biomedicals, Heidelberg, Germany) with 3 cycles of 30 s, speed 8.0 m/s, 120 s breaks, glass beads). Lysates were boiled for 5 min at 96°C and centrifuged (17,000 g, 3 min, 2°C). Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, #23225). 20 µg of each lysate were subjected to an in-solution tryptic digest using a modified version of the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) protocol48,49. Here, lysates were added to Sera-Mag Beads (Thermo Scientific, #4515-2105-050250, 6515-2105-050250) in 10 µl 15% formic acid and 30 µl of ethanol. Binding of proteins was achieved by shaking for 15 min at room temperature. SDS was removed by 4 subsequent washes with 200 µl of 70% ethanol. Proteins were digested with 0.4 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, #V5111) in 40 µl Hepes/NaOH, pH 8.4 in the presence of 1.25 mM TCEP and 5 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, #C0267) overnight at room temperature. Beads were separated, washed with 10 µl of an aqueous solution of 2% DMSO and the combined eluates were dried down. In total three biological replicates were prepared (n=3). Each replicate included samples of control and clogger expressing cells (in total 6 samples per replicate). Peptides were reconstituted in 10 µl of H2O and reacted with 80 µg of TMT10plex (Thermo Scientific, #90111)22 label reagent dissolved in 4 µl of acetonitrile for 1 h at room temperature. Excess TMT reagent was quenched by the addition of 4 µl of an aqueous solution of 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma, 438227). Peptides were mixed to achieve a 1:1 ratio across all TMT-channels. Mixed peptides were desalted on home-made StageTips containing Empore C18 disks {Rappsilber, 2007 #7985} and subjected to an off-line fractionation under high pH condition48. The resulting 12 fractions were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) as previously described50.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification was done using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) {Cox, 2008 #6855;Cox, 2011 #6895;Tyanova, 2016 #7545} and a Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome database obtained from Uniprot. 10plex TMT was chosen in Reporter ion MS2 quantification, up to 2 tryptic miss-cleavages were allowed, protein N-terminal acetylation and Met oxidation were specified as variable modifications and Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The “Requantify” and “Second Peptides” options were deactivated. False discovery rate was set at 1% for peptides, proteins and sites, minimal peptide length was 7 amino acids. The output files of MaxQuant were processed using the R programming language. Only proteins that were quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered for the analysis. Moreover, only proteins that were identified in at least two out of three MS runs were kept. A total of 2920 proteins passed the quality control filters. Raw signal sums were cleaned for batch effects using limma {Ritchie, 2015 #7479} and further normalized using variance stabilization normalization {Huber, 2002 #7480}. Proteins were tested for differential expression using the limma package for the indicated comparison of strains. A reference list of yeast mitochondrial proteins was obtained from {Morgenstern, 2017 #7275}. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using Fisher’s exact test. A Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was used to account for multiple testing, where this was performed {Benjamini, 1995 #7424}.

### Publication Abstract
Hundreds of nucleus-encoded mitochondrial precursor proteins are synthesized in the cytosol and imported into mitochondria in a post-translational manner. However, the early processes associated with mitochondrial protein targeting remain poorly understood. Here, we show that in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the cytosol has the capacity to transiently store mitochondrial matrix-destined precursors in dedicated deposits that we termed MitoStores. Competitive inhibition of mitochondrial protein import via clogging of import sites greatly enhances the formation of MitoStores, but they also form during physiological cell growth on nonfermentable carbon sources. MitoStores are enriched for a specific subset of nucleus-encoded mitochondrial proteins, in particular those containing N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequences. Our results suggest that MitoStore formation suppresses the toxic potential of aberrantly accumulating mitochondrial precursor proteins and is controlled by the heat shock proteins Hsp42 and Hsp104. Thus, the cytosolic protein quality control system plays an active role during the early stages of mitochondrial protein targeting through the coordinated and localized sequestration of mitochondrial precursor proteins.

### Keywords
Rpn4, Mitostore, Ubiquitin proteasome system, Mitochondrial import

### Affiliations
Technical University Kaiserslautern
Molecular Genetics, TU Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Räschle
Molecular Genetics, TU Kaiserslautern


