### Accession
PXD011001

### Title
Phosphoproteomic profiling reveals a defined genetic program for osteoblastic lineage commitment of human bone marrow derived stromal stem cells

### Description
Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) differentiate into osteoblasts upon induction by signals present in their niche. As the global signaling cascades involved in the early phases of MSCs osteoblast (OB) differentiation are not well-defined, we employed quantitative mass spectrometry (SILAC based) to delineate changes in human MSCs proteome and phosphoproteome during the first 24 hours of their OB lineage commitment. The temporal profiles of 6,252 proteins and 15,059 phosphorylation sites suggested at least two distinct signaling waves: one peaking within 30 to 60 min after induction and a second upsurge after 24 hours

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were separated using an in in-house packed fused silica column with a length of 15cm, an inner diameter of 75 μm and reverse phase material (3 μm C18, ReproSil-Pur C18 AQ) (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch Germany). An EASY-nLC (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark), Agilent 110 or Agilent 1200 systems were used, generating linear gradients of 90 minutes (solvent A being 0.5% acetic acid in water and solvent B 80% Acetonitrile and 0.5% acetic acid) at constant flow of 250 nL/min. Mass spectrometry was performed in positive ion mode using LTQ-Orbitrap XL for total protein coverage (data data-dependent acquisition for isolation and fragmentation of 10 most intense ions, CID fragmentation) and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos and Q-Exactive for phospho-enriched samples (data data-dependent acquisition for isolation and fragmentation of 10 most intense ions for Velos and 12 most intense for Q-Exactive, HCD fragmentation) (all Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files from the three biological replicas were processed together using the MaxQuant 1.2.6.13 suite (Cox and Mann, 2008) with Andromeda algorithm integrated for database search (Cox et al., 2011) against Uniprot release from 05-09-12, including both reviewed and unreviewed sequences. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation, aspargine/glutamine deamidation and N-term acetylation as well as serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. The minimum sequence length for the peptides was set to 7. FDR of 1% was set for both protein and site identification after common contaminants were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) differentiate into osteoblasts upon stimulation by signals present in their niche. Because the global signaling cascades involved in the early phases of MSCs osteoblast (OB) differentiation are not well-defined, we used quantitative mass spectrometry to delineate changes in human MSCs proteome and phosphoproteome during the first 24 h of their OB lineage commitment. The temporal profiles of 6252 proteins and 15,059 phosphorylation sites suggested at least two distinct signaling waves: one peaking within 30 to 60 min after stimulation and a second upsurge after 24 h. In addition to providing a comprehensive view of the proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics during early MSCs differentiation, our analyses identified a key role of serine/threonine protein kinase D1 (PRKD1) in OB commitment. At the onset of OB differentiation, PRKD1 initiates activation of the pro-osteogenic transcription factor RUNX2 by triggering phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion of the histone deacetylase HDAC7.

### Keywords
Mscs, Phosphorylation, Osteoblast, Silac, Differentiation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
EMBL-EBI
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Inigo Barrio

### Lab Head
Dr Blagoy Blagoev
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark


