### Accession
PXD022633

### Title
The effect of interferons on presentation of defective ribosome products as HLA peptides

### Description
The class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) bound peptides, produced from immature proteins that are degraded rapidly are called defective ribosome products (DRiPs). Such DRiPs are possibly involved with early alerting of the immune system about impeding infections, thus bringing about faster killing of infected cells before the viruses replicate. Interferons are a major group of cytokines, produced in response to viral infection. The interferons modulate the cellular metabolism and gene expression patterns and increase the expression and cell-surface presentation of the MHC molecules, helping this way coping with the viral infection. In this study, we evaluated whether the interferons also induce rapid degradation of cellular or viral proteins and produce DRiPs MHC-bound peptides to help the alert of the immune system. Cultured human breast cancer cells were treated with interferons and the cells were transferred to growth media containing heavy stable isotope labeled amino acids (dynamic-SILAC)in several time points a few hours after the interferons’ treatment. The rates of synthesis, degradation, and production of the cellular protein and their degradation products, the MHC peptides, were followed by LC-MS/MS analyses. Detection of large numbers of MHC peptides that incorporate the heavy amino acids into them, faster than their source proteins, indicated to us that not only DRiP-peptides are rather abundant among the MHC peptidome, but that the interferons increase significantly the presentation of DRiP-peptides. Importantly, much of this DRiPome derive from multi-subunit complexes, including the proteasomes and ribosomes, while the degradation of the standard protostome give rise to the immunoproteasome, which is thought to produce peptides that enhance the immune-response; the degradation of the ribosome subunits may aid in reducing the synthesis of viral infection

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I molecules were purified from approximately 5x108 cells. cells were lysed with 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitors Cocktail (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), 1 mM PMSF and 1% octyl-β-D glucopyranoside (Sigma Aldrich) in PBS (4°C, 1 h). Extracts were then cleared by centrifugation (45 min, 47,000g, 4°C) and the HLA class I molecules were immunoaffinity-purified using the W6/32 monoclonal  antibody bound to protein A-resin beads (Genscript, Piscataway, NJ) as in (Milner et al. 2013). HLA molecules with their bound peptides were then eluted with five column volumes of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and then loaded on disposable C18 columns (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA). Peptide fraction was recovered with 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA, as in (Milner et al. 2013). The peptides were dried using vacuum centrifugation, reconstituted with 100 μl 0.1% TFA, reloaded on C18 StageTips, eluted with 80% acetonitrile, dried and then reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. HLA peptidome purifications were performed in two biological replicas and two technical repeats.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS data were analyzed by the MaxQuant computational proteomics platform (Cox and Mann 2008) version 1.5.8.3. The database search was done by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011). Peptide and protein identifications were based on the April 2017 human section of the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org/), containing 70,946 entries. Mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for the precursor masses, and 20 ppm for the fragments, were allowed. Methionine oxidation was accepted as a variable modification for both tryptic and HLA peptides. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was accepted as a fixed modification for the proteomics data. Methionine sulfoxide and n-acetylation were set as variable modifications for both the proteomics and HLA peptidomics analyses. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed for tryptic peptides. The false discovery rate (FDR) for tryptic peptides and for HLA peptides was set to 0.01 and 0.05, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
A subset of class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-bound peptides is produced from immature proteins that are rapidly degraded after synthesis. These defective ribosomal products (DRiPs) have been implicated in early alert of the immune system about impending infections. Interferons are important cytokines, produced in response to viral infection, that modulate cellular metabolism and gene expression patterns, increase the presentation of MHC molecules, and induce rapid degradation of proteins and cell-surface presentation of their derived MHC peptides, thereby contributing to the battle against pathogen infections. This study evaluated the role of interferons in the induction of rapid degradation of DRiPs to modulate the repertoire of DRiP-derived MHC peptides. Cultured human breast cancer cells were treated with interferons, and the rates of synthesis and degradation of cellular protein and their degradation products were determined by LC-MS/MS analysis, following the rates of incorporation of heavy stable isotope-labeled amino acids (dynamic stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture, dynamic SILAC) at several time points after the interferon application. Large numbers of MHC peptides that incorporated the heavy amino acids faster than their source proteins indicated that DRiP peptides were abundant in the MHC peptidome; interferon treatment increased by about twofold their relative proportions in the peptidome. Such typical DRiP-derived MHC peptides were from the surplus subunits of the proteasome and ribosome, which are degraded because of the transition to immunoproteasomes and a new composition of ribosomes incorporating protein subunits that are induced by the interferon. We conclude that degradation of surplus subunits induced by the interferon is a major source for DRiP-MHC peptides, a phenomenon relevant to coping with viral infections, where a rapid presentation of MHC peptides derived from excess viral proteins may help alert the immune system about the impending infection.

### Keywords
Ifns, Mhc, Hla peptides, Drips

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Dganit Melamed Kadosh

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology


