### Accession
PXD019883

### Title
Versican in murine cell line supernatants

### Description
The tumor derived Versican (VCAN) can be a possible mediator of the host NF-κB pathway in cancer pathogenesis. In this context, we defined VCAN function in the pathogenesis development in vitro with cell lines as well as in vivo with mouse model. We used the proteomic technique to quantify VCAN integrity and relative abundancy produced by different cancer cell lines and to link this information to our pre-existing data. These results helped us to finalise our dataset and define more clearly VCAN influence tumor development.

### Sample Protocol
Cell line supernatant was collected and filtered at 0.22 µm under sterile conditions. 600 µl of cell culture supernatant were enzymatically digested using a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Ref.1,2). Peptides were stored at -20°C until MS measurement.  1. Wiśniewski JR, Zet al. (2009) Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods 6: 359–362. 2. Grosche A, et al. (2016) The Proteome of Native Adult Müller Glial Cells From Murine Retina. Mol Cell Proteomics 15: 462–480.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry (MS) measurement MS data were acquired in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode on a Q Exactive (QE) high field (HF) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Approximately 0.5 μg per sample were automatically loaded to the online coupled RSLC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) HPLC system. A nano trap column was used (300 μm inner diameter (ID) × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; LC Packings, Sunnyvale, CA) before separation by reversed phase chromatography (Acquity UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column 75µm ID x 250mm, 1.8µm; Waters, Eschborn, Germany) at 40°C. Peptides were eluted from 3% to 40 % over a 95 minutes gradient. The MS spectrum was acquired with a mass range from 300 to 1500 m/z at resolution 60 000 with AGC set to 3 x 106 and a maximum of 50 ms IT. From the MS prescan, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation (MSMS) if at least doubly charged, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. MSMS spectra were recorded at 15 000 resolution with AGC set to 1 x 105 and a maximum of 100 ms IT. CE was set to 28 and all spectra were recorded in profile type.  Proteome Discoverer analysis  Label-free quantification of DDA-MS data was performed with Proteome discoverer (version 2.3; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) using Sequest HT (as node in PD) and searching against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mouse database (release 2017_2, 16872 sequences). Searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerances of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as static modification, deamidation (N,Q), oxidation (M), and N-terminal Met-loss+Acetyl were selected as dynamic modifications and two missed cleavages were allowed. Percolator (Ref.3) was used for validating peptide spectrum matches and peptides, accepting only the top-scoring hit for each spectrum, and satisfying the cutoff values for FDR <1%, and posterior error probability <0.01. The final list of proteins complied with the strict parsimony principle. The quantification of proteins, after precursor recalibration, was based on abundance values (area under curve) for unique peptides. Abundance values were normalized in a retention time dependent manner. The protein abundances were calculated summing the abundance values for admissible peptides.  3. Kaell, L. et al. (2007) Semi-supervised learning for peptide identification from shotgun proteomics datasets. Nature Meth. 4: 923-925.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Kirsten rat sarcoma virus (KRAS)</i>-mutant cancers are frequent, metastatic, lethal, and largely undruggable. While interleukin (IL)-1&#x3b2; and nuclear factor (NF)-&#x3ba;B inhibition hold promise against cancer, untargeted treatments are not effective. Here, we show that human <i>KRAS</i>-mutant cancers are addicted to IL-1&#x3b2; via inflammatory versican signaling to macrophage inhibitor of NF-&#x3ba;B kinase (IKK) &#x3b2;. Human pan-cancer and experimental NF-&#x3ba;B reporter, transcriptome, and proteome screens reveal that <i>KRAS</i>-mutant tumors trigger macrophage IKK&#x3b2; activation and IL-1&#x3b2; release via secretory versican. Tumor-specific versican silencing and macrophage-restricted IKK&#x3b2; deletion prevents myeloid NF-&#x3ba;B activation and metastasis. Versican and IKK&#x3b2; are mutually addicted and/or overexpressed in human cancers and possess diagnostic and prognostic power. Non-oncogene <i>KRAS</i>/IL-1&#x3b2; addiction is abolished by IL-1&#x3b2; and TLR1/2 inhibition, indicating cardinal and actionable roles for versican and IKK&#x3b2; in metastasis.

### Keywords
Vcan; versican; mouse; cancer; cell line

### Affiliations
Comprehensive Pneumology Center
Helmholtz Center Munich
Member of the German Center for Lung Research
Research Group Leader: Lung Carcinogenesis Comprehensive Pneumology Center Helmholtz Center Munich Member of the German Center for Lung Research  Max-Lebsche-Platz 31,  81377 Munich [T] +498931874846   [F] +498931874661 [E] stathopoulos@helmholtz-muenchen.de [U] http://www.helmholtz-muenchen.de/ilbd

### Submitter
Georgios Stathopoulos

### Lab Head
Dr Georgios T. STATHOPOULOS
Research Group Leader: Lung Carcinogenesis Comprehensive Pneumology Center Helmholtz Center Munich Member of the German Center for Lung Research  Max-Lebsche-Platz 31,  81377 Munich [T] +498931874846   [F] +498931874661 [E] stathopoulos@helmholtz-muenchen.de [U] http://www.helmholtz-muenchen.de/ilbd


