### Accession
PXD042394

### Title
Deconvoluting the complexity of Bacillus subtilis disulfide stress responses by redox-state and absolute abundance quantification of extracellular, membrane and cytosolic proteins

### Description
To understand cellular mechanisms of stress management, omics data constitute a powerful resource. However, the availability of absolute quantitative data on protein abundances is still a serious limiting factor. This knowledge gap increments especially when protein abundances need to be compared across different cell compartments. In the present study, we aimed to provide deeper insights in the proteomic responses of the model Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis to disulfide stress. For this purpose, proteome-wide absolute abundances were determined with focus on different subcellular locations (cytosol and membrane) and the extracellular medium, and these were combined with redox state determination. To achieve the quantification of secreted proteins in the culture medium, a simple and straightforward protocol for the absolute quantification of extracellular proteins in bacteria was developed. Extracellular proteins, which are highly diluted in the medium, were concentrated using StrataClean beads together with a set of standard proteins that were used to determine the extent of the concentration step. The resulting dataset offers new insights into the protein abundances in different subcellular compartments and the extracellular medium, as well as a proteome-wide redox-state determination. Altogether, our study provides a quantitative understanding of disulfide stress management, protein production and secretion in B. subtilis.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial growth and sampling Bacillus subtilis 168 trp+ was grown in Belitsky minimal medium (Stulke et al, 1993). For benchmarking the method for absolute protein quantification of secreted proteins, three biological replicates of 100 mL glucose-limited culture were grown and harvested either during exponential growth (OD500 0.4) or after two hours of stationary phase (OD500 1.2). Centrifugation (8,500 x g for 10 min at 4 °C) allowed to separated cells from culture supernatant.  For disulfide stress experiments, cultivation was also performed in Belitsky minimal medium as described above with four replicates for each sample. In exponential phase (OD500 0.4) diamide was added to a final concentration of 1 mM. Cultures were harvested by centrifugation before diamide addition at OD500 0.4 (before induction), and one hour after adding diamide (stress) or medium (control), respectively.  Extracellular protein concentration for absolute protein quantification To correct secreted protein amounts detected by MS (see below) for their concentration from culture supernatants, the obtained samples were spiked with a standard. The concentration standard consisted of seven proteins from different organisms detailed in Table 1. These proteins were selected based on their different physiochemical properties such as molecular weight, pI, and hydrophobicity considering a potential differential enrichment for different proteins. In addition, concentration standards were checked on Skyline 21.2 (MacCoss Lab software) to not provide non-unique tryptic peptides in a B. subtilis background. A stock of concentration standards was prepared based on the cited differences between selected proteins covering a range of amounts as explained in Supplemental Table 1, aiming to cover any possible bias caused by protein abundance in the supernatant. Standards were added based on the sample’s protein amount determined using the Bradford assay to a final ratio of 1:35 (ng of standard mixture: ng of estimated sample protein).  Protein concentration from culture supernatants was performed with StrataClean resin (Agilent) as described earlier (Bonn et al, 2014) with slight modifications. Briefly, the resin was primed with 37% HCl before 10.5 µl resin was incubated with the supernatants overnight at 4 °C with orbital shaking to bind extracellular proteins. Resin with bound proteins was recovered by centrifugation, washed, and vacuum-dried before resuspension in 20 µl loading buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 40 µg/mL bromophenol blue, 125 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8 with 10% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol). Extracellular protein digestion For MS-based absolute quantification, the universal protein standard (UPS2) (Sigma-Aldrich Merck) was used as dynamic range protein standard. UPS2 was solubilized in loading buffer to a final concentration of 0.5 µg/µL. Samples and UPS2 were denatured at 95 °C for 10 min and loaded onto precast 4-20% Tris-Glycine gels (Bio-Rad) in a ratio 1: 3.45 (µg UPS2: µl resin with boundbound protein) for protein electroelution at 160 V for 30 min. Afterwards, gels were Coomassie stained. For diamide stress experiments, a ratio of 1:3 (µg UPS: µl resin with boundbound protein) was added to the first replicate of each condition. Concentrated extracellular proteins were in-gel digested as described elsewhere (Bonn et al, 2014). Briefly, gel lanes were cut in seven fractions, destained and treated with trypsin for protein digestion overnight. Peptides were eluted twice with water by sonication and supernatants from the respective samples were pooled together. The peptide mixture was desalted using U-C18 Zip Tips (Merck Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Differential cysteine labelling (DiaCys) DiaCys labelling was performed as described earlier by (Sievers et al, 2018). Shortly, in a set of 4 replicates per condition, natively reduced thiol groups of cellular proteins were initially labelled with light iodoacetamide (IAA) for half of the replicates. Afterwards, natively oxidized thiols were reduced with Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP; 5 mM) and labelled with stable isotope labelled IAA (4 Da mass shift). In a label-switch experiment natively reduced thiol groups in the other half of the replicate samples were labelled with heavy IAM and natively oxidized thiols with light IAA. For extracellular proteins, the labelling protocol was slightly modified. Proteins were bound on StrataClean for their concentration, then labelled as described above and eluted using SDS-PAGE.

### Data Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in TE Buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) containing 50 mM IAM for labelling of natively reduced thiol groups (see above). Cells were mechanically disrupted using a FastPrep24 (MPBiomedicals. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation and protein concentration of the whole cell protein extract was determined using the Bradford assay (Roth).  Membrane proteins were enriched as published previously (Antelo-Varela et al, 2019). Cytosolic and membrane protein digestion was performed using the S-Trap protocol according to the manufacturer (Protifi) with a starting material of 7.5 µg. For shotgun-based absolute quantification, UPS2 proteins were added in a 1:3 ratio (2.5 μg) to the first replicate of each condition. Peptide concentration was determined using the Pierce quantitative fluorometric peptide assay. For LC-MS/MS analysis, 2 μg of peptide mixture per biological replicate was desalted using U-C18 Zip Tips according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For targeted proteomics no UPS2 but AQUA peptides were added as described previously (Antelo-Varela et al, 2020) to estimate the enrichment factor of membrane proteins.  Peptides were separated on an Easy nLC 1000 coupled online to an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). In-house self-packed columns (i.d. 100 µm, o.d. 360 µm, length 200 mm) packed with 3.0 µm Dr. Maisch Reprosil C18 reversed-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ) were loaded with 18 µl of buffer A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) at a maximum pressure of 220 bar. Peptide elution was performed in a nonlinear 145 min gradient with buffer B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in 95% (v/v) acetonitrile) for cytosol and extracellular samples at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. To improve the separation of hydrophobic peptides, a 180 min gradient with buffer B was used for membrane fraction samples. Precursor ion scans were obtained in the Orbitrap with a resolution of R= 30,000 with lock-mass correction activated. Following each MS-full scan, up to 20 MS/MS scans were performed in a dependent manner in the linear ion trap based on precursors’ intensity after collision-induced dissociation fragmentation (CID). Dynamic exclusion was enabled (exclusion size list 500, exclusion duration 20 s) with ± 10 ppm exclusion window. Membrane enrichment was assessed using AQUA peptides and targeted MS as described before (Antelo-Varela et al, 2020).   Data Processing Raw data from shotgun MS was searched in MaxQuant (2.1.1) using the B. subtilis Uniprot proteome annotation (4620 entries, UP000001570, accessed on 14-09-2021) with manually added sequences for spiked-in proteins (concentration standard) and UPS2. The following parameters were used for database search: peptide tolerance, 4.5 ppm; min fragment ions match per peptide, 2; fixed modifications, oxidation M (+15.9949), acetylation N, K (+42.0106). For disulfide stress experiment, light (+57.02146) and heavy (+61.04072) carbamidomethylations corresponding to DiaCys labelling were assigned as variable modifications. Results were filtered for a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on spectrum, peptide, and protein levels, and a minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein.  Skyline 21.2 (MacCoss Lab software) was used for targeted MS raw file analysis of membrane enrichment using the transition list provided by Antelo-Varela et al. (Antelo-Varela et al, 2020).  Data was processed and analyzed using Python 3.9. Numpy and Pandas libraries were used for data import and filtering coupled to an in-house pipeline. Normalized iBAQ (Krey et al, 2014) was used for absolute quantification of the identified proteins with a minimum of 2 valid values per condition for a valid quantification. The Sklearn library was used for calculating and assessing the UPS calibration curve and linear regression fitting. Scipy and Statsmodels packages were used for statistical analysis of the quantified proteins. Fold changes were calculated from averaged ng protein per µg extract and tested through unpaired t-test for significance. Resulting p-values were corrected using Bonferroni correction (alpha=0.05). Significance was considered for fold change >1.5 and adjusted p-value <0.05.  To assess redox changes, only one-cysteine containing peptides were considered. Redox state was calculated by dividing the peak intensity of the oxidized form by that of the reduced form. Quantified cysteines were subjected to an unpaired t-test, and the resulting p-values were adjusted using Bonferroni correction (alpha=0.05). Cysteines with an adjusted p-value <0.05 were considered significantly changed.  For protein categorical annotation, functional categories from Subtiwiki were used. The same database was used for identifying membrane proteins, as Subtiwiki (Pedreira et al, 2022) is manually curated by experts in the field. For extracellular protein annotation, the GP4 signal peptide prediction tool was used (Grasso et al, 2021).

### Publication Abstract
Understanding cellular mechanisms of stress management relies on omics data as a valuable resource. However, the lack of absolute quantitative data on protein abundances remains a significant limitation, particularly when comparing protein abundances across different cell compartments. In this study, we aimed to gain deeper insights into the proteomic responses of the Gram-positive model bacterium <i>Bacillus subtilis</i> to disulfide stress. We determined proteome-wide absolute abundances, focusing on different sub-cellular locations (cytosol and membrane) as well as the extracellular medium, and combined these data with redox state determination. To quantify secreted proteins in the culture medium, we developed a simple and straightforward protocol for the absolute quantification of extracellular proteins in bacteria. We concentrated extracellular proteins, which are highly diluted in the medium, using StrataClean beads along with a set of standard proteins to determine the extent of the concentration step. The resulting data set provides new insights into protein abundances in different sub-cellular compartments and the extracellular medium, along with a comprehensive proteome-wide redox state determination. Our study offers a quantitative understanding of disulfide stress management, protein production, and secretion in <i>B. subtilis</i>.IMPORTANCEStress responses play a crucial role in bacterial survival and adaptation. The ability to quantitatively measure protein abundances and redox states in different cellular compartments and the extracellular environment is essential for understanding stress management mechanisms. In this study, we addressed the knowledge gap regarding absolute quantification of extracellular proteins and compared protein concentrations in various sub-cellular locations and in the extracellular medium under disulfide stress conditions. Our findings provide valuable insights into the protein production and secretion dynamics of <i>B. subtilis</i>, shedding light on its stress response strategies. Furthermore, the developed protocol for absolute quantification of extracellular proteins in bacteria presents a practical and efficient approach for future studies in the field. Overall, this research contributes to the quantitative understanding of stress management mechanisms and protein dynamics in <i>B. subtilis</i>, which can be used to enhance bacterial stress tolerance and protein-based biotechnological applications.

### Keywords
Absolute protein quantification / bacillus subtilis / disulfide stress / redox proteomics / subcellular fractionation

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Greifswald, Germany


