### Accession
PXD004818

### Title
Spectral histopathology supported laser capture microdissection and quantitative proteome analysis of diffuse malignant mesothelioma

### Description
FTIR based spectral histopathology was used for label-free classification of tumor tissue sections. The regions of interest were identified and annotated with high spatial resolution. The spatial information was used for automated laser capture microdissection of relevant tissue areas. Subsequently, the collected tissue samples were analyzed using quantitative proteomics. This novel approach for precise sample collection in clinical studies was applied to differentiate epitheloid and sarcomatoid subtypes of diffuse malignant mesothelioma.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were collected via FTIR based spectral histopathology and automated laser capture microdissection. The resulting samples were sonicated in an ultrasonic bath for 1 min on ice. Subsequently, the samples were incubated for 5 min at 95 °C and the protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 60 °C. Alkylation was performed for 30 min at room temperature in the dark using 15 mM iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C using 20 ng trypsin (SERVA Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany) per sample. The enzymatic digestion was stopped by acidification with 0.5% TFA for 30 min at 37 °C and precipitated RapiGest was removed by centrifugation. The samples were vacuum dried and subsequently dissolved in 0.1% TFA. Each sample of 1 mm² microdissected tissue was divided in three replicates which were all analyzed technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
The RPLC−MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were injected in a volume of 15µL and pre-concentrated with 0.1% TFA on a trap column for 7 min (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm × 5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; flow rate 30 μL/min). Subsequently, the peptides were separated on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) by a gradient from 5% to 40% solvent B over 98 min (solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% acetonitrile; flow rate 400 nL/min; column oven temperature 60 °C). The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full scan mass spectra were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at 400 m/z in the Orbitrap analyzer and within a mass range of 350-2000 m/z. The 20 most abundant precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis. The tandem mass spectra were measured in the linear ion trap after peptide fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID). The precursor isolation width was 1.0 m/z. Charge state screening was enabled and only precursors of charge states +2, +3 and +4 were fragmented with normalized collision energy of 35.0%. The mass range for MS/MS spectra was 0-2000 m/z and the scan mode was centroid. Dynamic exclusion parameters were used: Exclusion list size was 500, exclusion duration was 30 s and the mass width relative to excluded mass was ± 10 ppm. The time for one duty cycle was 3.6 s if 20 MS/MS spectra per full scan were acquired.  Peptide identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer Software (ver. 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The mass spectra were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Uniprot/Swissprot-Release 2015_05 of 29.04.2015; 548,454) restricted to homo sapiens using the Mascot search engine (version 2.5). The mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.4 daltons for fragment ions. One tryptic missed cleavage was considered as well as chemical modifications of methionine (oxidation, dynamic) and cysteine (carbamidomethyl, static). The percolator function implemented in proteome discoverer was used to estimate peptide confidence and only peptides which passed a false discovery rate < 1% (q-value < 0.01) were considered for analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Diffuse malignant mesothelioma (DMM) is a heterogeneous malignant neoplasia manifesting with three subtypes: epithelioid, sarcomatoid and biphasic. DMM exhibit a high degree of spatial heterogeneity that complicates a thorough understanding of the underlying different molecular processes in each subtype. We present a novel approach to spatially resolve the heterogeneity of a tumour in a label-free manner by integrating FTIR imaging and laser capture microdissection (LCM). Subsequent proteome analysis of the dissected homogenous samples provides in addition molecular resolution. FTIR imaging resolves tumour subtypes within tissue thin-sections in an automated and label-free manner with accuracy of about 85% for DMM subtypes. Even in highly heterogeneous tissue structures, our label-free approach can identify small regions of interest, which can be dissected as homogeneous samples using LCM. Subsequent proteome analysis provides a location specific molecular characterization. Applied to DMM subtypes, we identify 142 differentially expressed proteins, including five protein biomarkers commonly used in DMM immunohistochemistry panels. Thus, FTIR imaging resolves not only morphological alteration within tissue but it resolves even alterations at the level of single proteins in tumour subtypes. Our fully automated workflow FTIR-guided LCM opens new avenues collecting homogeneous samples for precise and predictive biomarkers from omics studies.

### Keywords
Diffuse malignant mesothelioma, Ftir, Colorectal carcinoma, Laser capture microdissection, Infrared spectral histopathology

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center AG Clinical Proteomics

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Sitek
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center AG Clinical Proteomics


