### Accession
PXD027211

### Title
Primary cilia contribute to the aggressiveness of atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors

### Description
Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is the most common malignant brain tumor in infants and is characterized by loss of nuclear SMARCB1 protein expression. Recent studies show that AT/RTs comprise three molecular subgroups with epigenetic differences, including distinct expression patterns of genes involved in ciliogenesis, but little is known on the functional role of primary cilia in the biology of AT/RT. Here, we show that primary cilia are present across all AT/RT subgroups with specific enrichment in AT/RT-TYR patient samples. Furthermore, we demonstrate that primary ciliogenesis contributes to AT/RT biology in vitro and in vivo. Specifically, we observed a significant decrease in proliferation and clonogenicity following disruption of primary ciliogenesis in AT/RT cell line models. Apoptosis was significantly increased via the induction of STAT1 and DR5 signaling, as detected by proteogenomic profiling. In a Drosophila model of SMARCB1 deficiency, concomitant knockdown of several cilia-associated genes resulted in a substantial shift of the lethal phenotype with more than 20% of flies reaching adulthood. Finally, we demonstrated significantly extended survival in an orthotopic xenograft mouse model of AT/RT upon disruption of primary ciliogenesis, confirming a survival benefit across different species with SMARCB1 deficiency. Altogether, our findings indicate that targeting primary ciliogenesis or its downstream signaling may constitute a novel therapeutic approach for AT/RT.

### Sample Protocol
BT-12 and CHLA-266 cells, grown in 6-wells or 10 cm dishes, were either transfected with siPOOLs as described above (see 3.2.5) for 72 h or treated with 30 µM of Ciliobrevin D dissolved in DMSO or DMSO as negative control for 24 h. After transfection or treatment, cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS and cell pellets were collected through centrifugation for 5 min at 800 xg and 4 °C. Proteins were extracted as described previously135. Briefly, cells were homogenized in urea buffer with a TissueLyser (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and subsequent sonication.  After centrifugation for 15 min at 14000 xg and 4 °C, supernatants were collected. Protein concentration was determined via Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and 10 µg protein per sample were desalted through electrophoretic migration at 50 V for 10 min on a 4-12% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide gel. After silver staining, protein bands were cut out reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin before peptide extraction via sonication. Thus, generated peptide samples were diluted with 0.1% TFA at a ratio of 1:8. For mass spectrometric analysis, 15 µl peptide solution per sample was analyzed on a nano-high-performance liquid chromatography electrospray ionization mass spectrometer. The analytical system was composed of a RSLCnano U3000 HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Elite or a QExactive plus mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Injected peptides were concentrated and desalted at a flow rate of 6 µl/min on a trapping column (Acclaim PepMao C18, 2 cm x 100 µm x 3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with 0.1% TFA for 10 min. Subsequently, peptides were separated at a constant flowrate of 300 nl/min over a 120 min gradient on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 25 cm x 75 µm x 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 60 °C. Separation was achieved through a gradient from 4 to 40% solvent B (solvent A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 84% (v/v) acetonitrile in water).  Afterwards, peptides were ionized at a voltage of 1400 V and introduced into the mass spectrometer operated in positive mode. On the Orbitrap Elite, MS scans were recorded in profile mode in a range from 350-1700 m/z at a resolution of 60000 while tandem mass spectra were recorded in the ion trap at normal scan rate. Tandem mass spectra were recorded with a data dependent Top20 method and 35% normalized collision energy.  Dynamic exclusion was activated with a repeat count of 1 for 45 s and only charge states 2+ and 3+ were analyzed. MS scans on the QExactive plus were recorded in profile mode in a range from 350-2000 m/z at a resolution of 70000, while tandem mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 17500. Tandem mass spectra were recorded with a data dependent Top10 method and 30% normalized collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was activated with a repeat count of 1 for 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Computational mass spectrometric data analysis Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3.0.523, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was applied for peptide/protein identification with Mascot and MS Amanda as search engines employing the UniProt database (human; including isoforms; date 2019-05-29). A false discovery rate of 1% (p≤0.01) on peptide level was set as identification threshold.  Proteins were quantified with Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Version 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters Corporation, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK).

### Publication Abstract
Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is a highly malignant brain tumor in infants that is characterized by loss of nuclear expression of SMARCB1 or SMARCA4 proteins. Recent studies show that AT/RTs comprise three molecular subgroups, namely AT/RT-TYR, AT/RT-MYC and AT/RT-SHH. The subgroups show distinct expression patterns of genes involved in ciliogenesis, however, little is known about the functional roles of primary cilia in the biology of AT/RT. Here, we show that primary cilia are present across all AT/RT subgroups with specific enrichment in AT/RT-TYR patient samples. Furthermore, we demonstrate that primary ciliogenesis contributes to AT/RT biology in vitro and in vivo. Specifically, we observed a significant decrease in proliferation and clonogenicity following disruption of primary ciliogenesis in AT/RT cell line models. Additionally, apoptosis was significantly increased via the induction of STAT1 and DR5 signaling, as detected by proteogenomic profiling. In a Drosophila model of SMARCB1 deficiency, concomitant knockdown of several cilia-associated genes resulted in a substantial shift of the lethal phenotype with more than 20% of flies reaching adulthood. We also found significantly extended survival in an orthotopic xenograft mouse model of AT/RT upon disruption of primary ciliogenesis. Taken together, our findings indicate that primary ciliogenesis or its downstream signaling contributes to the aggressiveness of AT/RT and, therefore, may constitute a novel therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Targeted therapy, Primary cilia, Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor, Stat1/dr5 signaling

### Affiliations
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf Germany

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Kai Stühler
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory Institute of Molecular Medicine I Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf Germany


