### Accession
PXD012944

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Candida albicans after serial systemic infection in murine model

### Description
This study assessed proteomic profile of Candida albicans after serial systemic infection in a murine model. The animals were infected initially by wild-type C. albicans SC5314 (WT) with an inoculum of of 3.5x105 cells via lateral tail vein. Then, five days post-infection, the animals were euthanized and their kidneys were removed, homogenized in lysis buffer, plated on SDA and incubated for 24 h at 35 °C. Colonies recovered from infected kidney were used to prepare inoculum for the subsequent infections as described for WT, totalizing five serial passages (P1-P5) and they were also used to protein extraction. By LC-MS/MS, 479 proteins were identified, with 56 proteins statistically significant in abundance in P1, 29 proteins in P3 and 97 proteins in P4. Regarding biological processes, the majority of proteins were related to carbohydrate metabolism, stress response and amino acid metabolism. The proteins were also categorized according to their potential role in virulence factors such as biofilm production, yeast-to-hyphae transition, phenotypic switching, proteins related to stress response and uncharacterized proteins. Therefore, serial infection associated with proteomic approach enabled to deepen the knowledge about host-pathogen interaction.

### Sample Protocol
The serial systemic candidiasis consisted of initially infect female Balb/c mice with an inoculum of  3.5x105 wild-type C. albicans SC5314 cells (WT) via lateral tail vein. After five days post-infection, the animals were euthanized. The kidney was aseptically removed, homogenized in lysis buffer (200 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris, 10% glycerol v/v, pH 8.30), plated on SDA and incubated for 24 h at 35 °C. Colonies recovered were used to prepare inoculum for the subsequent infections as described for WT, totalizing five serial passages (P1-P5). Furthermore, these colonies recovered from kidney were submitted to protein extraction. Then, cells were collected and centrifuged for 5 min at 3000 rpm. The pellet was washed three times with ultrapure water and resuspended in 1100 μL of buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 40 mM DTT. Then, the suspension was sonicated (30 bursts of 10 seconds ON, 30 seconds OFF with 100% amplitude). After that, the lysate was centrifuged at 4800 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C, and supernatant collected and stored at -80 °C. Bradford assay was performed for protein quantification, using bovine serum albumin (Sigma) as a standard. Prior to digestion, protein content was denatured with 8M urea, then, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). For the quench of the remaining IAA, 5 mM DTT was added. Samples were diluted with four volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1 mM calcium chloride was added with subsequent trypsin (V5280 - Promega) digestion at 37 °C overnight (ratio of 1 μg enzyme to 100 μg protein). Then, samples were acidified with 0.4% trifluoroacetic acid to stop trypsin action and desalted using SepPak tC18 cartridges (WAT 036820) before subjection to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (Shimadzu, Nexera X2, Japan) coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry (Impact II, Bruker Daltonics Corporation, Germany) and equipped with an electrospray ionization source. Thus, ten microliter of the sample were loaded at flow of 0.1000 ml/min. The capillary voltage was operated in positive ionization mode, set at 4500 V and with an end plate offset potential of −500 V.  The dry gas parameters were set to 7.0 L min−1 at 180 °C with a nebulization gas pressure of 2.0 bar. Data were collected from m/z 150-2200 with an acquisition rate of 5 spectrums per second, and the ions of interest were selected by auto MS/MS scan fragmentation. Chromatographic separation was performed using gradient A containing purified water and 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and B containing acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (v/v) using a C18 column (Shim-pack GIST - 3um x 1.0 mm x 250 mm). The gradient used was 2%, 35%, 95%, 95% and 2% of B in 2, 60, 90, 110 and 111 min respectively, and stopped at 120 min. Files obtained by the mass spectrometer were normalized using Data Analysis software (Bruker, Germany), converted in a vendor free file by MSFile from the ProteoWizard Platform and processed in MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.3). The proteins were searched against reference proteome from C. albicans (strain SC5314 / ATCC MYA-2876) taxonomy code 237561 obtained from UniProt Database. Parameters were set for digestion mode specific for trypsin with maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Variable modifications were oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term) and fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C) with maximum of five modifications. False discovery rates (FDR) were set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein levels. Then, MaxQuant output file was imported in Perseus (version 1.6.1.3) for statistical analysis. First, protein dataset were filtered, removing proteins into categorical parameters: contaminant, only identified by site and reverse database. For statistical analysis, the level of stringency was set protein identification with LFQ values greater than zero in two of the replicates. Thus, data analysis was performed using two sample test, considering significant those proteins with - log10 (p value < .05) associated with the highest difference (passage versus WT). All proteins were classified according to molecular functions and/or biological processes obtained from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/) and Candida Genome Database (http://www.candidagenome.org/). Furthermore, proteins were separated according to their role in virulence factors expressed by C. albicans.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Candida albicans</i> is the major pathogen isolated from nosocomial bloodstream infections, leading to higher mortality rates. Thus, due to its clinical relevance, studies aiming to understand host-pathogen interactions in <i>C. albicans</i> infection are necessary. Therefore, we performed proteomic analysis using a murine model of serial systemic infection by <i>C. albicans</i> to evaluate possible changes in the protein profile of the pathogen over time. Firstly, we observed a reduction in the median survival time of infected animals with increasing passage number, suggesting a higher pathogenicity acquired during repeated infections. By LC-MS/MS, it was possible to obtain protein profiles from the wild-type strain (WT) and compare them to proteins extracted from <i>Candida</i> cells recovered from infected tissues during passages one, three, and four (P1, P3, and P4). We obtained 56, 29, and 97 proteins in P1, P3, P4, respectively, all varying in abundance. Regarding biological processes, the majority of proteins were related to carbohydrate metabolism, stress responses and amino acid metabolism. The proteins were also categorized according to their potential role in virulence traits, such as biofilm production, yeast-to-hyphae transition, phenotypic switching, proteins related to stress responses, and uncharacterized proteins. Therefore, serial infection in combination with proteomic approach enabled us to deepen the existing knowledge about host-pathogen interactions.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Systemic candidiasis, Virulence, Proteomics, Serial passage, Lc-ms/ms, Host–pathogen interaction, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Universidade Estadual de Maringá
Department of Clinical Analysis and Biomedicine, Laboratory of Medical Mycology, State University of Maringá, Brazil

### Submitter
Glaucia Arita

### Lab Head
Dr Patrícia de Souza Bonfim de Mendonça
Department of Clinical Analysis and Biomedicine, Laboratory of Medical Mycology, State University of Maringá, Brazil


