### Accession
PXD022257

### Title
Integrative analysis of proteomics and DNA methylation in orbital fibroblasts from Graves​

### Description
Graves’ ophthalmopathy (GO) is an extrathyroidal complication of Graves’ hyperthyroidism. Orbital fibroblast, an important cell in the pathogenesis of GO, is responsible for GO characteristics during active and inactive stages; however, information on the extensive profiles and the mechanistic regulations behind orbital fibroblast phenotypes are currently limited. The aim of this study was to compare the proteome profile of orbital fibroblasts isolated from inactive GO, active GO and healthy control. The proteome profile was further integrated with global DNA methylation data to identify this epigenetics regulation involved in the pathogenesis of GO.  Methods Orbital fibroblasts culture isolated from five inactive GO, four active GO and five controls were cultured for total protein and DNA extraction. The labelled and fractionated proteins were analyzed with a liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS). On the other hand, the bisulphite-treated DNA was measured with the Illumina Infinium Human Methylation 450K beadchip. Proteome and methylation data were validated by real-time quantitative (RQ)-PCR. Network, pathway and functional analysis were performed by Ingenuity (Qiagen). Results Orbital fibroblasts from active GO displayed overexpression of proteins typically involved with inflammation, cellular proliferation, hyaluronan synthesis and adipogenesis, while several proteins linked to extracellular matrix (ECM) biology and fibrotic disease were overexpressed in orbital fibroblasts from inactive GO. The DNA methylation patterns were similar in healthy control and inactive GO orbital fibroblasts which were distinct from active GO orbital fibroblasts. In orbital fibroblasts from active GO hypermethylated genes link to inflammation while those genes hypomethylated are involved in adipogenesis and autoimmune-related genes. For the network analysis, overlapped between hypermethylated and hypomethylated genes were observed including NF-B, ERK1/2, Alp, RNA polymerase II, Akt and IFNα. In addition, NF-κB, Akt and IFNα were also identified in networks from the differentially expressed proteins. In general, poor correlation between protein expression, DNA methylation and mRNA expression in our study was observed.

### Sample Protocol
Orbital fibroblasts from four patients with GO at an active stage and five GO patients at an inactive stageof disease, and five controls were included in this experiment. Orbital fibroblasts (5 x 106) were obtained and pelleted after which Halt™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL) was added before digestion and homogenization in 5% sodium deoxycholate with a sonicator.  Protein concentration was determined with Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). For peptide preparation, 100 µg of protein was digested with 2 µg trypsin and labelled with tandem mass tag (TMT) 10plex with different isotype according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Afterwards, the peptide mixture was passed through the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL).   Peptide analysis  The labelled fractionated peptides were analyzed with a liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS) (Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer; Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The LC-MS/MS methods included a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans at a resolution of 37,500. The normalized collision energy of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was set at 28%. MS scan range of 400 to 1600 m/z was selected and precursor ions with unassigned charge states. A charge state of +1 and a charge state of greater than +8 were excluded. Proteome discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used to analyze the MS raw data files with database containing forward and reverse peptide sequences from the human Uniprot Database. The search parameters were set for the fix modifications of carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) and TMT modifications (+229.2634 Da) at N-terminal and lysine, while oxidation of methionine (+15.99491 Da) was set for the variable modification. A maximum of four modifications and two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed for these parameters. Parent and fragment monoisotopic mass errors were set at 10 and 0.2 ppm, respectively. A target–decoy approach was used to limit the false discovery rate (FDR) of the identified peptides to less than 1%. Differential protein expression was compared between orbital fibroblasts isolated from active and inactive GO by Student’s t-test. Network, pathway and functional analysis were further performed on these differential expressed proteins using Ingenuity (Qiagen) filtering only for those networks and pathways that are based on experimentally obtained information.

### Data Protocol
Parent and fragment monoisotopic mass errors were set at 10 and 0.2 ppm, respectively. A target–decoy approach was used to limit the false discovery rate (FDR) of the identified peptides to less than 1%. Differential protein expression was compared between orbital fibroblasts isolated from active and inactive GO by Student’s t-test. Network, pathway and functional analysis were further performed on these differential expressed proteins using Ingenuity (Qiagen) filtering only for those networks and pathways that are based on experimentally obtained information

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna methylation, Proteomics, Epigenetics, : graves’ ophthalmopathy, Orbital fibroblast

### Affiliations
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Research affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University
Chulalongkorn university

### Submitter
Poorichaya Somparn

### Lab Head
Dr Poorichaya Somparn
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Research affairs, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University


