### Accession
PXD011800

### Title
Analysis of endogenous peptides released from osteoarthritic articular cartilage unravels novel pathogenic markers

### Description
We have performed a peptidomic strategy to identify endogenous peptides (neopeptides) that are released from knee and/or hip OA cartilage, which may serve as disease markers.

### Sample Protocol
Secretomes were collected at days 2 and 5 and mixed together in a total volume of 600µL. The endogenous peptides were concentrated by ultrafiltration using Amicon Ultra-4 devices (10 kDa MWCO, Merck Millipore, Bedford, MA). The resulting eluted volumes (peptidomic fractions), comprising peptides of < 10 kDa, were dried in a vacuum concentrator. The samples were cleaned twice prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, first by homemade Stage Tips containing six C18 Solid Phase Extraction Disks (Empore), and then using NuTip C18 (Glygen). The secretome desalted samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from raw data from the LTQ-Orbitrap was carried out using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.3, Thermo Scientific). The following constraints were used for the searches: no enzyme and tolerances of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragment ions. Search against decoy database (integrated decoy approach) using false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a pathology characterized by the loss of articular cartilage. In this study, we performed a peptidomic strategy to identify endogenous peptides (neopeptides) that are released from human osteoarthritic tissue, which may serve as disease markers. With this aim, secretomes of osteoarthritic and healthy articular cartilages obtained from knee and hip were analyzed by shotgun peptidomics. This discovery step led to the identification of 1175 different peptides, corresponding to 101 proteins, as products of the physiological or pathological turnover of cartilage extracellular matrix. Then, a targeted multiple reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry method was developed to quantify the panel of best marker candidates on a larger set of samples (<i>n</i> = 62). Statistical analyses were performed to evaluate the significance of the observed differences and the ability of the neopeptides to classify the tissue. Eight of them were differentially abundant in the media from wounded zones of OA cartilage compared with the healthy tissue (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Three neopeptides belonging to Clusterin and one from Cartilage Oligomeric Matrix Protein showed a disease-dependent decrease specifically in hip OA, whereas two from Prolargin (PRELP) and one from Cartilage Intermediate Layer Protein 1 were significantly increased in samples from knee OA. The release of one peptide from PRELP showed the best metrics for tissue classification (AUC = 0.834). The present study reveals specific neopeptides that are differentially released from knee or hip human osteoarthritic cartilage compared with healthy tissue. This evidences the intervention of characteristic pathogenic pathways in OA and provides a novel panel of peptidic candidates for biomarker development.

### Keywords
Cartilage, Osteoarthritis, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Rheumatology Division Proteomics Group-ProteoRed PRB2/ISCIII Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña (INIBIC) A Coruña - Spain
INIBIC

### Submitter
valentina calamia

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco J Blanco
Rheumatology Division Proteomics Group-ProteoRed PRB2/ISCIII Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña (INIBIC) A Coruña - Spain


