### Accession
PXD026584

### Title
analysis combined with fragment intensity predictions results in improved identification of classical bioactive peptides and sORF-encoded peptides

### Description
Bioactive peptides exhibit key roles in a wide variety of complex processes, such as regulation of body weight, learning, aging and innate immune response. Next to the classical bioactive peptides, emerging from larger precursor proteins by specific proteolytic processing, a new class of bio-active peptides originating from small open reading frames (sORFs) have been recognized as important biological regulators. But their intrinsic properties, specific expression pattern and location on presumed non-coding regions have hindered the full characterization of the repertoire of bioactive peptides, despite their predominant role in various pathways. Although the development of peptidomics has offered the opportunity to study these peptides in vivo, it remains challenging to identify the full peptidome as the lack of cleavage enzyme specification complicates conventional database search approaches. In this study, we introduce a proteogenomics methodology using a new type of mass spectrometry instrument and the implementation of machine learning tools towards improved identification of bioactive peptides in the mouse brain. The application of trapped ion mobility spectrometry (tims) coupled to a time-of-flight mass analyzer (TOF) offers improved sensitivity, an enhanced peptide coverage, reduction in chemical noise and the occurrence of chimeric spectra. Subsequent machine learning tools MS2PIP, predicting fragment ion intensities and DeepLC, predicting retention times, improve the database searching based on a large and comprehensive custom database containing both sORFs and alternative ORFs. Finally, the identification of peptides is further enhanced by applying the post-processing semi-supervised learning tool Percolator. Applying this workflow, we identified 48 sORF-encoded peptides originating from presumed non-coding locations, next to identifying 66 known neuropeptides from within 22 different families. Altogether, this robust pipeline fuses technological advancements from different fields ensuring an improved coverage of the neuropeptidome in the mouse brain.

### Sample Protocol
Brains from early postnatal Swiss CD1 mice were dissected and flash frozen: one brain from a postnatal day 1 (P1) mouse (in its entirety) and one brain from a P5 mouse that was separated in 4 parts (after removal of cortex and cerebellum the remaining part was divided by a coronal section in an anterior and a posterior part). After storage at -80°C an icecold mixture of methanol:water:acetic acid (90:9:1) was added and samples were stirred 15 minutes at full speed in a thermomixer at 4°C. Samples were centrifuged 15 min at 16 000g after which the supernatans was dried in a speedvac vacuum concentrator. The dried pellet was resuspended in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid after which the sample was cleaned up using C18 reversed phase spin columns (ThermoFisher).  The sample was dissolved in 10 µl of 6% ACN and 0.1% FA and separated on a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class System (Waters), fitted with a nanoEaseTM M/Z Symmetry C18 trap column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and a nanoEaseTM M/Z HSS C18 T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, both from Waters). The sample was loaded onto the trap column in 2min at 5µl/min in 94% buffer A 6% buffer B (buffer A is 0.1% FA in MilliQ, buffer B 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). The flow over the main column was 0.4  µl/min and the column was heated to 40°C. After an isocratic gradient of 4 min at 6%B, the concentration of B increased in 36 min to 50% B, to 94% B in 4 min. After again an isocratic gradient of 4 min at 94% B, the concentration of B decreased in 4 min to 6% which was followed by 15 of equilibration at 6 %. The column was online with a timsTOF Pro operating in positive ion mode, coupled with a CaptiveSpray ion source (both from Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen). The timsTOF Pro was calibrated according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. The temperature of the ion transfer capillary was 180°C. The Parallel Accumulation–Serial Fragmentation DDA method was used to select precursor ions for fragmentation with 1 TIMS-MS scan and 10 PASEF MS/MS scans, as described by Meier et al. (2018). The TIMS-MS survey scan was acquired between 0.70 - 1.45 V.s/cm2 and 100 - 1700 m/z with a ramp time of 166 ms. The 10 PASEF scans contained on average 12 MS/MS scans per PASEF scan with a collision energy of 10 eV. Precursors with 1 – 6 charges were selected with the target value value set to 20 000 a.u and intensity threshold to 2500 a.u. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 0.4s. The timsTOF Pro was controlled by the OtofControl 5.1 software (Bruker Daltonik GmbH). 10 PASEF scans contained on average 12 MS/MS scans per PASEF scan. Raw data was analysed with the DataAnalysis 5.1 software (Bruker Daltonik). The resulting d folder obtained from the Bruker software for each run individually was uploaded into the alphatims tool  (Willems and Mann 2021) (run via command line) to create a centroid mgf file for further processing.

### Data Protocol
A custom proteogenomic search database was constructed combining the known Mus musculus UniProt reference proteome (downloaded at 8/10/2020) and an alternative proteome based on the sORFs.org method (Olexiouk et al. 2016; Olexiouk et al. 2018) and the OpenProt repository (Brunet et al. 2021). First, seven publicly available ribosome profiling datasets from mouse brain tissues were downloaded from NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (GSE140565, GSE143330 and GSE143331(Shah et al. 2020), GSE94982, GSE112223 (Gerashchenko et al. 2021), GSE119681 (Zhao et al. 2019), GSE51424 (Gonzalez et al. 2014) and GSE74683 (Laguesse et al. 2015)). These datasets were subjected to the previously published sORF prediction pipeline (Olexiouk et al. 2018) with minor code modifications (available upon request). All datasets were combined into one FASTA file and analyzed by an in-house scripting module (written in Python 3.7, available upon request) to exclude overlapping sequences with the reference proteome and to construct compatible headers. Next, the alternative proteome was downloaded from OpenProt (Brunet et al. 2021) (on 25/6/2020, release 1.5, only containing altprots and isoprots) and compared against the sORFs.org predictions for overlapping sequences with the same previously mentioned module. Finally, all different parts were concatenated with the cRAP database (downloaded on 16/9/2020) to account for common contaminants in proteomics samples, reverse sequences were added as decoys and the resulting fasta file was used in subsequently database searches in SearchGUI (v4.0.32) (Barsnes and Vaudel 2018). MSGF+ was chosen as the search engine (S. Kim and Pevzner 2014), setting respectively the precursor mass and fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm and 0.05 Da, the instrument to TOF and the peptide length from 8 to 50. Additionally, no cleavage enzyme was specified and the modifications (amidation of the peptide C-terminal, oxidation of methionine and pyro-glu formation from glutamine and glutamic acid) were defined as variable. Database searches against the UniProt reference proteome (UP000000589_10090) were performed in a similar manner. All searches (five brain samples from different mice in triplicate) were run on a Linux server. The pipeline for further peptide validation is described in the accompanying article.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spectral intensity prediction, Proteogenomics, Peptidomics, Non-coding, Neuropeptide, Timstof, Sorf-encoded peptide (sep), Micropeptide

### Affiliations
University of Antwerp, VITO
Antwerp University Faculty of Pharmaceutical, Biomedical and Veterinary Sciences  Protein Chemistry, Proteomics and Epigenetic Signalling - PPES VITO, Unit Environmental Risk and Health

### Submitter
Kurt Boonen

### Lab Head
Dr Kurt Boonen
Antwerp University Faculty of Pharmaceutical, Biomedical and Veterinary Sciences  Protein Chemistry, Proteomics and Epigenetic Signalling - PPES VITO, Unit Environmental Risk and Health


