### Accession
PXD014309

### Title
One-pot analysis on cyclosporine A binding

### Description
Investigate if one-pot analysis works on several energetic-based proteomics method on cyclosporine A.

### Sample Protocol
The samples are executed through the SPROX/TPP/CPP/STEPP-PP protocols. After the protocol, samples from different conditions are combined into one sample. Following iFASP digestion and TMT 10-plex labelling are done by normal protocols and the raw data are acquired by Thermo Fusion LUMOS.

### Data Protocol
The data is searched through Thermo Discoverer, and the log2 based ratio for plus and minus ligand group is acquired. Two tail paired T test is done to evaluate the consistency of the results among biological replicates. The hits are selected by the t-test p values and the Z-scores of the log 2 ratio.

### Publication Abstract
Recently, several mass-spectrometry- and protein-denaturation-based proteomic methods have been developed to facilitate protein target discovery efforts in drug mode-of-action studies. These methods, which include the stability of proteins from rates of oxidation (SPROX), pulse proteolysis (PP), chemical denaturation and protein precipitation (CPP), and thermal proteome profiling (TPP) techniques, have been used in an increasing number of applications in recent years. However, while the advantages and disadvantages to using these different techniques have been reviewed, the analytical characteristics of these methods have not been directly compared. Reported here is such a direct comparison using the well-studied immunosuppressive drug, cyclosporine A (CsA), and the proteins in a yeast cell lysate. Also described is a one-pot strategy that can be utilized with each technique to streamline data acquisition and analysis. We find that there are benefits to utilizing all four strategies for protein target discovery including increased proteomic coverage and reduced false positive rates that approach 0%. Moreover, the one-pot strategy described here makes such an experiment feasible, because of the 10-fold reduction in reagent costs and instrument time it affords.

### Keywords
Cpp, Yeast, Stepp, Tpp, Sprox, One-pot

### Affiliations
Duke University
Professor, Department of Chemistry, Duke University, USA

### Submitter
Baiyi Quan

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Professor, Department of Chemistry, Duke University, USA


