### Accession
PXD018920

### Title
Influenza A hemagglutinin glycoproteomics similarity

### Description
Influenza A virus (IAV) mutates rapidly, preventing a single seasonal vaccine from targeting more than one strain, and year-to-year vaccine effectiveness is low. One challenge in designing effective vaccines is that genetic mutations frequently cause amino acid variations in IAV envelope protein hemagglutinin (HA) that create new N-glycosylation sequons; resulting N-glycans cause antigenic shielding, allowing viral escape from adaptive immune responses. Vaccine candidate strain selection currently involves correlating antigenicity with HA protein sequence among circulating strains, but quantitative comparison of site-specific glycosylation information is likely to improve the ability to design vaccines with broader effectiveness against evolved strains. However, there is poor understanding of the influence of glycosylation on immunodominance, antigenicity, and immunogenicity of HA, and there are no well-tested methods for comparing glycosylation similarity among virus samples. Here, we present a method for statistically rigorous quantification of similarity between two related virus strains that considers the presence and abundance of glycopeptide glycoforms. We demonstrate the strength of our approach by determining that there was a quantifiable difference in glycosylation at the protein level between wild-type IAV HA from A/Switzerland/9715293/2013 (SWZ13) and a mutant strain of SWZ13, even though no N-glycosylation sequons were changed. We determined site-specifically that WT and mutant HA have varying similarity at the glycosylation sites of the head domain, reflecting competing pressures to evade host immune response while retaining viral fitness. To our knowledge, our results are the first to quantify changes in glycosylation state that occur in related proteins of considerable glycan heterogeneity. Our results provide a method for understanding how changes in glycosylation state are correlated with variations in protein sequence, which is necessary for improving IAV vaccine strain selection. Understanding glycosylation will be especially important as we find new expression vectors for vaccine production, as glycosylation state depends greatly on the host species.

### Sample Protocol
Viral glycopeptide sample preparation Viral samples were sonicated for 15-20 min in methanol to lyse virion membranes, and then evaporated to dryness in a centrifugal evaporator. Glycoprotein solutions were denatured and reduced with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (J.T. Baker), 2-2-2 trifluoroethanol (TFE) (Sigma, #T63002), and 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma), incubating for 1 hr at 65 °C. Cysteine residues were alkylated by incubating with 200 mM iodoacetamide (Bio-Rad) for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark. After alkylation, excess iodoacetamide was quenched with additional DTT, again incubating for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark. The amount of TFE in each mixture was diluted to at most 5% with the addition of a 3:1 solution of water:100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Sequencing-grade trypsin or chymotrypsin (Promega) was added at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:20, and the solutions were incubated overnight at 37 °C. After incubation, the enzymes were inactivated by heating the samples for 10 min at 95 °C. A small aliquot from each sample was reserved for de-glycosylation, and the remainders were enriched using iSPE-HILIC solid-phase extraction columns (HILICON), as follows. Samples were evaporated to dryness, and the HILIC columns were conditioned with water, then acetonitrile, and equilibrated with 80% acetonitrile/1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Immediately prior to loading onto HILIC SPE columns, samples were reconstituted in 80% acetonitrile/1% TFA. Columns were washed in sample loading buffer, and then eluted with 1% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Samples were evaporated to dryness, and then resuspended in 1% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS injection. The reserved aliquots were incubated with 500 units PNGase F (New England Biolabs) for every 20 g of glycoprotein overnight at 37 °C. After incubation, de-glycosylated samples were cleaned using PepClean C18 spin columns, the eluate containing de-glycosylated peptides.  Exoglycosidase modification of AGP and A/Philippines/2/1982 samples Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (AGP) purified from human serum (Sigma #G9885) and A/Philippines/2/1982 (Phil82) were digested in parallel with trypsin and chymotrypsin, as above. Before HILIC enrichment, the digested AGP glycopeptides were incubated with 200 units of α2-3,6,8 Neuraminidase (New England Biolabs # P0720S) for every 20 g of glycoprotein overnight at 37 °C. This was to remove all terminal sialic acid residues from AGP glycans. The following day, the asialo AGP glycopeptides and digested Phil82 glycopeptides were divided into two equal aliquots. The first aliquot was HILIC-enriched, as above. The second aliquot was incubated overnight at 37 °C with β1-4 galactosidase (New England Biolabs #P0745) using the same reaction conditions as the neuraminidase above, and then HILIC-enriched. The aliquots with terminal galactose residues removed were denoted AGPgal and Phil82gal.  LC-MS/MS acquisition Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) data for de-glycosylated peptides were acquired in duplicate; those for HILIC-enriched glycopeptide samples were acquired with at least three replicate injections. All samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher) in positive mode, equipped with a nanoAcquity UPLC system, (nanoAcquity NPLC Symmetry C18 trap column and ACQUITY UPLC Peptide BEH C18 analytical column; Waters) and a Triversa Nanomate source (Advion, Ithaca, NY). Using mobile phase A (1% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (99% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid), peptides were trapped for 4 min at 4 L/min in A, and then separated using a flow rate of 0.5 L/min with the following gradient: 0–3 min: 2–5% B, 3–93 min: 5–40% B, 93–98 min: 40% B, 98–100 min: 40-98% B, 100–105 min: 98% B, 105–106 min: 98–2% B, and 106–120 min: 2% B. Data for both de-glycosylated peptides and HILIC-enriched glycopeptides were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) methods. MS1 spectra were acquired at 60,000 resolution at m/z 400, scan range m/z 350–2000, 1 microscan per spectrum, AGC target of 1e6, maximum injection time 200 ms (100 ms for de-glycosylated peptides). MS2 spectra were acquired at 15,000 resolution at m/z 400, 2 microscans per spectrum, AGC target 3e6 (1e6 for de-glycosylated peptides), maximum injection time 200 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.4 m/z, exclusion of unassigned charge states and charge states 1, dynamic exclusion 10 s, and stepped NCE at 30, 40 (NCE 27 for de-glycosylated peptide). The 20 most abundant precursor ions per scan were fragmented. Profile data were recorded for both MS1 and MS2 scans.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were first converted to mzML format using MSConvert with no additional filters.  Proteomics data from de-glycosylated samples were processed using the “Peaks PTM Search”function of the Peaks Studio 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON). AGP was searched against the entire human Uniprot proteome (UP000005640 9606). Databases for Phil82 and the SWZ13 variants consisted of HA and neuraminidase (NA) sequences from each specific strain and internal IAV protein sequences from A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 (PR8) appended to the host proteome, either Gallus gallus (UP000000539 9031) or Canis lupus familiaris (UP000002254 9615). Relevant FASTA files can be found in Figures S1 and S2. Technical replicates were searched together. Trypsin or chymotrypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, with maximum of 3 missed cleavages and one non-specific cleavage were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were specified as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. We used a target-decoy false discovery threshold of 1%. The precursor ion (MS1) mass error tolerance was specified at 10 ppm and a fragment ion (MS/MS) error tolerance at 0.02 Da. Protein identifications required a minimum of two unique peptides. Protein abundances were calculated by aggregating the MS1 peak areas for all the peptides deconvoluted and identified for a specific protein. Peaks Studio search results were exported in mzIdentML format.  LC/MS/MS raw files for all intact HILIC-enriched glycopeptides were processed using the GlycReSoft search engine, a complete open-source software package that assigns glycopeptides from tandem mass spectra. GlycReSoft requires the input of a peptide hypothesis, obtained in this work from the Peaks Studio proteomics search described above, and a glycan hypothesis. We constructed the glycan hypothesis combinatorially, following these glycan composition rules: #Hex 3-10, #HexNAc 2-9, #Fuc 0-5, #Neu5Ac 0-4, with #Fuc < #HexNAc and #HexNAc > #Neu5Ac + 1. The same glycan hypothesis was used for AGP and IAV samples, alike. Glycopeptide abundances were quantified by aggregating the MS1 peak areas of the glycoforms deconvoluted and identified by GlycReSoft.

### Publication Abstract
Influenza A virus (IAV) mutates rapidly, resulting in antigenic drift and poor year-to-year vaccine effectiveness. One challenge in designing effective vaccines is that genetic mutations frequently cause amino acid variations in IAV envelope protein hemagglutinin (HA) that create new <i>N</i>-glycosylation sequons; resulting <i>N</i>-glycans cause antigenic shielding, allowing viral escape from adaptive immune responses. Vaccine candidate strain selection currently involves correlating antigenicity with HA protein sequence among circulating strains, but quantitative comparison of site-specific glycosylation information may likely improve the ability to design vaccines with broader effectiveness against evolving strains. However, there is poor understanding of the influence of glycosylation on immunodominance, antigenicity, and immunogenicity of HA, and there are no well-tested methods for comparing glycosylation similarity among virus samples. Here, we present a method for statistically rigorous quantification of similarity between two related virus strains that considers the presence and abundance of glycopeptide glycoforms. We demonstrate the strength of our approach by determining that there was a quantifiable difference in glycosylation at the protein level between WT IAV HA from A/Switzerland/9715293/2013 (SWZ13) and a mutant strain of SWZ13, even though no <i>N</i>-glycosylation sequons were changed. We determined site-specifically that WT and mutant HA have varying similarity at the glycosylation sites of the head domain, reflecting competing pressures to evade host immune response while retaining viral fitness. To our knowledge, our results are the first to quantify changes in glycosylation state that occur in related proteins of considerable glycan heterogeneity. Our results provide a method for understanding how changes in glycosylation state are correlated with variations in protein sequence, which is necessary for improving IAV vaccine strain selection. Understanding glycosylation will be especially important as we find new expression vectors for vaccine production, as glycosylation state depends greatly on the host species.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Similarity, Influenza a, Glycosylation, Glycopeptides

### Affiliations
Boston University School of Medicine
Department of Biochemistry Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry Boston University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Deborah Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Joseph Zaia
Department of Biochemistry Center for Biomedical Mass Spectrometry Boston University School of Medicine


