### Accession
PXD028852

### Title
Proteins enriched on damaged lysosomes in 293T

### Description
Lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP) or lysosomal membrane damage is commonly associated with aging and age-related diseases. In searching for cellular mechanisms in response to LMP, we used a proteomic approach to identify proteins enriched on damaged lysosomes. This unbiased approach identified a new phosphoinositide signaling pathway triggered by LMP to mediate rapid lysosomal repair. Specifically, LMP induces fast lysosomal recruitment of PI4K2A which generates high levels of the lipid messenger phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate (PtdIns4P) on damaged lysosomes. Lysosomal PtdIns4P in turn recruits multiple oxysterol-binding protein (OSBP)-related protein (ORP) family members, including ORP9, ORP10, and ORP11, to orchestrate extensive membrane contact sites (MCSs) between damaged lysosomes and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The ORPs subsequently catalyze robust ER-to-lysosomal transport of phosphatidylserine (PS), which is critical for rapid lysosomal repair. The lipid transporter ATG2 is also recruited to damaged lysosomes, activated by PS, and is essential for rapid lysosomal repair. Our findings identify a phosphoinositide-dependent membrane tethering and lipid transport (PITT) pathway essential for the maintenance of lysosomal membrane integrity, with important implications for a wide range of diseases characterized by impaired lysosomal function.

### Sample Protocol
293T cells stably expressing LAMP1-GFP-TurboID was treated with or without 1 mM LLOME for 30 min to induce lysosomal membrane damage, followed by another 30 min treatment with 50 uM biotin to allow for biotinylation of proteins on lysosomal surface. The cells were then washed and physically broken before centrifugation to remove nuclei and pellet the membrane fraction containing lysosomes. The membrane pellets were then lysed with detergent buffer and subject to streptavidin pull down to purify biotinylated proteins on lysosomes. Proteins on beads were eluted by heating to 95V in 2x SDS loading buffer. Half of each sample was separated ~1.5cm on a 10% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel (Invitrogen) using the MES buffer system. The gel was stained with coomassie and each lane was excised into ten equally sized segments.  Gel pieces were processed using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) with the following protocol: • Washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. • Reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. • Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h. • Quenched with formic acid and the supernatant was analyzed directly without further processing. The gel digests were analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75µm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Jupiter Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 70,000 FWHM resolution and 17,500 FWHM resolution, respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters:  Enzyme: Trypsin  Database: Swissprot Human (forward and reverse appended with common contaminants) Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance:  10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2  Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered 1% protein and peptide level false discovery rate (FDR) and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Lysosomal dysfunction has been increasingly linked to disease and normal ageing<sup>1,2</sup>. Lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP), a hallmark of lysosome-related diseases, can be triggered by diverse cellular stressors<sup>3</sup>. Given the damaging contents of lysosomes, LMP must be rapidly resolved, although the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Here, using an unbiased proteomic approach, we show that LMP stimulates a phosphoinositide-initiated membrane tethering and lipid transport (PITT) pathway for rapid lysosomal repair. Upon LMP, phosphatidylinositol-4 kinase type 2&#x3b1; (PI4K2A) accumulates rapidly on damaged lysosomes, generating high levels of the lipid messenger phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate. Lysosomal phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate in turn recruits multiple oxysterol-binding protein (OSBP)-related protein (ORP) family members, including ORP9, ORP10, ORP11 and OSBP, to orchestrate extensive new membrane contact sites between damaged lysosomes and the endoplasmic reticulum. The ORPs subsequently catalyse robust endoplasmic reticulum-to-lysosome transfer of phosphatidylserine and cholesterol to support rapid lysosomal repair. Finally, the lipid transfer protein ATG2 is also recruited to damaged lysosomes where its activity is potently stimulated by phosphatidylserine. Independent of macroautophagy, ATG2 mediates rapid membrane repair through direct lysosomal lipid transfer. Together, our findings identify that the PITT pathway maintains lysosomal membrane integrity, with important implications for numerous age-related diseases characterized by impaired lysosomal function.

### Keywords
Human, Lysosomal membrane permeabilization

### Affiliations
University of Pittsburgh
Aging Institute of UPMC Department of Cell Biology University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine Bridgeside Point I Room 457 100 Technology Dr. Pittsburgh, PA 15219

### Submitter
Jay Xiaojun Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Jay X. Tan, PhD
Aging Institute of UPMC Department of Cell Biology University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine Bridgeside Point I Room 457 100 Technology Dr. Pittsburgh, PA 15219


