### Accession
PXD036659

### Title
On the relationship between metabolic capacities and in vivo viscoelastic properties of the liver

### Description
The liver is the central metabolic organ. It constantly adapts its metabolic capacity to current physiological requirements. However, the relationship between tissue structure and hepatic function is incompletely understood; this results in a lack of diagnostic markers in medical imaging that can provide information about the liver’s metabolic capacity. Therefore, using normal rabbit livers, we combined magnetic resonance elastography (MRE) with proteomics-based kinetic modeling of central liver metabolism to investigate the potential role of MRE for predicting the liver’s metabolic function in vivo. 
Nineteen New Zealand white rabbits were investigated by multifrequency MRE and positron-emission tomography (PET). This yielded maps of shear wave speed (SWS), penetration rate (PR), and standardized uptake value (SUV). Proteomic analysis was performed after the scans. Hepatic metabolic functions were assessed on the basis of the HEPATOKIN1 model in combination with a model of hepatic lipid-droplet metabolism using liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry. 
Our results showed marked differences between individual livers in both metabolic functions and stiffness properties, though not in SUV. When livers were divided into ‘stiff’ and ‘soft’ subgroups (cutoff SWS = 1.6 m/s), stiff livers showed a lower capacity for triacylglycerol storage, while at the same time showing an increased capacity for gluconeogenesis and cholesterol synthesis. Furthermore, SWS was correlated with gluconeogenesis and PR with urea production and glutamine exchange.
In conclusion, our study indicates a close relationship between the viscoelastic properties of the liver and metabolic function. This could be used in future studies to predict non-invasively the functional reserve capacity of the liver in patients.


### Sample Protocol
Between 11 and 100 mg of each liver tissue were homogenized under denaturing conditions with a FastPrep (two times for 60 s, 6.5 m x s-1) in 1 mL of a fresh buffer containing 3 M guanidinium chloride (GdmCl), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 20 mM chloroacetamide and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. Lysates were boiled at 95°C for 10 min in a thermal shaker, followed by sonication for 10 min and centrifuged at 10,000 rcf for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred into new protein low binding tubes (Eppendorf, Germany). 30 µg protein per sample were diluted to 1 M GdmCl by adding 10% acetonitrile and 25 mM Tris, 8.5 pH, followed by a Lys C digestion (Roche, Basel, Switzerland; enzyme to protein ratio 1:50, MS-grade) at 37°C for 2 hours. This was followed by another dilution to 0.5 M GdmCl and a tryptic digestion (Roche, 1:50) at 37°C, at 800 rpm, and overnight. Subsequently, peptides were desalted with C18 columns and reconstituted in 2% formic acid in water and further separated into five fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX, 3M Purification, Meriden, CT). Eluates were first dried in a SpeedVac, then dissolved in 5% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid in water, briefly vortexed, and sonicated in a water bath for 30 seconds prior to injection to nano- Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), as reported previously (Gielisch and Meierhofer, 2015). Briefly, the LC separation was performed using a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 50 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) in-house packed with 3-µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were eluted using a gradient from 3.8 to 38% solvent B in solvent A over 120 min at a 266 nL per minute flow rate. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was 79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, and 0.1% formic acid. For the IP samples, a one-hour gradient was used. Nanoelectrospray was generated by applying 3.5 kV. A cycle of one full Fourier transformation scan mass spectrum (300−1750 m/z, resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1 × 106) was followed by 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans (resolution of 30,000, AGC target 5 × 105) with a normalized collision energy of 25 eV. Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v 1.6.10.43) and searched against the oryctolagus cuniculus (Rabbit) proteome database UniProtKB (UP000001811) with 21,178 entries, released in September 2019. Parameters of MaxQuant database searching were a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Viscoelasticity, Reserve capacity, Mre, Magnetic resonance elastography, Proteomics, Tomoelastography, Stiffness, Hepatic function model, Liver metabolism, Pet

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Department of Radiology Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin Charitéplatz 1 10117 Berlin  Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ingolf Sack
Department of Radiology Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin Charitéplatz 1 10117 Berlin  Germany


