### Accession
PXD012502

### Title
Unbiased mapping of human cerebrospinal fluid proteome dynamics - Profile data

### Description
Our purpose is to explore the dynamics of a clinically relevant proteome by determining protein turnover, synthesis and breakdown. ]. The alteration of protein turnover represents a new type of biological information which might provide unique insight in disease pathophysiology, e.g. Alzheimer disease (AD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or diabetes. The use of tracer methods makes it however possible to follow protein synthesis on a proteome-scale based on the incorporation of stable isotope-labeled precursors such as 13C6-leucine. The latest mass spectrometry (MS) technologies on quantitative approach called stable isotope labeling kinetics (SILK) was applied to humans after the intravenous administration of 13C6-leucine. The SILK approach has therefore the potential to generate unique in vivo information that is not accessible using classical quantitative techniques. As a matter of fact, the concentration of a given protein in a tissue or a biological fluid is the combination of multiple events and mechanisms. The translation rate at the cellular level is obviously the initial determinant which will directly impact the presence/absence of a given protein. Translation is dependent on transcription and its genetic and epigenetic regulation. Transcriptomics is therefore one of the way to follow protein synthesis, but it is known that it reflects only partially protein concentration. In fact, many subsequent events will modify protein presence starting by post-translational maturation (which in case of pathologic mutation could lead to proteins misfolding, degradation or mis-trafficking. In our study, we are focusing on CSF proteins which originate locally from resident cells (lymphocytes...) or after compartment transfer, from central nervous system (CNS) and systemic tissues. In this work, we relied on high resolution MS (HRMS) to follow the kinetics incorporation of labelled Leucine in thousands of peptides corresponding to hundreds of proteins and their isoforms. This new approach necessitated first to develop original data processing and modelling of protein turnover which is the foundation for the SILK analysis of other types of samples, including blood and urine. The information that derived from this type of large scale analysis will help build a new vision of human physiology based on protein turnovers, and compartment transfer investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Patients hospitalized in neurosurgery unit having in place a temporary ventricular derivation of the CSF were enrolled. The labelling protocol was taken from Bateman et al.. Briefly, 13C6-leucine prepared in accordance with the European Pharmacopeia was intravenously administered. After a 10min initial bolus at 2 mg/kg, a 8h50 infusion at 2 mg kg/h was performed. Ventricular CSF samples were collected from time 0 every 3h (3 to 6 mL) over 24h (exact times: 0, 3.02, 6.47, 9.22, 10.17, 12.3, 15.22, 18.13, 21.13, and 24.47 hours). One patient CSF was processed with all the steps performed in triplicate. All the sample preparation steps were performed in triplicate on automation system (BRAVO, Agilent). Two times 20uL of CSF were denaturated and reduced (DTT) (30uL of 8M urea / 20mM DTT / 100mM Tris pH8.5), alkylated (6uL of 400mM IAA / 1M Tris pH11), digested overnight (37°C) with LysC/trypsin mix (diluted with 200uL 20mM Tris pH8.5 / 2mM DTT; and addition of 9uL 0.05ug/uL LysC/trypsin), and acidified by formic acid addition. Desalting was performed by C18 Tips primed with 50uL of 70% ACN/ 0.1% TFA, equilibrated with 50uL of 0.1% TFA, loaded with sample, washed two times with 50uL of 0.1% TFA and eluted with 50uL of 70% ACN/ 0.1% TFA. After peptide clean-up step, samples were dried on speedvac and resuspended with 100uL of the equilibration buffer (10mM H3PO4, 25% ACN, pH 2.6). SCX cartridges (ref) were primed with 100uL of 350mM KCl/10mM H3PO4/25% ACN/pH 2.6; equilibrated with 50uL of 10mM H3PO4/25% ACN/pH 2.6; loaded with samples, washed with 25uL of 10mM H3PO4/25% ACN/pH 2.6; and sequentially eluted by salt steps gradient in common buffer (10mM H3PO4/25% ACN/pH 2.6) as follows: 115uL of elution buffer 1 (30mM KCl); 115uL of elution buffer 2 (50mM KCl) ; 135uL of elution buffer 3 (85mM KCl) ; 115uL of elution buffer 4 (115mM KCl) ; 90uL of elution buffer 5 (150mM KCl) ; and 40uL of elution buffer 6 (500mM KCl at pH 9.5). First 45uL of the fraction 1 were removed because they didn’t contain peptides. Fraction 6 was acidified by 2uL of FA and pooled to fraction 5. At the end, the 5 fractions were dried and cleaned-up on C18 tips like previously. Fractionated and cleaned samples were resuspended in 10uL of A phase (A = 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water) and 7uL were injected on nanoRSLC Ultimate 3000 (Thermo). NanoFlow LC was coupled to QTOF MS instrument (Impact II, Bruker Daltonics) through captive spray ion source operating with nanobooster. To the LC part, sample was desalted and pre-concentrated on-line on a PepMap u-precolumn (300 um x 5 mm, C18 PepMap 100, 5 um, 100 Angstrom). Capillary pump worked at 20uL/min with phase constituted by 0.05% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. This step spent 3 minutes. Peptides were transfer to analytical column (75 um x 500 mm; Acclaim Pepmap RSLC, C18, 2um, 100 Angstrom) to perform separation. A gradient consisting of 5-26% B for 192 min and 90% B for 10 min (A = 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water; B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at 400 nL/min, 50°C, was used to elute peptides from the reverse-phase column. Separated peptides were ionized on Captive Spray (1200V, dry gas: 3 l/min at 150°C) with nanobooster (0.2 Bar of Nitrogen boiling in acetonitrile/0.1% FA). Ionized peptides, ions, were analyzed on QTOF MS instrument (Impact II, Bruker Daltonics). 13C6-leucine incorporation was followed by LC-MS profiling. A mass range of 300 to 1400 m/z was scan at 0.5 Hz. The other parameters were the same as that of the Data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. DDA was performed to identify peptides and to generate Peptide Library. For all full-scan measurements, a lock-mass (m/z 1222, Hexakis(1H, 1H, 4H-hexafluorobutyloxy)phosphazine, chip cube high mass reference, Agilent) was used as internal calibrant. Instant Expertise software selected as many as possible most intense ions per cycle of 3 seconds. They were then fragmented on collision cell and analyzed in TOF. MSMS accumulation was dependent to the MS1 level (MS1 5000cts = spectra rate of 2Hz, to MS1 50000cts = spectra rate of 50Hz). Peptide fragmentation was conducted with nitrogen gas on the most abundant and at least doubly-charged to 5 charged ions detected in the initial MS Scan. Active exclusion was performed after 1 spectrum during 2 minutes unless the precursor ion exhibited intensity higher of 3 than the previous scan. Collision energy for the CID was adapted to the charge and the mass ion.

### Data Protocol
All the resulting MS/MS spectra were searched against the NextProt 2018 database with the Mascot 2.6.0 search engine (Matrix Science). The following settings were used: database: neXtProt_2018-01-17; enzyme: trypsin; variable modifications: oxidation (M), Glu -> pyro-Glu (N-term E and Q), Acetyl (K) and deamidated (N,Q); fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C); missed cleavages: 1; instrument type CID: ESI-QUAD-TOF; peptide tolerance: 4.0 ppm; MS/MS tolerance: 0.05 Da; peptide charge: 1+, 2+ and 3+; mass: monoisotopic; C13: 1; minimum peptide length: 5; peptide decoy: ON; adjust FDR [%]: 1; percolator: on; ions score cut-off: 12; ions score threshold for significant peptide IDs: 12. The identified MS/MS spectra allowed us to build the reference peptide library, which was comprised of the peptide sequences, the MS/MS spectra, and the retention times. Skyline 2.6 (MacCoss Lab.) was used to generate it with a cut-off score of 0.95. Skyline software was used to process LC-MS profile raw data on the basis of the reference peptide library with information on SCX fraction, retention time, charge state, nominal and 13C6-leucine shifted masses (+6Da per leucine). A large tabular export of 1,620,796 rows was obtained reporting MS peak areas with reference on the peptide of origin. Time dependent incorporation of 13C6-leucine can be followed by computing light and heavy peptide peak area ratios, e.g. A’1/(A1+A’1). Such ratios reveal the rate of newly synthesized proteins over time and hence the protein dynamics.

### Publication Abstract
The extraction of accurate physiological parameters from clinical samples provides a unique perspective to understand disease etiology and evolution, including under therapy. We introduce a new methodologic framework to map patient proteome dynamics in vivo, either proteome-wide or in large targeted panels. We applied it to ventricular cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and could determine the turnover parameters of almost 200 proteins, whereas a handful were known previously. We covered a large number of neuron biology- and immune system-related proteins, including many biomarkers and drug targets. This first large data set unraveled a significant relationship between turnover and protein origin that relates to our ability to investigate organ physiology with protein-labeling strategy specifics. Our data constitute the first draft of CSF proteome dynamics as well as a repertoire of peptides for the community to design new analyses. The disclosed methods apply to other fluids or tissues provided sequential sample collection can be performed. We show that the proposed mathematical modeling applies to other analytical methods in the field.

### Keywords
Ms1 profile data

### Affiliations
CHU Montpellier
Hôpital St Eloi, IRMB, INSERM U1183 80 av A Fiche, 34295 Montpellier France

### Submitter
Jerome Vialaret

### Lab Head
Dr Sylvain Lehmann
Hôpital St Eloi, IRMB, INSERM U1183 80 av A Fiche, 34295 Montpellier France


