### Accession
PXD029473

### Title
Role of plasma proteomics in predicting the prognosis of older men with chronic coronary syndrome

### Description
Data-independent acquisition liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (DIA LC-MS/MS) quantitative proteomics was performed on 38 patients with CCS; 19 in the CCS events group and 19 in the non-events group as the controls.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomics analysis was performed using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify potential protein biomarker candidates among those proteins differing in abundance between event group and non-event group.  We used an integrated approach involving DIA strategy, HPLC fractionation to quantify the dynamic changes of the whole proteome.

### Data Protocol
Spectral library generation: The resulting DDA data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20387 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 4.5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification. Acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. The false discovery rates of the PSMs and proteins were set to less than 1%. DIA data analysis: All DIA data were analyzed in Skyline (v 4.1.0). The DDA search results were imported to Skyline to generate the spectral library, and the retention times were aligned to iRT reference values. Transition settings: precursor charges were set as 2, 3, 4, 5, ion charges were set as 1, 2. The ion match tolerance was set as 0.02 Da. Six most intense fragment ions from the spectral library were selected for each precursor. Decoy generation was based on shuffled sequences, and the FDR was estimated with the mProphet approach and set to 1%. Relative quantification of proteins was performed using MSstats package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Chinese PLA General hospital
Chinese PLA General Hospital

### Submitter
Hongbin Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Hongbin Liu
Chinese PLA General Hospital


