### Accession
PXD003973

### Title
Dynamic of the Grb2 interactome in primary cells by DDA-MS

### Description
We applied AP-MS to quantify Grb2 interaction dynamics in primary T cells. Data generated here in shotgun/DDA mode were used to build a high quality Grb2 binders-specific SWATH assay library for high-throughput targeted analysis of DIA data.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amount of post-nuclear lysates were incubated with prewashed Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA GmbH) for 1.5 h at 4°C on a rotary wheel. Beads were then washed 5 times with 1 ml of lysis buffer in the absence of detergent and of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Proteins were eluted from the Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads with 2.5 mM D-biotin. For removal of D-biotin, samples were precipitated by addition of trichloroacetic acid (100%) to 25% (v/v) and incubation on ice for 1 h. Protein were pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 ºC. Protein pellets were then washed 3 times with 200 µL ice-cold acetone with 5-min interspersed centrifugation. Washed protein pellets were dried by vacuum centrifugation at 45 ºC for 5 min and then resuspended in 25 µL 6 M urea, 50 mM NH4HCO3.  Samples were diluted to 0.5 M urea with 50 mM NH4HCO3 before cysteines reduction (5 mM TCEP, 30 min at 37 ºC) and alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at 37 ºC in the dark). Protein was digested overnight at 37 ºC by addition of 1 µg trypsin (2.5 uL Promega, sequence-grade, V5113). Trifluoroacetic acid (50%) was added to 1 % (v/v) to stop the reaction, and peptides were purified using C18 microspin columns (3 – 30 ug, Nest Group) and resuspended in 15 µL Buffer A (acetonitrile 2%, formic acid 0.1 %) containing iRT peptides for retention-time alignment (Biognosys). 4 µL of resuspended peptides was injected serially in SWATH and shotgun acquisition modes.

### Data Protocol
A high quality SWATH assay library was generated as described previously using the iPortal workflow. In brief, the TPP (4.7.0) and SpectraST (5.0) were used for the analysis of the shotgun proteomics runs. The datasets were searched using X!tandem and Comet against the canonical mouse proteome as annotated by the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and appended iRT peptide and decoy sequence. The search parameters were set to include fully tryptic peptides (KR/P) containing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethyl (+ 57.021465 Da) on cysteine was set as static peptide modification. Oxidation (+ 15.99492 Da) of methionine and phosphorylation (+79.966331 Da) of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as dynamic peptide modifications. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 50 p.p.m. and the fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.1 Da. The peptide spectrum matches obtained were evaluated statistically using PeptideProphet and iProphet within the TPP. MAYU was used to select an iProphet cutoff score resulting in a protein FDR < 1 %. The resulting pep.xml and prot.xml files were used as input for the software tool Abacus for the calculation of spectral counts and normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) values. SpectraST was used in library generation mode with CID-QTOF settings and iRT normalization at import against the iRT Kit peptide sequences (-c_IRTirtkit.txt -c_IRR) and a consensus library was consecutively generated. The script spectrast2tsv.py was then used to generate the assay library with suggested settings: -l 350,2000 -s b,y -x 1,2 -o 6 -n 6 -p 0.05 -d -e -w swath32.txt -k openswath. The OpenSWATH tool ConvertTSVToTraML converted the TSV file to TraML and decoys were appended to the TraML assay library with the OpenSWATH tool OpenSwathDecoyGenerator as described.

### Publication Abstract
Spatiotemporal organization of protein interactions in cell signaling is a fundamental process that drives cellular functions. Given differential protein expression across tissues and developmental stages, the architecture and dynamics of signaling interaction proteomes is, likely, highly context dependent. However, current interaction information has been almost exclusively obtained from transformed cells. In this study, we applied an advanced and robust workflow combining mouse genetics and affinity purification (AP)-SWATH mass spectrometry to profile the dynamics of 53 high-confidence protein interactions in primary T&#xa0;cells, using the scaffold protein GRB2 as a model. The workflow also provided a sufficient level of robustness to pinpoint differential interaction dynamics between two similar, but functionally distinct, primary T&#xa0;cell populations. Altogether, we demonstrated that precise and reproducible quantitative measurements of protein interaction dynamics can be achieved in primary cells isolated from mammalian tissues, allowing resolution of the tissue-specific context of cell-signaling events.

### Keywords
Dda, Interactome, Ms, Primary t cells, Grb2

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Etienne Caron

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Gstaiger
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


