### Accession
PXD036571

### Title
COVID-19 salivary protein profile: unravelling molecular aspects of SARS-COV-2 infection

### Description
COVID-19 is the most impacting global pandemic of all times with over 600 million infected and 6.5 million deaths worldwide, in addition to an unprecedented economic impact. Despite the many advances in scientific knowledge about the disease, much remains to be clarified about the molecular alterations induced by SARS-COV-2 infection. For this reason, it is urgent to carry out studies that help to clarify the molecular changes after SARS-COV-2 infection. In this work, we show a hybrid proteomics and in silico interactomics strategy to establish a COVID-19 salivary protein profile. The differential proteome was narrowed down by PLS-DA tool and the enrichment analysis was performed with FunRich. In parallel OralInt was used to determine interspecies PPIs between humans and SARS-CoV-2. Five dysregulated biological processes were identified in COVID-19 proteome profile: Apoptosis, Energy Pathways, Immune Response, Protein Metabolism and Transport. Interactomics analysis allowed the identification of new PPIs between the virus and the host, representing molecular aspects that could be important to understand this disease.

### Sample Protocol
For data-dependent acquisition (DDA) experiments, replicates from each condition were pooled into two different samples (COVID+ and COVID-) before sample processing. For data-independent acquisition (DIA) each sample was processed individually. Protein content (60 µg) from each sample was separated by SDS-PAGE (4-15%) for about 17 minutes at 110 V (Short-GeLC Approach [13] and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. For DDA experiments, each lane was divided into 5 gel pieces and for DIA experiments into 3 gel pieces for further individual processing. After the distaining step, gel bands were incubated overnight with trypsin for protein digestion and peptides were extracted from the gel using 3 solutions containing different percentages of acetonitrile (30, 50, and 98%) with 1% formic acid. Acetonitrile was evaporated using a vacuum-concentrator and peptides were re-suspended in 25 µL (DDA) or 30 µL (DIA) 2% acetonitrile/ 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was sonicated using a cup-horn (Ultrasonic processor, 750W) for about 2 minutes, 40% amplitude, and pulses of 1 sec ON/OFF. Ten microliters of each sample (DDA) or 5µL (DIA) were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed on a NanoLC™ 425 System (Eksigent) coupled to a Triple TOF™ 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex) equipped with an ESI DuoSpray™ Source (Sciex). The chromatographic separation was performed on a Triart C18 Capillary Column 1/32" (12 nm, S-3µm, 150 × 0.3 mm, YMC) and using a Triart C18 Capillary Guard Column (0.5 × 5 mm, 3 μm, 12nm, YMC) at 50°C. The flow rate was set to 5 µL/min and mobile phases A and B were 5% DMSO plus 0.1% formic acid in water and 5% DMSO plus 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. The LC program was performed as followed: 5 – 30% of B (0 - 50 min), 30 – 98% of B (50 – 52 min), 98% of B (52-54 min), 98 - 5% of B (54 – 56 min), and 5% of B (56 – 65 min). The ionization source was operated in the positive mode set to an ion spray voltage of 5500 V, 25 psi for nebulizer gas 1 (GS1), 10 psi for nebulizer gas 2 (GS2), 25 psi for the curtain gas (CUR), and source temperature (TEM) at 100°C. For DDA experiments, the mass spectrometer was set to scanning full spectra (m/z 350-2250) for 250 ms, followed by up to 100 MS/MS scans (m/z 100 – 1500). Candidate ions with a charge state between +1 and +5 and counts above a minimum threshold of 10 counts per second were isolated for fragmentation and one MS/MS spectrum was collected before adding those ions to the exclusion list for 15 seconds (mass spectrometer operated by Analyst® TF 1.8.1, Sciex®). The rolling collision was used with a collision energy spread of 5. For SWATH experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in a looped product ion mode and specifically tuned to a set of 42 overlapping windows, covering the precursor mass range of 350-1400 m/z. A 50 ms survey scan (350-2250 m/z) was acquired at the beginning of each cycle, and SWATH-MS/MS spectra were collected from 100-2250 m/z for 50 ms resulting in a cycle time of 2.1 seconds.

### Data Protocol
A specific ion-library of the precursor masses and fragment ions was created by combining all files from the DDA experiments in one protein identification search using the ProteinPilot™ software (v5.0, Sciex). The paragon method parameters were the following: searched against the reviewed Human (SwissProt) database, cysteine alkylation by acrylamide, digestion by trypsin, and gel-based ID. An independent False Discovery Rate (FDR) analysis, using the target-decoy approach provided by Protein Pilot™, was used to assess the quality of identifications. SWATH data processing was performed using SWATHTM processing plug-in for PeakViewTM (v2.0.01, Sciex®). Protein relative quantification was performed in all samples using the information from the protein identification search. Quantification results were obtained for peptides with less than 1% of FDR and by the sum of up to 5 fragments/peptide. Each protein was normalized for the total sum of areas for the respective sample. Protein quantities were obtained by the sum of up to 15 peptides/protein.

### Publication Abstract
COVID-19 is the most impacting global pandemic of all time, with over 600 million infected and 6.5 million deaths worldwide, in addition to an unprecedented economic impact. Despite the many advances in scientific knowledge about the disease, much remains to be clarified about the molecular alterations induced by SARS-CoV-2 infection. In this work, we present a hybrid proteomics and in silico interactomics strategy to establish a COVID-19 salivary protein profile. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD036571. The differential proteome was narrowed down by the Partial Least-Squares Discriminant Analysis and enrichment analysis was performed with FunRich. In parallel, OralInt was used to determine interspecies Protein-Protein Interactions between humans and SARS-CoV-2. Five dysregulated biological processes were identified in the COVID-19 proteome profile: Apoptosis, Energy Pathways, Immune Response, Protein Metabolism and Transport. We identified 10 proteins (KLK 11, IMPA2, ANXA7, PLP2, IGLV2-11, IGHV3-43D, IGKV2-24, TMEM165, VSIG10 and PHB2) that had never been associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection, representing new evidence of the impact of COVID-19. Interactomics analysis showed viral influence on the host immune response, mainly through interaction with the degranulation of neutrophils. The virus alters the host's energy metabolism and interferes with apoptosis mechanisms.

### Keywords
Covid-19; saliva; proteomics; interactomics; oralint

### Affiliations
Universidade Católica Portuguesa,  Faculty of Dental Medicine (FMD),  Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Health (CIIS) Portugal
Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra

### Submitter
Vera Mendes

### Lab Head
Dr Nuno Rosa
Universidade Católica Portuguesa,  Faculty of Dental Medicine (FMD),  Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Health (CIIS) Portugal


