### Accession
PXD022402

### Title
WT/SIRT6 KO 293T cell AP-MS anti-CDH1-HA

### Description
The study found reciprocal regulation between SIRT6 and APC/C. While SIRT6 is ubiquitinated by APC/C and degraded, CDH1, a co-activator of APC/C, is also deacetylated by SIRT6 and degraded.

### Sample Protocol
Wild-type and SIRT6 knock-out 293T cells stably expressing CDH1-HA were lysed and subjected to anti-FLAG immunoprecipitation. IP samples were separated with SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested and submitted to LC-MS analysis.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, the digestion product was separated by a 120 min gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.250 μL/min with an EASY-nLCII integrated nano-HPLC system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark), which was directly interfaced to a Thermo Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. The analytical column was a homemade fused silica capillary column (75 μH ID, 150 mm length; Upchurch, Oak Harbor, WA, USA) packed with C-18 resin (300 Å, 5 μm; Varian, Lexington, MA, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. The QE HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode using Xcalibur 3.0 software, and there was a single full-scan mass spectrum in the orbitrap (400-1800 m/z, 30 000 resolution) followed by 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans in the ion trap at 35% normalized collision energy (CID).

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were searched using PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) with the following criteria: full tryptic specificity was required; one missed cleavage was allowed; oxidation (M), carbamidomethylation (C), and acetylation (K) were set as dynamic modifications; precursor ion mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm for all MS acquired in an Orbitrap mass analyzer; and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da for all MS2 spectra acquired in the linear ion trap. Ratios of acetylated peptide were quantified with peak area and normalized to the total peak area of the whole protein.

### Publication Abstract
SIRT6 is an NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent deacetylase that plays an important role in mitosis fidelity and genome stability. In the present study, we found that SIRT6 overexpression leads to mitosis defects and aneuploidy. We identified SIRT6 as a novel substrate of anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C), which is a master regulator of mitosis. Both CDH1 and CDC20, co-activators of APC/C, mediated SIRT6 degradation via the ubiquitination-proteasome pathway. Reciprocally, SIRT6 also deacetylated CDH1 at lysine K135 and promoted its degradation, resulting in an increase in APC/C-CDH1-targeted substrates, dysfunction in centrosome amplification, and chromosome instability. Our findings demonstrate the importance of SIRT6 for genome integrity during mitotic progression and reveal how SIRT6 and APC/C cooperate to drive mitosis.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Acetylation, 293t

### Affiliations
Tsinghua University
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University

### Submitter
Helin Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Haiteng Deng
School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University


