### Accession
PXD002441

### Title
Daphnia pulex_Lysine acetylation

### Description
Daphnia (Daphnia pulex) is a small planktonic crustacean and a key constituent of aquatic ecosystems. It is commonly used as a model organism for studying environmental toxic challenges. In the past decade, a Daphnia genomic information and proteomic dataset has been developed. This dataset has expanded the opportunity to relate toxicological effects with “Daphnia proteomics” as it integrates proteomic knowledge in Daphnia, those approach will provide greater insights for toxicological research. In order to exploit Daphnia for ecotoxicological research, information on the post-translational modification (PTM) of proteins is necessary as this is a critical regulator of biological processes. Acetylation of lysine (Kac) is a reversible and highly regulated PTM that is associated with diverse biological functions. However, a comprehensive description of Kac in Daphnia is not yet available. Here, to understand the cellular distribution of lysine acetylation in Daphnia, we identified 98 acetylation sites in 65 proteins by immunoprecipitation using an anti-acetyllysine antibody and an liquid chromatography system supported by mass spectroscopy. We identified 28 acetylated sites connected with metabolic proteins and 6 acetylated enzymes associated with the TCA cycle in Daphnia. From GO and KEGG enrichment analyses, we showed that Kac in D. pulex is highly enriched in proteins associated with metabolic processes. Our data provide the first global analysis of lysine acetylation in D. pulex. The expanded proteomic dataset will be an important resource for the functional analysis of Kac in D. pulex and it will be nice to have a first step done using a promising future model organism.

### Sample Protocol
* Daphnia culture  The D. pulex cultures were initiated from ephippia purchased from MicroBioTest Inc. (Belgium; batch number DP070508). The ephippia were induced to hatch according to the supplier’s instructions. In brief, the ephippia were washed in deionized water and then placed in aerated Elendt M4 medium in a petri dish. The eggs were cultured at 20°C for 96 hr under continuous illumination (6,000 to 10,000 lux). Neonates were transferred to fresh Elendt M4 medium at 20 ± 2°C and 16 hr light/ 8 hr dark light cycle in a plant culture chamber. Daphnia were fed daily with Chlorella sp. And yeast cells (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) daily and the medium was renewed 3 times per week; cetyl alcohol (~1 mg/L) was added to the culture surface to prevent trapping of the Daphnia in the surface film. The Daphnia were acclimated for a month under these conditions.  * Daphnia protein extraction  For protein extraction, about 550 adult D. pulex were collected and the medium was removed; the Daphnia were rinsed in deionized-water, and then frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen. Prior to sample preparation, the Daphnia were not fed for 12 hr. The collected Daphnia were lysed in RIPA buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate and 0.1% SDS) containing protease inhibitor (10 M sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate) with 50 mM sodium butyrate and 30 mM nicotinamide as Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. The lysed sample was then sonicated 4 times at 20% for 10s on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, CT, USA). The sonicated sample was incubated at 4°C for 1 hr and centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh Eppendorff-tube and its protein content was quantified using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific Pierce, IL, USA). For protein precipitation, the proteins were added final concentration of 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and incubated at 4°C overnight and centrifuged for 10 min at 14,000 g at 4°C; the pellets were then washed twice in ice-cold acetone. Protein pellets were dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer.  * In-solution trypsin digestion  Trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) was added to the protein solution with a ratio of trypsin to protein of 1:50 (w/w); protein digestion was allowed to continue at 37°C for 16 hr. Digested peptides were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The peptide samples were then added to 15 mM cysteine at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. For additional digestion, trypsin was added to the peptide sample at a trypsin to peptide ratio of 1:100 (w/w) at 37°C for 4 hr. Digestion was stopped by adding 50% acetonitrile containing 5% trifluoroacetic acid (final concentration of 1% TFA) to the peptide sample; peptides were dried using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.  * Affinity enrichment of Kac peptides  To enrich Kac peptides, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and incubated with pre-washed antibody agarose beads (PTM Biolabs, IL, USA) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The agarose beads (X L) were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with water. Bound peptides were eluted from the beads using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Eluted fractions were combined, vacuum-dried and then analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
* LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water), directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) with a linear gradient of 5–35% solvent B (98% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min and 35-80% solvent B for 10 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). The peptides were subjected to an NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q-ExactiveTM Plus coupled online to the UPLC. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1,600 Da. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using 28% normalization collision energy (NCE); ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 10 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 2E4 in the MS survey scan with 5.0 s dynamic exclusion. An electrospray voltage of 2.0 kV was applied. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra.   * Database search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were used to search the D. pulex in UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000305, contained 30978 proteins) concatenated with the reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as the fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on lysine and acetylation on N-terminal of the protein were specified as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 1% was set for protein, peptide, and modification sites. Mass tolerance was less than 10 ppm and minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.

### Publication Abstract
Daphnia (Daphnia pulex) is a small planktonic crustacean and a key constituent of aquatic ecosystems. It is generally used as a model organism to study environmental toxic problems. In the past decade, genomic and proteomic datasets of Daphnia have been developed. The proteomic dataset&#xa0;allows for the investigation of toxicological effects in the context of "Daphnia proteomics," resulting in greater insights for toxicological research. To exploit Daphnia for ecotoxicological research, information on the post-translational modification (PTM) of proteins is necessary, as this is a critical regulator of biological processes. Acetylation of lysine (Kac) is a reversible and highly regulated PTM that is associated with diverse biological functions. However, a comprehensive description of Kac in Daphnia is not yet available. To understand the cellular distribution of lysine acetylation in Daphnia, we identified 98 acetylation sites in 65 proteins by immunoprecipitation using an anti-acetyllysine antibody and a liquid chromatography system supported by mass spectroscopy. We identified 28 acetylated sites related to metabolic proteins and six acetylated enzymes associated with the TCA cycle in Daphnia. From GO and KEGG enrichment analyses, we showed that Kac in D.&#xa0;pulex is highly enriched in proteins associated with metabolic processes. Our data provide the first global analysis of Kac in D.&#xa0;pulex and is an important resource for the functional analysis of Kac in this organism.

### Keywords
D. pulex; lysine acetylation; post-translational modification; proteomics

### Affiliations
Kyungpook National University
College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University

### Submitter
Oh Kwang Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Sangkyu Lee
College of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyungpook National University


