### Accession
PXD014936

### Title
Complexome profiling of mitochondrial protein complexes from patients with mutation in NDUFC2 gene

### Description
NDUFC2 is a subunit of the membrane part of NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I). Here we used complexome profiling to study the role of NDUFC2 in complex I stability and assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Blue native electrophoresis Sample preparation and blue native electrophoresis (BNE) of cultured cell pellets were essential done as described (Wittig et al. 2006). Briefly: Cells were collected by scraping and centrifugation, further disrupted using a pre-cooled motor-driven glass/Teflon Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer at 2000 rpm and 40 strokes. Homogenates were centrifuged for 15 min at 600 g to remove nuclei, cell debris, and intact cells. Mitochondrial membranes were sedimented by centrifugation of the supernatant for 15 min at 22´000g. Mitochondria enriched membranes from 20 mg cells were resuspended in 35 µl solubilisation buffer (50 mM imidazole pH 7, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilized with 10 µl 20% digitonin (Serva). Samples were supplemented with 2.5 µl 5% Coomassie G250 in 500 mM aminocaproic acid and 5 µl 0.1% Ponceau S in 50% glycerol. Equal protein amounts of samples were loaded on top of a 3 to 18% acrylamide gradient gel (dimension 14x14 cm). After native electrophoresis in a cold chamber, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid). Sample preparation for complexome profiling Each lane of a BNE gel was cut into equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamid. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid.  Mass spectrometry for complexome profiling Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 50 % mobile phase B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min with a flow rate 300 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*106 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 105 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol MS Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (v1.6.1.0) [Cox et al. 2008] using default settings. Proteins were identified using human reference proteome database UniProtKB with 71785 entries, released in 02/2018. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%.  Intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. The sum of all IBAQ values from sample was normalized to control fibroblasts. Protein abundance within native lanes were normalized to maximum appearance to enable comparison of mitochondrial complexes between control and patients. Slice numbers of the maximum appearance of mitochondrial complex I (979577 Da), complex II (220156 Da) complex III dimer (483695 Da), Complex IV (220156  Da), complex V (618824 Da) and respiratory supercomplex S1, a complex containing complex I, a dimer of complex III and one copy of complex IV (1663827 Da) were used for native mass calibration. The software NOVA (v.0.5.7) was used for hierarchical clustering of complexomics data [Giese et al. 2015].  Wittig I1, Braun HP, Schägger H. (2006) Blue native PAGE. Nat Protoc. 1:418-28. Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Giese H, Ackermann J, Heide H, Bleier L, Dröse S, Wittig I, Brandt U, Koch I. (2015) NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics. 31:440-1.

### Publication Abstract
Leigh syndrome is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, most commonly observed in paediatric mitochondrial disease, and is often associated with pathogenic variants in complex I structural subunits or assembly factors resulting in isolated respiratory chain complex I deficiency. Clinical heterogeneity has been reported, but key diagnostic findings are developmental regression, elevated lactate and characteristic neuroimaging abnormalities. Here, we describe three affected children from two unrelated families who presented with Leigh syndrome due to homozygous variants (c.346_*7del and c.173A&gt;T p.His58Leu) in NDUFC2, encoding a complex I subunit. Biochemical and functional investigation of subjects' fibroblasts confirmed a severe defect in complex I activity, subunit expression and assembly. Lentiviral transduction of subjects' fibroblasts with wild-type NDUFC2 cDNA increased complex I assembly supporting the association of the identified NDUFC2 variants with mitochondrial pathology. Complexome profiling confirmed a loss of NDUFC2 and defective complex I assembly, revealing aberrant assembly intermediates suggestive of stalled biogenesis of the complex I holoenzyme and indicating a crucial role for NDUFC2 in the assembly of the membrane arm of complex I, particularly the ND2 module.

### Keywords
Oxidative phosphorylation system, Lc-msms, Complexome profiling, Complex i assembly

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
(Head, NHS Highly Specialised Mitochondrial Diagnostic Laboratory and Professor of Mitochondrial Pathology), Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle University, UK

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Taylor
(Head, NHS Highly Specialised Mitochondrial Diagnostic Laboratory and Professor of Mitochondrial Pathology), Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle University, UK


