### Accession
PXD014046

### Title
The acetylome analysis of lysine acetylation in the plant pathogenic bacterium Brenneria nigrifluens

### Description
Protein lysine acetylation, a dynamic and reversible posttranslational modification, plays a crucial role in several cellular processes including cell cycle regulation, metabolic pathways, enzymatic activities and protein interactions. Brenneria nigrifluens is the pathogen of shallow bark canker of walnut trees and can cause serious disease on walnut trees. Up to now, it is little known about the roles of lysine acetylation in the plant pathogenic bacteria. In the present study, the lysine acetylome of B. nigrifluens was determined by high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis. In total, we identified 1,866 lysine acetylation sites distributed in 737 acetylated proteins. Bioinformatics results indicate that acetylated proteins participate in many different biological functions in B. nigrifluens. Four conserved motifs, namely, LKac, Kac*F, I*Kac and L*Kac, were identified in this bacterium. Protein interaction network analysis indicates that all kinds of interactions are modulated by protein lysine acetylation. Overall, 14 acetylated proteins are related to the virulence of B. nigrifluens.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture and Protein Extraction  The B. nigrifluens strain LMG 2694 was cultured in tryptic soy broth (TSB, BD, USA) medium by shaking at 200 rpm for 24 h at 30 °C. The harvested cells were washed twice using cold PBS (phosphate-buffered saline) by centrifuging at 1,000 g for 3 min at 4 °C. Then, the centrifuged cell pellet was resuspended in 8 M urea supplemented with 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail III, 65 mM DTT, 3 μm Trichostatin A (TSA), 2 mM EDTA, and 50 nicotinamide. After the remaining debris removed by centrifuging at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, the proteins were deposited by 15% cold trichloroacetic acid for 2 h at -20 °C. The precipitate was washed and dried. The redissolved proteins were defined with a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, USA) based on the manufacturer’s instructions. The digestion of the protein was performed according to the method described by Reverdy et al. 2018. A total of 12 mg protein was used for digestion and divided into 6 components, each of which was enriched with 2 mg peptide. The tests were performed once. The disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma) for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Then, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM NH4CO3 to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  Enrichment of Lysine Acetylated Peptide  The enrichment of lysine acetylated peptide was performed as described by Liu et al. 2016. In brief, tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and incubated with pre-washed anti-acetyllysine antibody conjugated agarose beads (PMT104, PTM Bio, Hangzhou, China) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted by using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The eluted peptides were combined and vacuum-dried. The cleaned peptides with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) were used to analyze by LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described by Liu et al. 2016. In brief, 4μL enriched peptides was used for analysis. The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 7% to 20% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) for 20 min, 20% to 35% for 8 min and climbing to 80% in 2 min then holding at 80% for the last 5 min, all at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to nanospray ion source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using normalized collision energy setting as 30; daughter ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 10.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800. MS2 fixed first mass set as 100.

### Data Protocol
Database Search MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2) were used to analyze MS/MS data. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt database for Brenneria (EniD312). The detailed method was the same as the description by Liu et al. 2016. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 20 ppm for first search precursor ions, 5 ppm for second search precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragmentions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lys and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.  Protein annotation and subcellular localization predication The identified acetylated proteins were classified on basis of the Gene Ontology (GO) (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA) (Hulsegge et al., 2009). Genomes (KEGG) pathways and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes were investigated according to the method descripted by Kanehisa et al. 2004. Identified functional protein domain descriptions were annotated using InterProScan on basis of the protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) (Hunter et al., 2009). Subcellular localization of the proteins was predicted by Wolfpsort (Horton et al., 2007).  2.6 Motif analysis, Functional enrichment analysis and Motif logo-based Clustering Analysis  The model of sequences constituted with amino acids in specific positions of modifier-21-mers was analyzed by Soft motif-x (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site). The background database parameter was all the database protein sequences and other parameters with default.  The enrichment analysis was performed by a functional annotation tool DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.7 (Huang, et al., 2007). The detailed setting was the same as the description by Yu et al. 2016. In brief, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the protein-containing IPI entries against all IPI proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods. A corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant for all the enrichment analysis. Motif logo-based clustering analysis was performed according to the description by Li et al. 2018. All the acetylation substrates categories obtained after enrichment were collated along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value<0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally, these x values were z-transformed for each category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership was visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Plant pathogen, Brenneria nigrifluens

### Affiliations
Research Institute of Forest Ecology Environment and Protection, Chinese Academy of Forestry
Research Institute of Forest Ecology Environment and  Protection

### Submitter
Yong Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Li
Research Institute of Forest Ecology Environment and Protection, Chinese Academy of Forestry


