### Accession
PXD001494

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomics reveals synergistic mechanism of a new erythromycin derivative and oxacillin against methcillin-resistant S. aureus

### Description
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) remains a global health threat with an over 14% fatality rate, in case of invasive infection, in 2011. Multi-drug resistance is the main reason for the failure of therapy. Use of antimicrobial drug combinations with synergistic effect is increasingly seen as a critical strategy to combat multi-drug resistant pathogens such as MRSA. However, the mechanism of synergistic effect has yet been systematically studied. In this work, we investigated a new erythromycin derivative, SIPI-8294, which has been demonstrated to have synergistic effect with oxacillin against MRSA, unlike its parent compound erythromycin. To obtain insights into the mechanism for the synergistic effect, label-free quantitative proteomics was employed. Cultured MRSA was exposed to sub-inhibitory doses of oxacillin, SIPI-8294, erythromycin, and combinations of SIPI-8294/oxacillin and erythromycin/oxacillin to reveal the global proteome responses to drug treatment. Results showed that 200 proteins were differentially expressed in SIPI-8294/oxacillin-treated cells. Among these proteins, the expression levels of penicillin binding protein 2a and β-lactamase, two proteins mainly responsible for oxacillin resistance, were four times lower in the SIPI-8294/oxacillin treatment group than in the erythromycin/oxacillin treatment group. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis also revealed similar trends at the transcription level. These results suggest that the synergistic mechanism may be related to interference with the known oxacillin resistance mechanism. The data also provided some evidence that the combination of SIPI-8294 and oxacillin appears to impact oxidation-reduction homeostasis and cell wall biosynthesis.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were collected and washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) buffer twice. Cell disruption was completed by ultra-sonication in the lysis buffer (8 M urea) for 5 min under ice-water bath. Then the cell lysate was centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 min at 4℃ and the supernatant was subjected to cold acetone precipitation. The precipitated proteins were dissolved in 4 M urea and 30 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.5) and the protein concentration was measured by Bradford Protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, U. S. A.).  Thirty micrograms of proteins were used for the proteomics sample preparation, which was reduced by dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated by iodoacetamide. The resulting proteins were then digested by trypsin (1: 50 w/w, Promega, Madsion, WI) overnight at 37°C. After digestion, the peptide sample was desalted by C18 reverse-phase ZipTip (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) and dried by SpeedVac (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Unless otherwise noted, all reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, U.S.A). The peptide samples were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific LTQ VelosTM platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with a Thermo Accela LC. One microgram of peptides were enriched on a trap column (Zorbax X300 SB-C18, 50.3mm, 5 µm particle size) and separated on a C18 column (Thermo Bio-Basic-18, 1500.1mm, 300 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) at a flow rate of 150 µL/min and 150 min LC run. For the MS parameters, the top ten most intense ions observed in the MS1 scan were set to acquire MS2 spectra. The dynamics exclusion was set as 60 seconds and the normalized collision energy was set at 30%.

### Data Protocol
MM file conversion (v3.9)  was utilized to convert all the raw data into mgf file, and OMSSA was applied to search all the files against MRSA database. The database was constructed by combining complete proteome of 23 strains MRSA in UniProt, 1: 1 ratio shuffled decoy protein sequences and common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine and oxidation on methionine were set as fix modification and variable modification, respectively. The search results were further processed by the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) . The spectral counts of the two technical replicates from the same biological replicate with protein FDR lower than 0.01 were combined.

### Publication Abstract
The use of antibacterial drug combinations with synergistic effects is increasingly seen as a critical strategy to combat multi-drug resistant bacteria such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). In this work, the proteome responses in MRSA under the stress of a sub-inhibitory dose of a synergistic drug combination of a novel erythromycin derivative, SIPI-8294, and oxacillin, were studied by label-free quantitative proteomics. Several control treatment groups were designed to isolate proteome responses potentially related to the synergy: (1) the non-synergistic drug combination of erythromycin and oxacillin, (2) SIPI-8294 only, (3) oxacillin only and (4) erythromycin only. Results showed that 200 proteins were differentially expressed in SIPI-8294/oxacillin-treated cells. Among these proteins, the level of penicillin binding protein 2a, the protein mainly responsible for oxacillin resistance in MRSA, was four times lower in the SIPI-8294/oxacillin group than in the erythromycin/oxacillin group, suggesting that SIPI-8294 may interfere with this known oxacillin resistance mechanism. Moreover, hierarchical clustering analysis of differentially expressed proteins under different treatments revealed that SIPI-8294/oxacillin elicits very different responses than the individual drugs or the non-synergistic erythromycin/oxacillin combination. Bioinformatic analysis indicated that the synergistic effect can be further traced to a disruption in oxidation-reduction homeostasis and cell wall biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Oxacillin， methicillin-resistant s. aureus, Key words: synergistic effect, Label-free quantitative proteomics, Erythromycin derivative

### Affiliations
Chemical engineering
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Liu Xiaofen

### Lab Head
Dr Henry Lam
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology


