### Accession
PXD013935

### Title
Disruption of acetyl group balance in cardiomyocytes augments the mitochondrial acetylproteome without affecting respiratory function or heart susceptibility to pressure overload

### Description
Circumstantial evidence links the development of heart failure to perturbations in oxidative metabolism and corresponding shifts in post-translational modifications (PTMs) of mitochondrial proteins, including lysine acetylation (Kac). Nonetheless, direct evidence that acetyl-PTMs compromise mitochondrial performance remains sparse. Here, we used a respiratory diagnostics platform and serial assessment of cardiac phenotype to evaluate functional consequences of mitochondrial hyperacetylation caused by cardiac deficiency of carnitine acetyltransferase (CrAT) and sirtuin 3 (Sirt3); enzymes that oppose Kac by buffering the acetyl CoA pool and catalyzing lysine deacetylation, respectively.  Although the dual knockout (DKO) manipulation raised the cardiac acetyl-lysine landscape well beyond that observed in response to Sirt3 deficiency or pathophysiological heart remodeling, bioenergetics of DKO mitochondria were remarkably normal. Moreover, DKO hearts were not more vulnerable to pressure overload-induced dysfunction resulting from chronic transaortic constriction. The findings challenge the premise that hyperacetylation per se threatens metabolic resilience by causing broad-ranging damage to mitochondrial proteins. See Davidson et. al. 2019 for further experimental details, reagents, and references.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, powdered biventricular cardiac tissue was resuspended in ice-cold Urea Lysis Buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 40 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl₂ supplemented with 10 mM nicotinamide, 10 μM trichostatin A, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche 5892791001) , and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche 4906837001)). Samples were disrupted with a TissueLyser (Qiagen) and subjected to 3 freeze-thaw cycles with liquid nitrogen followed by sonication with a probe sonicator (three 5-sec bursts, power setting of 3). Samples were clarified by centrifugation at 10,000 rcf for 10 min at 4°C. Protein content of supernatant was determined via BCA assay. 500 μg of protein was aliquoted and diluted to a concentration of 2.5 mg/mL. Samples were reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and unreacted iodoacetamide was quenched by a final addition of DTT.  Samples were digested with Endoproteinase LysC (Wako Chemicals; 1:100 w:w; 5 μg enzyme per 500 μg protein) for 4h at 32°C. Urea was diluted to 1.5 M (using solution of 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 5 mM CaCl₂) and samples digested with trypsin (Promega Seq Grade Modified Trypsin, 50:1 w/w, protein:enzyme) overnight at 32°C. Samples were acidified to 0.5% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged at 10,000 rcf for 10 min at room temperature to clarify. The supernatant was desalted on a 50 mg tC18 SEP-PAK Solid Phase Extraction (SPE) column (Waters) and peptides were eluted with ACN/0.1% TFA. The eluate was frozen on dry ice and dried overnight in a speed vac.  All samples were suspended in 100 μL of 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, mixed with a 10 or 11-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT, 0.8 mg in 50 μL 100% acetonitrile, ThermoFisher), and vortexed for 4h at room temperature. Samples were quenched with 0.8 μL 50% hydroxylamine, combined, frozen, and dried overnight in a speed vac. Dried samples were resuspended in 1 mL 0.5% TFA and desalted on a 100 mg tC18 SEP-PAK SPE column (Waters). The eluate was vortexed and ∼5% was transferred to a separate tube for quantification of unmodified peptides (“input” material) and the larger portion (95%) was retained for acetylpeptide enrichment. Both portions were frozen on dry ice, dried overnight in a speed vac. Acetylpeptide enrichment was performed using the Cell Signaling PTMScan Acetyl-lysine Motif Kit (#13416). Peptide pellets were suspended in 1.4 mL IAP buffer and centrifuged at 10,000 rcf for 5 min at 4°C to clarify. The supernatant was transferred into a tube containing PBS-washed, antibody-bound-beads and incubated on a rotator overnight at 4°C. After incubation, supernatant was removed and beads were washed according to manufacturer's instructions. Bound peptides eluted with 100 μL of 0.15% TFA (2×), acidified to 0.5% TFA and desalted on a 50 mg tC18 SEP-PAK SPE column (Waters), eluted, frozen on dry ice, and dried overnight in a speed vac. Dried samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid water for LC-MS/MS analysis.  The "input" material (retained prior to acetylpeptide enrichment) was processed using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher #84868) according to manufacturer's instructions. The eluate was collected for a total of eight fractions per TMT kit. All fractions were frozen on dry ice and dried overnight in a speed vac. All fractions were frozen on dry ice and dried overnight in a speed vac. Dried fractions were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and peptides were quantified using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (ThermoFisher #23275). Samples were diluted to a 0.1 μg/μL with 0.1% formic acid water for LC-MS/MS analysis. All samples were subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-performance liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer via an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ionization source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Acetylpeptide samples were analyzed with one or more injections of 4 µL and "input" fractions were subjected to 5 μL (1 μg) injections. After trapping on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trapping column (3 μm particle size, 75 μm × 20 mm, Thermo) at a variable flow rate dictated by max pressure of 500 Bar, each sample was subjected to analytical separation on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (2 μm particle size, 75 µm × 500 mm column, Thermo) over a 105 min gradient (300 nL/min) of 5 to 40% solvent B (90% ACN/0.1% TFA), with a column temp. of 55°C. MS¹ was performed with 70,000 resolution, an AGC target of 3×10⁶ ions, and a maximum injection time (IT) of 60 ms. MS² spectra were collected by data-dependent acquisition of the top 10 (loop count) most abundant precursor ions with a charge >1 per MS¹ scan with a 30 sec. dynamic exclusion window. Precursor ions were filtered with a 0.7 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 30. MS² scans were performed at 35,000 resolution with an AGC target of 1×10⁵ ions and a maximum IT of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the UniProt mouse complete proteome database of reviewed (Swiss-Prot) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) proteins, which consisted of 52,015 sequences on the date of download (23-Sep-17). Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2, searching with both Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 with the following default parameters: oxidation (15.995 Da on M) as a variable modification and carbamidomethyl (57.021 Da on C) and TMT6plex (229.163 Da on peptide N-terminus and K, same nominal mass as TMT10plex) as fixed modifications, and 2 missed cleavages (full trypsin specificity). All runs with an acetyl-enriched fraction included acetylation (42.011 Da on K) as a variable modification and TMT as a variable modification on K (remaining fixed on peptide N-term). PSMs from each search algorithm were filtered to a 1% FDR using Percolator (PMID: 17952086) and PTM site localization probabilities were determined using ptmRS (PMID: 22073976). PSMs were grouped to unique peptides while maintaining a 1% FDR for peptides and a 90% localization threshold for PTMs. Peptides from acetyl and input fractions were grouped to proteins using the rules of strict parsimony and proteins were filtered to 1% FDR using the Protein FDR Validator node of PD2.2. Reporter ion intensities for all PSMs with co-isolation interference below 0.5 and an average S/N >5 for reporter ions were summed together at the peptide and protein level, but quantification for each data type (acetyl, input) were kept separate. Peptides shared between protein groups were excluded from protein quantitation calculations.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Mitochondria, Lc-msms, Mouse, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, and Director of Basic Research at the Duke Molecular Physiology Institute
Duke Molecular Physiology Institute

### Submitter
Michael Davidson

### Lab Head
Dr Deb Muoio
Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, and Director of Basic Research at the Duke Molecular Physiology Institute


