### Accession
PXD023598

### Title
PP1 inhibition using 1E7-03 during Human Cytomegalovirus infection in foreskin fibroblasts

### Description
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) carries the human protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) and other human proteins in its tegument layer for a rapid supply upon infection. However, the biological relevance behind PP1 incorporation and release upon infection is unclear. Additionally, PP1 is a difficult molecular target due to its promiscuity and similarities between the catalytic domain of multiple phosphatases. In this study, we circumvented these shortcomings by using 1E7-03, a small molecule protein-protein interaction inhibitor, as a molecular tool of noncatalytic PP1 inhibition in CMV infection.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins (150 ug per group) extracted from DMSO or 1E7-03 treated HFF cells infected with HCMV were ultrasonically suspended in sodium phosphate buffer (pH 8.0), reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (1 hr at 60°C), alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (20 min, RT in the dark) and digested with 10 ug trypsin (Promega) at 37°C on an orbital shaker overnight. Peptide mixtures from each group were divided into two equal parts. One half was directly purified by Pierce Graphite Spin Columns (88302, Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions, and analyzed by LC-FT/MS.  The other half of peptide mixtures were enriched by high-select TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment kit (88301, Thermo Scientific). TiO2 spin columns were prepared by washing with 20 uL of 0.4% TFA in 80% acetonitrile and 20 uL of 25% lactic acid. Peptide mixtures were dried, resuspended in 150 uL of 25% lactic acid, added to TiO2 spin columns, and incubated for 10 mins at room temperature with end-over-end rotation (repeat twice). Samples were washed with 20 uL of 25% lactic acid and 20 uL of 25% lactic acid (repeat twice). Then samples were eluted using 50 uL of 1.5% ammonium hydroxide and 50 uL of 5% pyrrolidine. The elution fractions were combined, acidified by adding 100 uL of 2.5% TFA, and purified using Graphite Spin Columns. The enriched phosphopeptides were submitted to LC-FT/MS analysis. LC-FT/MS analysis was performed on a LC-20AD nano HPLC system (Shimadzu Corporation, Columbia, MD, USA) coupled to LTQ XL Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the installed Xcalibur software (version 2.0.7, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Processed peptides or phosphopeptides were resuspended in 50 uL water with 0.1% formic acid (v/v). A total of 10 uL of sample was loaded and analyzed using an in house C18-packed analytical column (25 cm × 150 um, 5 um, 200 A, Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA). Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Samples were separated with a linear gradient of 6-55 min, 2-40% B, 55-62 min, 40-80% B, 62-70 min, 80% B (v/v) at the flow rate of 600 nL/min. The Orbitrap was operated under data-dependent acquisition mode. The spray voltage, capillary temperature and capillary voltage were set to 2.0 kV, 200°C, and 39.5 V, respectively. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in Orbitrap over 300-2000 m/z with a resolution of 30000, followed by MSn scans by CID activation mode. The three most intense ions were selected for fragmentation using collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the LTQ.

### Data Protocol
LC-FT/MS raw data were searched by Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD 2.4) using Sequest search engine (Thermo Fisher Scientific), against the Uniprot Human database at a false discovery cut off ≤1%. Filter settings to define peptide confidence were: charge 2 = 1.5 (XCorr score), charge 3 = 2.0 and charges >4 =2.5 for high confidence peptides; charge 2 = 0.5, charge 3 = 0.8 and charges >4 =1 for modest confidence peptides. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites was allowed. The mass tolerance for the precursor ion was set on 30 ppm and for the fragment on 0.1 Da. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were enabled as dynamic modifications, while carbamidometylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. The same filter settings as above were used to determine the peptide confidence. The label-free quantification of phosphopeptides was performed with SIEVE 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific). The identified phosphopeptides by PD 1.4 were unloaded as framing seeds.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Pp1, Hcmv, Cmv

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna
Department of Internal Medicine I Division of Infectious Diseases Medical University of Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Carmen Stecher

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Steininger
Department of Internal Medicine I Division of Infectious Diseases Medical University of Vienna, Austria


