### Accession
PXD033506

### Title
GLH/VASA helicases promote germ granule formation to ensure the fidelity of piRNA-mediated transcriptome surveillance

### Description
The ability to distinguish non-self from self is the key characteristic for any defense system. piRNAs function as guardians of the genome by silencing non-self nucleic acids and transposable elements in animals. Many piRNA factors are enriched in perinuclear germ granules, but whether their localization is required for piRNA biogenesis or function is not known. Here we show that GLH/VASA helicase mutants exhibit defects in forming perinuclear condensates containing PIWI and other small RNA cofactors. These mutant animals produce largely normal levels of piRNA but are defective in triggering piRNA silencing. Strikingly, while many piRNA targets are activated in GLH mutants, we observed that hundreds of endogenous genes are aberrantly silenced by piRNAs. This defect in self versus non-self recognition was also observed in other mutants where perinuclear P granules are disrupted. Together, our results argue that perinuclear germ granules function critically to promote the fidelity of piRNA-based transcriptome surveillance in C. elegans and preserve self versus non-self distinction.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were subjected to SDS PAGE gel electrophoresis experiments, and gel slice was subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin at overnight at 37°C. Purified peptides were desalted using a C18 Stage Tip column (Pierce), concentrated and dried. Then the peptides are reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution for subsequent liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis using a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoliter flow rate Easy-nLC 1200 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). The buffers used in the liquid chromatography separation consisted of buffer A (0.1% formic acid and 19.9% H2O) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 19.9% H2O). The liquid chromatography separation was achieved by linear gradient elution at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The related liquid phase gradient was as follows: 0-3min, linear gradient of liquid B from 2% to 8%; 3-43 min, linear gradient of liquid B from 8% to 28%; 43-51 min, linear gradient of liquid B from 28% to 40%; 51- 52 min, linear gradient of liquid B from 40% to 100%; 52-60 min, linear gradient of liquid B maintained at 100%. The Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was used in the data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The full scan survey mass spectrometry analysis was performed as detection mode of positive ion, analysis time of 60 minutes, scan range of 350-1800 m/z, resolution of 60,000 at m/z 20, AGC target of 3e6, and maximum injection time (IT) of 50ms. The 20 highest intensity precursor ions were analyzed by the secondary mass spectrometry (MS2) with resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200, AGC target of 1e5, and maximum IT of 25ms, activation type of HCD, isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and normalized collision energy of 28. The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 and used the database from Uniprot Protein Database (species: Caenorhabditis elegans).

### Data Protocol
The samples were subjected to SDS PAGE gel electrophoresis experiments, and gel slice was subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin at overnight at 37°C. Purified peptides were desalted using a C18 Stage Tip column (Pierce), concentrated and dried. Then the peptides are reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid aqueous solution for subsequent liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis using a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoliter flow rate Easy-nLC 1200 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). The buffers used in the liquid chromatography separation consisted of buffer A (0.1% formic acid and 19.9% H2O) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 19.9% H2O). The liquid chromatography separation was achieved by linear gradient elution at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The related liquid phase gradient was as follows: 0-3min, linear gradient of liquid B from 2% to 8%; 3-43 min, linear gradient of liquid B from 8% to 28%; 43-51 min, linear gradient of liquid B from 28% to 40%; 51-52 min, linear gradient of liquid B from 40% to 100%; 52-60 min, linear gradient of liquid B maintained at 100%. The Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was used in the data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The full scan survey mass spectrometry analysis was performed as detection mode of positive ion, analysis time of 60 minutes, scan range of 350-1800 m/z, resolution of 60,000 at m/z 20, AGC target of 3e6, and maximum injection time (IT) of 50ms. The 20 highest intensity precursor ions were analyzed by the secondary mass spectrometry (MS2) with resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200, AGC target of 1e5, and maximum IT of 25ms, activation type of HCD, isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and normalized collision energy of 28. The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 and used the database from Uniprot Protein Database (species: Caenorhabditis elegans).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vasa, Glh-1

### Affiliations
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Donglei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Donglei Zhang
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China


