### Accession
PXD018980

### Title
Characterisation of South American camelid fibres by proteomics

### Description
The species-specific identification of fibre origin is essential in archaeology but reveals challenging for closely related species. This is particularly true between the four South American Camelids (SAC) species: alpaca, guanaco, llama and vicuña. The analysis of proteins extracted from hairs and/or yarns by proteomics has emerged as a powerful method to differentiate between species. However, for SAC, the database information available is very poor, which limits this approach. In this study, we analysed 42 modern and 4 archaeological reference samples from the four SAC species.

### Sample Protocol
For each individual, about 20 mg hair was washed with milliQ water + 2% Decon™ 90 (Decon Laboratories) under stirring, washed 2 × 15 min in a MeOH/CHCl3 (1:2 v/v) under stirring and then washed 15 min in milliQ water under sonication. The washed fibres were extracted upon incubation under stirring for 3 days at 50°C in 3 mL 25mM Tris-HCl, 2.4 M thiourea, 5M urea (pH 8.5), and dithiothreitol (DTT, 100 mM). After filtration, a fraction of the protein extract (100 µL) was reduced upon 1 h incubation the presence of DTT (5 mM) and alkylated upon 1 h incubation in the dark in the presence of iodoacetamide (20 mM). Finally, 1 μL of trypsin gold® (1 g/L in 50 mM acetic acid) was added, the solution was completed to 1 mL with milliQ water and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. The digests were treated by solid phase extraction on a C8 cartridge (Sep-Pak C8 Plus, 400 mg sorbent, 37–55 μm particle size, Waters). After conditioning the cartridge with 8 mL HPLC-grade CH3CN and 4 mL milliQ-water + 0.1% formic acid (FA), the sample was loaded and the cartridge was washed with 1 mL H2O + 0.1% FA and eluted with 2 mL H2O + 0.1% FA/ CH3CN 20:80 (v/v). The samples were dried under vacuum and resuspended in 1 mL H2O + 0.1% FA/ CH3CN 70:30 (v/v). The trypsic digests were analysed by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography - mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS) on an Ultimate 3000-RSLC system (Thermo Scientific) connected to an electrospray ionization - quadrupole–time of flight (ESI-Q-TOF) instrument (Maxis II ETD, Bruker Daltonics). The separation was achieved using a RSLC Polar Advantage II Acclaim column (2.2 μm, 120 Å, 2.1 × 100 mm, Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of mobile phase A (milliQ water + FA 0.1%) and B (LC-MS grade CH3CN + FA 0.08%), at 300 μL/min. The MS detection was carried out in positive mode in the range m/z 100–2000. Analyses were performed using collision-induced dissociation in data dependent auto-MS/MS mode. The MS instrument was calibrated at each run start using a sodium formate solution.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analysed and converted to mgf files using Data Analysis 4.4 software (Bruker Daltonics). Database search was carried out against the NCBI and SwissProt databases with Mascot (www.matrixscience.com, in-house licence). Combined Mascot results were generated with ProteinScape Version 4.0.2 (Bruker Daltonics). We restricted the search to Mammalia, allowed 2 missed cleavages and considered Cys carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and Asp and Glu deamidation together with Met oxidation as variable modifications. Charge states 1+, 2+, and 3 + were considered with 10 ppm tolerance for precursor ions and 0.05 Da tolerance for MS/MS fragments. The statistic decoy was applied to minimise false-positive match.

### Publication Abstract
The proteomic analysis of hairs, yarns or textiles has emerged as a powerful method to determine species of origin, mainly used in archaeozoological research and fraud control. Differentiation between the South American camelid (SAC) species (the wild guanaco and vicu&#xf1;a and their respective domesticates the llama and alpaca) is particularly challenging due to poor database information and significant hybridization between species. In this study, we analysed 41 modern and 4 archaeological samples from the four SACs species. Despite strong similarities with Old World Camelidae, we identified 7 peptides specific to SACs assigned to keratin K86 and the keratin-associated proteins KAP13-1 and KAP11-1. Untargeted multivariate analysis of the LC-MS data permitted to distinguish SAC species and propose discriminant features. MS/MS-based molecular networking combined with database-assisted de novo sequencing permitted to identify 5 new taxonomic peptides assigned to K33a, K81 and/or K83 keratins and KAP19-1. These peptides differentiate the two wild species, guanaco and vicu&#xf1;a. These results show the value of combining database search and untargeted metabolomic approaches for paleoproteomics, and reveal for the first time the potential of molecular networks to highlight deamidation related to diagenesis and cluster highly similar peptides related to interchain homologies or intra- or inter-specific polymorphism. SIGNIFICANCE: This study used an innovative approach combining multivariate analysis of LC-MS data together with molecular networking and database-assisted de novo sequencing to identify taxonomic peptides in palaeoproteomics. It constitutes the first attempt to differentiate between hair fibres from the four South American camelids (SACs) based on proteomic analysis of modern and archaeological samples. It provides different proteomic signatures for each of the four SAC species and proposes new SAC taxonomic peptides of interest in archaeozoology and fraud control. SACs have been extensively exploited since human colonization of South America but have not been studied to the extent of their economic, cultural and heritage importance. Applied to the analysis of ancient Andean textiles, our results should permit a better understanding of cultural and pastoral practices in South America. The wild SACs are endangered by poaching and black-market sale of their fibre. For the first time, our results provide discriminant features for the determination of species of origin of contraband fibre.

### Keywords
Keratins, Hair fibres, South american camelids, Paleoproteomics, Molecular network

### Affiliations
Museum national d'Histoire naturelle
Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle

### Submitter
Severine Zirah

### Lab Head
Dr Plateforme analytique du Museum national d'Histoire naturelle
Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle


