### Accession
PXD013071

### Title
iTRAQ-based MS analysis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells with inflammasome activation

### Description
We previously reported that tumor-cell inflammasomes play a key role in tumor control and act as favorable prognostic markers in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Activated inflammasomes frequently form distinguishable ASC specks and govern the cellular secretion of IL-1. However, we know little about the biological and biochemical differences between cells with and without ASC speck formation. In this study, we used proteomic iTRAQ analysis to analyze the proteomes of NPC cells that differ in their apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase-recruitment domain (ASC) speck formation upon cisplatin treatment. We identified proteins that were differentially over-expressed in cells with specks, and found that they fell into two Gene ontology (GO) pathways: mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos) and ubiquinone metabolism. We observed up-regulation of various components of the OxPhos machinery (including NDUFB3, NDUFB8 and ATP5B), and subsequently found that these changes lead to mitochondrial ROS (mtROS) production, which promotes the formation and activation of NLRP3 inflammasomes and subsequent pyroptosis. In NPC patients with [Define this term?] high-NLRP3 tumors, better recurrence-free survival was significantly associated with high-level expression of NDUFB8 (P=0.037) and ATP5B (P=0.029), as examined using immunohistochemistry. Together, our results demonstrate that upregulated mitochondrial OxPhos components are strongly associated with NLRP3 inflammasome activation in NPC. Our findings further suggest that high-level expression of OxPhos components could be prognostic markers and/or promising therapeutic targets in patients with NPC.

### Sample Protocol
NPC-HK1-ASC-GFP cells were isolated by flow cytometry and lysed in buffer containing 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC; Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% RapiGestTM SF (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) on ice for 15 min. The cell lysate was collected, sonicated on ice and centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 25 min at 4°C. The resulting supernatant was used as the cell extract. Protein concentrations were determined using a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). For tryptic in-solution digestion, 20 µg protein of each sample was reduced with 4.8 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP; Sigma-Aldrich) and 260 mM TEABC at 60ºC for 1 hr and then alkylated with 9.6 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS; Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 30 min. The proteins were digested at 37ºC overnight with modified sequencing-grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) using a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:1 (w/w). Trypsin-digested peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagents (AB Sciex, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The peptides from ASC speck(-) and speck(+) cells were labeled with iTRAQ 114 and 115 tags, respectively. For the biological replicates, the iTRAQ 116 and 117 tags were incubated with peptide samples obtained from different batches of ASC speck(-) and speck(+) cells. After incubation for 1 hr at room temperature, the four labeled samples were pooled, frozen and lyophilized to dryness using a Proteomic CentriVap Concentrator System (Labconco, Kansas City, MO, USA). The peptides were desalted using a ziptip (Merck Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) packed with Resin-C18 (GE Healthcare, UK). In brief, a sufficient volume of Resin-C18 (1 µL for 10 µg of proteins) was packed into a ziptip. To activate the Resin-C18, the ziptip was sequentially loaded with 200 µL of acetonitrile (Mallinckrodt Baker, Ireland) at concentrations of 75%, 40% and 3% in 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and then centrifuged at 300 rpm for 30 seconds. This step was repeated three times to ensure complete activation. Dried iTRAQ-labeled peptide samples were reconstituted with 0.1% TFA to a final protein concentration of 1 µg/µL. The reconstituted peptides were loaded into the ziptip, centrifuged at 300 rpm for 30 seconds and washed with 3% acetonitrile in 1% TFA. Finally, the iTRAQ-labeled peptide samples were eluted from the ziptip with 30%, 50% and 70% acetonitrile in 1% TFA and dried by vacuum centrifugation.  The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were separated using an on-line 2D-HPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides (20 μg) were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (20 μL) and desalted using a ziptip home-packed with C18 resin (5-20 μm, LiChroprep RP-18; Merck, Taipei, Taiwan). The resultant samples were vacuum-dried, reconstituted in 50 μL of buffer A (0.1% formic acid and 30% acetonitrile), and loaded onto the homemade column (Luna SCX, 5 μm, 0.5 × 180 mm) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 30 min. The peptides were then eluted with a 0-100% gradient of buffer B (0.5 M ammonium chloride, 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The resulting 44 peptide fractions were diluted in-line prior to being trapped onto the Zorbax 300SB-C18 column (0.3 × 5 mm; Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA). Each fraction was then separated on a homemade column (HydroRP 2.5 μm, 75 μm inner diameter and 20 cm length) with a 15-μm tip using buffer C (acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid). A linear gradient of buffer C (3-28% for 37 min, 28-50% for 12 min, 50-95% for 2 min, 95% for 5 min and 3% for 9 min) was applied at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The LC equipment was connected to the LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was operated using the Xcalibur software (Version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full-scan MS was performed in the Orbitrap over a range of 400 to 2,000 Da and a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. The ion signals of (Si(CH3)2O)6H+ at m/z 445.120025, 462.146574 and 536.165365 were used for lock masses and internal calibration. Each 12 data-dependent MS/MS scan events of six collision-induced dissociations (CID) and six higher-energy collision-induced dissociations (HCD) were followed by one MS scan for the six most abundant ions in the preview MS scan. The m/z values selected for MS/MS were excluded dynamically for 40 seconds with a relative mass window of 1.5 Da. The electrospray voltage was set to 1.8 kV and the temperature of the capillary was set to 220°C. Automatic gain control was applied to preclude over-filling of the ion trap, and 1000 ms/2,000,000 ions, 150 ms/5 × 103 ions and 300 ms/30,000 ions were set as the maximum accumulated time/ions for the full scan, CID and HCD, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein database searching was performed using the Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the reporter ion quantifier node for iTRAQ data analysis. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot human sequence database (released 2018/03, selected for Homo sapiens; 20,198 entries) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.2.0; Matrix Science, London, UK). For peptide identification, one missing tryptic cleavage was allowed. Mass tolerances of 10 ppm, 0.5 Da and 0.05 Da were permitted for intact peptide masses, CID fragment ions and HCD fragment ions, respectively. Oxidized methionine (+16 Da) was considered a potential variable modification, and iTRAQ (N terminal, +144 Da), iTRAQ (K, +144 Da) and methyl methanethiosulfonate (C, +46 Da) were considered fixed modifications. The search results (peptide-spectrum matches) were filtered for a highly confident peptide identification in Proteome Discoverer to ensure that the overall false discovery rate was less than 0.01. Identification of epithelial keratins was excluded. Proteins with single peptide hits were removed. Each quantified protein contained at least two quantifiable spectra. The quantitative data were exported from Proteome Discoverer and manually normalized such that the log2 of protein ratios displayed a median value of zero for all peptides in a given protein. This was performed across an entire labeling experiment to correct for any variation in protein abundance. The cutoff value for determining whether a protein was considered dysregulated was selected according to a comparison of protein levels between the same ASC speck(-) samples in two different batches. Proteins with a log2 ratio greater than the mean ratio plus one standard deviation (SD) and those with a log2 ratio less than the mean ratio minus one SD were considered to be overexpressed and underexpressed, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
We previously reported that tumor inflammasomes play a key role in tumor control and act as favorable prognostic markers in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Activated inflammasomes frequently form distinguishable specks and govern the cellular secretion of IL-1&#x3b2;. However, we know little about the biological and biochemical differences between cells with and without apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase-recruitment domain (ASC) speck formation. In this study, we used proteomic iTRAQ analysis to analyze the proteomes of NPC cells that differ in their ASC speck formation upon cisplatin treatment. We identified proteins that were differentially over-expressed in cells with specks, and found that they fell into two Gene ontology (GO) pathways: mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos) and ubiquinone metabolism. We observed up-regulation of various components of the OxPhos machinery (including NDUFB3, NDUFB8 and ATP5B), and subsequently found that these changes lead to mitochondrial ROS (mtROS) production, which promotes the formation and activation of NLRP3 inflammasomes and subsequent pyroptosis. In NPC patients, better local recurrence-free survival was significantly associated with high-level expression of NDUFB8 (<i>p</i> = 0.037) and ATP5B (<i>p</i> = 0.029), as examined using immunohistochemistry. However, there were no significant associations between the expression of NDUFB8 and ATP5B with overall survival of NPC patients. Together, our results demonstrate that up-regulated mitochondrial OxPhos components are strongly associated with NLRP3 inflammasome activation in NPC. Our findings further suggest that high-level expression of OxPhos components could be markers for local recurrence and/or promising therapeutic targets in patients with NPC.

### Keywords
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, Inflammasome, Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, Itraq

### Affiliations
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University

### Submitter
Chih-Ching Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Chih-Ching Wu
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan


