### Accession
PXD020959

### Title
LepR deficiency, MEFs and iPSCs, LC-MS/MS

### Description
Leptin receptors (Lepr) are expressed by various types of stem cells including mesenchymal stem cells, hematopoietic stem cells, embryonic stem cells, and induced pluripotent stem cells. Leptin/lepr signaling is also a central regulator of metabolism. However, the role of Lepr in pluripotency, metabolic disease progression and growth development is still controversial and poorly understood. In the present study, we explored the Lepr function in disease progression, pluripotency and metabolism using day 14.5 mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and their reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) as model system. We successfully reprogrammed mouse embryonic fibroblasts into iPSCs from control and db/db (Lepr deficient) mice. Using a global quantitative proteomic approach, we identified key pathways regulating pluripotency, metabolic homeostasis and protein synthesis during fetal growth and development. The Lepr MEFs show abnormal metabolic abnormalities and mitochondrial dysfunction as compared to control MEFs, while Lepr iPSCs show upregulated elongated factor 4 e (eIF4e) protein synthesis pathway and altered Oct4 and Stat3 pathways which are involved in normal fetal growth development. Furthermore, chip analysis revealed that higher Stat3 binding on the promoter of eIF4e in Lepr iPSCs leads to higher protein synthesis in these cell types as compared to control iPSCs. Finally, point mutation corrected Lepr iPSCs using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing method showed recovered pluripotency, metabolic and protein synthesis pathways. In conclusion, we have shown that Lepr signaling is involved in the regulation of the metabolic properties and key developmental pathways in MEFs and stemness of pluripotent stem cells. Disruption of Lepr signaling has been shown to involve in the pathophysiology of various diseases including obesity and diabetes. The generated MEFs and iPSCs in this present study provide valuable tools to explore the role of Lepr in the progression of obesity, diabetes and metabolic abnormalities, and to find the putative targets of Lepr signaling during the development of these diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lyzed and equal amounts of protein from each cell line were prepared for analysis by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Peptides from each cell lines were labeled using isobaric tags (Tandem Mass Tags, TMT, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and multiplexed in equal amounts, experimental design in supplemental information. Each multiplexed sample was subjected to fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite coupled to a Dionex Ultimate NCS-3000 LC system (both Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were converted using MSConvert as part of the ProteoWizard package, and searched with OMSSA and X!Tandem via SearchGUI. Search engine results were processed using PeptideShaker. Notably, so-called protein ambiguity groups were built based on the unicity of peptide sequences in proteins as described in. In the following, proteins identified by mass spectrometry will implicitly refer to protein ambiguity groups. All identification results were validated at a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) threshold estimated using the target/decoy strategy. Proteins abundances were inferred from the reporter ion intensities using Reporter.

### Publication Abstract
The role of leptin receptor (OB-R) signaling in linking pluripotency with growth and development and the consequences of dysfunctional leptin signaling on progression of metabolic disease is poorly understood. Using a global unbiased proteomics approach we report that embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) carrying the db/db mutation exhibit metabolic abnormalities, while their reprogrammed induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) show altered expression of proteins involved in embryonic development. An upregulation in expression of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4e (Eif4e) and Stat3 binding to the Eif4e promoter was supported by enhanced protein synthesis in mutant iPSCs. Directed differentiation of db/db iPSCs toward the neuronal lineage showed defects. Gene editing to correct the point mutation in db/db iPSCs using CRISPR-Cas9, restored expression of neuronal markers and protein synthesis while reversing the metabolic defects. These data imply a direct role for OB-R in regulating metabolism in embryonic fibroblasts and key developmental pathways in iPSCs.

### Keywords
Mouse, Stem cells

### Affiliations
Universitetet i Bergen
KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen N-5009, Norway

### Submitter
Heidrun Vethe

### Lab Head
Dr Helge Raeder
KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen N-5009, Norway


