### Accession
PXD026559

### Title
Proteomics analysis LC-MS/MS of human bladder cancer cells

### Description
A total of 6,526 proteins were identified in this study, of which 5880 proteins contained quantitative information. 1.2 times  as the threshold of differential expression change, and statistical test t-test p-value<0.05 as the threshold of significance,  among the quantified proteins, the expression of 193 proteins in the T24-KO/T24-V2 comparison group was Up-regulation, and down-regulation of 130 protein expressions (for more information about differences in comparison groups, please see the main body of the report). Based on the above data, we performed systematic bioinformatics analysis (protein function annotation) on all identified proteins based on the above data, and performed all differentially expressed proteins), and performed all differentially expressed proteins), Function classification, function enrichment and cluster analysis based on function enrichment. And combining the above information, it provides a reference direction for in-depth research based on the downstream proteome.

### Sample Protocol
The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against XXX database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Bladder

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University

### Submitter
XiaoLing Ying

### Lab Head
Dr XiaoLing Ying
The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University


