### Accession
PXD017405

### Title
Persistent changes in the glutamatergic and GABAergic signaling in adolescent rats exposed developmentally to chlorpyrifos

### Description
Male Sprague Dawley rats were treated daily by oral gavage with either corn oil, chlorpyrifos, or PF-04457845 (selective FAAH inhibitor) from postnatal day10-16. The rats were scarified on postnatal day 38, and brains were collected and stored at -80˚C. Amygdala was isolated from the brain, homogenized the tissue, proteins were quantified, trypsin digested, and analyzed by LC ESI MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Collected amygdala tissue was lysed in NP-40 lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0.5% NP-40) supplemented with 1mM of the serine protease inhibitor, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) using a MicrosonTM ultrasonic cell disruptor. The debris was removed by centrifugation at 21,000g at 4˚C for 30 min. The protein concentration was measured using a PierceTM BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific). From each sample, 100 µg of protein was precipitated by chloroform/methanol extraction. Briefly, the sample volume was adjusted to 200 µl using NP-40 lysis buffer. To each sample, 600 µl of methanol, 150 µl of chloroform, and 450 µl of milliQ-H20 were added, vortexed, and centrifuged at room temp for 1 min, at 21,000g. The upper aqueous phase was discarded and 450 µl of methanol was added to the lower phase, vortexed, and centrifuged under the same conditions for 2 min. The supernatant was discarded and protein digestion was performed by suspending the pellet in 33 µl of 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) containing 6 M urea. The samples were reduced with 1.6 µl of 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 45min at room temperature and alkylated with 6.6 µl of 200 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min at room temperature. The alkylation reaction was then quenched by adding 20 µl of 200 mM DTT for 45 min at room temperature. The urea concentration was reduced by adding 258 µl of milliQ-H20. Finally, the proteins were digested with trypsin (sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega) at 1:50 ratio for 18 hr at 37˚C. Protein digestion was terminated by lowering the pH of each sample to <6 by adding concentrated acetic acid. The samples were desalted using C18 SepPak columns (Waters, USA). The sample was then dried down in speed vac. All samples were submitted to the University of Arizona Proteomic Consortium for analysis by tandem mass spectrometry coupled to liquid chromatography (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were extracted by Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, USA) using the Sequest algorithm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.3.0.339). Sequest was set up to search RattusNovergicus_UniprotKB assuming the digestion enzyme as trypsin. Fully tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavage sites were selected. While searching with Sequest, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM were used. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. The results were also validated using X!Tandem, another search engine and displayed with Scaffold v 4.5.1 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland OR), a program that relies on various search engine results (i.e.: Sequest, X!Tandem, MASCOT) and uses Bayesian statistics to reliably identify more spectra. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 91.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 91.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contain similar peptides and cannot be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Label-free protein quantitation using the sum of weighted spectra associated with a protein was performed in Scaffold. The proteins that passed the Fisher’s exact test with a p-value of ≤ 0.05 were used for biological interpretation. Differentially expressed proteins (DEP) were identified based on a fold change value, which was calculated by applying normalization in Scaffold. A minimum value of 0.2 was used for the samples in which a protein was not identified.

### Publication Abstract
Chlorpyrifos (CPF) remains one of the most widely used organophosphorus insecticides (OPs) despite the concerns about its developmental neurotoxicity. Developmental exposure to CPF has long-lasting negative impacts, including abnormal emotional behaviors. These negative impacts are observed at exposure levels do not cause inhibition of acetylcholinesterase, the canonical target of OPs. Exposure to CPF at these levels inhibits the endocannabinoid metabolizing enzyme fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) but it is not clear what the persistent effects of this inhibition are. To investigate this, male rat pups were exposed orally to either corn oil, 0.75&#x202f;mg/kg CPF, or 0.02&#x202f;mg/kg PF-04457845 (PF; a specific inhibitor of FAAH) daily from postnatal day 10 (PND10) - PND16. This dosage of CPF does not inhibit brain cholinesterase activity but inhibits FAAH activity. On PND38 (adolescence), the protein expression in the amygdala was determined using a label-free shotgun proteomic approach. The analysis of control vs CPF and control vs PF led to the identification of 44 and 142 differentially regulated proteins, respectively. Gene ontology enrichment analysis revealed that most of the proteins with altered expression in both CPF and PF treatment groups were localized in the synapse-related regions, such as presynaptic membrane, postsynaptic density, and synaptic vesicle. The different biological processes affected by both treatment groups included persistent synaptic potentiation, glutamate receptor signaling, protein phosphorylation, and chemical synaptic transmission. These results also indicated disturbances in the balance between glutamatergic (&#x2193; Glutamate AMPA receptor 2, &#x2193; Excitatory amino acid transporter 2, and &#x2191; vesicular glutamate transporter 2) and GABAergic signaling (&#x2191; GABA transporter 3 and &#x2191; glutamate decarboxylase 2). This imbalance could play a role in the abnormal emotional behavior that we have previously reported. These results suggest that there is a similar pattern of expression between CPF and PF, and both these chemicals can persistently alter emotional behavior as a consequence of inhibition of FAAH.

### Keywords
Chlorpyrifos, Developmental, Gabaergic, Amygdala, Glutamatergic, Protein expression

### Affiliations
Mississippi State University

### Submitter
Navatha Alugubelly

### Lab Head
Dr Russell L.Carr
Mississippi State University


