### Accession
PXD012030

### Title
Linking the Vegetative Cell and Spore Proteomes of Peptoclostridium difficile

### Description
Peptoclostridium difficile, an anaerobic pathogen, known as causative agent of pseudomembranous colitis and nosocomial diarrhoea. It can also form highly resistant endospores which lay the basic foundations of infection prior germination in the human guts. P. difficile exploits toxins TcdA and TcdB as well as a plethora of other proteins to infect the host. The present study is exclusively focused on the interconnection between vegetative cell and spore proteomes. A novel method developed for 15N metabolic labelling of P. difficile vegetative cells has enabled mass spectrometric quantification of relative protein levels of this pathogen. A total of 1095 proteins has been identified over the combined spores and vegetative cells. From this 796 proteins have been relatively and reproducibly quantified between spores and vegetative cells. Of the quantified proteins 80% are common to both the vegetative cells and spores, indicating that pathogenic P. difficile employs a relatively modest proteomic changeover for survival. Also of the identified proteins are 20%putative membrane proteins which may provide essential targets to combat P. difficile infections. Detailed data analysis has qualified potential biomarkers for diagnostic purposes.

### Sample Protocol
Typically, 0.5 mg (dry weight) of spores/cells was suspended in lysis buffer and disrupted for seven cycles with 0.1 mm zirconium beads (BioSpec Products, Bartlesville, OK, USA) using a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Technologies, Aix en Provence, France). The tubes were incubated for 1 h at 56°C and alkylated using 15 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in the dark. The reaction was quenched with 20 mM thiourea and digestion with Lys-C (at 1:200 protease/protein ratio) was carried out for 3 h at 37°C. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with trypsin (at 1:100 protease/protein ratio) was carried out at 37°C for 18 h. The tryptic digest was freeze-dried. Before use, the freeze-dried samples were re-dissolved in 0.1% TFA and desalted using Omix μC18 pipette tips (80 μg capacity, Varian, Palo Alto, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. ZIC-HILIC chromatography was used to fractionate the freeze-dried peptide samples. Dried digests were dissolved in 500 µl of Buffer A (85% acetonitrile, 5 mM ammonium acetate, 0.4% acetic acid, pH 5.8), centrifuged to remove any undissolved components, and injected into the chromatography system. An isocratic flow with 100% Buffer A for 10 min was followed by a gradient of 0-30% Buffer B (30% acetonitrile, 5 mM ammonium acetate, 0.5% acetic acid, pH 3.8) in the first phase and 30-100% of Buffer B in the second phase (flow rate 400 µl/min). The peptides were eluted and collected in 10 fractions, freeze-dried, and stored at -80°C until further use. ZIC-HILIC fractions were re-dissolved in 0.1% TFA and peptide concentrations were determined by measuring the absorbance at 205 nm. LC-MS/MS data were acquired with an Apex Ultra Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 7 T magnet and a Nano electrospray Apollo II Dual Source coupled to an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) HPLC system. Samples containing up to 300 ng of the tryptic peptide mixtures were injected as a 40μl 0.1% TFA, 3% ACN aqueous solution together with 25 fmol of [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B human peptide and loaded onto a PepMap100 C18 (5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300  μm inner diameter × 5 mm length) precolumn. Following injection, the peptides were eluted through an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter × 250 mm length) analytical column (Thermo Scientific, Etten-Leur, the Netherlands) to the Nano electrospray source. Gradient profiles of up to 120 min were used from 0.1% formic acid-3% acetonitrile to 0.1% formic acid-50% acetonitrile (flow rate 300 nl/min). Data-dependent Q-selected peptide ions were fragmented in the hexapole collision cell at an argon pressure of 6 × 10-6 mbar (measured at the ion gauge) and the fragment ions were detected in the ICR cell at a resolution of up to 60000. In the MS/MS duty cycle, three different precursor peptide ions were selected from each survey MS. The MS/MS duty cycle time for one survey MS and three MS/MS acquisitions was approximately 2s. Instrument mass calibration was better than 1 ppm over m/z range of 250–1500.

### Data Protocol
Each raw FT-MS/MS data set was mass calibrated better than 1.5 ppm on the peptide fragments from the co-injected GluFib calibrant. The 10 ZIC-HILIC fractions were jointly processed as a multifile with the MASCOT DISTILLER program (version 2.4.3.1, 64 bits), MDRO 2.4.3.0 (MATRIX science, London, UK), including the Search toolbox and the Quantification toolbox. Peak-picking for both MS and MS/MS spectra was optimized for the mass resolution of up to 60000. Peaks were fitted to a simulated isotope distribution with a correlation threshold of 0.7, with minimum signal to noise ratio of 2. The processed data were searched in a MudPIT approach with the MASCOT server program 2.3.02 (MATRIX science, London, UK) against the P. difficile 630 ORF translation database. The MASCOT search parameters were as follows: enzyme - trypsin, allowance of two missed cleavages, fixed modification - carboamidomethylation of cysteine, variable modifications - oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, quantification method - metabolic 15N labelling, peptide mass tolerance and peptide fragment mass tolerance - 50 ppm. MASCOT MudPIT peptide identification threshold score of 20 and FDR of 2% were set to export the reports. Using the quantification toolbox, the quantification of the light spore peptides relative to the corresponding heavy cell peptides was determined as light/heavy ratio using Simpson’s integration of the peptide MS chromatographic profiles for all detected charge states. The quantification parameters were: Correlation threshold for isotopic distribution fit - 0.98, 15N label content - 99.6%, XIC threshold - 0.1, all charge states on, max XIC width -120 seconds, elution time shift for heavy and light peptides - 20 seconds. All isotope ratios were manually validated by inspecting the MS spectral data. The protein isotopic ratios were then calculated as the average over the corresponding peptide ratios. For each of the three replicas, the identification and quantification reports were imported into a custom made program to facilitate data combination and statistical analysis. Protein identification was validated with identifications in at least two replicas. For these identified proteins the relative quantification was calculated as the geometric mean of at least two validated light/ heavy ratios.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Clostridioides difficile</i>-associated infection (CDI) is a health-care-associated infection caused, as the name suggests, by obligate anaerobic pathogen <i>C.&#xa0;difficile</i> and thus mainly transmitted via highly resistant endospores from one person to the other. In vivo, the spores need to germinate into cells prior to establishing an infection. Bile acids and glycine, both available in sufficient amounts inside the human host intestinal tract, serve as efficient germinants for the spores. It is therefore, for better understanding of <i>C.&#xa0;difficile</i> virulence, crucial to study both the cell and spore states with respect to their genetic, metabolic, and proteomic composition. In the present study, mass spectrometric relative protein quantification, based on the <sup>14</sup>N/<sup>15</sup>N peptide isotopic ratios, has led to quantification of over 700 proteins from combined spore and cell samples. The analysis has revealed that the proteome turnover between a vegetative cell and a spore for this organism is moderate. Additionally, specific cell and spore surface proteins, vegetative cell proteins CD1228, CD3301 and spore proteins CD2487, CD2434, and CD0684 are identified as potential protein markers for <i>C.&#xa0;difficile</i> infection.

### Keywords
One-pot sample processing, Proteomics, Peptoclostridium difficile, Spores

### Affiliations
University of Amsterdam
Department of Mass Spectrometry of Biomacromolecules, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Wishwas R. Abhyankar

### Lab Head
Dr Chris G. de Koster
Department of Mass Spectrometry of Biomacromolecules, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands


