### Accession
PXD022971

### Title
Identification C3 cleavage sites by alpha-Thrombin

### Description
Identification C3 cleavage sites by alpha-Thrombin. Goal of the experiment is the validation of predicted cleavage sites by HTPS

### Sample Protocol
Purified human complement protein C3 (Complement Technology, Inc., USA) was used in a cleavage assay with Thrombin α. 10 µg of each protein was exposed to the protease at 1/100 [E]/[S] ratio and the reaction was incubated at 37° for 2 hours in 50 mM HEPES buffer pH 7.4 with 200 mM NaCl. As a control, the protein sample was incubated under the same conditions without the protease. After the proteolysis, the reaction was terminated by heat-inactivation of the protease. The sample was mixed at 1:1 ratio with 100 mM HEPES pH 6.5 and reductive demethylation of free N-termini was performed by adapting the steps from the dimethylation TAILS protocol. Briefly, formaldehyde and NaCNBH3 were added in 2:1 ration to reach a 20 mM and 10 mM final concentration, respectively. The reaction mixture was incubated for 16 hours at 37 °C before the reaction was stopped by diluting the reaction mix 1:5 in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8. Trypsin was added to the reaction at 1:50 ratio and the reaction was allowed to proceed for 16 hours at 37 °C. The reaction was terminated by acidification with formic acid and the peptides were recovered with the use of a standard C18 cleanup step as earlier described. MS identification was performed on Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fischer Scientific) interfaced with an Easy 1000 nano-LC unit (Thermo Fischer Scientific), coupled online with the nano-electrospray. The flow rate on the nano-LC was set to 300 nl/min and the peptides were chromatographically separated with a 5 – 35 % 90 minute linear acetonitrile/water gradient in 0.1% formic acid. During the entire run, the MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap in positive ion mode with 2.0 kV voltage in the mass range of 350 to 1600 m/z, set to the profile mode and a resolution of 120.000 at 400 m/z. For peptide fragmentation, a CID fragmentation method with normalized collision energy 35 was used and the MS/MS spectra were obtained from the 15 most intense precursor ions from the full MS spectra. During the entire run, precursors with repeat count of 1 were dynamically excluded for 30 seconds. Precursors with charges +2, +3 and +4 were considered and the MS/MS spectra were recorded in the ion trap analyzer in the centroid mode with normal scan rate and standard settings.

### Data Protocol
Identification of Thrombin α cleavages was performed by specific database searches with MaxQuant as earlier described , where demethylation of N-termini and Lysine side chains (+28.0313 Da) were considered as variable modifications. The labelled N-termini present in the Thrombin-treated samples but absent from the negative controls were considered as thrombin cleavages and compared with the predicted cleavage sites from HTPS Motif Score.

### Publication Abstract
Proteases are among the largest protein families and critical regulators of biochemical processes like apoptosis and blood coagulation. Knowledge of proteases has been expanded by the development of proteomic approaches, however, technology for multiplexed screening of proteases within native environments is currently lacking behind. Here we introduce a simple method to profile protease activity based on isolation of protease products from native lysates using a 96FASP filter, their analysis in a mass spectrometer and a custom data analysis pipeline. The method is significantly faster, cheaper, technically less demanding, easy to multiplex and produces accurate protease fingerprints. Using the blood cascade proteases as a case study, we obtain protease substrate profiles that can be used to map specificity, cleavage entropy and allosteric effects and to design protease probes. The data further show that protease substrate predictions enable the selection of potential physiological substrates for targeted validation in biochemical assays.

### Keywords
Cleavages identification, Htps

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland  Faculty of Science, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
ETH

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland  Faculty of Science, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland


### SDRF

