### Accession
PXD049136

### Title
Widespread prevalence of a post-translational modification in activation of an essential bacterial DNA damage response

### Description
DNA methylation plays central roles in diverse cellular processes, ranging from error-correction during replication to regulation of bacterial defense mechanisms. Nevertheless, certain aberrant methylation modifications can have lethal consequences. The mechanisms by which bacteria detect and respond to such damage remain incompletely understood. Here, we discover a highly conserved but previously uncharacterized transcription factor (Cada2), which orchestrates a methylation-dependent adaptive response in Caulobacter. This response operates independently of the SOS response, governs the expression of genes crucial for direct repair, and is essential for surviving methylation-induced damage. Our molecular investigation of Cada2 reveals a cysteine methylation-dependent post-translational modification and mode of action distinct from its E. coli counterpart, a trait conserved across all bacteria harboring a Cada2-like homolog instead. Extending across the bacterial kingdom, our findings support the notion of divergence and co-evolution of adaptive response transcription factors and their corresponding sequence-specific DNA motifs. Despite this diversity, the ubiquitous prevalence of adaptive response regulators underscores the significance of a transcriptional switch, mediated by methylation post-translational modification, in driving a specific and essential bacterial DNA damage response.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection: Cells over-expressing flag-tagged wild type cada2 or its mutants (cada2R68A, cada2R114A) from a xylose-inducible promoter in a Δcada2 background were used. Overnight cultures grown in PYE media containing gentamycin was back-diluted to 0.025 OD600 and grown at 30°C for 3 hrs. At ∼0.1OD600, 1.5mM MMS and 0.3% xylose was added to the culture and culture volume corresponding to 0.6 OD600 was collected after 4 hrs of treatment. The culture was pelleted following which supernatant was discarded. The pelleted cells were resuspended in 200 μL of lysis buffer [500mM Tris-HCL(pH6.8), 8% SDS, 40% glycreol, 2-Mercaptoethanol and sufficient amount of bromophenol blue] and heated at 95°C for 3 minutes. This was followed by 30 second vortex spin, followed by a short spin. The above two steps were repeated twice. The resuspended cells were again heated to 95°C post which samples were loaded on to a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and subjected to electrophoresis. The gel was appropriately resolved and stained with Coomassie dye. Bands corresponding to the size of Cada2-3x-Flag (∼37 kDa) were excised from the gel, resuspended in milliQ water and submitted to the NCBS mass spectrometry facility for further processing.  Sample preparation and mass spectrometry: The excised gel fragments were first washed thrice with LC-MS water post which the supernatant water was discarded. Next, the gel pieces were chopped followed by destaining with 1:1 100 mM Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) with 100% acetonitrile (ACN). Post destaining, the supernatant was discarded. ∼200 μL of 100% ACN was then added and the sample was kept at room temperature till the gel pieces shrunk, following which the supernatant was discarded. The previous step of ACN addition was repeated for a second time. The gel pieces were allowed to dry for a few minutes at room temperature. Next, the gel was suspended in a minimum of 500 ng of Trypsin with 100-200 μL of 100mM TEAB. The samples were then kept for overnight trypsin digestion at 37 °C. 100 μL of 100% ACN with 0.1% Formic acid was then introduced to the digested sample and the digested sample were sonicated for 5 min. The supernatant was then collected into a fresh tube. The post-digestion step was repeated for a second time. The collected supernatant was then dried using a SpeedVac vaccum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. This was followed by desalting post which samples were injected into Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled to a Thermo EASY nanoLC 1200 chromatographic system for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The results were analyzed using the PeakStudio 8.0 for identifying peptide fragments and their associated post-translational modifications (if any).The MS/MS data was searched against the primary sequence of the Cada2 protein (wild type or mutant). Searches were conducted with a parent mass error tolerance of 10.0 ppm and a fragment mass error tolerance of 0.1 Da. The detected peptides were further searched for the presence of methylation modifications (+14.02).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Methylation damage, Bacterial ptms, Adaptive response, Dna repair, Dna damage, Bacteria, Sos response, Caulobacter

### Affiliations
National Centre for Biological Sciences
National Centre for Biological Sciences (NCBS), Bangalore, India

### Submitter
Aditya Kamat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Anjana Badrinarayanan
National Centre for Biological Sciences (NCBS), Bangalore, India


