### Accession
PXD027941

### Title
Spatial proteomics reveals profound subcellular reorganization in human keratinocytes exposed to UVA light

### Description
The effects of UV light on the skin have been extensively investigated. However, systematic information about how exposure to UVA light, the least energetic but the most abundant UV radiation reaching the Earth, shapes the subcellular organization of proteins is lacking. Using subcellular fractionation, mass-spectrometry-based proteomics, machine learning algorithms, immunofluorescence, and functional assays, we mapped the subcellular reorganization of the proteome of human keratinocytes in response to UVA light. Our workflow quantified and assigned subcellular localization and redistribution patterns for over 3000 proteins, of which about 600 were found to redistribute upon UVA exposure. Reorganization of the proteome affected modulators of signaling pathways, cellular metabolism and DNA damage response. Strikingly, mitochondria were identified as the main target of UVA-induced stress. Further investigation demonstrated that UVA induces mitochondrial fragmentation, up-regulates redox-responsive proteins and attenuates respiratory rates. These observations emphasize the role of this radiation as a potent metabolic stressor in the skin.

### Sample Protocol
Two million cells were plated in 100 mm dishes 48 hours before the experiments (until cells reached 80-90% confluency). An entire dish containing around eight million cells yielded at least 10 µg of protein in the fraction with the lowest yield, which was enough for mass spectrometry analysis. Cells were trypsinized and harvested by centrifugation 30 minutes after irradiation. The cell pellet was washed twice in PBS and incubated for 10 minutes in 1 mL of hypotonic lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 50 mM Sucrose, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EGTA) on ice. Cells were then transferred to a Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer and homogenized with 30 strokes on ice (until at least 70% of cells were stained with trypan blue). After homogenization, 110 µL of hypertonic sucrose buffer (2.5 M sucrose, 25 mM Tris pH 7.5, 0.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EGTA) was used to restore osmolarity. The cell lysate was transferred to 2 mL tubes and centrifuged twice at 200 × g for 5 minutes to remove intact cells. The lysate was then subjected to a series of differential centrifugations: 1000 × g for 10 minutes, 3000 × g for 10 minutes, 5000 × g for 10 minutes, 9000 × g for 15 minutes, 12000 × g for 15 minutes, 15000 × g for 15 minutes, 30000 × g for 20 minutes and 80000 × g  for 40 minutes. In total, each of the five biological replicates of each condition yielded nine fractions. The supernatant was collected because it contains the remaining cytosolic proteins. Afterward, fractions enriched with different organelles were lysed in 8 M urea containing 0.1% deoxycholate. The total protein concentrations were quantified using a BCA assay kit (Thermo Scientific), and 10 µg of protein per fraction were digested and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Aliquots corresponding to 10 µg of protein per sample were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for one hour, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes, diluted ten-fold with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested by the addition of two aliquots of trypsin (1:40 and 1:50, respectively, with an interval of four hours between the additions). The samples were digested overnight at 30°C with agitation (400 rpm). Digestion was stopped by adding 4% trifluoracetic acid (TFA), and then the samples were dried. Samples were desalted using the StageTip protocol. Peptides were washed ten times with 0.1% TFA in the StageTips and eluted with 50% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. Each sample was injected in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to a Nano EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were injected into a trap column (nanoViper C18, 3 μm, 75 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) with 12 µL of solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at 980 bar. After this period, the trapped peptides were eluted onto a C18 column (nanoViper C18, 2 μm, 75 μm × 15 cm, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and subsequently separated with a 5-28% acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% formic acid for 80 minutes, followed by a 28-40% acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% formic acid for 10 minutes. The eluted peptides were detected in the data-dependent acquisition mode under positive electrospray ionization conditions. A full scan (m/z 400-1600) was acquired at a 60000 resolution, followed by HCD fragmentation of the most intense ions, considering an intensity threshold of 5 × 104. Ions were filtered for fragmentation by the quadrupole with a transmission window of 1.2 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 30, and the Orbitrap detector analyzed the fragments with a 30000 resolution. The number of MS2 events between full scans was determined by a cycle time of 3 seconds. A total of 5 × 105 and 5 × 104 ions were injected in the Orbitrap with accumulation times of 50 and 54 seconds for the full scan and MS2 acquisition, respectively. Monocharged ions or ions with undetermined charges were not selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant. Each fraction was considered a different sample in the experimental design annotation file required for the MaxQuant analysis. A matrix of relative quantification data (LFQ) for proteins in each fraction was obtained and used for subsequent analysis. Each protein was normalized by the total sum of the LFQs for a given replicate/cell map, yielding a value between 0 and 1. Proteins that were not quantified in at least 3 biological replicates were filtered out to remove uninformative fractionation profiles with missing values generated by stochastic fragmentation in the shotgun proteomics approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spatial proteomics, Keratinocytes, Uva light

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo
Universidade de São Paulo

### Submitter
Hellen Valerio

### Lab Head
Dr Paolo Di Mascio
Institute of Chemistry, University of São Paulo


