### Accession
PXD026079

### Title
Differential interferon-α subtype immune signatures suppress SARS-CoV-2 infection

### Description
Type I interferons (IFN-I) exert pleiotropic biological effects during viral infections, balancing virus control versus immune-mediated pathologies and have been successfully employed for the treatment of viral diseases. Humans express twelve IFN-alpha (α) subtypes, which activate downstream signalling cascades and result in distinct patterns of immune responses and differential antiviral responses. Inborn errors in type I IFN immunity and the presence of anti- IFN autoantibodies account for very severe courses of COVID-19, therefore, early administration of type I IFNs may be protective against life-threatening disease. Here we comprehensively analysed the antiviral activity of all IFNα subtypes against SARS-CoV-2 to identify the underlying immune signatures and explore their therapeutic potential. Prophylaxis of primary human airway epithelial cells (hAEC) with different IFNα subtypes during SARS-CoV-2 infection uncovered distinct functional classes with high, intermediate and low antiviral IFNs. In particular IFNα5 showed superior antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 infection. Dose-dependency studies further displayed additive effects upon co-administered with the broad antiviral drug remdesivir in cell culture. Transcriptomics of IFN-treated hAEC revealed different transcriptional signatures, uncovering distinct, intersecting and prototypical genes of individual IFNα subtypes. Global proteomic analyses systematically assessed the abundance of specific antiviral key effector molecules which are involved in type I IFN signalling pathways, negative regulation of viral processes and immune effector processes for the potent antiviral IFNα5. Taken together, our data provide a systemic, multi-modular definition of antiviral host responses mediated by defined type I IFNs. This knowledge shall support the development of novel therapeutic approaches against SARS-CoV-2.

### Sample Protocol
Infection of Human airway epithelial cells  Human airway epithelial cells (hAEC) were obtained from lung transplant donors post mortem or from explanted lungs Selection criteria for donors are listed in the Eurotransplant guidelines. For ALI cultures, cells were thawed, expanded in KSFM for 5-7 days and transferred to transwell inserts (PE Membrane, 12 well plates, 0.4 µm pore size, Corning). A monolayer hAECs were grown submerged in S/D Media (1:1 mixture of DMEM (StemCell) and BEpiCM-b (ScienCell), supplemented with Penicillin and Streptomycin, HEPES (Gibco) (12.5mL/l, 1M), 1x Bronchial Epithelial Cell Growth Supplement (ScienCell), and EC-23 (Tocris) (5mM) until they reached confluency. Apical media was removed and cell differentiation was induced under air exposure for 2 weeks. Infection was started after cells were fully differentiated measured by movement of cilia, secretion of mucus and transepithelial electrical resistance (>1000Ω/cm2). Fully differentiated hAECs were washed with HBSS apically for 10 min before infection. For SARS experiments, the cells were infected apically with 30,000 PFU diluted in HBSS. The cells were incubated with the inoculum for 1 h in 33°C in a 5 % CO2 atmosphere. Thereafter, the inoculum was aspirated and the cells were washed thrice with 150 µl of HBSS for 10 min. The last wash was collected and stored at -80 °C as 0 h sample. At the indicated time points, cells were washed apically for 10 min and the washes were subjected to an end-point dilution assay or to a plaque titration assay as described for SARS-CoV-2. Treatment of hAECs was performed by adding the indicated amounts of IFNs directly to the cell culture medium on the basolateral side of the cells.  Proteomics sample preparation Cells were washed with ice cold PBS and harvested in urea buffer (30 mM Tris HCl, 7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 0.1% NaDOC, pH 8.5). Cells were centrifuged for 15 min at 16.100 x g and 4 °C and the supernatant was further processed. Tryptic digestion was performed on 20 µl cell lysate. Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding final 5 mM DTT (Dithiothreitol) for 15 minutes at 50 °C before thiols were alkylated by final 15 mM IAA (iodoacetamide) for 15 min in the dark. Hydrophilic and hydrophobic Cytiva Sera-Mag Carboxyl-Magnet-Beads (GE Healthcare) were mixed 1:1 and 2 µl beads (25 µg/µl) were added per samples. The samples were filled up to 70% ACN (acetonitrile) and incubated for 15 min to ensure protein binding to the beads. Subsequently, beads were washed two times with 70% EtOH followed by washing with 100% ACN. Beads were resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate carbonate containing 0.2 µg trypsin (SERVA) per sample and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The peptides were transferred into a new reaction tube, vacuum dried and dissolved in 0.1 % TFA (trifluoroacetic acid).  LC-MS/MS Analysis 400 ng tryptic peptides per sample were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Dionex) coupled to a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were pre-concentrated on a C18 trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) within seven minutes at a flow rate of 30 μL/min with 0.1 % trifluoric acid and subsequently transferred to a Nano Viper C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed by a gradient from 5% - 30% solvent B over 120 minutes at 400 nL/min (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 0.1% formic acid, 84% acetonitrile). Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 70,000 at 400 m/z within a mass range of 350 – 1400 m/z. The 10 highest abundant peptide ions were fragmented by HCD (NCE [normalized collision energy] = 27) and MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics Data Analysis Peptide identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant (v.1.6.17) searching UniProtKB/SwissProt (2020_05, 563,552 entries) restricted to either Homo sapiens or Homo sapiens and SARS-CoV-2. Search parameters were default, LFQ was used for peak quantification and normalization was enabled. Peptides were considered for quantification irrespective of modifications. Match between runs was enabled when the analysis was performed considering human proteins only. Statistical data analysis was conducted using R (v.3.6.2). Differences between the experimental groups were assessed using t-tests (paired, two-sided) and proteins quantified in minimum 3 of 4 donors per group with minimum 2 unique peptides, a p-value ≤ 0.05 and a ratio of mean abundances ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.67 were considered statistically significant. Proteins that were quantified in one experimental group but not detected at all in an opposed group were defined as On-Offs between these groups.

### Publication Abstract
Type I interferons (IFN-I) exert pleiotropic biological effects during viral infections, balancing virus control versus immune-mediated pathologies, and have been successfully employed for the treatment of viral diseases. Humans express 12 IFN-alpha (&#x3b1;) subtypes, which activate downstream signaling cascades and result in distinct patterns of immune responses and differential antiviral responses. Inborn errors in IFN-I immunity and the presence of anti-IFN autoantibodies account for very severe courses of COVID-19; therefore, early administration of IFN-I may be protective against life-threatening disease. Here we comprehensively analyzed the antiviral activity of all IFN&#x3b1; subtypes against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) to identify the underlying immune signatures and explore their therapeutic potential. Prophylaxis of primary human airway epithelial cells (hAEC) with different IFN&#x3b1; subtypes during SARS-CoV-2 infection uncovered distinct functional classes with high, intermediate, and low antiviral IFNs. In particular, IFN&#x3b1;5 showed superior antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 infection in&#xa0;vitro and in SARS-CoV-2-infected mice in&#xa0;vivo. Dose dependency studies further displayed additive effects upon coadministration with the broad antiviral drug remdesivir in cell culture. Transcriptomic analysis of IFN-treated hAEC revealed different transcriptional signatures, uncovering distinct, intersecting, and prototypical genes of individual IFN&#x3b1; subtypes. Global proteomic analyses systematically assessed the abundance of specific antiviral key effector molecules which are involved in IFN-I signaling pathways, negative regulation of viral processes, and immune effector processes for the potent antiviral IFN&#x3b1;5. Taken together, our data provide a systemic, multimodular definition of antiviral host responses mediated by defined IFN-I. This knowledge will support the development of novel therapeutic approaches against SARS-CoV-2.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Therapy, Ifnα subtypes, Antiviral treatment, Covid-19, Type i ifn, Isg

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Ruhr-University Bochum  Medizinisches Proteom-Center Clinical Proteomics - Translational Proteomics and University Hospital Knappschaftskrankenhaus Bochum Department of Anesthesia, Intensive Care Medicine, and Pain Therapy

### Submitter
Thilo Bracht

### Lab Head
Dr Thilo Bracht
Ruhr-University Bochum  Medizinisches Proteom-Center Clinical Proteomics - Translational Proteomics and University Hospital Knappschaftskrankenhaus Bochum Department of Anesthesia, Intensive Care Medicine, and Pain Therapy


### SDRF
- organism: Homo sapiens
- organism part: Lung
- cell type: Epithelial cell
- disease: not available, COVID-19
- instrument: NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002523, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002524, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002525, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002526, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002527, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002528, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002529, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002530, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002531, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002532, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002533, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002534, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002535, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002536, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002537, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002538, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002539, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002540, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002541, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002542, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002543, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002544, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002545, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002546, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002547, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002548, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002549, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002550, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002551, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002552, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002553, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002554, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002555, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002556, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002557, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002558, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002559, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002560, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002561, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002562, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002563, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002564, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002565, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002566, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002567, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002568, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002569, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002570, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002571, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002572, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002573, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002574, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002575, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002576, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002577, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002578, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002579, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002580, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002581, NT=Q Exactive HF;AC=MS:1002582

