### Accession
PXD038587

### Title
Lung Cancer Exosomes Hypoxic v Normoxic

### Description
Exosomes derived from NSCLC cells under normoxic or hypoxic conditions were compared to identify hypoxic associated enrichment of proteins in exosomes.

### Sample Protocol
sEV preparations were reduced by the addition of 10 mM dithiothreitol (4°C 1-hour, 22°C 2 hours) in the presence of 2% SDS, protease inhibitors (SigmaAldrich, Cat# P8340) and 50 mM Tris.HCl pH 8.8.  Samples were then alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamide to 25 mM (22°C 1-hour) and methanol co-precipitated overnight at -20°C with trypsin (1:100 enzyme:substrate). Pellets were resuspended in 10% acetonitrile, 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested at 37°C for 8 hours with further trypsin added after 2 hours (1:100 enzyme:substrate). LCMS analysis of acidified digests (trifluoroacetic acid) was performed by interfacing a NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) in front of an Elite Orbitrap ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Two micro-grams of digest was loaded onto a 20 mm x 180 µm Symmetry C18 trap (Waters) and separated over 120 minutes on a 200 mm x 75 µm, BEH130 1.7 µm column (Waters) using a series of linear gradients (buffer A: aqueous 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) 2% B to 5% B over 5 minutes, 30% B over 75 minutes, 50% B over 10 minutes 95% B over 5 minutes and hold for 6 minutes, re-equilibrate in 2% B.  Eluate from the column was introduced into the mass spectrometer through a 10 µm P200P coated silica emitter (New Objective) and Nanospray-Flex source (Proxeon Biosystems A/S).  Source voltage 1.8 kV, heated capillary temperature 275 °C, using a top 15 method MS acquired in the orbitrap at 120 000 resolution AGC 1E6, MS2 in the ion-trap AGC 1E4, 50 ms maximum injection time.  MS1 lock mass of 445.120024 was used.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4 34). MaxQuant was used to assign peptide sequences to tandem mass spectra, assign peptides to proteins according to the principle of parsimony and perform label-free quantification. The complete proteome for Homo sapiens (70,956 canonical sequences downloaded from www.uniprot.org on 12 January 2017) was used for the MaxQuant (RRID:SCR_014485) database search.

### Publication Abstract
Despite significant therapeutic advances, lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide<sup>1</sup>. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients have a very poor overall five-year survival rate of only 10-20%. Currently, TNM staging is the gold standard for predicting overall survival and selecting optimal initial treatment options for NSCLC patients, including those with curable stages of disease. However, many patients with locoregionally-confined NSCLC relapse and die despite curative-intent interventions, indicating a need for intensified, individualised therapies. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), the phenotypic depolarisation of epithelial cells to elongated, mesenchymal cells, is associated with metastatic and treatment-refractive cancer. We demonstrate here that EMT-induced protein changes in small extracellular vesicles are detectable in NSCLC patients and have prognostic significance. Overall, this work describes a novel prognostic biomarker signature that identifies potentially-curable NSCLC patients at risk of developing metastatic NSCLC, thereby enabling implementation of personalised treatment decisions.

### Keywords
Nsclc, Exosomes

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
QIMR Berghofer

### Submitter
Richard Lobb

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Moller
QIMR Berghofer


