### Accession
PXD026458

### Title
HDX-MS Analysis of CD47 Conformational Dynamics

### Description
CD47 is the only 5-transmembrane (5-TM) spanning receptor of the immune system. Its extracellular domain (ECD) is a cell surface ‘marker of self’ that binds SIRPα and inhibits macrophage phagocytosis, and cancer immuno-therapy approaches in clinical trials are focused on blocking CD47/SIRPα interaction. Using hydrogen-deuterium exchange we show that CD47’s ECLR architecture, comprised of two extracellular loops and the SWF loop, creates a molecular environment stabilizing the ECD for presentation on the cell surface.

### Sample Protocol
HDX was conducted on an HDX PAL robot (LEAP Technologies, Carrboro, NC) where 5 μL of each protein construct at 1 mg/mL was diluted into 55 μL of deuterium oxide (D2O) buffer (10 mM phosphate buffer, 0.05% DDM, D2O, pD 7.0) to start the labeling reactions. The reactions were carried out for different time periods in the range of 20 seconds to 1 hour. The reaction was quenched at the end of each labeling reaction period by adding quenching buffer (100 mM phosphate buffer with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride (GdnCl) and 0.4 M tris(2-carboxylethyl)phosphine (TCEP), pH 2.5, 1:1, volume/volume), and 50 μL of quenched sample was injected into Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC HDX ManagerTM. Proteolytic digestion was performed online using a Enzymate pepsin column, 300Å, 5 µm, 2.1 mm X 30 mm (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA), at 20 °C under 100 µL/min flow rate for 3 min. The deuterated peptides were trapped and desalted for 3 min on an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard Pre-column (130Å, 1.7 µm, 2.1 mm x 5 mm) with water containing 0.1% formic acid. Peptide separation was achieved with an ACQUITY UPLC C18 BEH 1.0 × 100.0 mm column (Waters Corp.) with a 10 min gradient of 8% – 85% acetonitrile/water containing 0.1% formic acid operated under 40 µL/min flow rate. All the chromatographic components were held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C. Mass spectra were obtained with a Waters Synapt G2si Q-TOF equipped with a standard ESI source (Waters Corp.). The instrument configuration was the following: capillary was 3.5 kV, sampling cone at 35 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C. Mass spectra were acquired over an m/z range of 260 to 2000.

### Data Protocol
For HDX-MS data analysis, peptic peptides were identified using ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0.2 (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA). Peptide-level deuterium uptakes were calculated using Waters DynamX TM 3.0 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Cd47

### Affiliations
Bristol-Myers Squibb
Bristol-Myers Squibb, USA

### Submitter
Richard Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Huang
Bristol-Myers Squibb, USA


