### Accession
PXD042711

### Title
Immunopeptidome of a human beta cell line infected by Coxsackievirus B strains

### Description
Coxsackievirus B (CVB) infection of pancreatic β cells is associated with β-cell autoimmunity. We investigated how CVB impacts human β cells and anti-CVB T-cell responses. β cells were efficiently infected by CVB in vitro, downregulated HLA Class I and presented few, selected HLA-bound viral peptides. Circulating CD8+ T cells from CVB-seropositive individuals recognized only a fraction of these peptides, and only another sub-fraction was targeted by effector/memory T cells that expressed the exhaustion marker PD-1. T cells recognizing a CVB epitope cross-reacted with the GAD β-cell antigen. Infected β cells, which formed filopodia to propagate infection, were more efficiently killed by CVB than by anti-CVB T cells. Thus, our in-vitro and ex-vivo data suggest limited T-cell responses to CVB, supporting the rationale for CVB vaccination trials for type 1 diabetes prevention. CVB-reactive CD8+ T cells provide biomarkers to follow response to infection and vaccination.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were lysed for 1 h at 4°C with 1% (w/v) octyl-b-D glucopyranoside (Sigma) diluted in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA and 0.1% (v/v) Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), with vortexing every 30 min. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation and pHLA-I complexes isolated by immunoaffinity purification using W6/32 mAb (produced in-house) crosslinked to protein A beads (GE Healthcare) with dimethyl pimelimidate (Sigma). Beads were loaded into GELoader Tips (ThermoFisher), washed and pHLA-I complexes eluted with 10% (v/v) acetic acid. The eluates were further concentrated by SpeedVac, acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, ThermoFisher) and loaded into pre-washed and -equilibrated C18 stage tips (ThermoFisher). After further washing, peptides were eluted with 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN, ThermoFisher) and 0.05% (v/v) TFA. Samples were dried, resuspended in 0.05% TFA 2% ACN and spiked with 10 fmol/µL of CMV pp65495-503 peptide (NLVPMVATV) as an internal control. Using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system, peptides were loaded onto a C18 Acclaim PepMap nanocolumn (5 mm x 300 µm; ThermoFisher) and separated with an Acclaim PepMap C18 nanocolumn (50 cm x 75 µm; Dionex) coupled to a nano-electrospray ionization Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). Separation was achieved with a linear gradient of 2-90% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.05% formic acid) at a flow rate of 220 nL/min over 90 min at 35-45°C. Full MS spectra were acquired from 375 to 1,500 m/z, at a resolution of 60,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3,000,000. Precursors were selected using Top20 mode at a resolution of 15,000 with an AGC target of 50,000, a maximum injection time of 120 ms and a dynamic exclusion of 20-30 s. Unassigned and precursor ion charge states of 1 or >5 (or >4 in some cases) were excluded. The peptide match option was set to ‘preferred’.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using Peaks 8.1 (Bioinformatics Solutions). Sequence interpretation was carried out using no enzyme specification, a mass tolerance precursor of 10 ppm for peptides and 0.05 for fragment ions. Sequence matching was done against a database containing: a) all human SwissProt entries (downloaded 11/2017); b) aa sequences translated from RNA-sequencing of the CVB1 and CVB3 strains used; c) an in-house database compiled as described16, containing 679,576 and 530,424 predicted peptide splice products composed of major known and candidate β-cell antigen sequences with CVB1 and CVB3 sequences, respectively; d) large T antigen from simian virus (UniProt P03070) used for β-cell immortalization; and e) putative polyproteins from a xenotropic murine leukemia virus (UniProt F8UU35, F8UU37) known to be present in ECN90 cells40. Post-translational modifications detected with the Peaks PTM built-in module were disregarded as likely artifactual and the unmodified aa sequence was retained. A false discovery rate of 5% was set using a parallel decoy database search. Only the peptides with a 8-12 aa length compatible with HLA-I binding were retained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Beta cells, Coxsackievirus, Immunopeptidome

### Affiliations
Université Paris Cité, Institut Cochin, CNRS, INSERM, Paris
Université Paris Cité, Institut Cochin, CNRS, INSERM, Paris, France

### Submitter
Roberto Mallone

### Lab Head
Dr Roberto Mallone
Université Paris Cité, Institut Cochin, CNRS, INSERM, Paris, France


