### Accession
PXD030443

### Title
Unexpected arabinosylation after humanization of plant protein N-glycosylation

### Description
As biopharmaceuticals, recombinant proteins have become indispensable tools in medicine. An increasing demand, not only in quantity but also in diversity, drives the constant development and improvement of production platforms. The N-glycosylation pattern on biopharmaceuticals plays important roles in activity, serum half-life and immunogenicity. Therefore, production platforms with tailored protein N-glycosylation are of great interest. Plant-based systems have already demonstrated their potential to produce pharmaceutically relevant recombinant proteins, although their N-glycan patterns differ from those in humans. Plants have shown great plasticity towards the manipulation of their glycosylation machinery, and some have already been glyco-engineered in order to avoid the attachment of plant-typical, putatively immunogenic sugar residues. This resulted in complex-type N-glycans with a core structure identical to the human one. Compared to humans, plants lack the ability to elongate these N-glycans with β1,4-linked galactoses and terminal sialic acids. However, these modifications, which require the activity of several mammalian enzymes, have already been achieved for Nicotiana benthamiana and the moss Physcomitrella. Here, we present the first step towards sialylation of recombinant glycoproteins in Physcomitrella, human β1,4-linked terminal N-glycan galactosylation, which was achieved by the introduction of a chimeric β1,4-galactosyltransferase (FTGT). This chimeric enzyme consists of the moss α1,4-fucosyltransferase transmembrane domain, fused to the catalytic domain of the human β1,4-galactosyltransferase. Stable FTGT expression led to the desired β1,4-galactosylation. However, additional pentoses of unknown identity were also observed. The nature of these pentoses was subsequently determined by Western blot and enzymatic digestion followed by mass spectrometric analysis and resulted in their identification as α-linked arabinoses. Since a pentosylation of β1,4-galactosylated N-glycans was reported earlier, e.g. on recombinant human erythropoietin produced in glyco-engineered Nicotiana tabacum, this phenomenon is of a more general importance for plant-based production platforms. Arabinoses, which are absent in  humans, may prevent the full humanization of plant-derived products. Therefore, the identification of these pentoses as arabinoses is important as it creates the basis for their abolishment to ensure the production of safe biopharmaceuticals in plant-based systems.

### Sample Protocol
The N-glycosylation pattern on rhEPO was analyzed via mass spectrometry (MS) on glycopeptides obtained by double digestion with trypsin and GluC. For this, the samples were reduced as described above and additionally S-alkylated with a final concentration of 120 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 20 minutes at RT in darkness prior to SDS-PAGE. After Coomassie staining as described previously (Bohlender et al., 2020), bands corresponding to the molecular weight of rhEPO, ranging between 20 kDa and 40 kDa, were cut. Double digestions were performed with trypsin and GluC in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution at 37°C overnight. Peptide recovery and sample cleanup were performed as described in (Top et al., 2019; https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.00260).

### Data Protocol
The initial MS analysis comparing the three test lines (I10, X13 and X24) was performed on an Q-TOF istrument as described in (Michelfelder et al., 2017;  https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2015070745). Glycopeptides were identified from processed Mascot mgf files using custom Perl skripts. A precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm was used to search for glycopeptide precursors. Glycopeptide identity was confirmed by the presence of typical N-glycan fragments such as GlcNAc oxonium ions (m/z-values: [GlcNAc]+ = 204.087, [GlcNAc - H2O]+ = 186.076, [GlcNAc - 2H2O]+ = 168.066, [GlcNAc - C2H4O2]+ = 144.065, [GlcNAc - CH6O3]+ = 138.055, [GlcNAc - C2H6O3]+ = 126.055) and glycan fragment ions ([GlcNAcHex]+ = 366.139, [GlcNAcHex2] + = 528.191, [GlcNAcHexPent]+ = 498.1818, [GlcNAcHexPent2]+ = 630.2241, [GlcNAcHexPent3]+ = 762.266, [GlcNAcHexPent2]+ = 894.3087) at a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da. Spectra were plotted and labeled from mgf files using custom Perl scripts an R (www.R-project.org).  Further MS analyses were performed on a QExative Plus instrument (Thermo Scientific™, Bremen, Germany) were performed as described previously (Top et al., 2019; https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.00260). Identification of glycopeptides and quantitation was performed as described in (Bohlender et al., 2020; https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2020.610032). In brief, glycopeptides were identified with custom Perl scripts from Mascot mgf files of processed raw data. Precursors were matched at a mass tolerance of 5 ppm and resulting spectra were scanned for the presence of typical glycosylation reporter ions such as GlcNAc oxonium ions (m/z-values: [GlcNAc]+ = 204.087, [GlcNAc - H2O]+ = 186.076, [GlcNAc - 2H2O]+ = 168.066, [GlcNAc - C2H4O2]+ = 144.065, [GlcNAc - CH6O3]+ = 138.055, [GlcNAc - C2H6O3]+ = 126.055) and glycan fragment ions ([GlcNAcHex]+ = 366.139, [GlcNAcHex2]+ = 528.191. For fragment ion matching a mass tolerance of 0.02 Da was specified. Quantitative values (peak areas) for the identified glycopeptides were extracted using a custom Perl script from an allPeptides.txt file obtained from a default MaxQuant (V1.6.0.16; Cox & Mann, 2008; https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1511 ) search on the respective raw data.

### Publication Abstract
As biopharmaceuticals, recombinant proteins have become indispensable tools in medicine. An increasing demand, not only in quantity but also in diversity, drives the constant development and improvement of production platforms. The <i>N</i>-glycosylation pattern on biopharmaceuticals plays an important role in activity, serum half-life and immunogenicity. Therefore, production platforms with tailored protein <i>N</i>-glycosylation are of great interest. Plant-based systems have already demonstrated their potential to produce pharmaceutically relevant recombinant proteins, although their <i>N</i>-glycan patterns differ from those in humans. Plants have shown great plasticity towards the manipulation of their glycosylation machinery, and some have already been glyco-engineered in order to avoid the attachment of plant-typical, putatively immunogenic sugar residues. This resulted in complex-type <i>N</i>-glycans with a core structure identical to the human one. Compared to humans, plants lack the ability to elongate these <i>N</i>-glycans with &#x3b2;1,4-linked galactoses and terminal sialic acids. However, these modifications, which require the activity of several mammalian enzymes, have already been achieved for <i>Nicotiana benthamiana</i> and the moss Physcomitrella. Here, we present the first step towards sialylation of recombinant glycoproteins in Physcomitrella, human &#x3b2;1,4-linked terminal <i>N</i>-glycan galactosylation, which was achieved by the introduction of a chimeric &#x3b2;1,4-galactosyltransferase (FTGT). This chimeric enzyme consists of the moss &#x3b1;1,4-fucosyltransferase transmembrane domain, fused to the catalytic domain of the human &#x3b2;1,4-galactosyltransferase. Stable FTGT expression led to the desired &#x3b2;1,4-galactosylation. However, additional pentoses of unknown identity were also observed. The nature of these pentoses was subsequently determined by Western blot and enzymatic digestion followed by mass spectrometric analysis and resulted in their identification as &#x3b1;-linked arabinoses. Since a pentosylation of &#x3b2;1,4-galactosylated <i>N</i>-glycans was reported earlier, e.g., on recombinant human erythropoietin produced in glyco-engineered <i>Nicotiana tabacum</i>, this phenomenon is of a more general importance for plant-based production platforms. Arabinoses, which are absent in humans, may prevent the full humanization of plant-derived products. Therefore, the identification of these pentoses as arabinoses is important as it creates the basis for their abolishment to ensure the production of safe biopharmaceuticals in plant-based systems.

### Keywords
N-glycan pentosylation, N-glycan humanization, Glyco-engineering, Plant-made recombinant biopharmaceuticals, Physcomitrella (physcomitrium patens), 4-galactosylation, Plant-made pharmaceuticals, Glyco-optimization, Β1

### Affiliations
Head, Chair Plant Biotechnology Faculty of Biology University of Freiburg Schaenzlestrasse 1 D-79104 Freiburg Germany
Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg (Chair Plant Biotechnology), Schaenzlestr. 1, D-79104 Freiburg

### Submitter
Ralf Reski

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf Reski
Head, Chair Plant Biotechnology Faculty of Biology University of Freiburg Schaenzlestrasse 1 D-79104 Freiburg Germany


