### Accession
PXD007827

### Title
Proteomics analysis of different stages during mouse hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury

### Description
6-plex TMT-based quantitative proteomics was used to analysis the proteomic profile in different stages of mouse hepatic ischemia-reperfusion injury.

### Sample Protocol
Male mice at the age of 8-10 weeks (24–27 g) on the background of C57BL/6 were subjected into a 70% warm hepatic I/R injury. Liver samples were collected from sham-treated mice, mice after 60 min of ischemia or indicated time points after reperfusion (3 h, 6h, 12h, 24 h). LC-MS/MS experiments labeled with 6 TMT tags (called TMT 126 to TMT 131) were performed using Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™ HF system. Fifteen mice in each stage with every five mice samples mixed together to a pool, resulting in three biological replicates of each stage (TMT1, TMT2, TMT3).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the Uniport mouse protein sequences using the Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4). Main parameters for integrated Mascot server were as follows: precursor tolerance 20 ppm; fragment tolerance 0.1 Da; trypsin digestion; 2 missed cleavages; fixed modification of lysines and peptide N-termini with TMT 6-plex and of cysteines with carbamido methylation; variable modifications of methionine with oxidation and N-termini with acetyl. Unique peptides with a 1% peptide FDR were reserved for proteins quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Hepatic ischemia-reperfusion (IR) injury is a common clinical issue lacking effective therapy and validated pharmacological targets. Here, using integrative 'omics' analysis, we identified an arachidonate 12-lipoxygenase (ALOX12)-12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (12-HETE)-G-protein-coupled receptor 31 (GPR31) signaling axis as a key determinant of the hepatic IR process. We found that ALOX12 was markedly upregulated in hepatocytes during ischemia to promote 12-HETE accumulation and that 12-HETE then directly binds to GPR31, triggering an inflammatory response that exacerbates liver damage. Notably, blocking 12-HETE production inhibits IR-induced liver dysfunction, inflammation and cell death in mice and pigs. Furthermore, we established a nonhuman primate hepatic IR model that closely recapitulates clinical liver dysfunction following liver resection. Most strikingly, blocking 12-HETE accumulation effectively attenuated all pathologies of hepatic IR in this model. Collectively, this study has revealed previously uncharacterized metabolic reprogramming involving an ALOX12-12-HETE-GPR31 axis that functionally determines hepatic IR procession. We have also provided proof of concept that blocking 12-HETE production is a promising strategy for preventing and treating IR-induced liver damage.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, 6-plex tmt

### Affiliations
Institute of Model Animal of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

### Submitter
Yanfang Su

### Lab Head
Dr Hongliang Li
Institute of Model Animal of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.


