### Accession
PXD023662

### Title
Proteomics analysis of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell lines reveals novel drug vulnerabilities

### Description
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common childhood cancer, and it has a 5-year survival rate of 85% for European children. But for subsets of patients who fail to respond to standard of care chemotherapeutics, treatment options are limited, and clinical prognosis is poor. To establish a platform and methodology to better characterize ALL subtypes and identify their pharmacologic vulnerabilities, we assembled a biobank of 49 readily available childhood ALL cell lines representing diverse immunotypes and genetic profiles. Using these cell lines, we performed comprehensive multi-omic analyses, providing proteomic, transcriptomic and pharmacoproteomic characterization of childhood ALL. We used this resource to characterize the functional impact of genetic fusions and cellular differentiation states on the proteome. Additionally, we identified a novel drug vulnerability in one of the ALL subtypes. Our results are provided as an interactive online data portal with navigable proteomics, transcriptomics, and drug sensitivity profiles.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using a modified version of the spin filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. A volume equivalent to 200 μg of protein was digested for each sample. Cell pellets were resuspended in a buffer containing 4% SDS, 25 mM HEPES pH 7.6 and 1mM DTT and lysed by heating to 95°C for 5 min and subsequent sonication (Bandelin). Cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 14,000g for 15 min. Total protein amount was estimated (Bio-Rad DC). For filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), 250 µg of protein sample was mixed with 1 mM DTT, 8 M urea, and 25 mM HEPES pH 7.6 in a centrifugation-filtering unit with a 10-kDa cut-off (Nanosep® Centrifugal Devices with Omega™ Membrane, 10 k). The samples were then centrifuged for 15 min, 14.000g, followed by another addition of the 8 M urea buffer and centrifugation. Proteins were alkylated by 25 mM IAA, in 8 M urea, 25 mM HEPES pH 7.6 for 10 min, centrifuged, followed by two more additions and centrifugations with 4 M urea, 25 mM HEPES pH 7.6. Protein samples were digested on the filter, first by incubation the samples with Lys-C (Nordic Biolabs (Wako Chemicals GmbH)) overnight at 37°C and an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50. In the second digestion step trypsin (Thermo Scientific) was added in 50 mM HEPES at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:100 and incubated for another 8 h at 37°C. The addition of trypsin is repeated for a final over-night incubation. After digestion, the filter units were centrifuged for 15 min, 14.000 g, followed by another centrifugation with 50 µL MilliQ water. Peptides were collected and the peptide concentration was determined. The quality of digest was checked for every sample by LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were then dried in a speed-vac. 100 µg of peptides were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5 and labelled with isobaric TMT10-tags (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions, but for three hours. Labelling efficiency was determined by LC-MS/MS before mixing the samples. In total ten TMT10 sets were prepared, whereas some cell lines were analysed in duplicates to assess the influence of the biological variance. Each TMT set contained a pool for posterior dataset normalization that was composed of lysates of different cell lines and digested together with the individual samples. The prefractionation method was applied as previously described (Branca et. al. 2014). Sample pools were subjected to peptide IEF-IPG (isoelectric focusing by immobilized pH gradient) in pI range 3-10, 3.7-4.9 and 3.4-4.8. Online LC-MS was performed using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each fraction was subjected to MS analysis. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100Å, 75 μm x 50 cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, the curved gradient went from 2% B up to 40% B in each fraction, followed by a steep increase to 100% B in 5 min.  FTMS master scans with 60,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (35 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1E6 for MS1 and 1E5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 100 ms for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (Holman et al., 2014). Spectra were then searched using MSGF+ (v10072) (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) and Percolator (v2.08) (Granholm et al., 2014), where search results from 8 subsequent fraction were grouped for Percolator target/decoy analysis. All searches were done against the human protein subset of Ensembl 99 in the Galaxy platform (Boekel et al., 2015). MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully-tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMT-10plex on lysines and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues. Quantification of TMT-10plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project's IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.0) (Sturm et al., 2008). PSMs found at 1% FDR (false discovery rate) were used to infer gene identities.  Protein quantification by TMT10plex reporter ions was calculated using TMT PSM ratios to the entire sample set (all 10 TMT-channels) and normalized to the sample median. The median PSM TMT reporter ratio from peptides unique to a gene symbol was used for quantification. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR (Savitski et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is the most common childhood cancer. Although standard-of-care chemotherapeutics are sufficient for most ALL cases, there are subsets of patients with poor response who relapse in disease. The biology underlying differences between subtypes and their response to therapy has only partially been explained by genetic and transcriptomic profiling. Here, we perform comprehensive multi-omic analyses of 49 readily available childhood ALL cell lines, using proteomics, transcriptomics, and pharmacoproteomic characterization. We connect the molecular phenotypes with drug responses to 528 oncology drugs, identifying drug correlations as well as lineage-dependent correlations. We also identify the diacylglycerol-analog bryostatin-1 as a therapeutic candidate in the MEF2D-HNRNPUL1 fusion high-risk subtype, for which this drug activates pro-apoptotic ERK signaling associated with molecular mediators of pre-B cell negative selection. Our data is the foundation for the interactive online Functional Omics Resource of ALL (FORALL) with navigable proteomics, transcriptomics, and drug sensitivity profiles at https://proteomics.se/forall .

### Keywords
Hirief, All, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Karoliniska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Rozbeh Jafari

### Lab Head
Dr Rozbeh Jafari
Karoliniska Institutet, Department of Oncology-Pathology


