### Accession
PXD011238

### Title
Quantifying post-transcriptional regulation in the development of Drosophila melanogaster

### Description
Even though proteins are produced from mRNA, the correlation between mRNA levels and protein abundances is moderate in most studies, occasionally attributed to complex post-transcriptional regulation. To address this, we generated a paired transcriptome/proteome time course dataset with 14 time points during Drosophila embryogenesis. Despite a limited mRNA-protein correlation (ρ = 0.54), mathematical models describing protein translation and degradation explain 84% of protein time-courses based on the measured mRNA dynamics without assuming complex post-transcriptional regulation, and allow  for classification of most proteins into four distinct regulatory scenarios. By performing an in-depth characterization of the putatively post-transcriptionally regulated genes, we postulated that the RNA-binding protein Hrb98DE is involved in post-transcriptional control of sugar metabolism in early embryogenesis and partially validated this hypothesis using Hrb98DE knockdown. In summary, we present a systems biology framework for the identification of post-transcriptional gene regulation for large-scale time-resolved transcriptome and proteome data.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were separated by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). Separation was achieved by a 25 cm capillary (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C using SprayQC. Peptides were separated chromatographically by a 240 min gradient from 2% to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid with a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Spray voltage was set between 2.4-2.6 kV. The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode performing a top10 MS/MS per MS full scan. Isotope patterns with unassigned and charge state 1 were excluded. MS scans were conducted with 70,000 and MS/MS scans with 17,500 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The raw measurement files were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 standard settings except LFQ quantitation⁠ and match between runs option was activated as well as quantitation was performed on unique peptides only. Alternatively, quantification was performed using iBAQ⁠. The raw data was searched against the translated ENSEMBL transcript databases (release 79) of D. melanogaster (30,362 translated entries) and the S. cerevisiae protein database (6,692 entries). Known contaminants, protein groups only identified by site and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed. A distribution calculated via the logspline R package of each replicate per time point as density function was used to impute the missing values. The mean of measured replicates or the average of two surrounding time points were used as a central value for the imputation distribution calculated using the zoo R package. In case the gap was bigger than a single time point, as well as single measurements with no surrounding values, they were replaced by a fixed small value of 22.5 in log2 scale.

### Publication Abstract
Even though proteins are produced from mRNA, the correlation between mRNA levels and protein abundances is moderate in most studies, occasionally attributed to complex post-transcriptional regulation. To address this, we generate a paired transcriptome/proteome time course dataset with 14 time points during Drosophila embryogenesis. Despite a limited mRNA-protein correlation (&#x3c1;&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.54), mathematical models describing protein translation and degradation explain 84% of protein time-courses based on the measured mRNA dynamics without assuming complex post transcriptional regulation, and allow for classification of most proteins into four distinct regulatory scenarios. By performing an in-depth characterization of the putatively post-transcriptionally regulated genes, we postulate that the RNA-binding protein Hrb98DE is involved in post-transcriptional control of sugar metabolism in early embryogenesis and partially validate this hypothesis using Hrb98DE knockdown. In summary, we present a systems biology framework for the identification of post-transcriptional gene regulation from large-scale, time-resolved transcriptome and proteome data.

### Keywords
Drosophila, Transcriptome, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)


