### Accession
PXD029630

### Title
CasID on RRM2 promoter region in neuroblastoma

### Description
dCas9-guided recruitment of the proximity ligation enzyme BirA* to the promoter region of RRM2 in SKNBE2c neuroblastoma cells.

### Sample Protocol
SK-N-BE(2)-C cells were transduced with lentiviral constructs for stable expression of the different tested RRM2 promotor targeting sgRNAs versus an sgRNA targeting LacZ as control. Infections were done with titers corresponding to a final multiplicity-of-infection of 15. Cells were seeded at a density of 7.5 x 106 cells 24h post-infection and incubated with 1 µg/ml doxycycline (48h) and 50 µM biotin (18 to 24h)and followingly harvested. Harvested cells were washed twice with PBS and collected by scraping in urea lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8, 9 M urea). The obtained lysates were cleared by centrifugation. To the supernatant, 1/278 volume of 1.25 M DTT was added and incubated for 30 minat 55°. Next, 1/10 volume of iodoacetamide solution was added and incubated at room temperature for 15 min. Next, the sample is 4-fold diluted with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 2 M urea. Followingly, 30 µl prewashed GE Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance bead suspension was added to each sample and incubated for 2h with agitation at room temperature. Beads were washed three times with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 + 2M urea and resuspended in Resuspend beads in 20ul 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 + 2M urea. In a next step, 0,4 ug LysC (Wako) was added to the beads/proteins (assume 100ug; 1:250 (w:w)) and digested in an incubator, for 4 hours at 37°C. Then, 1ug Trypsin (Promega) was added to the beads/proteins (assume 100ug; 1:100 (w:w)) and digest in incubator overnight at 37°C and beads were removed by centrifugation at 500 g for 2 minutes. Add TFA to the digest for a final pH of 2-3. After acidification, precipitate was allowed to form by letting stand for 15 minutes on ice. The acidified peptide solution was centrifuged for 15 minutes at full speed (room temperature) to removethe precipitate and analyzed on a Q-HF standard gradient.

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur raw files were analysed using the Andromeda search engine as implemented in MaxQuant (v1.6.0.1). Identified spectra were searched against the human proteome (UniProt). Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications during the search. Fast LFQ was disabled, and the minimum LFQ ratio was set at 2. LFQ intensities for identified proteins were imported in Perseus (v1.5.8.5) for downstream analysis. In brief, LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and filtered based on reverse hits, contaminant proteins, and proteins identified by site. At least three valid values were needed for a protein to be retained in the analysis. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution. Finally, a two-sided t-test (FDR 0.05, 1000 randomizations) was performed to find differential proteins as visualized by volcano plots. Default S0 values were kept during the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
High-risk neuroblastoma, a pediatric tumor originating from the sympathetic nervous system, has a low mutation load but highly recurrent somatic DNA copy number variants. Previously, segmental gains and/or amplifications allowed identification of drivers for neuroblastoma development. Using this approach, combined with gene dosage impact on expression and survival, we identified ribonucleotide reductase subunit M2 (RRM2) as a candidate dependency factor further supported by growth inhibition upon in vitro knockdown and accelerated tumor formation in a neuroblastoma zebrafish model coexpressing human RRM2 with MYCN. Forced RRM2 induction alleviates excessive replicative stress induced by CHK1 inhibition, while high RRM2 expression in human neuroblastomas correlates with high CHK1 activity. MYCN-driven zebrafish tumors with RRM2 co-overexpression exhibit differentially expressed DNA repair genes in keeping with enhanced ATR-CHK1 signaling activity. In vitro, RRM2 inhibition enhances intrinsic replication stress checkpoint addiction. Last, combinatorial RRM2-CHK1 inhibition acts synergistic in high-risk neuroblastoma cell lines and patient-derived xenograft models, illustrating the therapeutic potential.

### Keywords
Bioid, Rrm2, Neuroblastoma, Casid

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Louis Delhaye

### Lab Head
Dr Sven Eyckerman
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology


