### Accession
PXD017013

### Title
Gas-phase Fragmentation of ADP-Ribosylated Peptides: Arginine-Specific Side-Chain Losses and their Implication in Database Searches

### Description
ADP-ribosylation is a reversible post-translational modification of proteins that has been linked to many biological processes. The identification of ADP-ribosylated proteins and of their acceptor amino acids remains a significant challenge. The attachment sites of the modification are difficult to study by mass spectrometry (MS) because of its labile nature and its complex fragmentation pattern in MS/MS experiments.  In this study we performed a detailed analysis of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) spectra acquired from ADP-ribosylated peptides which were modified on arginine, serine, glutamic acid, aspartic acid, tyrosine or lysine. In addition to the fragmentation of the peptide backbone, various cleavages of bonds within the ADP-ribose, and between the modification and the amino acid residue, have to be considered. We focused on gas-phase fragmentations that are specific either to ADP-ribosylated arginine or to ADP-ribosylated serine and other O-linked ADP-ribosylations. The O-glycosidic linkage between ADP-ribose and serine, glutamic acid or aspartic acid is the major cleavage site, making localization of these modification sites difficult. In contrast, the bond between ADP-ribose and arginine is relatively stable. The main cleavage site is the inner bond of the guanidine which results in the formation of ADP-ribosylated carbodiimide and of ornithine in place of modified arginine. Taking this specific cleavage into account, a considerably larger number of peptides containing ADP-ribosylated arginine were identified in database searches, and their modification sites were assigned with increased confidence.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of samples from skeletal muscle tissue from wild-type mice and of samples from HeLa cells was performed as previously described. In short, proteins were first digested with trypsin. Poly-ADP-ribosylated peptides were then converted to mono-ADP-ribosylated peptides by cleavage with poly(ADP-ribose)glycohydrolase (PARG), to enable mass spectrometric detection of formerly poly- and mono-ADP-ribosylated sites. The mono-ADP-ribosylated peptides were enriched using ADP-ribose-binding macro domain proteins, which specifically bind the terminal ADP-ribose unit.  Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Liquid chromatography solvent compositions of buffers A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively. The samples were redissolved in 0.1% formic acid/3% acetonitrile and loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo Scientific) trap column, 75 μm x 2 cm, packed with C18 material, 3 μm, 100 Å, and separated on an analytical EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific, 75 μm × 500 mm) packed with reverse-phase C18 material (PepMap RSLC, 2 μm, 100 Å). Peptides were eluted over 110 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The following LC gradient protocol was applied: 0 - 2 minutes: 2% buffer B, 95 minutes: 25% B, 100 minutes: 35% B, 105 - 110 minutes: 95% B. Survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer in the range of m/z 350-2000, with a resolution of 120000, an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 200000, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. HCD spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer using normalized collision energy of 35%. A resolution of 120000, an AGC target value of 200000 and maximum injection time of 246 ms were applied. Precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole with an m/z 2.0 isolation window. Charge state screening was enabled and only precursor ions with charge states 2 - 6 were included. The threshold for signal intensities was 50000. Precursor ion masses already selected for MS/MS acquisition were dynamically excluded for 30 s.  EThcD data [30] were obtained by using the previously described ADP-ribose product-dependent HCD-PD-EThcD/HCD method. In this method short HCD pre-scans were acquired, which triggered the acquisition of high-quality HCD and EThcD MS/MS data if at least two ADP-ribose fragment ions (136.06, 250.09, 348.07 and 428.04) were detected. The full-scan mass spectra and the final high-quality HCD spectra were acquired as described above. The same acquisition parameters were used for the EThcD spectra, and the supplemental activation collision energy was set to 20%. The following parameter settings were applied in the HCD pre-scans: HCD collision energy: 38%, Orbitrap resolution: 30000, AGC target: 50000, maximum injection time: 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS spectra were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) by Proteome Discoverer, version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using the automated rule based converter control. When two fragmentation techniques (HCD and EThcD) were utilized, separate MGF files were created from the raw file for each type of fragmentation. The resulting MGF files were searched against the UniProtKB mouse database (taxonomy 10090, version 20160902, September 2016), which included 24’905 Swiss-Prot, and 34’616 TrEMBL entries, 59’783 reversed sequences, and 262 common protein contaminants. The Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1.3) was used for peptide and protein sequence identification. Mascot searches were performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.03 Da and a parent ion mass tolerance of 8.0 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, allowing up to 3 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation of proteins, and ADP-ribosylation were selected as variable modifications. Arginine, serine, aspartic and glutamic acid, tyrosine, and lysine residues were considered as potential ADP-ribose acceptor sites. The neutral losses from the ADP-ribose modification equal to 249.09 Da and 347.06 Da, or to 249.09 Da, 347.06 Da and additionally to 583.08 Da, or only to 583.08 Da, were scored in HCD fragment ion spectra. The ADP-ribose fragment ions at m/z 136.06, 250.09, 348.07, and 428.04 were excluded from scoring in HCD and in EThcD spectra.  Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR; version 4.8.4) was used to re-analyze MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1.0%, using a target-decoy approach. Protein identifications were accepted as long as the protein FDR was below 2.0%. Proteins that contained the same peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Scaffold-PTM (Proteome Software Inc.; version 3.2.0) was used to annotate post-translational modification (PTM) sites derived from Mascot and Scaffold results. Using the site localization algorithm Ascore, Scaffold-PTM re-analyzes MS/MS spectra identified as modified peptides and calculates site localization probabilities to assess the level of confidence in each PTM localization. Scaffold-PTM then combines localization probabilities for all peptides containing each identified PTM site to obtain the best estimated probability that a PTM is present at that particular site. For ADP-ribosylation site analysis, localization scores > 80% were required if not stated otherwise.

### Publication Abstract
ADP-ribosylation is a reversible post-translational modification of proteins that has been linked to many biological processes. The identification of ADP-ribosylated proteins and particularly of their acceptor amino acids remains a major challenge. The attachment sites of the modification are difficult to localize by mass spectrometry (MS) because of the labile nature of the linkage and the complex fragmentation pattern of the ADP-ribose in MS/MS experiments. In this study we performed a comprehensive analysis of higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) spectra acquired from ADP-ribosylated peptides which were modified on arginine, serine, glutamic acid, aspartic acid, tyrosine, or lysine residues. In addition to the fragmentation of the peptide backbone, various cleavages of the ADP-ribosylated amino acid side chains were investigated. We focused on gas-phase fragmentations that were specific either to ADP-ribosylated arginine or to ADP-ribosylated serine and other O-linked ADP-ribosylations. The O-glycosidic linkage between ADP-ribose and serine, glutamic acid, or aspartic acid was the major cleavage site, making localization of these modification sites difficult. In contrast, the bond between ADP-ribose and arginine was relatively stable. The main cleavage site was the inner bond of the guanidine group, which resulted in the formation of ADP-ribosylated carbodiimide and of ornithine in place of modified arginine. Taking peptide fragment ions resulting from this specific cleavage into account, a considerably larger number of peptides containing ADP-ribosylated arginine were identified in database searches. Furthermore, the presence of diagnostic ions and of losses of fragments from peptide ions allowed us, in most cases, to distinguish between ADP-ribosylated arginine and serine residues.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Adp-ribosylation, Arginine, Marker ion, Mass spectrometry, Neutral loss, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
Functional Genomics Center Zurich
University and ETH Zurich
Winterthurerstrasse 190
8057 Zurich

### Submitter
Peter Gehrig

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hottiger
Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


