### Accession
PXD003875

### Title
Quantitative proteomics analysis of exosomes purified from serum of patients with colorectal cancer

### Description
Tumor cells of colorectal cancer (CRC), release exosomes into peripheral blood. These exosomes can mediate communication between cells and affect various tumor-related processes in their target cells. We present a quantitative proteomics analysis on the exosomes purified from serum of patients with CRC and normal volunteers. 918 proteins were identified with an overlap of 725 Gene IDs in Exocarta proteins list. Comparing with the serum-purified exosomes of normal volunteers, we found 36 proteins upregulated and 22 proteins downregulated in the serum-purified exosomes of CRC patients, of which over 50% were involved in protein metabolism and immune response. Pathway and interaction network analysis results revealed that most of the exosome-enriched differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were associated with complement and coagulation cascades and cancer pathways, suggesting their potential roles in tumor carcinogenesis. Our study demonstrates that serum-purified exosomes of CRC patients can play a pivotal role in invasiveness and pre-metastatic niche establishment of CRC, but not sustain the tumor survival and proliferation. The content selection of exosomes might be associated with the functions of proteins in the development of CRC. This information will be helpful in elucidating the pathophysiological functions of tumor-derived exosomes, and aid in the development of colorectal cancer diagnostics and therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem Mass Tag Labeling For proteolytic digestion, 100 µg protein of the lysate in 8 M Urea were alkylated with dithiothreitol (DTT) and idoacetamide (IAA), and then diluted with seven-fold volume of PBS. Digestion with Trypsin/Lys-C was followed the manufacturer’s protocol and the reaction was quenched by heating at 60°C. Digested proteins were desalted, dried and finally dissolved in 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer. Tandem Mass Tagging (TMT) labeling was performed using TMT Kit following the manufacturer’s protocol. Different TMT labels were used to label different groups: TMT-130 was used for CRC patients group; TMT-131 for normal group. After labeling, samples were pooled, dried and dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The dissolved samples were desalted and dried again, and finally dissolved in 100 µl of 0.1% TFA.    High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation The TMT labeled peptides (100 μL in 0.1% TFA) were first transferred to MS tubes for HPLC (UltiMate 3000 UHPLC, Thermo Scientific) analysis, using an Xbridge BEH300 C18 column (4.6 × 250 mm, 2.5 μm) maintained at 45 °C with a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min for further fractionation. UV absorbance was detected at 214 nm. Gradient elution buffer was consisted by methanol (phase A, pH=10.0) and acetonitrile (phase B, pH=10.0). Fractions were collected every 1.5 min into 47 tubes, then dried and combined into 20 tubes, and were dissolved with 20 μL of 0.1% TFA for liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as previously described\. Briefly, the following separation using a 120 min gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min using UltiMate 3000 RSLCano System (Thermo Scientific), the protein digests were analyzed with a directly interfaced Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A home-made fused silica capillary column (75 μm×150 mm) packed with C18 resin (300 Å, 5 μm) was used as the analytical column. Xcalibur 3.0 software was used with the Q Exactive mass spectrometer in data dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and TMT-based quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer software suite 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) with the SEQUEST search engine. In detail, the spectra were extracted from raw MS data files and searched against the Swiss-Prot reviewed human proteome database (downloaded on July 18, 2015, number of protein entries=20,207). Precursor Mass Tolerance was 20 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance was 0.02 Da and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Total Intensity Threshold was 20,000 and Minimum Peak Count was 200. Carbamidomethylation (on C) and TMT 6-plex (on K and peptide N terminal) were set as static modification, and oxidation (on M) was set as dynamic modification. Protein identification was considered valid if at least one peptide was statistically significant (p<0.05 with a false discovery rate [FDR] of 5%). Default values were used for all other parameters not mentioned above. TMT 6-plex was chosen as the quantification method. Reporter monoisotopic m/z was tuned according to the raw spectra data. Proteins were quantified based on only the unique peptide ratio. Protein relative abundances are presented as the ratios to TMT-131. Quantification data were read using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with the peptide filter set at high peptide confidence. Quantitative precision was presented with protein ratio variability. The differential expression threshold was defined as 0.67＆1.5 fold change. Representative MS/MS spectrum data of identified peptides and the intensity of TMT precursor ions were used for protein quantification. UniProtKB accessions were converted into Entrez Gene IDs for subsequent analysis using the UniProt online ID mapping server.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor cells of colorectal cancer (CRC) release exosomes into the circulation. These exosomes can mediate communication between cells and affect various tumor-related processes in their target cells. We present a quantitative proteomics analysis of the exosomes purified from serum of patients with CRC and normal volunteers; data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003875. We identified 918 proteins with an overlap of 725 Gene IDs in the Exocarta proteins list. Compared with the serum-purified exosomes (SPEs) of normal volunteers, we found 36 proteins upregulated and 22 proteins downregulated in the SPEs of CRC patients. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that upregulated proteins are involved in processes that modulate the pretumorigenic microenvironment for metastasis. In contrast, differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) that play critical roles in tumor growth and cell survival were principally downregulated. Our study demonstrates that SPEs of CRC patients play a pivotal role in promoting the tumor invasiveness, but have minimal influence on putative alterations in tumor survival or proliferation. According to bioinformatics analysis, we speculate that the protein contents of exosomes might be associated with whether they are involved in premetastatic niche establishment or growth and survival of metastatic tumor cells. This information will be helpful in elucidating the pathophysiological functions of tumor-derived exosomes, and aid in the development of CRC diagnostics and therapeutics.

### Keywords
Colorectal, Exosome, Proteomics

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Dongdan Santiao 5 #, Dongcheng district, Beijing 100005, China.

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Ge
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Dongdan Santiao 5 #, Dongcheng district, Beijing 100005, China.


