### Accession
PXD011780

### Title
Proteomic profile of macrophage serectome

### Description
Macrophage secretome- Macrophages were isolated from the left ventricle from control (day 0) or from the infarct region at day 1 after myocardial infarction (MI). Cells were isolated in RPMI media with 0.1% fetal bovine serum and incubated for 2 hours and then spun at 800g for 5 min to separate cell debris. The sample sizes are n=4 biological replicates for each time point.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome was cleaned using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and peptides were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin-digested into peptides for proteomic analysis. The trypsinized peptide mixture was cleaned using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) coupled with a 15 cm × 75 μm C18 column (5 μm particles with 100 Å pore size). Target values in MS were 1e6 ions at a resolution setting of 70,000 and in MS2 1e5 ions at a resolution setting of 17,500

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher) against the human RefSeq database (November 3, 2013 version) containing 53,918 sequences and Swiss Prot database (January 18, 2017 version). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.05 to eliminate low-probability protein identifications. Peptides were quantified using spectral counting and total spectral counts of each sample were used for normalization. Missing values were replaced with a small value (0.01) in order to calculate the ratio and p-value.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammation presides early after myocardial infarction (MI) as a key event in cardiac wound healing. Ischemic cardiomyocytes secrete inflammatory cues to stimulate infiltration of leukocytes, predominantly macrophages and neutrophils. Infiltrating neutrophils degranulate to release a series of proteases including matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 to break down extracellular matrix and remove necrotic myocytes to create space for the infarct scar to form. While neutrophil to macrophage communication has been explored, the reverse has been understudied. We used a proteomics approach to catalogue the macrophage secretome at MI day 1. Murinoglobulin-1 (MUG1) was the highest-ranked secreted protein (4.1-fold upregulated at MI day 1 <i>vs.</i> day 0 pre-MI cardiac macrophages, <i>p</i> = 0.004). By transcriptomics evaluation, galectin-3 (Lgals3) was 2.2-fold upregulated (<i>p</i> = 0.008) in MI day 1 macrophages. We explored the direct roles of MUG1 and Lgals3 on neutrophil degranulation. MUG1 blunted while Lgals3 amplified neutrophil degranulation in response to phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate or interleukin-1&#x3b2;, as measured by MMP-9 secretion. Lgals3 itself also stimulated MMP-9 secretion. To determine if MUG1 regulated Lgals3, we co-stimulated neutrophils with MUG1 and Lgals3. MUG1 limited degranulation stimulated by Lgals3 by 64% (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.001). <i>In vivo</i>, MUG1 was elevated in the infarct region at MI days 1 and 3, while Lgals3 increased at MI day 7. The ratio of MUG1 to Lgals3 positively correlated with infarct wall thickness, revealing that MUG1 attenuated infarct wall thinning. In conclusion, macrophages at MI day 1 secrete MUG1 to limit and Lgals3 to accentuate neutrophil degranulation to regulate infarct wall thinning.

### Keywords
Heart, Mouse, Secretome, Macrophage

### Affiliations
University of Mississippi Medical Center
University of Mississippi Medical Center Director, Mississippi Center for Heart Research Professor, Department of Physiology and Biophysics Research Health Scientist, Research Service G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Veterans Affairs Medical Center. 2500 North State Street, Room G351-04 Jackson, MS  39216-4505

### Submitter
Elizabeth Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Merry Lindsey
University of Mississippi Medical Center Director, Mississippi Center for Heart Research Professor, Department of Physiology and Biophysics Research Health Scientist, Research Service G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery Veterans Affairs Medical Center. 2500 North State Street, Room G351-04 Jackson, MS  39216-4505


