### Accession
PXD016615

### Title
The Arabidopsis Mediator complex subunit 8 regulates oxidative stress responses

### Description
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) signals regulate plant growth and defense by orchestrating genome-wide transcriptional re-programming, however, the specific mechanisms that regulate H2O2-dependent gene expression are poorly understood. Here we report the identification of the Mediator complex subunit MED8 as regulator of H2O2 responses, through a genetic screen of EAL4 promoter. Interestingly, the introduction of med8 mutation in the catalase-deficient background was associated with enhanced activation of salicylic acid biosynthesis and signaling pathways. Surprisingly, however, med8 seedlings were more tolerant to oxidative stress generated by methyl viologen. This tolerance phenotype is associated with the hyperactivation of defense and hormone signaling pathways in particular salicylic acid and jasmonic acid-related pathways. In addition, analysis of MED8 interactomes revealed interaction with novel pathways expanding Mediator complex function to processes beyond transcription, including miRNA biogenesis and and mRNA processing. We establish MED8 as a new component within the regulation of oxidative stress responses and demonstrate that MED8 act as negative regulator of H2O2 -driven activation of defense gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
To identify potential interactors, a GFP-pull down strategy was adapted to cells expressing full length and truncated variants of MED fused to GFP (Wendrich et al., 2017). Approximately 3 g of cells were harvested and grinded to powder in liquid nitrogen and then solubilized in extraction buffer (0.05 M Tris-HCl pH7.5, 0.15 M NaCl, 1 Protease inhibitor tablet/50 mL (ROCHE)) supplemented with 1% NP40. Protein extracts were sonicated, incubated on ice for 30 min, and NP40 diluted to 0.2%. Samples were cleared by centrifugation twice at 18.000 rpm, 4 ºC for 15 min and by filtering through a 40 µm cell strainer. Protein extracts were incubated with 100 μl anti-GFP coated Microbeads (μMACS, Miltenyi) for 2 hours at 4 ºC, then, applied onto the μColumns placed in the magnetic field of the μMACS Separator (μMACS, Miltenyi). After running all the samples through the columns, the columns were washed twice was removed from the separator and samples eluted using 50 μl of preheated ammonium bicarbonate buffer. The 50 μl eluate was reduced using 500 mM dithiotreitol, alkylated by incubation with 550 mM iodocetamide. The alkylation was stopped by adding 1 μl of 200 mM cysteine, and samples were digested overnight at 20 °C using 0.5 μg/μl trypsin sequencing grade (MS Gold, Promega). 10% trifluoroacetic acid was added to the sample to adjust the pH to 3.0. Subsequently, the samples were loaded onto a homemade micro-column (C18 Empore) to remove un-cut proteins and salts. Peptides were eluted using 50 μl of 50% acetonitrile and 50% formic acid and concentrated using vacuum centrifugal (SpeedVac). The sample concentration was determined and equal amount of peptides (600 ng) were injected to the column and analyzed using chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with a tandem UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS runs were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.6.9.0. Spectra were searched against a concatenated target-decoy Araport11 database and also frequently observed contaminants with the build-in Andromeda search engine. Matching-between-runs and the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm were enabled on default settings. The resulting “peptides.txt” and “proteinGroups.txt” output tables were used for differential protein testing using MSqRob (Goeminne et al., 2016). Peptides matching reverse/contaminant proteins or with solely a single peptide-to-spectrum match were filtered. Peptide intensities are preprocessed by quantile normalization and log2 transformation. Preprocessed peptide intensities are used to fit a robust ridge model for each protein with genotype (wild-type, MED8, or MED8ΔQ) as fixed effect, and MS/MS run, replicate and peptide sequence as random effects with empirical Bayes variance estimator and M-estimation with Huber weights as described (Goeminne et al., 2016). Afterwards, pairwise testing of each condition was performed and differential proteins were defined as having a |log2 Fold Change | ≥ 1 and Q value ≤ 0.05. Next to significant quantitative differences, ‘singleton proteins’ were selected in a qualitative manner as proteins identified by matching or MS/MS in at least three out of six replicates in either MED8 or MED8ΔQ (MaxQuant ‘proteinGroups.txt’), but not identified in the wild-type.

### Publication Abstract
Signaling events triggered by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) regulate plant growth and defense by orchestrating a genome-wide transcriptional reprogramming. However, the specific mechanisms that govern H2O2-dependent gene expression are still poorly understood. Here, we identify the Arabidopsis Mediator complex subunit MED8 as a regulator of H2O2 responses. The introduction of the med8 mutation in a constitutive oxidative stress genetic background (catalase-deficient, cat2) was associated with enhanced activation of the salicylic acid pathway and accelerated cell death. Interestingly, med8 seedlings were more tolerant to oxidative stress generated by the herbicide methyl viologen (MV) and exhibited transcriptional hyperactivation of defense signaling, in particular salicylic acid- and jasmonic acid-related pathways. The med8-triggered tolerance to MV was manipulated by the introduction of secondary mutations in salicylic acid and jasmonic acid pathways. In addition, analysis of the Mediator interactome revealed interactions with components involved in mRNA processing and microRNA biogenesis, hence expanding the role of Mediator beyond transcription. Notably, MED8 interacted with the transcriptional regulator NEGATIVE ON TATA-LESS, NOT2, to control the expression of H2O2-inducible genes and stress responses. Our work establishes MED8 as a component regulating oxidative stress responses and demonstrates that it acts as a negative regulator of H2O2-driven activation of defense gene expression.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Mediator complex, Hydrogen peroxide, Catalase, Arabidopsis, Med8

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Oxidative Stress Signalling lab, Ghent University
PSB-VIB

### Submitter
Patrick Willems

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Van Breusegem
Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Oxidative Stress Signalling lab, Ghent University


