### Accession
PXD013607

### Title
The sulfur stress response and protein S-thioallylation caused by allicin and diallyl polysulfanes in Bacillus subtilis as revealed by transcriptomics and proteomics

### Description
In this study, we compared the transcriptome signatures under allicin and diallyl tetrasulfane (DAS4) exposure in the Gram-positive bacterium B. subtilis. We further used shotgun proteomics to unravel the overall S-thioallylomes provoked by allicin and DAS4. Allicin and DAS4 caused a similar thiol-specific oxidative and electrophile stress response, protein and DNA damage in the transcriptome. At the proteome level, we identified in total 108 S-thioallylated proteins under allicin and/or DAS4 stress, while allicin appeared to have a stronger thiolation affect on redox-sensitive proteins. The S-thioallylome includes enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of surfactin (SrfAA, SrfAB), amino acids (SerA, MetE, YxjG, YitJ, CysJ, GlnA, YwaA), nucleotides (PurB, PurC, PyrAB, GuaB), translation factors (EF-Tu, EF-Ts, EF-G), antioxidant enzymes (AhpC, MsrB) as well as redox-sensitive MarR/OhrR and DUF24-family regulators (OhrR, HypR, YodB, CatR). Growth phenotype analysis revealed that the LMW thiol bacillithiol, the thiol-redox regulator Spx as well as the HypR and OhrR regulons confer protection against allicin and DAS4 stress. Altogether, we could show here that allicin and DAS4 cause both an oxidative and sulfur stress response in the transcriptome and widespread S-thioallylation of redox-sensitive proteins in B. subtilis.

### Sample Protocol
1) Proteome-wide S-thioallylation mapping in B. subtilis:  For global investigation of the overall extend of S-thioallylations, Bacillus subtilis 168was grown in Belitsky minimal medium and treated with 90 µM allicin and 92 µM diallyl tetra polysulfane (DAS4) for 30 min. Cells were harvested and reduced thiols were alkylated in NEM buffer. The NEM-alkylated protein extracts were subjected to tryptic in-gel-digestion and LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometry to determine proteins with S-thioallylations in the B. subtilis proteome.   2) Identification of S-thioallylated OhrR, HypR, YodB and CatR proteins: The OhrR-FLAG protein expressing B. subtilis strain HB9121 was grown in BMM and exposed to 90 µM allicin at an OD500 of 0.4. Cells were harvested 30 min after allicin stress in TE-buffer with 100 mM IAM. OhrR-FLAG protein was immunoprecipated using anti-FLAG M2-affinity agarose. For immunoprecipitation of HypR, YodB and CatR, protein extracts of allicin-treated cells were subjectedDynabead Protein A sepharose coupled to polyclonal HypR, YodB and CatR antibodies. The eluted OhrR-FLAG, HypR, YodB and CatR proteins were subjected to tryptic in-gel digestion and Orbitrap mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
S-thioallylated proteins were identified by searching all tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra against the B. subtilis 168 target–decoy protein sequence database extracted from UniprotKB release 12.7 (UniProt Consortium, Nucleic acids research 2007, 35, D193-197) using SorcererTM-SEQUEST® (Sequest v. 2.7 rev.11, Thermo Electron, including Scaffold 4.0; Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR). The SEQUEST search was carried out with the previously used parameters, including a parent ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.00 Da. Up to two tryptic mis-cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation (Met+15.994915 Da), cysteine alkylation by N-ethylmaleimide (Cys+125.04767 Da) and cysteine S-thioallylation by allicin and DAS4 (Cys+72.00337 Da for C3H5S1) were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Garlic plants (<i>Allium sativum</i> L.) produce antimicrobial compounds, such as diallyl thiosulfinate (allicin) and diallyl polysulfanes. Here, we investigated the transcriptome and protein <i>S</i>-thioallylomes under allicin and diallyl tetrasulfane (DAS4) exposure in the Gram-positive bacterium <i>Bacillus subtilis</i>. Allicin and DAS4 caused a similar thiol-specific oxidative stress response, protein and DNA damage as revealed by the induction of the OhrR, PerR, Spx, YodB, CatR, HypR, AdhR, HxlR, LexA, CymR, CtsR, and HrcA regulons in the transcriptome. At the proteome level, we identified, in total, 108 <i>S</i>-thioallylated proteins under allicin and/or DAS4 stress. The <i>S</i>-thioallylome includes enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of surfactin (SrfAA, SrfAB), amino acids (SerA, MetE, YxjG, YitJ, CysJ, GlnA, YwaA), nucleotides (PurB, PurC, PyrAB, GuaB), translation factors (EF-Tu, EF-Ts, EF-G), antioxidant enzymes (AhpC, MsrB), as well as redox-sensitive MarR/OhrR and DUF24-family regulators (OhrR, HypR, YodB, CatR). Growth phenotype analysis revealed that the low molecular weight thiol bacillithiol, as well as the OhrR, Spx, and HypR regulons, confer protection against allicin and DAS4 stress. Altogether, we show here that allicin and DAS4 cause a strong oxidative, disulfide and sulfur stress response in the transcriptome and widespread <i>S</i>-thioallylation of redox-sensitive proteins in <i>B. subtilis</i>. The results further reveal that allicin and polysulfanes have similar modes of actions and thiol-reactivities and modify a similar set of redox-sensitive proteins by <i>S</i>-thioallylation.

### Keywords
Bacillus subtilis/ allicin/ diallyl polysulfane/ bacillithiol/ s-thioallylation

### Affiliations
Freie Universität Berlin
Freie Universität Berlin Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie

### Submitter
Van Loi Vu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Haike Antelmann
Freie Universität Berlin Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie


