### Accession
PXD011645

### Title
Native alpha synuclein crosslinking

### Description
Alpha synuclein in it's native state in solution was crosslinked using a variety of short-range crosslinking reagents. Crosslinks detected by mass spectrometry were then used as constraints in a discrete molecular dynamics simulation of the synuclein protein, and a structural ensemble of the protein was determined.

### Sample Protocol
Synuclein protein, both 14N and 15N labelled, were incubated together in a 1:1 mixture prior to crosslinking. The protein was then crosslinked using a given short-range reagent (either ABAS, EDC or SDA). Reactions were quenched with ABC, and photoreactive crosslinking reactions were carried out using either 366 or 254 nm uv light, as appropriate for the crosslinker in use. Samples were then digested with proteinase K and analyzed using either an orbitrap velos or an orbitrap fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Resulting mass spec data were analyzed using the 14N15N DXMSMS Match software, matching to the full length synuclein sequence. Results from this search were then manually validating by examining MSMS data in the DXMSMS Match software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alpha synuclein, Crosslinking, Modelling

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Petch Building, Room 270d, 3800 Finnerty Rd., Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada
University of Victoria

### Submitter
Nicholas Brodie

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Borchers
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Petch Building, Room 270d, 3800 Finnerty Rd., Victoria, BC V8P 5C2, Canada


