### Accession
PXD035942

### Title
DIA analysis of EPS-urine from PCa and BPH patients

### Description
The objective of the experiment was to compare the proteome of EPS-urine from PCa and BPH patients.

### Sample Protocol
EPS-urine samples were digested by trypsin using FASP protocol and purified by two purification steps (SCX and C18)before LC-MS/MS analysis. Data-independent analysis was used for relative quantification of protein amounts between the two analysed groups.

### Data Protocol
Spectronaut v13.0 without imputation (q-value percentile equal to 0.45). The results were processed by Machine Learning algorithms.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer (PCa) is annually the most frequently diagnosed cancer in the male population. To date, the diagnostic path for PCa detection includes the dosage of serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and the digital rectal exam (DRE). However, PSA-based screening has insufficient specificity and sensitivity; besides, it cannot discriminate between the aggressive and indolent types of PCa. For this reason, the improvement of new clinical approaches and the discovery of new biomarkers are necessary. In this work, expressed prostatic secretion (EPS)-urine samples from PCa patients and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) patients were analyzed with the aim of detecting differentially expressed proteins between the two analyzed groups. To map the urinary proteome, EPS-urine samples were analyzed by data-independent acquisition (DIA), a high-sensitivity method particularly suitable for detecting proteins at low abundance. Overall, in our analysis, 2615 proteins were identified in 133 EPS-urine specimens obtaining the highest proteomic coverage for this type of sample; of these 2615 proteins, 1670 were consistently identified across the entire data set. The matrix containing the quantified proteins in each patient was integrated with clinical parameters such as the PSA level and gland size, and the complete matrix was analyzed by machine learning algorithms (by exploiting 90% of samples for training/testing using a 10-fold cross-validation approach, and 10% of samples for validation). The best predictive model was based on the following components: semaphorin-7A (sema7A), secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC), FT ratio, and prostate gland size. The classifier could predict disease conditions (BPH, PCa) correctly in 83% of samples in the validation set. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD035942.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Eps-urine, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Catanzaro, Italy
Università Magna Graecia di Catanzaro

### Submitter
Licia Elvira  Prestagiacomo

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Gaspari
Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Catanzaro, Italy


