### Accession
PXD008149

### Title
Acetate yielding diet protects mice from C. rodentium infection

### Description
Background and Aims: Many inflammatory diseases are associated with microbial dysbiosis, which may considerably alter the production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). SCFAs are produced in the large bowel through bacterial fermentation of dietary fiber and play an important role in maintaining gut homeostasis. SCFAs, particularly acetate and butyrate, show beneficial immunomodulatory effects contributing to the prevention of inflammatory and allergic reactions. Thus, reduced production of SCFAs may impact on the mucosal immune responses critical to fighting pathogens. This study aims to determine the influence of SCFAs on a murine model of colonic bacterial infection.  Methods: In the present study, we used acetate- (HAMSA) or butyrate- (HAMSB) yielding diets to deliver high concentrations of individual SCFAs to the large bowel of mice infected with C. rodentium. We assessed the effects of these SCFAs on clinical burden and gut pathogenicity in correlation with changes in bacteria growth, fecal microbiota composition, function and changes in the immunological profile.  Results:  Here we show in vitro that acetate and butyrate directly inhibited growth of the attaching and effacing (A/E) pathogen C. rodentium in a bacteriostatic manner. This correlated with reduced expression of Tir, a gene responsible for bacterial adherence and pathogenicity. Interestingly, HAMSA-fed mice presented reduced clinical scores during C. rodentium infection associated with high concentrations of fecal acetate. This was linked with compositional and functional changes in the microbiota when examining 16s sequencing and proteomics analysis.  The HAMSA mediated is protection involved increased expression IL-22 and Muc-2 in the colon and increased numbers of CD8αα+ TCRγδ T cells in the colonic epithelium. These effects were dependent on GPR43, a metabolite-sensing GPCR that binds acetate.   Conclusions: We established a promising new approach to moderate bacterial gut infections by manipulating the gut microbiota and mucosal immune tolerance through diets that yield the SCFA acetate.

### Sample Protocol
Fecal samples were collected from the colon at time of cull, immediately frozen on dry ice, and stored at -80C. Approximately 0.1 g of each sample was thawed on ice in 50mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 7.4 containing a mixture of protease inhibitors (0.1 mM phenylmethylsofonyl fluoride, 10 ug/ml leupeptin, 10 ug/ml aprotinin, 500 mM EDTA). The volume of buffer added was adjusted to approximately double the volume of the fecal sample. Samples were gently suspended by shaking in a cell homogenizer at 3000 rpm for 2 seconds and centrifuged at 8000 x g for 10 min at 4C to remove debris. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube, centrifuged at the same settings, and this supernatant was used for further processing. Twenty ug of total protein, as estimated using the direct detect spectrometer (Merck Millipore), was diluted to 1 ug/ul in PBS and deglycosylated with 10 units (1 ul of 10U/ul) of PNGase F (Promega) for 3 hours at 37C. Proteins were then solubilized, reduced, and alkylated at 95C for 5 minutes in a solution containing 1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (TCEP), and 40mM 2-Chloroacetaldehyde (2CAA) in 100mM Tris pH 8. This solution was diluted 1:10 in water and proteins were digested overnight at 37C by addition of modified pig trypsin (Promega) at a protein-trypsin ratio of 50:1 (w/w). Detergents were precipitated by addition of 10% trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% followed by centrifugation at 2000g for 10 minutes. Salts were removed using C18 tips (Glygen) on a Bravo liquid handler (Agilent). The eluent was evaporated with centrifugation under vaccuum in a SpeedVac (Thermo Savant) and tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis.  Tryptic peptides equivalent to 1 ug of total protein were loaded for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific Inc.). Peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray analytical column (Thermo Fisher PepMap RSLC, 75um x 50cm, 2 um beads with 100 A pores). A 90-minute gradient was performed from 3 to 25% acetonitrile over 60 mins, followed by 25 to 40% acetonitrile over 12mins and 95% acetonitrile for 15mins containing 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250nl / min. Survey MS scans from m/z 350‚àí1400 were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with resolution r = 70,000, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time of 100ms. The top 20 most intense ions were selected for tandem MS analysis by HCD with a normalized collision energy of 29. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 seconds, with a mass exclusion width of 10 ppm. MS2 was acquired from m/z 200-2000 at a resolution of 17,500, AGC of 5e5 with a maximum injection time of 55ms.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectrum matching followed by protein inference, grouping, and quantitation was performed using the MetaPro-IQ strategy with exceptions as follows (Zhang, 2016). The X! Tandem algorithm was implented using RTandem and the final database search was performed with Spectrum Mill (Agilent). Briefly, each raw file was first converted to mgf format using msconvert (Proteowizard) and searched against a collection of mouse metagenomic shotgun data of approximately 2.6 million proteins using rTANDEM. Proteins from this search were then extracted into sample-specific databases and re-searched for the corresponding sample. All proteins identified in this search were combined into a final non-redundant database and searched with Spectrum Mill.  Carbamidomethylation of cyteine was included as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine were considered as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. A decoy database, prepared by reversing the search database, was searched to determine thresholds to achieve a false discovery rate of 0.01 %. Proteins which shared 1 or more peptide were grouped. Proteins with only a single detected peptide were discarded.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metaproteome scfa acetate mouse stool

### Affiliations
School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University, Wellington Road, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.
university of queensland

### Submitter
patrick gavin

### Lab Head
Dr Eliana Marino
School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University, Wellington Road, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.


