### Accession
PXD037667

### Title
Curcuminoid Supplementation in Canine Diabetic Mellitus and its Complications using Proteomic Analysis

### Description
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a disorder that disrupts the body from shifting glucose into the cells resulting in hyperglycaemia (1). Insulin dependence or DM that resembles type I diabetes in humans is commonly observed in dogs (2). Canine DM diagnosis is based on fasting hyperglycaemia and glucosuria with clinical presentation of polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia and weight loss (2). Its treatment goal is blood glucose control, which can be accomplished through insulin therapy, dietary modification and control of concurrent disorders (3). The major complications of DM include diabetic nephropathy, diabetic neuropathy, diabetic retinopathy, diabetic cardiomyopathy and atherosclerosis induced by chronic hyperglycaemia via several pathways (4). The proposed unifying mechanism that mediates the tissue-damaging effects of hyperglycaemia is superoxide overproduction (5). Effective monitoring is required for DM treatment to reduce the risk of progression and complication. Hence, the identification of novel biomarkers is being researched (6, 7). Proteomics has been recognised as an important tool for establishing a diagnosis of disease aetiology and monitoring therapy outcomes (8, 9). Proteomic patterns were applied to detect diabetes and complications, as well as to evaluate treatment effectiveness in humans (10-12). There is limited information on proteomic data in DM dogs (13-15). In a proteomic analysis of serum samples from DM dogs, most upregulated proteins are involved in oxidative state, defence and inflammation (13).  Medicinal plants are utilised in DM dogs as an adjunct medicine in combination with standard treatment to prevent the development of long-term diabetes complications and improve overall well-being. Curcumin, the most phytochemically active curcuminoid extracted from Curcuma longa, has gained attention in human and laboratory animals. Curcumin is known to have antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and anticancer properties (16-18). In humans and experimental animals with DM, curcumin has an antioxidant potential of enhanced reduced glutathione (GSH) and reduced malondialdehyde (MDA) levels (19, 20). The anti-inflammatory effects of curcumin in DM were reported via decreased interleukin-1β (IL‐1β), interleukin-6 (IL‐6), interleukin-8 (IL‐8) and tumour necrosis factor-α levels and also diminished monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 and C-reactive protein levels (19-21).  There has been no published evidence of the impact, safety and proteomic profiles of curcuminoids, particularly curcumin, in client-own DM dogs. Accordingly, the aims of the present study were (1) to evaluate the effects of curcuminoid supplementation on canine DM-associated oxidative stress and inflammation, (2) to determine the safety of curcuminoid supplementation in canine diabetes and (3) to determine whether curcuminoid has an impact on proteins implicated in DM-associated complications by a proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Animals The diabetic dogs were diagnosed by fasting hyperglycemia, high blood fructosamine and glucosuria. The inclusion criteria of DM were dogs with any breed, age or sex, which stable blood glucose for at least 3 months. The diabetic dogs with complications that affected blood glucose included diabetic ketoacidosis, acromegaly, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and neoplasia were excluded to prevent confounding factors that affected parameters and data analysis. Dogs over 7 years old with any breed and sex with normal vital signs and blood test results were used as the clinically healthy group. Sample collection Blood samples were collected from the cephalic or saphenous vein for at least 5-9 ml. In-gel digestion and analysis of peptide patterns by nano-LC-MS/MS To identify the profile of serum proteins, a 30 μg sample of serum from each group was separated using 12% SDS-PAGE. For gel-based separation by SDS-PAGE, each lane was pooled by 2 serum dogs in the same volume and diluted at a 1:1 ratio with 1% Triton X-100, 1% NaCl, and 1% SDS. Protein bands were visualized by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (Bio-Rad), excised from the gel and cut into 13 pieces for in-gel digestion. Each gel piece was de-stained by incubating with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Merck) in 50% acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher). After that, disulfide bonds were reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol (Omnipur) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, then alkylated with 250 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) and dehydrated 2 times with 100% acetonitrile. After drying, the gel pieces were digested with 10 ng trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) dissolved in a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 5% acetonitrile and incubated overnight. The tryptic peptides were extracted by adding acetonitrile. Finally, the mixtures containing the peptides were transferred to a new tube and dried in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (Merck). The trypsin-treated sample (resuspended in 0.1% formic acid) was subjected to the nano-LC system (Dionex Ulti-Mate 3000). Peptide separation was performed at flow rate of 300 nL/min using a C18 column. The elution was performed using 30 minutes gradient from the 4% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) to the 50% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water), and the eluent was infused into a microTOF-Q mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). The mass spectra from the mass spectrometry (MS) and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) covered m/z mass ranges of 400–2000 and 50–1500, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and protein identification and quantification  The LC-MS/MS data files were converted into a mascot generic file (.mgf) format with Data Analysis 3.4 version software. Mascot daemon version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science) was used to merge the .mgf files and to identify the proteins from the UniProt database. Canis lupus familiaris was set for the taxonomy filter. The entries were 151,819 sequences. The Mascot search allowed up to one missed cleavage and a peptide tolerance of 0.8 Da, and the tandem MS tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Variable modifications included methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamidomethylation. Selecting protein hits were with P-value ≤ 0.05. The proteins reported in this research were 95% confident Processed protein-level data were analyzed through a range of software tools. Bioinformatic analysis was performed for the mapping of the roles of proteins in molecular, cellular, and biological processes, protein–protein interaction and drug–protein interaction (www.string-db.org, http://pantherdb.org, respectively and http://stitch.embl.de, accessed on 30 July 2022).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Curcuminoids, Diabetes mellitus, Proteomic, Inflammation

### Affiliations
Faculty of Veterinary Science, Mahidol University 
Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

### Submitter
Sataporn Phochantachinda

### Lab Head
Dr Onrapak Reamtong
Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand


