### Accession
PXD039703

### Title
Proteomic landscape of human spermatozoa in patients with different spermatogenic impairments

### Description
Infertility is a widespread problem, affecting around 15% of couples worldwide, and is defined as the inability to achieve pregnancy within one year despite unprotected intercourse 1. Infertility can be caused by either male or female reproductive issues. Various medical conditions including malignancies, infections, urogenital conditions, or genetic causes can contribute to male infertility. However, 30-40% of men in their reproductive age are affected by idiopathic infertility, according to the guidelines of  European Association of Urology (EAU) 1. Towards a better understanding of male infertility, it is mandatory to achieve a comprehensive understanding of involved genes, their RNA transcripts, and regulatory factors, including miRNAs, which influence the expression level of proteins. Therefore, such proteins need to be identified to investigate their role in spermatogenesis and male infertility. Although there are numerous studies on RNAs, including miRNAs related to male infertility 2-9, there are few studies aiming to cover the whole proteome of human sperm 10. The sperm transcriptome comprises a total of 60,505 transcripts including 11,688 differentially expressed transcripts in infertile and fertile men, as reported by Joshi et al. (2022)11. The entire sperm proteome encompasses 6871 proteins, as summarized by Castillo et al. (2018)10. Nevertheless, there is still a lack of high-throughput studies aiming to identify dysregulated proteins in sperm from subfertile men. Only few studies focused on comparisons of the sperm proteome in men with asthenozoospermia and there is virtually no proteomic studies of oligoasthenozoospermic men 12. Some identified proteins in sperm have functions in maintaining sperm motility and enabling fertilization and are involved in structural composition and/or energy metabolism 12-14 and others are not yet functionally characterized. In this study, we employed Mass spectrometry (MS) technology that is still rarely used in the field of human reproductive research to investigate the proteomic landscape of human sperm and their differential expression patterns in men with subfertility.

### Sample Protocol
Study population and sample collection      Proteomics analysis was performed using sperm samples collected from a total of 53 men attending infertility treatment. Semen samples were classified for primary semen parameters based on WHO 2010 guidelines. These parameters, when taken together, have specified our groups. These groups were specifically classified based on the sperm count (≥15 x 106/mL) and progressive motility (≥ 32%, motile), resulted in a total of 31 normal men (normozoospermic men, N) and a total of 22 men with at least one abnormal semen parameter (subfertile men, AN). Subfertile men were additionally subdivided into oligoasthenozoospermia (OA, n=9) and asthenozoospermia (A, n=13) as summarized in Figure 1A. All the included men exhibited sperm morphology with an average percentage of ≥ 4. Semen samples were collected after at least three days of sexual abstinence and immediately liquefied for 30 minutes at 37 °C. Sperm were purified using discontinuous PureSperm® density gradient (Nidacon) to eliminate somatic cells, round cells, and leukocytes as previously described 5. The study complies with the declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Institutional Review Board (Ha 195/11/updated June 2021) of the Saarland Medical Association. Ethical guidelines were also followed in the conduction of the research, with patients' and volunteers written informed consent obtained before experiments.   Protein Lysis      Sperm samples were thawed on ice and washed three times with 1x Phosphate-Buffered Saline (PBS) to eliminate contaminants and discontinuous density gradient residues. Samples were mixed with 100 µL of Lysis Buffer [4% SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1M DTT] and incubated for 5 minutes at 95 °C. Afterward, each sample was sonicated on ice 10 times each 10 seconds at 20 joules for 2 seconds. After 30 minutes of incubation on ice, samples were centrifuged at 14000 xg for 10 minutes and the supernatant was collected in a separate collection tube and stored at -80°C.  Peptide preparation and LC-MS/MS analysis      To remove SDS from protein lysates, a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP)-method was carried out as described  by Wisniewski et al., 15. Ninety microliters of protein lysate were mixed with 600 µL freshly prepared UA solution [8 M Urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5], transferred to the Microcon-centrifugal filter unit (MRCF0R030, Merck-Millipore) and centrifuged at 14000 xg for 15 minutes at room temperature (RT). Then, the filter unit was washed twice with 200 µL of UA solution at 14000 xg for 15 minutes to remove the remaining SDS. The carbamidomethylation of thiols was achieved with 100 µL of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA) in a 30-minute incubation step in the dark. Residual IAA was eliminated by centrifugation at 14000 xg for 15 minutes at RT and three following washing steps with 100 µL UA solution. After washing the filter units three times with 100 µL of ABC buffer (0.05 M NH4HCO3 in H2O), each at 14 000 x g for 15 minutes at RT, proteins were digested with 40 µL ABC buffer containing trypsin (trypsin to protein ratio 1:100) overnight in a wet chamber at 37 °C for approximately 18 hours. After removing the ABC-trypsin mixture by centrifugation by 14000 xg for 15 minutes, 50 µL of 0.5 M NaCl was added to elute the peptides from the centrifugal filter unit by centrifuging at 14000 xg for 15 minutes at RT.  The obtained peptides were acidified with CF3COOH (Trifluoroacetic acid, TFA; Final Conc. 1%) and tested for their acidity with pH paper (pH<2). Before applying the peptides to the MS-System, digested peptides were cleaned, desalted, and concentrated using the ‘’Stage Tips technique’’ with a self-made C18 filter tips, as described by Rappssilber et al. 16. After Elution, the peptides were vacuum dried, resuspended in 20 µL of 0.1% Formic Acid (Buffer A) and the concentration of peptides was determined using the Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific-Pierce).   For MS analysis, desalted peptides were resuspended in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and separated on a 50 cm reverse phase column with an inner diameter of 75 mm (New Objective from Woburn, Massachusetts) packed in-house with 1.8 mm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbruch-Entrigen, Germany) using a 180 min non-linear gradient of 2–95% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. All MS data was recorded with a data dependent acquisition strategy. Survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 60’000 at m/z = 200. The top 15 most abundant precursor with charge > 2 were selected for fragmentation. MS/MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 15’000 at m/z = 200.

### Data Protocol
Data processing and statistical analysis The processing of LC-MS/MS data was performed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.3.3) 17. All data were matched with the human reference proteome database (UniProt: UP000005640) with protein and peptide FDR < 1%.Label-free quantified (LFQ) intensities of all protein groups along the 53 samples were preprocessed using R software (v4.2.1). Downstream analysis and visualization of results was performed using the R packages operators (v0.1-8), tidyverse (v1.3.2), readxl (v1.4.0), ggplot2 (v3.3.6), VennDiagram (v1.7.3), UpSetR (v1.4.0), pheatmap (v1.0.12), plotly (v4.10.0), gplots (v3.1.3), gridExtra (v2.3), grid (v4.2.1), lattice (v0.20-45), ggrepel (v0.9.1), extrafont (v0.18), showtext (v0.9-5), Rttf2pt1 (v1.3.10), systemfonts (v1.0.4), RColorBrewer (v1.1-3) and/or viridis (v0.6.2). LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and protein groups were filtered to eliminate contaminants, reverse hits, and proteins identified by site only. Protein groups that were identified in at least 70% of all samples were kept for further processing. An unequal variance t-test was used to call proteins with significant enrichment in the subfertile men (AN) and their respective subgroups (OA and A) compared to the normozoospermic men (N) and p-values were adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure18. Spearman’s correlation between the LFQ intensities and selected semen parameters (sperm count and progressive sperm motility) was generated using the R package Hmisc (v4.7-2). Correlation coefficients of all proteins are provided in Supplementary Table 3. To perform ROC and logistic regression analysis, missing values were replaced with values drawn from a normal distribution centered around the detection limit of the MS instrument with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8 with respect to the standard deviation and mean of all protein intensities of each sample.

### Publication Abstract
Although the proteome of sperm has been characterized, there is still a lack of high-throughput studies on dysregulated proteins in sperm from subfertile men, with only a few studies on the sperm proteome in asthenozoospermic and oligoasthenozoospermic men. Using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) along with bioinformatics analyses, we investigated the proteomic landscape of sperm collected from subfertile men (<i>n</i> = 22), i.e., asthenozoospermic men (<i>n</i> = 13), oligoasthenozoospermic men (<i>n</i> = 9) and normozoospermic controls (<i>n</i> = 31). We identified 4412 proteins in human sperm. Out of these, 1336 differentially abundant proteins were identified in 70% of the samples. In subfertile men, 32 proteins showed a lower abundance level and 34 showed a higher abundance level when compared with normozoospermic men. Compared to normozoospermic controls, 95 and 8 proteins showed a lower abundance level, and 86 and 1 proteins showed a higher abundance level in asthenozoospermic and oligoasthenozoospermic men, respectively. Sperm motility and count were negatively correlated with 13 and 35 and positively correlated with 37 and 20 differentially abundant proteins in asthenozoospermic and oligoasthenozoospermic men, respectively. The combination of the proteins APCS, APOE, and FLOT1 discriminates subfertile males from normozoospermic controls with an AUC value of 0.95. Combined APOE and FN1 proteins discriminate asthenozoospermic men form controls with an AUC of 1, and combined RUVBL1 and TFKC oligoasthenozoospermic men with an AUC of 0.93. Using a proteomic approach, we revealed the proteomic landscape of sperm collected from asthenozoospermic or oligoasthenozoospermic men. Identified abundance changes of several specific proteins are likely to impact sperm function leading to subfertility. The data also provide evidence for the usefulness of specific proteins or protein combinations to support future diagnosis of male subfertility.

### Keywords
Sperm, Infertility

### Affiliations
Molecular Genetics, RPTU Kaiserslautern, Germany
Technical University Kaiserslautern

### Submitter
Markus Räschle

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Räschle
Molecular Genetics, RPTU Kaiserslautern, Germany


