### Accession
PXD005713

### Title
The developmental proteome of Drosophila melanogaster (embryogenesis)

### Description
Drosophila melanogaster is a well-studied genetic model organism with several large-scale transcriptome resources. Here we investigate 7,952 proteins during the fly life cycle from embryo to adult and also provide a high-resolution temporal time course proteome of 5,458 proteins during embryogenesis. We use our large scale data set to compare transcript/protein expression, uncovering examples of extreme differences between mRNA and protein abundance. In the embryogenesis proteome, the time delay in protein synthesis after transcript expression was determined. For some proteins, including the transcription factor lola, we monitor isoform specific expression levels during early fly development. Furthermore, we obtained firm evidence of 268 small proteins, which are hard to predict by bioinformatics. We observe peptides originating from non-coding regions of the genome and identified Cyp9f3psi as a protein-coding gene. As a powerful resource to the community, we additionally created an interactive web interface (http://www.butterlab.org) advancing the access to our data.

### Sample Protocol
For the embryonic time course analysis, embryos in PBS were homogenized with a microtube pestle, cells were pelleted at 1000 g for 5 min at 4°C and resuspended in 1x LDS buffer complemented with 0.1 M DTT. Samples were boiled for 10 min at 80°C and proteins were separated on a 4-12% NuPAGE Bis/Tris gel for 10 min at 180 V in MOPS buffer.Peptides were separated by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo). Separation was achieved by a 25 cm capillary (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C using SprayQC (Scheltema and Mann 2012). Peptides were separated chromatographically by a 280 min gradient from 2% to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid with a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Spray voltage was set between 2.4-2.6 kV. The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode performing a top15 MS/MS per MS full scan. Isotope patterns with unassigned and charge state 1 were excluded. MS scans were conducted with 70,000 and MS/MS scans with 17,500 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The raw measurement files were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 standard settings except LFQ quantitation (Cox et al., 2014) and match between run option were activated as well as quantitation was performed on unique peptides only. The raw data was searched against the translated ENSEMBL transcript databases (release 79) of D. melanogaster (30,362 translated entries) and the S. cerevisiae protein database (6,692 entries).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> is a widely used genetic model organism in developmental biology. While this model organism has been intensively studied at the RNA level, a comprehensive proteomic study covering the complete life cycle is still missing. Here, we apply label-free quantitative proteomics to explore proteome remodeling across <i>Drosophila</i>'s life cycle, resulting in 7952 proteins, and provide a high temporal-resolved embryogenesis proteome of 5458 proteins. Our proteome data enabled us to monitor isoform-specific expression of 34 genes during development, to identify the pseudogene <i>Cyp9f</i>3&#x3a8; as a protein-coding gene, and to obtain evidence of 268 small proteins. Moreover, the comparison with available transcriptomic data uncovered examples of poor correlation between mRNA and protein, underscoring the importance of proteomics to study developmental progression. Data integration of our embryogenesis proteome with tissue-specific data revealed spatial and temporal information for further functional studies of yet uncharacterized proteins. Overall, our high resolution proteomes provide a powerful resource and can be explored in detail in our interactive web interface.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Fly, Development

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology Ackermannweg 4 55128 Mainz


