### Accession
PXD013655

### Title
Systems Biology of Lipid Accumulating Organisms

### Description
Characterization of microbial communities at the genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic levels, with a special interest on lipid accumulating bacterial populations, which are naturally enriched in biological wastewater treatment systems and may be harnessed for the conversion of mixed lipid substrates (wastewater) into biodiesel. The project aims to elucidate the genetic blueprints and the functional relevance of specific populations within the community. It focuses on within-population genetic and functional heterogeneity, trying to understand how fine-scale variations contribute to differing lipid accumulating phenotypes. Insights from this project will contribute to the understanding the functioning of microbial ecosystems, and improve optimization and modeling strategies for current and future biological wastewater treatment processes. This project contains datasets derived from the same biological wastewater treatment plant. The data includes metagenomes, metatranscriptomes, metaproteomes and organisms isolated in pure cultures. Characterization of microbial communities at the genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic levels, with a special interest on lipid accumulating bacterial populations, which are naturally enriched in biological wastewater treatment systems and may be harnessed for the conversion of mixed lipid substrates (wastewater) into biodiesel. The project aims to elucidate the genetic blueprints and the functional relevance of specific populations within the community. It focuses on within-population genetic and functional heterogeneity, trying to understand how fine-scale variations contribute to differing lipid accumulating phenotypes. Insights from this project will contribute to the understanding the functioning of microbial ecosystems, and improve optimization and modeling strategies for current and future biological wastewater treatment processes. This project contains datasets derived from the same biological wastewater treatment plant. The data includes metagenomes, metatranscriptomes, metaproteomes and organisms isolated in pure cultures.

### Sample Protocol
Oleaginous mixed microbial communities were sampled from the surface of the anoxic treatment phase of a biological wastewater treatment plant. Islets were collected into a sterile tube, snap frozen on site and maintained at −80 °C until processing. All biomolecular fractions were obtained using a methodological framework (DOI:10.1038/ismej.2012.72), which allows recovery of high-quality biomolecular fractions (DNA, RNA, proteins and metabolites) from unique undivided sample. For biomacromolecular purification the AllPrep DNA/RNA/Protein Mini kit (Qiagen) was used.  Five microlitres of the protein extract were denatured using XT sample buffer and separated by 1D SDS–PAGE. After in-gel reduction and alkylation, tryptic digestion was performed. Resulting peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using a binary solvent gradient. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. Solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Eight microlitres of each peptide fraction were injected per LC analysis. The three-step elution programme was operated at a flow rate of 0.3 ml min−1 consisting of (1) a gradient from 2 to 35% solvent B over 60 min, (2) a 10-min wash at 80% solvent B and (3) a 20-min column re-equilibration step at 2% solvent B.  Mass spectra were acquired on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The instrument was operated on an 11-scan cycle consisting of a single Fourier transformed (FT) precursor scan at 30,000 resolution followed by 10 data-dependent MS/MS scan events using higher-energy collisional dissociation at 15,000 resolution in the FT Orbitrap. The precursor scans had a mass range of 300–2,000 m/z, and an automatic gain control setting of 106 ions. The MS/MS scans were performed using a normalized collision energy of 35 and an isolation width of 2 m/z. The data-dependent settings included monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state filtering that excluded unassigned and single charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, a repeat duration of 10 s, an exclusion list size of 500 and an exclusion duration of 180 s. Exclusion mass width was ±5 ppm relative to mass.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed with MS-GF+ using sample-specific meta-omic databases with several customized parameters. The instrument type was set on high-resolution LTQ with a precursor mass tolerance of 15ppm and an isotope error range of -1, 2. The minimum and the maximum precursor charges were set to 1 and 7 respectively. The false discovery rate was estimated by using a target-decoy approach where reversed sequences of the protein entries were generated while preserving the C-terminal residues (KR) and concatenated to the database. All identifications were filtered in order to achieve a FDR of 1%.  Sample-specific databases were genetared by integrating metagenomic and metatranscriptomic co-assembly graphs with metaproteomic spectra through the Graph2Pro pipeline. Raw mass spectrometry files were converted to MGF files using MSconvert with default parameters. Resulting files were used to run Graph2Pro together with the corresponding assembly graphs produced through the IMP pipeline using MEGAHIT. The Graph2Pro pipeline predicts peptides from the edges of the graph even if the peptides span over multiple edges. The combined set of tryptic peptides are then used as the target database for peptide identification by using the MS-GF+ search engine. Graph2Pro further predicts the protein sequences from the graph, using identified peptides as constraints and produces the sequence databases that were used for the final searches.

### Publication Abstract
Viruses and plasmids (invasive mobile genetic elements (iMGEs)) have important roles in shaping microbial communities, but their dynamic interactions with CRISPR-based immunity remain unresolved. We analysed generation-resolved iMGE-host dynamics spanning one and a half years in a microbial consortium from a biological wastewater treatment plant using integrated meta-omics. We identified 31 bacterial metagenome-assembled genomes encoding complete CRISPR-Cas systems and their corresponding iMGEs. CRISPR-targeted plasmids outnumbered their bacteriophage counterparts by at least fivefold, highlighting the importance of CRISPR-mediated defence against plasmids. Linear modelling of our time-series data revealed that the variation in plasmid abundance over time explained more of the observed community dynamics than phages. Community-scale CRISPR-based plasmid-host and phage-host interaction networks revealed an increase in CRISPR-mediated interactions coinciding with a decrease in the dominant 'Candidatus Microthrix parvicella' population. Protospacers were enriched in sequences targeting genes involved in the transmission of iMGEs. Understanding the factors shaping the fitness of specific populations is necessary to devise control strategies for undesirable species and to predict or explain community-wide phenotypes.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics; activated sludge; time series; lipid accumulation; crispr; metagenomics; phages; plamids

### Affiliations
LCSB
Eco-Systems Biology group, Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg

### Submitter
Benoit Kunath

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Wilmes
Eco-Systems Biology group, Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg


