### Accession
PXD032241

### Title
Label-free shotgun proteomics of S. cerevisiae producing starch-like glucans

### Description
The synthesis of starch-like glucans can be reconstituted in S. cerevisiae using the genes from Arabidopsis thaliana: heterologous expression of SS1 to SS4, BE2, BE3, ISA1, and ISA2, together with a bacterial ADPglucose pyrophosphorylase gene for substrate provision in yeast strain 29, yielded insoluble granules with a semi-crystalline structure similar to that of plant amylopectin (Pfister et al., 2016). Here we conducted a label-free proteomics experiment to compare yeast strains with and without glucan production. This experiment was performed on strains 29, 48A, 362.1, 363.1 and WT (n = 4 replicates each, arising from independent replicate cultures). Strains including genotypes are described in the associated publication.  Reference:  Pfister, B., Sánchez-Ferrer, A., Diaz, A., Lu, K., Otto, C., Holler, M., Shaik, F.R., Meier, F., Mezzenga, R., and Zeeman, S.C. (2016). Recreating the synthesis of starch granules in yeast. Elife 5: 1–29.

### Sample Protocol
Yeasts were cultivated in shake flasks using YPD and YP-galactose as media in pre- and main cultures, respectively, harvested after 3 h shaking in YP-galactose, the cell pellets snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until use as described (Pfister et al., 2016). To extract total proteins, thawn cell pellets were homogenized in 3.3 volumes extraction buffer (100 mM Tris pH 8.2 at 4°C, complemented with protease inhibitor [Complete EDTA-free, from Roche]) and 4.3 volumes glass beads (425-600 µm diameter, acid washed) by vortexing at maximum speed for 30 min at 4°C. The homogenized cell suspension (without glass beads) was transferred to a fresh tube, supplemented with SDS to a final concentration of 4% (w/v) and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. The protein extracts were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 8 min at room temperature, protein concentrations in the supernatant determined by bicinchoninic acid assay using bovine serum albumin as standard, the extracts complemented with DTT (final concentration 100 mM) and stored at -80°C. Proteins were digested by trypsin using a modified filter-aided sample preparation protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009) on Ultracel-30 30-kDa centrifugal filters (Merck Millipore). Protein extracts were sonicated for 1 min with cooling in between, boiled for 95°C for 5 min and sonicated again. Thirty µl extracts containing 60 µg proteins were mixed with 200 µl urea buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.2), loaded onto the centrifugal filters and further processed and desalted as described (Carrera et al., 2018), using a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:80. References: Carrera, D., Oddsson, S., Grossmann, J., Trachsel, C., and Streb, S. (2018). Comparative Proteomic Analysis of Plant Acclimation to Six Different Long-Term Environmental Changes. Plant Cell Physiol. 59: 510–526. Pfister, B., Sánchez-Ferrer, A., Diaz, A., Lu, K., Otto, C., Holler, M., Shaik, F.R., Meier, F., Mezzenga, R., and Zeeman, S.C. (2016). Recreating the synthesis of starch granules in yeast. Elife 5: 1–29. Wisniewski, J.R., Zougman, A., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2009). Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat. Meth. 6: 359–362.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and directly coupled to an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class (Waters) chromatography system. The nanoUPLC was operated in single-pump trapping 75 µm scale configuration. Mobile phases were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B). Dried peptides were resuspended in 3% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid by vortexing and sonication in a water bath for 5 min. Of each sample, 500 ng peptides together with iRT peptides (Biognosys) were loaded onto an Acquity UPLC M-class Symmetry C18 trap column (100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Part No. 186007500 from Waters) and separated on an Acquity UPLC M-class HSS T3 column (1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Part No. 186007474 from Waters) heated to 50 °C. Samples were injected in a randomized sequence without technical replication. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 using a linear 90-min gradient from 1 to 40% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, using profile as spectrum data type and acquiring full-scan MS spectra (350−1500 m/z) at a resolution of 120,000 with a target value of 3,000,000. The 12 most intense signals per cycle were isolated using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and subjected to higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 using a normalized collision energy of 28 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The automatic gain control was set to 100,000 ions. Unassigned ions and those with charge states 1 or >8 were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further isolation for 30 s. Data processing using ProgenesisQI for Proteomics (nonlinear dynamics, Waters) was conducted as described previously (Pipitone et al., 2021), but with the following modifications. First, the run of strain 362.1 (replicate 4) was used as alignment reference. Second, the Mascot generic file produced in ProgensisQI was searched against a custom forward and reverse (decoy) database (containing the CEN.PK113-7D proteome, all heterologously expressed proteins, common MS contaminants and iRT peptide [Biognosys] sequences), using the following settings: trypsin digest with up to one missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification; acetylation at the protein’s N terminus and oxidation of methionine residue as variable modification; precursor ion mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment ion (MS/MS) tolerance 10 ppm. Third, the spectrum report in Scaffold Q+S was created using a false discovery rate (FDR) of 10% and 5% at the protein and peptide level, respectively, and a minimum of one identified peptide per protein. Forth, all associated statistics (inclusive q values) were directly exported from ProgenesisQI. Only proteins (or protein groups) that were identified with at least two unique peptides were quantified, allowing the quantification of 2788 endogenous yeast or heterologously expressed proteins at a false discovery rate of 0.5% at the protein level.  Reference:  Pipitone, R., Eicke, S., Pfister, B., Glauser, G., Falconet, D., Uwizeye, C., Pralon, T., Zeeman, S., Kessler, F., and Demarsy, E. (2021). A multifaceted analysis reveals two distinct phases of chloroplast biogenesis during de-etiolation in Arabidopsis. Elife 10: 1–32.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-ms/ms, Progenesisqi

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Plant Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Barbara Pfister

### Lab Head
Dr Samuel Christian Zeeman
Institute of Molecular Plant Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


