### Accession
PXD005613

### Title
Nitration of Tyrosines In Complement Factor H Domains Alters Its Immunological Activity and Mediates A Pathogenic Role In Age Related Macular Degeneration

### Description
Nitrosative stress has been implicated in the pathogenesis of age related macular degeneration (AMD). Tyrosine nitration is a unique type of post translational modification that occurs in the setting of inflammation and nitrosative stress. To date, the significance and functional implications of tyrosine nitration of complement factor H (CFH), a key complement regulator in the eye has not been explored, and is examined in this study in the context of AMD pathogenesis. Sections of eyes from deceased individuals with AMD (n = 5) demonstrated the presence of immunoreactive nitrotyrosine CFH. We purified nitrated CFH from retinae from 2 AMD patients. Mass spectrometry of CFH isolated from AMD eyes revealed residues in domains critical for binding to heparan sulphate glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), lipid peroxidation by-products and complement (C) 3b were nitrated. Functional studies revealed that nitrated CFH did not bind to lipid peroxidation products, nor to the GAG of perlecan nor to C3b. There was loss of cofactor activity for Factor I mediated cleavage of C3b with nitrated CFH compared to non-nitrated CFH. CFH inhibits, but nitrated CFH significantly potentiates, the secretion of the pro-inflammatory and angiogenic cytokine IL-8 from monocytes that have been stimulated with lipid peroxidation by-products. AMD patients (n = 30) and controls (n = 30) were used to measure plasma nitrated CFH using a novel ELISA. AMD patients had significantly elevated nitrated CFH levels compared to controls (p = 0.0117). These findings strongly suggest that nitrated CFH contributes to AMD progression, and is a target for therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
In vivo nitrated CFH was isolated: Adult human eyes with age-related macular degeneration (n=5) (age range 69 to 93 years) were obtained, with consent, from the Lions NSW Eye Bank, and with ethics approval from the University of NSW and University of Sydney Human Research Ethics Committees. All procedures were in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The delay from death to fixation was less than 16 h for all eyes. Following removal of the anterior segment (iris, lens or intraocular lens) and vitreous, the eyecups were rinsed in 0.1M PBS and the retina/choroid examined using a dissecting stereomicroscope and imaged using a digital camera (Leica DFC480) and Photoshop software. Images were used to further classify the eyes where appropriate, using the Age Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS) grading system to assess stages of AMD [29],  together with any history of AMD. Human eyes   were fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde PBS (pH 7.4) for at least 24 h. Eyes were then dissected and the central region including macular and optic disc, and peripheral nasal and temporal regions paraffin embedded and sections were at 8 µm and collected on Super-Frost Plus slides. Histopathology was assessed in sections stained with Mayer’s haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or Periodic Acid Schiff (PAS) using standard protocols. Stained sections were dehydrated through alcohols and xylenes, then coverslipped in DePeX. For two postmortem eyes (aged 87 and 93 years), the unfixed retina and choroid/RPE, were gently separated and removed from the eyecup, snap frozen in eppendorf tubes in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for use in protein assays.  Nitration of CFH in vitro: CFH (1 mg/ml) was incubated in PBS (pH 5.5) at 37°C with NaNO2 (sodium nitrite 1nM), cytochrome C (25 µM) and H2O2 (3.7 nM). H2O2 was added in 2 separate aliquots every 15 min over a 30 min. After nitration of CFH, nCFH was purified by electro elution. Briefly, nCFH was separated by SDS-PAGE. The nCFH band identified by Coomassie blue staining was excised and subjected to electro elution using the D-Tube dialyzer. Electrophoresis was performed at 100V over 16 h and electro elution was monitored by the loss of blue color in the gel. The purified nCFH was collected in the D-Tube dialyzer.  Mass spectrometry: The nitrated native CFH protein was resolved on NuPAGE Novex 4-12 % Bis-Tris Gel under non-reducing conditions and stained with colloidal Coomassie. The protein band was excised from the gel, destained, dried and incubated with 100 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 h at 25ºC. The gel slice was washed with NH4HCO3, dried and incubated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in 25 mM NH4HCO3. The slices were washed and dried before digestion of the nitrated CFH protein with 20 ng.µL-1 trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 30°C. Peptides were eluted from the slices with 5% formic acid, 50% acetonitrile for 30 min and separated by nano-LC on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex) using a fritless nano column (75µ x ~10cm) containing C18 media (5µ, 200 Å Magic, Michrom). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1 % formic acid) to H2O:CH3CN (64:36, 0.1 % formic acid) at 250 nL.min-1 over 60 min. Positive ions were generated by electrospray and analyzed in a LTQ FT Ultra (Thermo Electron) mass spectrometer operated in data dependent MS/MS acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral data were searched using Mascot (V2.3, Matrix Science) against the non-redundant database from NCBI. Search parameters were: precursor tolerance 6 ppm and product ion tolerances ± 0.5 Da. Cys-carboxyamidomethyl was selected as a fixed modification and Met-O, Trp-O, Tyr-NO2 and Pyro-Glu/Gln were selected as variable modifications with full tryptic cleavage of up to 2 missed cleavages.

### Publication Abstract
Nitrosative stress has been implicated in the pathogenesis of age related macular degeneration (AMD). Tyrosine nitration is a unique type of post translational modification that occurs in the setting of inflammation and nitrosative stress. To date, the significance and functional implications of tyrosine nitration of complement factor H (CFH), a key complement regulator in the eye has not been explored, and is examined in this study in the context of AMD pathogenesis.Sections of eyes from deceased individuals with AMD (n = 5) demonstrated the presence of immunoreactive nitrotyrosine CFH. We purified nitrated CFH from retinae from 2 AMD patients. Mass spectrometry of CFH isolated from AMD eyes revealed nitrated residues in domains critical for binding to heparan sulphate glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), lipid peroxidation by-products and complement (C) 3b.Functional studies revealed that nitrated CFH did not bind to lipid peroxidation products, nor to the GAG of perlecan nor to C3b. There was loss of cofactor activity for Factor I mediated cleavage of C3b with nitrated CFH compared to non-nitrated CFH. CFH inhibits, but nitrated CFH significantly potentiates, the secretion of the pro-inflammatory and angiogenic cytokine IL-8 from monocytes that have been stimulated with lipid peroxidation by-products. AMD patients (n = 30) and controls (n = 30) were used to measure plasma nitrated CFH using a novel ELISA. AMD patients had significantly elevated nitrated CFH levels compared to controls (p = 0.0117). These findings strongly suggest that nitrated CFH contributes to AMD progression, and is a target for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Macular degeneration, Complement factor h, Cfh, Nitrotyrosine

### Affiliations
University of Hong Kong
Department of Infectious Diseases, Immunology and Sexual Health and Department of Medicine, St George Hospital, University of New South Wales, 2 South Street, Kogarah, Sydney, NSW 2217, Australia

### Submitter
Jason Wong

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Krilis
Department of Infectious Diseases, Immunology and Sexual Health and Department of Medicine, St George Hospital, University of New South Wales, 2 South Street, Kogarah, Sydney, NSW 2217, Australia


