### Accession
PXD024223

### Title
Compatibility of distinct label-free proteomic workflows in absolute quantification of proteins linked to the oocyte quality in human follicular fluid (the Triple-Quad TOF workflow)

### Description
We present a comprehensive analysis of human follicular fluid proteome by comparing several strategies of sample preparation, mass spectrometry analysis, and data processing, resulting in the identification of 1638 proteins. We devised two separate label-free quantitative workflows, termed after the utilized mass spectrometer: Triple Quad-TOF and Quad-Orbitrap, and analyzed their performance in absolute protein quantification assisted by Total Protein Approach. In a pilot study of twenty samples linked to diverse oocyte quality status from four donors, 215 and 455 proteins were quantified by the Triple Quad-TOF and Quad-Orbitrap workflows, respectively. The concentration values obtained from both workflows correlated to a significant degree. We found reasonable agreement of both workflows in protein fold changes between tested groups, resulting in unified lists of 21 and 24 proteins, linked to oocyte maturity and blastocyst development, respectively. The Quad-Orbitrap workflow was best suited for an in-depth analysis, especially of low abundant proteome, whereas the Triple Quad-TOF workflow allowed a more robust approach with a greater potential to increase in effectiveness with the growing number of analyzed samples.

### Sample Protocol
The short description of sample preparation procedures utilized in the case of specific samples is included in the .csv files. Pool samples of hFF were subjected to different methods of protein or peptide fractionation (high abundant serum proteins immudepletion, ultrafractionation, peptide fractionation by high pH RP-HPLC) or left unfractionated. The material was digested either by FASP, MED-FASP (Multi-Enzyme Digestion FASP), or in-solution digestion. Samples were desalted in STAGE (STop And Go Extraction) Tips procedure on in-house prepared tips filled with C18 solid phase. iRT (indexed retention time) Kit (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) was spiked into samples used for SWATH-MS quantification in 1:10 standard to sample volume ratio in order to perform the retention time calibration. Clinical samples were not subjected to fractionation and in that case, proteins were digested by FASP. The LC-MS/MS measurements for the Triple Quad-TOF workflow were acquired on the TripleTOF 5600+ hybrid mass spectrometer with DuoSpray Ion Source (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA) coupled with the Eksigent microLC (Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System, Eksigent, Redwood City, CA). The Buffers A and B constituted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and ACN, respectively. LC separations were carried out on the ChromXP C18CL column (3 μm, 120 Å, 150 × 0.3 mm) using a gradient of 8-40% Buffer B in 30 minutes with a flowrate of 5 µl/min. The data-dependent acquisition (DDA) analyses consisted of a 250 ms TOF survey scan in the m/z range of 400-1000 Da followed by a 100 ms Product Ion scan in the m/z range of 100-1500 Da, which resulted in a 2.3 s cycle time. SWATH-MS analyses were performed in the m/z range of 400-1000 Da covered by a set of 25 variable-width windows. The SWATH-MS1 survey scan was acquired in high sensitivity mode in the beginning of each cycle with the accumulation time of 50 ms, and it was followed by 40 ms accumulation time high sensitivity product ion scans, which resulted in the total cycle time of 1.1 s.

### Data Protocol
The database search for the construction of spectral library for SWATH-MS quantification was performed in ProteinPilot 4.5 Software (SCIEX) using the Paragon algorithm against the SwissProt Homo sapiens database (ver. 26.07.2019; 20,428 entries) merged with iRT standard sequence. The resulting group file was loaded into MS/MS All with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.01 in PeakView 2.2 (SCIEX) to automatically create a spectral library. The library was processed with SWATH-MS measurements of either the pool samples or the clinical samples. The retention time calibration was performed manually with the use of iRT kit peptides. Absolute concentration values were derived from the SWATH-MS intensities using the Total Protein Approach. In the experiment comparison, database search of DDA runs was conducted either with ProteinPilot software, MaxQuant, or PEAKS Studio 10 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Total protein approach, Blastocyst development, Lc-ms/ms, Human follicular fluid, Proteome, Oocyte maturity, Oocyte quality control, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Justus Liebig University Giessen
Laboratory of Biopolymer Structure, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland

### Submitter
Aleksandra Bogucka

### Lab Head
Dr Stanisław Oldziej
Laboratory of Biopolymer Structure, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland


