### Accession
PXD029648

### Title
Class II Immunopeptidome of 9033 cells

### Description
Cells were treated with either PBS (mock) or hydroxychloroquine (HCQ).

### Sample Protocol
The BLCL 9033 cells (3e7 x 3 replicates per condition) were treated with 10 microM HCQ or PBS (control) for 24 h and harvested by washing cells in cold PBS and snap freezing in liquid nitrogen. The cell pellets were lysed with a lysis buffer containing 0.5 % IGEPAL CA630, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and complete protease inhibitors.   The lysate containing the HLA-peptide complexes was clarified and transferred into 1ml 96-well deep plates for processing using Agilent Bravo ASSAYMAP liquid handler. The antibody (900 mg of either LB3-1 (anti-DR), SPVL-3 and B721 (anti-DQ/DP) was immobilised on Protein-A tips with 25 ul bed volume. The lysate was loaded on to tips and washed with PBS to remove unbound material and eluted using 10% acetic acid. The eluate was subjected to 5 KDa molecular cut off filter to isolate peptides from beta-2-microglobulins, antibody and HLA heavy chains. The peptides were then purified using Agilent C18-Bond-Elut C18tips and reconstituted buffer containing 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for analysis using mass spectrometry

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with Peaks X Pro (Bioinformatic solutions) software package against the human proteome (uniprot reviewed v202001) using the following settings: Enzyme: none, parent mass tolerance 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da, Variable modifications: Deamidation (NQ), Oxidation (M), Cysteinylation.

### Publication Abstract
Although hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) has long been used to treat autoimmune diseases, its mechanism of action remains poorly understood. In CD4 T-cells, we found that a clinically relevant concentration of HCQ inhibited the mitochondrial antioxidant system triggered by TCR crosslinking, leading to increased mitochondrial superoxide, impaired activation-induced autophagic flux, and reduced proliferation of CD4 T-cells. In antigen-presenting cells, HCQ also reduced constitutive activation of the endo-lysosomal protease legumain and toll-like receptor 9, thereby reducing cytokine production, but it had little apparent impact on constitutive antigen processing and peptide presentation. HCQ's effects did not require endo-lysosomal pH change, nor impaired autophagosome-lysosome fusion. We explored the clinical relevance of these findings in patients with celiac disease-a prototypic CD4 T-cell-mediated disease-and found that HCQ limits <i>ex&#xa0;vivo</i> antigen-specific T&#xa0;cell responses. We report a T-cell-intrinsic immunomodulatory effect from HCQ and suggest potential re-purposing of HCQ for celiac disease.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Hcq, Class ii, Hla, 9033

### Affiliations
Monash University
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Room 214, level 2, 15 Innovation Walk Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia

### Submitter
Sri Ramarathinam

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony Wayne Purcell
Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Infection and Immunity Program Room 214, level 2, 15 Innovation Walk Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


