### Accession
PXD021167

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis tween supernatants

### Description
Whole cell lysates of THP-1 macrophages infected with of M. tuberculosis CDC1551, a ppe38-ppe71 knock out mutant and a complemented strain was performed at 4h and 18h post infection to find the differentially regulated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins suspended in 8M urea were diluted in 1M tris-HCl pH 6.8 and cast in an acrylamide gel containing 10% SDS within an Eppendorf tube. The samples were allowed to set overnight at room temperature. Protein-containing gels were removed from the Eppendorf tubes and cut into ~1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were washed three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich), followed by reduction with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) for 1 hour at 45°C. After reduction, the proteins were alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) for 1 hour at room temperature. The gel pieces were washed twice with 100% acetonitrile after alkylation. Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) was added to the gel pieces at a 1:50 trypsin to protein ratio and incubated at 4°C for 1 hour, followed by an 18h proteolytic digestion at 37°C in a humidified chamber. Peptides were eluted by sequential addition of 50%, 70% and 100% acetonitrile until gel pieces turned opaque. The gel pieces were then dried in a vacuum desiccator (SpeedVac). Dried peptides were suspended in 5% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) containing 0.1% formic acid and desalted using C18 desalting columns (ThermoFisher, MA, USA)  as recommended by the manufacturer. Dried peptides were dissolved in 30 µl of solvent A (2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) and 500 ng peptides was analysed. All chromatography was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters, MA, USA) using a 200 cm uPAK™ column (Pharmafluidics, Gent, Belgium) coupled to a Thermo Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, MA, USA) equipped with a Flex nanoelectrospray source. The spray voltage was set to 1.9 kV (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA) and the capillary temperature was 250°C. Peptide separation was performed using a linear gradient of solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 2% HPLC grade water), starting with 3% solvent B and increased to 40% solvent B over 80 minutes. Solvent B was increased to 100% in 5 minutes and subsequently decreased to 3% solvent B in 5 minutes. Solvent B was kept at 3% B for an additional 35 minutes at a flow rate of 750 nL/min, where a column temperature of 50°C was maintained with a heater. Mass spectrometry was performed in data-dependent acquisition mode using a full MS1 scan (350-1850 m/z, resolution at 70000, max injection time was 100 ms and ACG target was 3e6), and selecting precursor ions with a 2+  or greater charge state for MS/MS analysis. This was followed by HCD fragmentation with normalised collision energy set at 28% and MS/MS acquisition (200–2000 m/z, resolution 17500, max injection time of 80 ms, AGC target was 1e5) of the top 20 most intense precursors from each full scan. Dynamic exclusion of ions was implemented using a 20s exclusion duration and only ions with an unassigned charge state were disregarded.

### Data Protocol
All tandem mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant version 1.6.10 and searched against the the M. tuberculosis CDC1551/Oshkosh proteome (UP000001020, containing 4 204 entries) downloaded on 17/4/2017. Peak list generation of label-free tandem mass spectra was performed within MaxQuant using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine.Enzyme specificity was set to consider fully tryptic peptides with two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was allowed as a fixed modification. A protein and peptide false discovery rate of less than 1% was employed in MaxQuant with match between runs enabled. Proteins that contained similar peptides that could not be differentiated on the basis of MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Reverse database hits, contaminants and proteins only identified by site modifications were removed before downstream bioinformatic and statistical analysis. Precursor intensity values for each protein was obtained from MaxQuant using the MaxLFQ algorithm available internally. The file was further filtered for each protein group to contain at least two unique peptides. The assigned LFQ intensity values were subsequently log2 transformed to gain a normal distribution and further filtered for two values in at least one group. This resulted in the high confidence expression dataset, and missing values were imputed from a truncated normal distribution of transformed LFQ intensities. Statistical tests were done in R using the LIMMA package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
1DST/NRF Centre of Excellence in Biomedical Tuberculosis research, SA MRC Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, 7505, Cape Town, South Africa
Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town

### Submitter
Samantha Sampson

### Lab Head
Dr Samantha Leigh Sampson
1DST/NRF Centre of Excellence in Biomedical Tuberculosis research, SA MRC Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, 7505, Cape Town, South Africa


