### Accession
PXD000954

### Title
The Pan-Human Library: A repository of assays to quantify 10 000 proteins by SWATH-MS / SWATH-MS validation data

### Description
The “Pan-Human Library” is a compendium of highly specific assays covering more than 10 000 human proteins and enabling their targeted analysis in SWATH-MS datasets acquired from research or clinical specimens. This dataset contains validation SWATH-MS data and OpenSWATH results of whole cell lysates of HeLa (guot_L130330_005_SW, guot_L130330_006_SW, guot_L130330_007_SW) and U2OS cells (gout_L130330_013_SW, gout_L130330_014_SW, gout_L130330_015_SW). Further, the combined assay library (phl004_s32.csv) and the sample-specific assay libraries (phl004_sshela_s32.csv, phl004_ssu2os.csv) used for the analysis are provided.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and Tissue sampling, Protein fractionation (AP, SEC, Depletion, None), Proteolytic digestion (Trypsin, PCT), Peptide fractionation (OGE, 1D GE, SAX, None), LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
SWATH-MS targeted data analysis (OpenSWATH), Statistical evaluation (pyProphet), FDR control (MAYU)  The main OpenSWATH results are called [MS_INJECITON]_[ASSAY_LIBRARY]_filtered_with_dscore.csv. The according peptide and protein FDR estimates can be found in the *_main_1.07.txt file. The associated m_score cutoff in this file can be found by calculating 1-[IP/PPs].

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry is the method of choice for deep and reliable exploration of the (human) proteome. Targeted mass spectrometry reliably detects and quantifies pre-determined sets of proteins in a complex biological matrix and is used in studies that rely on the quantitatively accurate and reproducible measurement of proteins across multiple samples. It requires the one-time, a priori generation of a specific measurement assay for each targeted protein. SWATH-MS is a mass spectrometric method that combines data-independent acquisition (DIA) and targeted data analysis and vastly extends the throughput of proteins that can be targeted in a sample compared to selected reaction monitoring (SRM). Here we present a compendium of highly specific assays covering more than 10,000 human proteins and enabling their targeted analysis in SWATH-MS datasets acquired from research or clinical specimens. This resource supports the confident detection and quantification of 50.9% of all human proteins annotated by UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and is therefore expected to find wide application in basic and clinical research. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD000953-954) and SWATHAtlas (SAL00016-35).

### Keywords
Human, Targeted proteomics, Swath, Pan-human library, Swath-ms, Openswath

### Affiliations
Columbia University
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zurich

### Submitter
George Rosenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zurich


