### Accession
PXD034865

### Title
Histidine supplementation can escalate or rescue HARS deficiency in a Charcot Marie Tooth Disease model

### Description
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (ARSs) are essential enzymes responsible for charging amino acids onto cognate tRNAs during protein synthesis¬. In histidyl-tRNA synthetase (HARS), autosomal dominant mutations in the HARS catalytic domain are associated with Charcot Marie Tooth Disease Type 2W (CMT2W), while anticodon-binding domain mutations cause Usher Syndrome Type IIIB (USH3B). We use yeast as a model system to study disease-causing HARS mutations (V133F, V155G, Y330C, S356N) associated with CMT2W, and Y454S, associated with USH3B. All human HARS variants complemented genomic deletion of the yeast ortholog HTS1 at high expression levels. CMT2W associated mutations, but not Y454S, result in reduced growth. HARS V155G and S356N cause accumulation of insoluble proteins and mistranslation in yeast, and the growth defect of these mutants was rescued by histidine addition to the growth media, restoring the soluble proteome. V133F and Y330C, on the other hand, lead to decreased HARS abundance. Histidine supplementation further reduced viability in yeast expressing V133F and Y330C, and lead to insoluble protein accumulation, indicating histidine toxicity associated with these mutants. Because histidine is in clinical trials as treatment for USH3B, our data will inform future treatment options for these as well as CMT patients, where histidine supplementation may either have a toxic or compensating effect dependingon the nature of the causative HARS variant.

### Sample Protocol
Following the GFP-Trap Agarose kit protocol (Chromotek, Munich, Germany), yeast cells were lysed and HARS-YFP was purified from cell lysates. Purified HARS-YFP was diluted with 2 times sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS)-running buffer and separated using SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) with 12% acrylamide. Gels were then stained with Coomassie blue dye. The bands corresponding to HARS-YFP were identified at 84.4 kDa, excised from the gel, and placed in sterile 1.5 mL centrifuge tubes containing 5% acetic acid. In gel digestion was performed using LysC. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) using QExactive+ (FT/FT/HCD) top 10 for mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
PEAKSX+ data base search using a custom database containing protein sequences of HARS-YFP (P12081) with each of the mutations annotated, in addition to a list of common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are essential enzymes responsible for charging amino acids onto cognate tRNAs during protein synthesis. In histidyl-tRNA synthetase (HARS), autosomal dominant mutations V133F, V155G, Y330C and S356N in the HARS catalytic domain cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2&#xa0;W (CMT2W), while tRNA-binding domain mutation Y454S causes recessive Usher syndrome type IIIB. In a yeast model, all human HARS variants complemented a genomic deletion of the yeast ortholog HTS1 at high expression levels. CMT2W associated mutations, but not Y454S, resulted in reduced growth. We show mistranslation of histidine to glutamine and threonine in V155G and S356N but not Y330C mutants in yeast. Mistranslating V155G and S356N mutants lead to accumulation of insoluble proteins, which was rescued by histidine. Mutants V133F and Y330C showed the most significant growth defect and decreased HARS abundance in cells. Here, histidine supplementation led to insoluble protein aggregation and further reduced viability, indicating histidine toxicity associated with these mutants. V133F proteins displayed reduced thermal stability in vitro, which was rescued by tRNA. Our data will inform future treatment options for HARS patients, where histidine supplementation may either have a toxic or compensating effect depending on the nature of the causative HARS variant.

### Keywords
Transfer rna, Histidyl-trna synthetase (hars), Protein synthesis, Proteome, Genetic disease

### Affiliations
Western University
University of Western Ontario, Canada, Department of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Yi Qiu

### Lab Head
Dr Ilka U. Heinemann
University of Western Ontario, Canada, Department of Biochemistry


