### Accession
PXD018985

### Title
Enhancing the cardiac pig transcriptome by long-read sequencing and in-depth proteomics

### Description
Clinically translatable large animal models have become indispensable for cardiovascular research, clinically relevant proof of concept studies and for novel diagnostic and therapeutic interventions. In particular, the pig as emerged as an essential cardiovascular disease model, because its heart, circulatory system, and blood supply are anatomically and functionally similar to that of humans. Unfortunately, molecular and omics-based studies in the pig are hampered by the incompleteness of the genome and the lack of diversity of the corresponding transcriptome annotation. Here, we employed Nanopore long-read sequencing and in-depth proteomics on top of Illumina RNA-seq to enhance the pig cardiac transcriptome annotation. We assembled 15,926 transcripts, stratified into coding and non-coding, and validated our results by complementary mass spectrometry. A manual review of several gene loci, which are associated with cardiac function, corroborated the utility of our enhanced annotation. All our data are available for download and is also provided as tracks for integration in genome browsers. We deem this resource as highly valuable for molecular research in an increasingly relevant large animal model.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue sections were reconstituted in 100 μl of 0.1% RapiGest SF Surfactant in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC). Each sample was probe-sonicated for 2 times 10 seconds at 10% frequency. Samples were centrifuged at 15.000 x g, at 4°C for 30 minutes and the supernatant protein content was quantified using a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). 100 μg of protein per sample were processed in 50 μl total volume. Proteins were denatured for 5 minutes at 95°C. Disulfide-bonds were reduced with Dithiothreitol (DTT; 5mM final concentration) at 60°C for 30 minutes. Cysteine residues were alkylated using chloroacetamide (CAA; 15mM final concentration) at 23°C for 30 minutes. Reduced and alkylated proteins were digested overnight at 37°C in a table-top thermomixer at 300 rpm using an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 with sequencing-grade modified trypsin in 50 mM TEAB. Upon overnight protein digestion, samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes. Subsequently, samples were centrifuged at 15.000 x g, at 23°C for 30 minutes to pellet the RapiGest precipitate and recover the peptide-containing supernatant to a new reaction tube. 10 μg of peptide were labeled at 23°C for 60 minutes using TMT10plex isobaric label reagents (Pierce; Thermo Scientific) dissolved in acetonitrile (ACN) in a total buffer volume of 12 μl (filled with 200 mM TEAB) and a pH of 7.5. A pool of all samples was TMT labeled with TMT126 for a common reference between 10plex experiments. The labeling reaction was quenched using 5% hydroxylamine at 23°C for 15 minutes. Samples were diluted using 0.1% formic acid (FA), to reduce the remaining concentration of acetonitrile to less than 5% (mean 99.2% labeling efficiency). In the meanwhile, samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge at 40°C and resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% FA. For each TMT10plex experiment, channels were combined based on their median precursor intensities. The combined samples were high pH reversed phase fractionated and concatenated to 16 fractions per TMT10plex. Each fraction was dried in a vacuum centrifuge at 40°C and resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% FA. MS injection-ready samples were stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated using the Easy NanoLC 1200 fitted with a trapping (Acclaim PepMap C18, 5 μm, 100Å, 100 μm x 2 cm) and an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100Å, 75 μm x 50 cm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a Fusion Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Solvent A was ddH2O, 0.1% (v/v) FA and solvent B was 80% ACN in ddH2O, 0.1% (v/v) FA. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at a maximum pressure of 800 bar, onto the trapping column. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 0.3 μl/minute, at 55°C. During the elution, the percentage of solvent B was increased in a linear fashion from 3 to 8% in 4 minutes, then from 8% to 10% in 2 minutes, then from 10% to 32% in a further 68 minutes, and then to 50% B in 12 minutes. Finally, the gradient was finished with 7 minutes at 100% solvent B, followed by 10 minutes 97% solvent A. Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 μm OD x 20 μm ID; 10 μm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2 kV. The capillary temperature was set at 275°C. The data were acquired using a MS3-SPS method was used. All remaining data acquisition details are described within the Supplementary Material. Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16). The search was performed against our customized database (24,727 entries) using the Andromeda search engine with the following search criteria: enzyme was set to trypsin/P with up to 2 missed cleavages. Each TMT10plex experiment was specified within its individual parameter group. Carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as a fixed modification; oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term), The search type for protein quantification was set to reporter ion MS3 with the predefined TMT10plex isobaric labels with a reporter mass tolerance of 0.01. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) intensities were calculated. Peptide and protein hits were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1%, with a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. Second peptide search for the identification of chimeric MS2 spectra was enabled. The reversed sequences of the target database were used as a decoy database. Not mentioned MaxQuant settings were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
Clinically translatable large animal models have become indispensable for cardiovascular research, clinically relevant proof of concept studies and for novel therapeutic interventions. In particular, the pig has emerged as an essential cardiovascular disease model, because its heart, circulatory system, and blood supply are anatomically and functionally similar to that of humans. Currently, molecular and omics-based studies in the pig are hampered by the incompleteness of the genome and the lack of diversity of the corresponding transcriptome annotation. Here, we employed Nanopore long-read sequencing and in-depth proteomics on top of Illumina RNA-seq to enhance the pig cardiac transcriptome annotation. We assembled 15,926 transcripts, stratified into coding and non-coding, and validated our results by complementary mass spectrometry. A manual review of several gene loci, which are associated with cardiac function, corroborated the utility of our enhanced annotation. All our data are available for download and are provided as tracks for integration in genome browsers. We deem this resource as highly valuable for molecular research in an increasingly relevant large animal model.

### Keywords
Transcriptomics, Cardiac, Proteomics, Lcms, Tmt, Nanopore, Annotation, Pig

### Affiliations
DKFZ
University Hospital Heidelberg

### Submitter
Torsten Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Dieterich
University Hospital Heidelberg


