### Accession
PXD039061

### Title
The p97-UBXD8 complex regulates ER-Mitochondria contact sites by altering membrane lipid saturation and composition

### Description
The intimate association between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondrial membranes at ER-mitochondria contact sites (ERMCS) serves as a platform for several critical cellular processes, particularly lipid synthesis. How contacts are remodeled and the subsequent biological consequences of altered contacts such as perturbed lipid metabolism remains poorly understood. Here we show that the p97 AAA-ATPase and its ER-tethered ubiquitin-X domain adaptor 8 (UBXD8) regulate the prevalence of ERMCS. The p97-UBXD8 complex localizes to contacts and its loss increases contacts in a manner that is dependent on p97 catalytic activity. Quantitative proteomics and lipidomics of ERMCS demonstrates alterations in proteins regulating lipid metabolism and a significant change in saturated or monounsaturated lipid species in UBXD8 knockout cells. We show that loss of p97-UBXD8 results in perturbed contacts due to an increase in membrane lipid saturation via SREBP1 and the lipid desaturase SCD1. These aberrant contacts can be rescued by supplementation with unsaturated fatty acids or overexpression of SCD1. Notably, we find that the SREBP1-SCD1 pathway is negatively impacted in the brains of mice with p97 mutations that cause neurodegeneration. Our results suggest that contacts are exquisitely sensitive to alterations to membrane lipid composition and saturation in a p97-UBXD8 dependent manner.

### Sample Protocol
The PNS and MAM fractions were isolated from HEK293T WT or UBXD8 KO cells. 100 g protein from each sample was precipitated using 15% (v/v) Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) followed by 100% Acetone washes. The protein pellets were resuspended in 200 mM N-(2-Hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N′-(3-propanesulfonic acid) (EPPS) (pH 8.5) buffer followed by reduction using 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), alkylation with 14 mM iodoacetamide and quenched using 5 mM dithiothreitol treatments. The reduced and alkylated protein was precipitated using methanol and chloroform. The protein mixture was digested with LysC (Wako) overnight followed by Trypsin (Pierce) digestion for 6 hours at 37oC. The trypsin was inactivated with 30% (v/v) acetonitrile. The digested peptides were labelled with 0.2 mg per reaction of 6-plex TMT reagents (ThermoFisher scientific) (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, and 129N) at room temperature for 1 hour. The reaction was quenched using 0.5% (v/v) Hydroxylamine for 15 min. A 2.5 L aliquot from the labeling reaction was tested for labeling efficiency. TMT-labeled peptides from each sample were pooled together at a 1:1 ratio. The pooled peptide mix was dried under vacuum and resuspended in 5% formic acid for 15 min. The resuspended peptide sample was further purified using C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Sep-Pak, Waters).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the Human UniProt Database (downloaded: August 2018). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.163 Da for TMT) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equaled 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement.  Downstream data analyses for TMT datasets were carried out using the R statistical package (v4.0.3) and Bioconductor (v3.12; BiocManager 1.30.10). TMT channel intensities were quantile normalized and then the data were log-transformed. The log transformed data were analyzed with limma-based R package where p-values were FDR adjusted using an empirical Bayesian statistical. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a log2 (fold change (WT vs UBXD8 KO)) threshold of > +/- 0.65.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ermcs, Ubxd8, Srebp1, Neurodegeneration, Scd1

### Affiliations
Department of Developmental Molecular and Chemical Biology Tufts University School of Medicine Boston MA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Malavika Raman
Department of Developmental Molecular and Chemical Biology Tufts University School of Medicine Boston MA


