### Accession
PXD021635

### Title
Disruption of splicing, proliferation and stemness via PRMT5 inhibition as a therapeutic strategy for GBM

### Description
Glioblastoma (GBM) is a deadly cancer in which cancer stem cells (CSCs) sustain tumor growth and contribute to therapeutic resistance. Protein Arginine Methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) has recently emerged as a promising target in GBM. Using two orthogonal-acting inhibitors of PRMT5 (GSK591 or LLY-283), we show that pharmacological inhibition of PRMT5 suppresses the growth of a cohort of 46 patient-derived GBM stem cell cultures, with the proneural subtype showing greater sensitivity. We show that PRMT5 inhibition caused widespread disruption of splicing across the transcriptome, particularly affecting cell cycle gene products. We identify a GBM splicing signature that correlates with the degree of response to PRMT5 inhibition. Importantly, we demonstrate that LLY-283 is brain-penetrant and significantly prolongs the survival of mice with orthotopic patient-derived xenografts. Collectively, our findings provide a rationale for the clinical development of brain penetrant PRMT5 inhibitors as treatment for GBM.

### Sample Protocol
GSC lines G561, G564 and G583 were cultured adherently for 6 days with either 1 μM of GSK591, 1μM LLY283 or the inactive control, SGC2096 (n=3). Cells were then lysed in denaturing urea buffer in the presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Extracted proteins were digested into peptides with trypsin. After desalting, peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS, “1D separation”) using around 1 ug per injection. All analyses were performed on the latest generation of Orbitrap instrumentation (Orbitrap Fusion) using liquid chromatography (LC) gradients.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant was used for peptide identification, protein inference and label-free quantification. The relative abundance of all peptides for each protein was considered for quantification. Subsequent data analysis was done in R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Glioblastoma, Prmt5 inhibition, Cancer

### Affiliations
IRIC-Université de Montréal
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Tyers
IRIC-Université de Montréal


