### Accession
PXD010931

### Title
HEK293 Ku70 WT BioID -  Mapping the Ku interactome using proximity-dependent biotin identification in human cells

### Description
We conducted proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) using wild-type Ku70 in HEK293 cells. Ku70 is part of a protein complex known as Ku, which is involved in a variety of functions throughout the cell. By identifying candidate protein interactors, we can infer new cellular processes that may involve the Ku complex.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cell stably expressing Ku70-BirA* were incubated with biotin for 24 hours before cell lysis and enrichment for biotinylated proteins using streptavidin-conjugated beads. For 3 biological replicates and 1 negative control, following an on-bead tryptic digest, samples were submitted for identification by Liquid Chromatography Electrospray Ionizing Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) using an ACQUITY M-Class UHPLC system (Waters) connected to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were searched using PEAKS Studio (version 8.5) against the human Uniprot database. The FDR was set to 1%. Next, project files were exported from PEAKS and opened on Scaffold (version 4.8.7) to analyze peptide (set to >95%) and protein probabilities (set to >95% with at least 2 unique peptides). Spectral counts were exported from Scaffold for SAINTexpress analysis (web interface) to identify a list of high confidence protein interactors.

### Publication Abstract
The Ku heterodimer, composed of Ku70 and Ku80, is best characterized for its role in repairing double-stranded DNA breaks but is also known to participate in other regulatory processes. Despite our understanding of Ku protein interplay during DNA repair, the extent of Ku's protein interactions in other processes has never been fully determined. Using proximity-dependent biotin identification (BioID) and affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS) with wild-type Ku70, we identified candidate proteins that interact with the Ku heterodimer in HEK293 cells, in the absence of exogenously induced DNA damage. BioID analysis identified approximately 250 nuclear proteins, appearing in at least two replicates, including known Ku-interacting factors such as MRE11A, WRN, and NCOA6. Meanwhile, AP-MS analysis identified approximately 50 candidate proteins. Of the novel protein interactors identified, many were involved in functions already suspected to involve Ku such as transcriptional regulation, DNA replication, and DNA repair, while several others suggest that Ku may be involved in additional functions such as RNA metabolism, chromatin-remodeling, and microtubule dynamics. Using a combination of BioID and AP-MS, this is the first report that comprehensively characterizes the Ku protein interaction landscape, revealing new cellular processes and protein complexes involving the Ku complex.

### Keywords
Ku70, Bioid, Hek293

### Affiliations
University of Western Ontario
Biochemistry, Schild-Poulter Lab, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, Canada

### Submitter
Sanna Abbasi

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Schild-Poulter
Biochemistry, Schild-Poulter Lab, Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, Canada


