### Accession
PXD022286

### Title
Proteomic analysis of three Crohn’s Disease-Associated Escherichia coli isolates cultivated on medium supplemented with glucose or sodium propionate

### Description
Crohn’s disease (CD) is a severe chronic immune-mediated granulomatous inflammatory disease of the gastrointestinal tract. Its pathogenesis mechanisms remain obscure. One of the factors of CD pathogenesis is reduced diversity of gut microbiota which is accompanied by the characteristic increase of representation of Escherichia coli strains, several of which are able to penetrate the mucin layer, adhere to the epithelial cells, cross the epithelial barrier, and colonize macrophages. During the internalization, these E. coli strains can modulate macrophages’ defensive functions in a way that allows them to survive in a presence of such negative factors as low pH, oxidative stress, proteolytic enzymes and antimicrobial solutions. These strains were collectively assigned to the adhesive–invasive group of E. coli (AIEC). Earlier we sequenced 28 E. coli isolates from 10 patients with CD [Rakitina DV et al. Genome analysis of E. coli isolated from Crohn disease patients. BMC Genomics. 2017, 18(1):544. doi: 10.1186/s12864-017-3917-x] It has been demonstrated that the majority of enteropathogens feature specific metabolic pathways allowing them to use alternative carbon sources which leads to survivability and enhaced competitiveness in the host organism. Previously, we demonstrated that virulent properties of CD isolates are dependent on the carbon source: prolonged growth on propionate containing medium stimulates virulent properties while prolonged growth on glucose reduces these properties to levels indistinguishable from laboratory strain K-12 MG1655 [Pobeguts OV et al. Propionate Induces Virulent Properties of Crohn’s Disease-Associated Escherichia coli. Frontiers in Microbiology. 2020, 11:1460. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01460]. Thus, cultivation of E. coli on different growth mediums: M9 supplied with propionate and glucose made it possible to distinguish two states of each CD isolate: active (aAIEC) and inactive (iAIEC). In order to identify the major changes that occur upon change of carbon source, we carried out LC–MS-based proteomic analysis of aAIEC and iAIEC states of three CD isolates of E. coli ZvL2 (RCE07), BruB2 (RCE03) and К5 (RCE06) grown on glucose and propionate.

### Sample Protocol
Escherichia coli Crohn’s disease (CD) isolates ZvL2(RCE07), BruB2 (RCE03) and K5 (RCE06) were obtained by an endoscopic surgery of a patient with CD at The Loginov Moscow Clinical Scientific Center. Sample collection was carried out in accordance with the requirements of the local Ethics Committee based on the informed consent of the patient. Cell cultures were cultivated on M9 medium with a supplement of 50 mM glucose (Glu) or 20 mM sodium propionate (PA) at 37°C and 180 r/min. Growth curves were monitored using OD at 600 nm. Escherichia coli cells were harvested by centrifugation (5000 g for 5 min, 4°C), the pellets were washed with cold PBS and resuspended in 20 ul of 100 mM Tris-НCl (рН 8.0) with subsequent addition of lysozyme (final concentration 0,3 mg/ml). The cells were incubated for 30 min at 4°С, centrifuged at 5000 g for 5 min and washed again in cold PBS. Then 10 μl of 10% sodium deoxycholate (DCNa) and 0.5 μl nuclease mix (GE Healthcare) was added to the cell pellets. After incubation for 1 hour at 4°C, the samples were resuspended in 100 µl 100 mMTris-HCl buffer (pH 8.5) containing 0,5% DCNa, 8 M urea and 2.5 mM EDTA. After incubation for 20 minutes the sample was centrifuged at 16000 g for 10 min at 4°C to remove intact cells and debris. The supernatants were collected, and protein concentration was measured using BCA Assay Kit (Sigma). Disulfide bonds were reduced in supernatants (containing 200 μg of total protein) by the addition of Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) (Sigma) to a final concentration of 5 mM and reaction was incubated for 60 min at 37°C. To alkylate free cysteines, chloroacetamide (Sigma) was added to a final concentration of 30 mM and placed at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The step of adding TCEP was repeated. Then the sample was diluted 6-fold with 50 mMTris-HCl, pH 8.5 with 0.01% DCNa. Trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) was added for a final trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and incubated at 37°C overnight. To stop trypsinolysis and degrade the acid-labile DCNa, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the final concentration of 0.5% (v/v) (the pH should be less than 2.0), incubated at 37 °C for 45 min and the samples were centrifuged at 14000 g for 10 min to remove the DCNa. Peptide extract was desalted using a Discovery DSC-18 Tube (Supelco) according to the manufacturer protocol. Peptides were eluted with 1 ml of 75% acetonitrile in water containing 0.1% TFA, dried in a SpeedVac (Labconco) and resuspended in 3% acetonitrile in water containing 0.1% TFA to the final concentration of 5 μg/μl. LC-MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were loaded to a home-made trap column 20*0.1 mm, packed with Inertsil ODS3 3 μm sorbent (GLSciences), in the loading buffer (2% ACN, 98% H2O, 0.1% TFA) at 10 l/min flow and separated at RT in a home-packed fused-silica column 500*0.1 mm packed with Reprosil PUR C18AQ 1.9 (Dr. Maisch) into the emitter prepared with P2000 Laser Puller (Sutter, USA) [7]. Samples were eluted with a linear gradient of 80% ACN, 19.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (buffer B) in 99.9% H2O, 0.1% FA (solvent A) from 4 to 36% of solvent B in 1 h at 0.44 μl/min flow at RT. MS data was collected in DDA mode. MS1 parameters were as follows: 70K resolution, 350-2000 scan range, max injection time 50 ms, AGC target 3x106. Ions were isolated with 1.4 m/z window and 0.2 m/z offset targeting 10 highest intensity peaks of +2 to +6 charge, 8x103 minimum AGC, preferred peptide match and isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s. MS2 fragmentation was carried out in HCD mode at 17,5K resolution with 27% NCE. Ions were accumulated for max 45 ms with target AGC 1x105. In total for each sample type 3 biological replicates with 3 technical sample preparation replicates were analyzed.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification were performed with MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 software with default settings (variable modifications: oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term); fixed modifications carbamidomethyl (C), the LFQ minimum ratio count is set to one). Homemade databases composed of proteins unique to each strain and LF82 and K12 proteins (% of identity > 95, e-value < 0.05) were used. Further calculations were made with R 3.6.3 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Escherichia coli, Crohn's disease, Proteomic analysis

### Affiliations
Lab of Proteome Research, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, Russia
Lab of Proteome Research, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow

### Submitter
Aleksandr Zubov

### Lab Head
Dr Gleb Fisunov
Lab of Proteome Research, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow, Russia


