### Accession
PXD037922

### Title
DRAK2 alters IL-2 sensitivity and Treg development

### Description
Drak2¬-deficient (Drak2-/-) mice are resistant to multiple models of autoimmunity, yet effectively eliminate pathogens and tumors. Thus, DRAK2 is an ideal target to treat autoimmune diseases. However, the mechanisms by which DRAK2 contributes to autoimmunity, particularly type 1 diabetes (T1D), remain unresolved. Our data indicate that DRAK2 contributes to autoimmunity in multiple ways by regulating thymic Treg development and by impacting the sensitivity of conventional T cells to Treg-mediated suppression.

### Sample Protocol
We demonstrate that DRAK2 regulates IL-2 signaling by inhibiting STAT5 phosphorylation. In vitro kinase assay reactions were resolved on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were then in-gel digested and analyzed by Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) operating in a data-dependent high-resolution MS/MS mode.  Synthetic Peptides Assay Development and Absolute Quantification (AQUA): The AQUA (heavy Glycine-labeled) STAT5A Y694 peptides with unmodified Y694 (AVDGYVKPQIK) or Phospho-Y694 (AVDGYVKPQIK) were commercially synthesized and HPLC-purified. The two synthetic peptides were used to evaluate LC retention time, MS detection sensitivity, and MS/MS spectra. Absolute Quantification (AQUA) proteomics were performed using the AQUA peptides spiked-in at equimolar ratio (Phos AQUA/Non-Phos AQUA ratio = 1/1) and using the targeted high resolution mass spectrometry methods on a Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were computationally processed by converting the MS/MS raw files to mzXML files (ProteoWizard 3.0.22198-e6bb91f 64-bit) followed by PEAKS Studio 10.6 (Build 20201221, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) software search against the UniProt human database (validated, revision, 2021.09.12; entries: 20948). Major parameters included precursor and product ion mass tolerance (± 25 ppm, 0.1 Da), fully tryptic, static mass shift for carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine (+57.02146), dynamic mass shift for oxidation of Methionine (+15.99491), for Phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine, and Tyrosine residues (+79.96633), and Glycine heavy-isotope label (+2.0067); maximal missed cleavage (n = 3), and maximal modification sites (n = 3). All matched MS/MS spectra were filtered by mass accuracy and matching scores to reduce protein false discovery rate to ~1% based on the target/decoy search strategy. Peptide assignments and modification sites were further analyzed by Ascore, denovo sequencing for the manual assignment of site-specific fragment ions, and by LC retention time comparison against the synthetic AQUA peptide standard. Proteins were quantified by summing the MS1 Peak Area across all matched PSMs using the PEAKS Studio 10.6 and Skyline (21.2.0.536 dbaf6ccd2, 64-bit) software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Regulatory t cells, Type 1 diabetes, Tolerance, Il-2, T cells, Thymus

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA

### Submitter
Ashutosh Mishra

### Lab Head
Dr Maureen A. McGargill
Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA


