### Accession
PXD029013

### Title
Cryo-EM structure of native human thyroglobulin

### Description
The Tthyroglobulin (Tg) protein is the essential fundament toto thyroid hormone synthesis, a key player  playing a vital role in the regulation of metabolism, development and growth and serving as intraglandular iodine storage. Its structure is conserved among vertebrates. Tg is delivered through the secretory pathway of the thyroid follicular unit to the central colloid depository, where it is iodinated at specific tyrosine sites to form mono- or diiodotyrosine, which combine to produce triiodothyronine (T3) and thyroxine (T4), respectively. Synthesis of these hormones depends on the precise 3D structure, iodination capacity and post-translational modification of Tg. The Tg structure is overall conserved among vertebrates and , which and structural information has long been remained unknown missing despite decades of research until recently structural information has been made available on human thyroglobulin (hTg) originating from recombinant hTg and endogenous hTg from patients with goitres.   Here, we present the cryo-electron microscopy structure of native and fully functional human thyroglobulin (hTg) originating from healthy human thyroid glands, to a global resolution of 3.2 Å. We used LC-MS experiments to The structure provides detailed information on the location of the hTg hormonogenic sites by revealing native iodination, and reveals the position as well as the role of many of its glycosylation sites and other post-translational modifications. Our results offer structural insights into thyroid hormonogenesis of natively functional hTg and provide a fundamental understanding of clinically relevant hTg mutations, which can improve treatment of thyroid diseases.

### Sample Protocol
30 ug of human thyroglobulin were dissolved in 0.8 M Urea (Sigma), 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate by vortexing and ultra-sonication (5 seconds, Vial Tweeter, Hielscher, Germany). Then, the protein was reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 60 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C. After splitting the sample into 3 aliquots containing 10 ug of protein each, samples were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin, sequencing-grade Glu-C and sequencing-grade Chymotrypsin (all 1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin), respectively, overnight at 37°C. After acidification using 5% TFA, peptides were desalted on C18 reversed-phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus) and dried under vacuum.  The setup of the μRPLC-MS system was as described previously (PMID:27345528). Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 37 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Phosphorylated peptides were analyzed per LC-MS/MS run using a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 19.9% water, 0.1% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 60 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on Q-Exactive HF equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 20 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 20 seconds. Total cycle time was approximately 1 s. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 15,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 28%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.4 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were converted to the mascot generic file (mgf) format using the msconvert tool (part of ProteoWizard, version 3.0.4624 (2013-6-3)). Using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science, Version 2.4.1), the mgf files were searched against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted UniProt entries of homo sapiens (Uniprot, download date: 2019/03/07) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 41,592 sequences) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: semi-tryptic, semi-Glu-C and chymotryptic specificity was required for the corresponding 3 different prepared samples, 3 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C), was set as fixed modification. The following variable modifications were applied separately for all samples: (i) +16 on M (Oxidation), +42 on Peptide N-Terminal K (Acetyl), +126 on Y (Iodo);  (ii) +16 on M (Oxidation), +252 on Y (Diiodo), +378 on Y (Triiodo); (iii) +14 on KR (Methyl), +16 on M (Oxidation), +100 on K (Succinyl); (iv) +16 on M (Oxidation), +80 on STY (Phospho); (v) +1 on NQ (Deamidated), +16 on M (Oxidation), +80 on ST (Sulfo); (vi) +16 on M (Oxidation), +470 on Y (Triiodothyronine), +596 on Y (Thyroxine). Next, the database search results were imported to the Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.9.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and the protein and peptide false identification rate was set to 1% based on the number of decoy hits for each generated dataset. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet program (PMID:14632076). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Only peptides of human thyroglobulin that satisfied these strict identification criteria were reported

### Publication Abstract
The thyroglobulin (TG) protein is essential to thyroid hormone synthesis, plays a vital role in the regulation of metabolism, development and growth and serves as intraglandular iodine storage. Its architecture is conserved among vertebrates. Synthesis of triiodothyronine (T<sub>3</sub>) and thyroxine (T<sub>4</sub>) hormones depends on the conformation, iodination and post-translational modification of TG. Although structural information is available on recombinant and deglycosylated endogenous human thyroglobulin (hTG) from patients with goiters, the structure of native, fully glycosylated hTG remained unknown. Here, we present the cryo-electron microscopy structure of native and fully glycosylated hTG from healthy thyroid glands to 3.2&#x2009;&#xc5; resolution. The structure provides detailed information on hormonogenic and glycosylation sites. We employ liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) to validate these findings as well as other post-translational modifications and proteolytic cleavage sites. Our results offer insights into thyroid hormonogenesis of native hTG and provide a fundamental understanding of clinically relevant mutations.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Thyroglobulin

### Affiliations
Proteopmics Core Facility, Biozentrum,Univeristy of Basel, Switzerland
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Scxhmidt
Proteopmics Core Facility, Biozentrum,Univeristy of Basel, Switzerland


