### Accession
PXD027330

### Title
Deubiquitinating enzymes and the proteasome regulate unique sets of ubiquitin substrates.

### Description
The ubiquitin-proteasome axis has been extensively explored at a system-wide level, but the impact of deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) on the ubiquitinome remains largely unknown. Using UbiSite technology and inhibitors, we have compared the contributions of the proteasome and DUBs on the ubiquitinome. We uncovered large differential dynamic Ub signalling networks with substrates and sites uniquely regulated by DUBs or by the proteasome, highlighting the role of DUBs in degradation-independent ubiquitin signalling. DUBs regulate substrates via nearly 40,000 unique sites. Moreover, we found that ubiquitin conjugated to SUMO2/3 forms a unidirectional proteasomal degradation signal with strikingly rapid kinetics compared to ubiquitin polymers only. We found that PARP1 is hyper ubiquitinated in response to DUB inhibition, increasing its enzymatic activity. Our findings highlight the key regulatory roles of DUBs on ubiquitin dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells expressing His10-Ub were treated with 1µM TAK-243, 10µM MG132 or 20µM PR619 dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) for 10, 30, 60 or 180min and DMSO for 180min as a control. For combination treatments, the inhibitors were added simultaneously. Cells were washed twice with ice cold PBS, collected by scraping and centrifuged at 500rcf for 5min at 4°C. Cell pellets were lysed in guanidine lysis buffer (6M guanidine-HCl, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4 pH 7.8, 10mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.8). Lysates were sonicated (Misonix Sonicator 3000) twice for 5s at 80% power. The protein concentration of lysates was determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat:23227)) in triplicates with Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) protein concentration standards. Lysates were equalized to 1.5mg/ml protein with guanidine lysis buffer in 6ml total volume. 50mM Imidazole and 5mM β-mercaptoethanol were added to each sample. Nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid-agarose beads (Ni-NTA) (Qiagen, Venlo, NL) were used to enrich His10-Ub conjugates. 120µl of a 50% bead slurry was pre-washed four times with wash buffer A (Lysis buffer supplemented with 10mM imidazole pH 8, 5mM β-mercaptoethanol and 0.1% Triton X-100), then added to each lysate. Lysates were incubated in a rotary wheel at 4°C o/n.  Beads were pelleted at 1000rcf for 5min and washed with 10ml of wash buffer A and B (8M urea, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4 pH 8, 10mM Tris-HCL pH 8.0, 10mM imidazole pH 8 and 5mM β-mercaptoethanol) subsequently in 15ml falcon tubes. The beads were then transferred to low bind 1.5ml Eppendorf tubes (Sigma, Cat: Z666505) and washed for 15min on a rotary wheel at room temperature (RT) with wash buffer C (8M urea, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4 pH 6.3, 10mM Tris-HCL pH 6.3, 10mM imidazole pH 7 and 5mM β-mercaptoethanol). Beads were then transferred to new low bind 1.5ml Eppendorf tubes and washed with wash buffer D (wash buffer C without imidazole) for 15min. This final wash step was repeated once more. Pulldowns for MS (mass spectrometry) were prepared for digestion on the beads by removing wash buffer D and resuspending the beads in one bead volume of Digestion buffer (7M urea, 0.1M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4 pH 7, 10mM Tris-HCL pH 7, 50mM ABC). Samples were supplemented with 1mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated for 30min on a shaker at 1200rpm at RT, then supplemented with 5mM chloroacetamide (CAA) and incubated 30min on a shaker at 1200rpm at RT, then supplemented with an additional 5mM DTT (final concentration of 6mM DTT) and another 30min incubation on a shaker at 1200rpm at RT. Lys-C (Wako, Cat: 129-02541) was added in a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio, samples were incubated on a shaker at 1200rpm at RT o/n. Subsequently three volumes of 50mM ABC were added to dilute urea to a final concentration of 2M. Trypsin (Promega, Cat: V5111) was added in a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio and incubated on a shaker at 1200rpm at RT o/n. The digested peptides were separated from the beads over a 0.45µm Ultrafree-MC filter, pre-washed with 50mM ABC. Peptides were desalted and concentrated on stage-tips made with 3 stacked C18 disks (Sigma, Cat: 66883-U) using a plunger assembly (Sigma, Cat: 26150) as described previously. Peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile (ACN) (Sigma, 34998) in 0.1% formic acid (Sigma, 09676). Eluted fractions were vacuum dried employing a SpeedVac RC10.10 (Jouan) and dissolved in 0.1% formic acid before online nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS). Samples of His10-Ub pulldowns were run on an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon) connected to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (ThermoFisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source. Peptides were separated on a 15 cm fused silica column (MS Wil, FS360-75-15-N-5-C25) in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Cat: r119.aq). The gradient length was 120min from 2% to 95% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a top 10 method. Full-scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 × 106 and a resolution of 70,000, and the higher-collisional dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 × 105 and with a resolution of 17,500 with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25%. The maximum MS1 and MS2 injection times were 20ms and 60ms, respectively. The precursor ion masses of scanned ions were dynamically excluded (DE) from MS/MS analysis for 60s. Ions with charge 1, and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 events.

### Data Protocol
MS data generated from His10-Ub samples were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.14) matching to the Human Proteome (Uniprot, reviewed H. sapiens proteome downloaded June 22, 2020) with default settings of FDR and andromeda score filtering, matching to a decoy database and common contaminants. Digestion was set to allow 4 missed cleavages with Trypsin digestion. Normalization was done by LFQ (default settings) with matching between runs enabled. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine and diGly modification on lysine were included as variable modifications. Quantification of peptide intensities was set to include diGly modifications on lysine but not to discard unmodified counterparts.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin-proteasome axis has been extensively explored at a system-wide level, but the impact of deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) on the ubiquitinome remains largely unknown. Here, we compare the contributions of the proteasome and DUBs on the global ubiquitinome, using UbiSite technology, inhibitors and mass spectrometry. We uncover large dynamic ubiquitin signalling networks with substrates and sites preferentially regulated by DUBs or by the proteasome, highlighting the role of DUBs in degradation-independent ubiquitination. DUBs regulate substrates via at least 40,000 unique sites. Regulated networks of ubiquitin substrates are involved in autophagy, apoptosis, genome integrity, telomere integrity, cell cycle progression, mitochondrial function, vesicle transport, signal transduction, transcription, pre-mRNA splicing and many other cellular processes. Moreover, we show that ubiquitin conjugated to SUMO2/3 forms a strong proteasomal degradation signal. Interestingly, PARP1 is hyper-ubiquitinated in response to DUB inhibition, which increases its enzymatic activity. Our study uncovers key regulatory roles of DUBs and provides a resource of endogenous ubiquitination sites to aid the analysis of substrate specific ubiquitin signalling.

### Keywords
Human, His10-ub, Ubiquitin, U2os, Pr619, Mg132, Tak243

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center
LUMC

### Submitter
Fredrik Trulsson

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred Vertegaal
Leiden University Medical Center


