### Accession
PXD037103

### Title
Extracellular vesicles from Aureobasidium pullulans

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are increasingly recognized as an important mechanism for cell-cell interactions. Their role in fungi is still poorly understood and they have been isolated from only a handful of species. Here, we isolated and characterized EVs from Aureobasidium pullulans, a biotechnologically important black yeast-like fungus that is increasingly used for biocontrol of phytopathogenic fungi and bacteria. After optimization of the isolation protocol, characterization of EVs from A. pullulans by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) revealed a typical cup-shaped morphology and different subpopulations of EVs. These results were confirmed by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), which revealed that A. pullulans produced 6.1 × 10^8 nanoparticles per milliliter of culture medium. Proteomic analysis of EVs detected 642 proteins. A small fraction of them had signal peptides for secretion and transmembrane domains. Proteins characteristic of different synthesis pathways were found, suggesting that EVs are synthesized by multiple pathways in A. pullulans. Enrichment analysis using Gene Ontology showed that most of the proteins found in the EVs were associated with primary metabolism. When sequencing the small RNA fraction of A. pullulans EVs, we found two hypothetical novel mil-RNAs. Finally, we tested the biocontrol potential of EVs from A. pullulans. The EVs did not inhibit the germination of spores of three important phytopathogenic fungi – Botrytis cinerea, Colletotrichum acutatum, and Penicillium expansum. However, exposure of grown cultures of C. acutatum and P. expansum to A. pullulans EVs resulted in visible changes in morphology of colonies. These preliminary results suggest that EVs may be part of the antagonistic activity of A. pullulans, which is so far only partially understood. Thus, the first isolation and characterization of EVs from A. pullulans provides a starting point for further studies of EVs in the biotechnologically important traits of the biocontrol black fungus A. pullulans in particular and in the biological role of fungal EVs in general.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry, we lysed the EV-enriched samples after ultracentrifugation (three independent biological replicates). We added RIPA buffer containing 0.1 % protease inhibitor to EVs samples and incubated the samples on ice for four hours. Then we carefully resuspended the sample for 15 minutes. The filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol was performed using the FASP Protein Digestion Kit (Abcam, United Kingdom) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with some modifications. The supernatant was acidified with 2 µL of 0.5% TFA and then stored at -20 °C until use.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed at Advanced Mass Spectrometry Facility in the School of Biosciences at the University of Birmingham. UltiMate® 3000 HPLC series (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA USA) was used for peptide concentration and separation. Samples were trapped on precolumn, Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å 300 µm i.d. × 5 mm (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA USA) and separated in Nano Series™ Standard Columns 75 µm i.d. × 15 cm, packed with C18 PepMap100, 3 µm, 100Å (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA USA). The gradient used was from 3.2% to 44% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 30 min. The column was then washed with 90 % mobile phase B before re-equilibrating at 3.2 % mobile phase B. Peptides were eluted directly (~ 350 nL min-1) via a Triversa Nanomate nanospray source (Advion Biosciences, NY) into a QExactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The spray voltage of QE HF was set to 1.7 kV through Triversa NanoMate and heated capillary at 275 °C. The mass spectrometer performed a full FT-MS scan (m/z 380−1600) and subsequent HCD MS/MS scans of the 20 most abundant ions with dynamic exclusion setting 15S. Full scan mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 and ACG target of 3×10^6. Precursor ions were fragmented in HCD MS/MS with resolution set up at 15,000 and a normalized collision energy of 28. ACG target for HCD MS/MS was 1×10^5. The width of the precursor isolation window was 1.2 m/z and only multiply-charged precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Spectra were acquired for 56 mins. The MS and MS/MS scans were searched against Uniprot database using Protein Discovery 2.2 software, Sequest HT algorithm (Thermo Fisher). Variable modifications were deamidation (N and Q), oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T and Y). The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the MS/MS mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Two missed cleavage was allowed, and data were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. Protein with at least two high confidence peptides were accepted as real hit.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are increasingly recognized as an important mechanism for cell-cell interactions. Their role in fungi is still poorly understood and they have been isolated from only a handful of species. Here, we isolated and characterized EVs from Aureobasidium pullulans, a biotechnologically important black yeast-like fungus that is increasingly used for biocontrol of phytopathogenic fungi and bacteria. After optimization of the isolation protocol, characterization of EVs from A. pullulans by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) revealed a typical cup-shaped morphology and different subpopulations of EVs. These results were confirmed by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), which revealed that A. pullulans produced 6.1&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>8</sup> nanoparticles per milliliter of culture medium. Proteomic analysis of EVs detected 642 proteins. A small fraction of them had signal peptides for secretion and transmembrane domains. Proteins characteristic of different synthesis pathways were found, suggesting that EVs are synthesized by multiple pathways in A. pullulans. Enrichment analysis using Gene Ontology showed that most of the proteins found in the EVs were associated with primary metabolism. When sequencing the small RNA fraction of A. pullulans EVs, we found two hypothetical novel mil-RNAs. Finally, we tested the biocontrol potential of EVs from A. pullulans. The EVs did not inhibit the germination of spores of three important phytopathogenic fungi-Botrytis cinerea, Colletotrichum acutatum, and Penicillium expansum. However, exposure of grown cultures of C. acutatum and P. expansum to A. pullulans EVs resulted in visible changes in morphology of colonies. These preliminary results suggest that EVs may be part of the antagonistic activity of A. pullulans, which is so far only partially understood. Thus, the first isolation and characterization of EVs from A. pullulans provides a starting point for further studies of EVs in the biotechnologically important traits of the biocontrol black fungus A. pullulans in particular and in the biological role of fungal EVs in general.

### Keywords
Fungi, Aureobasidium pullulans, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Young Researcher
Department of Biology, Chair of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia

### Submitter
Anja Černoša

### Lab Head
Dr Nina Gunde-Cimerman
Department of Biology, Chair of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia


