### Accession
PXD007128

### Title
Analysis of Bacillus subtilis intracellular proteome under exposition to silver nanoparticles

### Description
Nanoparticles are more and more used in industrial process, food, medicinal or daily goods. At the end of their life, most of them are discharged in the environment where they impact the ecological equilibrium. Bacteria are one of the first targets of the nanoparticles in the environment. To evaluate the impact of silver nanoparticles on the physiology of Bacillus subtilis, we studied the intracellular proteome of bacteria exposed to different nanoparticles during the stationary phase.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in LB medium in Erlenmeyer flasks during 16h with an initial OD600 of 0.01. After 16h of growth the cell cultures were incubated without for the control and with 1mg/L of Ag-NPs, or Ag2S-NPs or 1.8 mg/L of silver lactate (=1mg/L of silver) during 5h under shaking in 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks.  Bacteria were recovered after 15min centrifugation at 8500 rpm. Proteins were solubilized in SDS loading buffer before stacking in the top of a SDS-PAGE (4-12% NuPAGE, Invitrogen). They were then in-gel digested using trypsin before 2h nanoLC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos pro, Thermo Scientific). Analytical duplicates were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3) and Uniprot database (SwissProt, Bacillus subtilis (strain 168) taxonomy, May 2017 version). Default parameters were used, except that unique peptide was set to 1. 2 miscleavages were allowed, Carbamidomethyl (C) was chosen as fixed modification and Oxidation (M)and Acetyl (Protein N-term) as variable ones. Match between runs were allowed. Analytical duplicates were summed.

### Publication Abstract
For many years, silver nanoparticles, as with other antibacterial nanoparticles, have been extensively used in manufactured products. However, their fate in the environment is unclear and raises questions. We studied the fate of silver nanoparticles in the presence of bacteria under growth conditions that are similar to those found naturally in the environment (that is, bacteria in a stationary phase with low nutrient concentrations). We demonstrated that the viability and the metabolism of a gram-positive bacteria, Bacillus subtilis, exposed during the stationary phase is unaffected by 1 mg/L of silver nanoparticles. These results can be partly explained by a physical interaction of the poly-gamma-glutamate (PGA) secreted by Bacillus subtilis with the silver nanoparticles. The coating of the silver nanoparticles by the secreted PGA likely results in a loss of the bioavailability of nanoparticles and, consequently, a decrease of their biocidal effect.

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Bacillus subtilis, Silver nanoparticles

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Coute
EDyP


