### Accession
PXD022919

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis reveals sophisticated metabolic alteration and identifies FMNL1 as a diagnostic and prognostic marker in clear cell renal cell carcinoma

### Description
Purpose: In this study, we have undertaken the whole proteomic analysis and got a better understanding of biological processes involved in the development and progression of ccRCC. We hope promising biomarkers can be uncovered to facilitate early diagnosis, predict the prognosis and progression, more importantly, to be applied as potential therapeutic targets. Experimental design: Fresh frozen tissue samples were surgically resected from patients with local or locally advanced ccRCC. Trypsin digested proteins were analyzed using TMT-based LC-MS/MS proteomic approach, followed by bioinformatic analysis. A potential prognostic marker FMNL1, annotated with actin cytoskeleton assembly and cell migration, was chosen to be validated in TCGA_KIRC datasets(n=597), further validation sets(n=20) and expanded validation sets(n=97). Results: A total of 657 differentially expressed proteins were identified and quantified between ccRCC and adjacent normal tissues (p-value<0.05, FC>2 or<1/2), of which 186 proteins were up-regulated and 471 proteins were down-regulated. Bioinformatic analysis showed enriched metabolic biological processes and pathways including oxidative phosphorylation, valine, leucine and isoleucine degeneration, propanoate metabolism, fatty-acid degeneration, TCA cycle, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, etc. Univariate and multivariate analysis defined FMNL1 as an independent negative prognostic marker in the TCGA datasets. High expression of FMNL1 correlated significantly with tumor stage, T stage, lymph node metastasis(P<0.05), and distant metastasis(P<0.05) both in the TCGA-KIRC datasets and expanded validation sets. And KM survival curve illustrated that patients with high FMNL1 protein level had shorter OS time in the expanded validation sets (p=0.0273) Conclusion and clinical relevance: The proteomic results uncovered sophisticated metabolic reprogramming of ccRCC and indicated that the upregulation of rate-limiting enzymes in glycolysis and mitochondrial impairment may be the cause of metabolic reprogramming in ccRCC. Moreover, FMNL1 has been identified as a diagnostic and prognostic marker, and may be implicated in the progression of ccRCC.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 2Mm EDTA) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 9 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1550 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Human（20387sequences）database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. GO annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) is a database that integrates diverse information about protein families, domains and functional sites, and makes it freely available to the public via Web-based interfaces and services. Central to the database are diagnostic models, known as signatures, against which protein sequences can be searched to determine their potential function. InterPro has utility in the large-scale analysis of whole genomes and meta-genomes, as well as in characterizing individual protein sequences. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. There, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. Special for protokaryon species, Subcellular localization prediction soft CELLO was used. Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. For each category proteins, InterPro (a resource that provides functional analysis of protein sequences by classifying them into families and predicting the presence of domains and important sites) database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins.  Protein domains with a p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. For further hierarchical clustering based on different protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package. All differentially expressed protein database accession or sequence were searched against the STRING database version 10.5 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence; we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score >0.7 (high confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in R package “networkD3

### Publication Abstract
<b>Purpose:</b> In this study, we have undertaken the whole proteomic analysis and got a better understanding of biological processes involved in the development and progression of ccRCC. We hope promising biomarkers can be uncovered to facilitate early diagnosis, predict the prognosis and progression, more importantly, to be applied as potential therapeutic targets. <b>Experimental design:</b> Fresh frozen tissue samples were surgically resected from patients with local or locally advanced ccRCC. Trypsin digested proteins were analyzed using TMT-based LC-MS/MS proteomic approach, followed by bioinformatic analysis. A potential prognostic marker FMNL1 was chosen to be validated in TCGA_KIRC datasets (n=525 and 72), further validation sets (n=10 and 10) and expanded validation sets (n=81 and 16). The effects of FMNL1 on proliferation, migration and invasion were determined by colony formation, wound healing, and transwell assays in 786-O and Caki-1 cells <i>in vitro</i> study. <b>Results</b>: A total of 657 differentially expressed proteins were identified and quantified between ccRCC and adjacent normal tissues (p-value&lt;0.05, FC&gt;2 or&lt;1/2), of which 186 proteins were up-regulated and 471 proteins were down-regulated. Bioinformatic analysis showed enriched metabolic biological processes and pathways. Univariate and multivariate analysis defined FMNL1 as an independent negative prognostic marker in the TCGA datasets. High expression of FMNL1 correlated significantly with tumor stage and distant metastasis (P&lt;0.05) both in the TCGA-KIRC datasets and expanded validation sets. Kaplan-Meier survival curve illustrated that the patients with high FMNL1 protein level had shorter OS time in the expanded validation sets (p=0.0273). <i>In vitro</i> experiments presented the functional effects of FMNL1 knockdown on the inhibition of proliferation, migration and invasion in cancer cell lines. <b>Conclusion and clinical relevance:</b> The proteomic results uncovered sophisticated metabolic reprogramming of ccRCC and indicated that the upregulation of rate-limiting enzymes in glycolysis and mitochondrial impairment may be the cause of metabolic reprogramming in ccRCC. Moreover, FMNL1 has been identified as a promising prognostic marker, and knockdown of FMNL1 could inhibit ccRCC cell proliferation, migration and invasion, which might be used as a new effective therapeutic strategy to inhibit the progression of ccRCC.

### Keywords
Ccrcc; proteomics; energy metabolism; prognosis; fmnl1

### Affiliations
Lanzhou University
The Second Clinical College of Lanzhou University

### Submitter
桂 马

### Lab Head
Dr Gui Ma
Lanzhou University


