### Accession
PXD038017

### Title
Calciprotein particles cause physiologically significant pro- inflammatory response in endothelial cells and systemic circulation

### Description
Calciprotein particles (CPPs) represent self-assembling scavengers of excessive Ca2+ and PO43- ions which are formed in the human serum under the guidance of acidic proteins termed mineral chaperones (e.g., fetuin-A and albumin). While protecting the human organism from extraskeletal calcification, circulating CPPs are internalised by Kupffer cells and endothelial cells (ECs) and induce calcium stress upon their dissolution in lysosomes, thereby causing a pro-inflammatory response through the inflammasome-dependent and inflammasome-independent mechanisms. In patients with hyperphosphatemia (e.g., those with end-stage renal disease), a considerable proportion of primary amorphous CPPs transforms into secondary crystallised CPPs which instigate stronger cytokine release and indicate critical depletion of mineral buffering systems. A number of reports documented that serum of patients with chronic kidney disease, arterial hypertension, coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, and autoimmune disorders shows increased CPP generation that reflects uncurbed mineral stress in these clinical scenarios and emphasizes the need in the development of anti-CPP therapies. For the experiments, CPPs are routinely synthesised in vitro by the supersaturation of serum-supplemented cell culture medium with Ca2+ and PO43- ions, as artificially generated CPPs are similar to those isolated from calcified human tissues. Approximate concentration of CPPs in the human blood is 250 particles per µL (2.5 × 108 per L), as measured by fluorescent-labeled bisphosphonate OsteoSense 680EX (IVISense Osteo 680 fluorescent probe). The kinetics of CPP assembling and clearance is far from being fully understood, albeit it evidently depends on the amount of Ca2+ and PO43- ions and acidic serum proteins (especially fetuin-A and albumin), and several reports specified a role of Mg2+ ions, HCO3- ions, and pyrophosphate in these processes as intrinsic Ca2+ antagonists. Although previous studies delineated cytokines overproduced by ECs under CPP treatment (i.e., interleukin-6, interleukin-8, and monocyte chemoattractant protein 1) and itemised other pathological consequences of CPP internalisation (i.e., hampered NO biosynthesis, endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and impaired mechanotransduction), a little is known about the proteomic signatures of ECs to calcium stress. Here we for the first time performed an unbiased proteomic profiling of ECs treated with CPPs and revealed relative enrichment of the protein categories related to mitochondrial and lysosomal physiology after the CPP treatment.

### Sample Protocol
We used home-made synthesised primary (CPP-P) and secondary (CPP-S) CPPs. Primary cultures of human coronary artery endothelial cells (HCAEC, 300K-05a) and human internal thoracic artery endothelial cells (HITAEC, 308K-05a) were grown in T-25, T-75, or T-150 flasks according to the manufacturer’s protocols using MesoEndo Growth Medium and subculture reagent kit. Immediately before all experiments, we replaced MesoEndo Growth Medium with MesoEndo Growth Medium without FBS. During such replacement, we washed cells twice with warm (≈ 37°C) PBS to remove the residual serum components which could affect further proteomic profiling or contaminate serum-free medium with serum-derived extracellular vesicles. The rationale behind the use of these two EC lines was that coronary artery is atheroprone and internal thoracic artery is atheroresistant. For the proteomic profiling experiments, HCAEC and HITAEC were cultured in 6-well plates to ≈ 90% confluence (≈ 0.5 × 106 cells per well) and were then exposed to 100 μL of MPPs, CPP-P, or CPP-S (0.6 × 105 particles per mL or 25 μg/μL calcium) or PBS (n = 3 wells per group) in a serum-free medium for 24 hours. Then, cell cultures were washed with ice-cold (4°C) PBS (pH = 7.4) and lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Quantification of total protein was conducted using BCA Protein Assay Kit and Multiskan Sky microplate spectrophotometer in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. Upon the removal of RIPA buffer by acetone precipitation, protein pellet was resuspended in 8 mol/L urea diluted in 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate. The protein concentration was measured by Qubit 4 fluorometer with QuDye Protein Quantification Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein samples (15 μg) were then incubated in 5 mmol/L dithiothreitol for 1 hour at 37°C with the subsequent incubation in 15 mmol/L iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Next, the samples were diluted with 7 volumes of 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 hours at 37°C with 200 ng of trypsin (1:50 trypsin:protein ratio; VA9000). The peptides were then frozen at -80°C for 1 hour and desalted with stage tips (Tips-RPS-M.T2.200.96) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Desalted peptides were dried in centrifuge concentrator for 3 hours and finally dissolved in 20 μL 0.1% formic acid for the further shotgun proteomics analysis. Shotgun proteomics analysis was performed by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) with ion mobility in TimsToF Pro mass spectrometer with nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics) using ≈ 500 ng of peptides. UHPLC was performed in the two-column separation mode with Acclaim PepMap 5 mm Trap Cartridge (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Bruker Fifteen separation column (C18 ReproSil AQ, 150 mm × 0.75 mm, 1.9 µm, 120 A; Bruker Daltonics) in a gradient mode with 400 nL/min flow rate and 40°C. Phase A was water/0.1% formic acid, phase B was acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (1000291000, Sigma-Aldrich). The gradient was from 2% to 30% phase B for 42 min, then to 95% phase B for 6 min with subsequent washing with 95% phase B for 6 min. Before each sample, trap and separation columns were equilibrated with 10 and 4 column volumes, respectively. CaptiveSpray ion source was used for electrospray ionization with 1600 V of capillary voltage, 3 L/min N2 flow, and 180°C source temperature. The mass spectrometry acquisition was performed in DDA-PASEF mode with 0.5 s cycle in positive polarity with the fragmentation of ions with at least two charges in m/z range from 100 to 1700 and ion mobility range from 0.85 to 1.30 1/K0.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed in PEAKS Studio Xpro software (a license granted to St. Petersburg State University; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) using human protein SwissProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/; accessed on 20 July 2022; organism: Human [9606]; uploaded on 2 March 2021; 20,394 sequences) and protein contaminants database CRAP (version of 4 March 2019). The search parameters were: parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance 0.05 ppm, protein and peptide FDR < 1% and 0.1% respectively, two possible missed cleavage sites, proteins with ≥ 2 unique peptides. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Calciprotein particles (CPPs) represent an inherent mineral buffering system responsible for the scavenging of excessive Ca<sup>2+</sup> and PO<sub>4</sub><sup>3-</sup> ions in order to prevent extraskeletal calcification, although contributing to the development of endothelial dysfunction during the circulation in the bloodstream. Here, we performed label-free proteomic profiling to identify the functional consequences of CPP internalisation by endothelial cells (ECs) and found molecular signatures of significant disturbances in mitochondrial and lysosomal physiology, including oxidative stress, vacuolar acidification, accelerated proteolysis, Ca<sup>2+</sup> cytosolic elevation, and mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilisation. Incubation of intact ECs with conditioned medium from CPP-treated ECs caused their pro-inflammatory activation manifested by vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM1) and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1) upregulation and elevated release of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1/ C-C motif ligand 2 (MCP-1/CCL2). Among the blood cells, monocytes were exclusively responsible for CPP internalisation. As compared to the co-incubation of donor blood with CPPs in the flow culture system, intravenous administration of CPPs to Wistar rats caused a considerably higher production of chemokines, indicating the major role of monocytes in CPP-triggered inflammation. Upregulation of sICAM-1 and IL-8 also suggested a notable contribution of endothelial dysfunction to systemic inflammatory response after CPP injections. Collectively, our results demonstrate the pathophysiological significance of CPPs and highlight the need for the development of anti-CPP therapies.

### Keywords
Human, Timstof pro, Calciprotein particles, Calcium, Shotgun proteomics, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Head of the Laboratory for Vascular Biology, Department of Experimental Medicine, Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation
Emmanuel Levy Lab, Dept. of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Arseniy Lobov

### Lab Head
Dr Anton Kutikhin
Head of the Laboratory for Vascular Biology, Department of Experimental Medicine, Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation


