### Accession
PXD032969

### Title
Plasma proteome profiling of healthy subjects undergoing bed rest reveals unload-dependent changes linked to muscle atrophy.Plasma proteome profiling of healthy subjects undergoing bed rest reveals unload-dependent changes linked to muscle atrophy.

### Description
Inactivity and unloading. induce skeletal muscle atrophy, loss of strength and detrimental metabolic effects. We used mass spectrometry-based proteomics to measure the abundance changes of proteins circulating in the blood plasma of young healthy subject undergoing ten days of continuous bed rest. Several plasma components, such as the complement cascade and lipid carriers, and proteins derived from the extracellular matrix and tissue leakage, such as lumican and teneurin-4, changed their abundance at different loading states of the body. Searching for potential plasma biomarkers relaying changes in muscle trophism, we identify common proteomic signatures distinguishing the majority of subjects undergoing extensive unloading-mediated muscle atrophy from those largely maintaining their initial muscle mass at the end of bed rest. Some of these plasma proteins also have different abundance in the serum proteome of cancer patients developing cachexia compared to that of healthy controls. Our findings highlight a combination or proteomic changes that can be explored as potential biomarkers of muscle atrophy occurring under different conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma and serum sample processing For the bed rest cohort, blood was drawn between 7 and 7.30 am after overnight fasting and collected in S-Monovette tubes containing EDTA (Sarsted). Plasma was prepared by centrifugation (1000×g for 5 minutes at 4 °C) in the Central Laboratory of the Izola General Hospital and subsequently kept refrigerated for less than 30 minutes, before being aliquoted and snap-frozen in dry ice. For the cancer patients cohort, serum samples were prepared from blood stored in collection tubes left at room temperature for 30 min and subsequently centrifuged at 3000×g for 10 min at 4 °C. Supernatant, corresponding to the serum fraction, was aliquoted and stored at −80 °C. For peptide preparation, 5 µl of plasma or serum were diluted in 50 µl of LYSE buffer (PreOmics), heated at 95oC for 5 minutes and sonicated in a water-bath sonicator (Diagenode) for 5 min. with a 50% duty cycle. Proteolytic digestion was carried out by addition of 2 µg of endoproteinase LysC and 2 µg of trypsin. After overnight digestion at 37oC under continuous shaking, samples were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% trifluoro-acetic acid (TFA) and loaded onto StageTip plugs of SDB-RPS. Purified peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile-1% ammonia and dried. Peptides were separated on 50 cm columns of ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) packed in-house. The columns were kept at 60 °C using a column oven. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis was carried out on an anEASY-nLC-1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled through a nanoelectrospray source to a mass spectrometer. Samples were analyzed in technical triplicates. Samples S8, S9 and S10 at time R+2 were analyzed in technical duplicates. For the bed rest cohort, the analysis was carried out on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) applying a nonlinear 45-min gradient of 3–75% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 450 nl/min. For the cancer patients cohort, samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A applying a nonlinear 120-min gradient of 0–65% buffer B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Data acquisition switched between a full scan and 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans. Multiple sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software (versions 1.6.10.43 and 2.0.3.0) was used for the analysis of raw files s.earching against the human Uniprot databases (UP000005640_9606, UP000005640_9606_additional) and a common contaminants database. The FDR was set to 1% for peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins and was determined by searching a reverse database. Peptide identifications by MS/MS were transferred by matching between the runs with a 0.7-min retention-time match window between the samples and the libraries Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for the search including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin cleaving c-terminal to arginine and lysine. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Atrophy, Plasma, Proteomics, Cachexia, Bed rest, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
MPI Biochemistry
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 1882152 Martinsried, Germany AND Department of Biomedical Sciences,  University of Padova, Via Ugo Bassi, 58/B, 35131, Padua Italy

### Submitter
Marta Murgia

### Lab Head
Dr Marta Murgia
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 1882152 Martinsried, Germany AND Department of Biomedical Sciences,  University of Padova, Via Ugo Bassi, 58/B, 35131, Padua Italy


