### Accession
PXD029809

### Title
TMT mass spectrometry analysis of wild type and Mecp2 null mouse CSF of animals aged 46 days

### Description
TMT mass spectrometry analysis of wild type and Mecp2 null mouse CSF of animals aged 46 days

### Sample Protocol
All CSF (5ul) samples were diluted with 50 ul of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and treated with TCEP and CAA and heated at 90°C for 10 minutes. The samples were digested with 1:20 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) at 25°C overnight.  Further overnight digestion was carried out with 1:20 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 25°C. Resulting peptides were desalted with a HLB  microelution plate (Waters) and dried under vacuum.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched using Thermo's Proteome Discoverer suite  (version 2.4.1) with Sequest HT. The spectra were searched against mouse uniprot database.  Search parameters included 20ppm precursor mass window, 0.05 Da product mass window, dynamic modifications methione (+15.995 Da), deamidated asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da), phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966 Da), and static modifications for carbamidomethyl cysteines(+57.021 Da) and N-terminal and Lysine-tagged TMT (+304.207 Da ). Percolator was used filter PSMs to 0.1%. Peptides were grouped using strict parsimony and only razor and unique peptides were used for protein level quantitation. Reporter ions were quantified from MS2 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. Only unique and razor (i.e., parsimonious) peptides were considered for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
MECP2 loss-of-function mutations cause Rett syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder resulting from a disrupted brain transcriptome. How these transcriptional defects are decoded into a disease proteome remains unknown. We studied the proteome of Rett cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to identify consensus Rett proteome and ontologies shared across three species. Rett CSF proteomes enriched proteins annotated to HDL lipoproteins, complement, mitochondria, citrate/pyruvate metabolism, synapse compartments, and the neurosecretory protein VGF. We used shared Rett ontologies to select analytes for orthogonal quantification and functional validation. VGF and ontologically selected CSF proteins had genotypic discriminatory capacity as determined by receiver operating characteristic analysis in <i>Mecp2</i> <sup><i>-/y</i></sup> and <i>Mecp2</i> <sup><i>-/+</i></sup> <i>.</i> Differentially expressed CSF proteins distinguished Rett from a related neurodevelopmental disorder, CDKL5 deficiency disorder. We propose that <i>Mecp2</i> mutant CSF proteomes and ontologies inform putative mechanisms and biomarkers of disease. We suggest that Rett syndrome results from synapse and metabolism dysfunction.

### Keywords
Mouse, Csf, Tmt

### Affiliations
Professor Dept. Cell Biology  615 Michael Street Whitehead 446 Atlanta, GA, 30322 Emory University
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Faundez
Professor Dept. Cell Biology  615 Michael Street Whitehead 446 Atlanta, GA, 30322 Emory University


