### Accession
PXD019478

### Title
Analysis of protein expression change upon RBMS1 knockdown

### Description
To assess how dpeletion of RBMS1 affects the proteome, SW480 colon adenocarcinoma cells expressing control or RBMS1 shRNAs were compared by Tandem Mass Tagging (TMT) protoemics.

### Sample Protocol
SW480 cells expressing control or RBMS1-targeting shRNAs (3x replicates per condition, 2 sets of experiments at different densities) were lysed in SDS lysis buffer (2% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.5,1X protease inhibitor cocktail). The lysates were passed through a 25G needle several times and cleared 10 min at 21,000 g at +4C. The protein concentration was determined using BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) and 25 μg of each lysate was then subjected to reduction, alkylation, trypsin digestion, and TMT-10plex labelling, using the iFASP protocol(McDowell et al, 2013), using 0.2 mg of each TMT label. 6 out of 10 labels were used (128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 131). Pooled TMT peptide samples were then fractionated into 7 fractions using Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher).The fractions were then lyophilized and re-suspended in 20 μL of A* buffer (2% ACN, 0.5% Acetic acid, 0.1% TFA in water), before analysis on a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher). Briefly, ~1μg of each pooled peptide sample was resolved at 250 nL/min flow-rate on an Easy-Spray 50 cm x 75 μm RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher), using a 123 minutes gradient of 3% to 35% of buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) against buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water), followed by online infusion into the mass spectrometer by electrospray (1.95 kV, 255C). The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent positive mode. A TOP15 method in which each MS scan is followed by 15 MS/MS scans was applied. The scans were acquired at 375-1500 m/z range, with a resolution of 70,000 (MS) and 35,500 (MS/MS). A 30 seconds dynamic exclusion was applied. Each fraction was injected twice (technical replicates R1 & R2).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) (Tyanova et al, 2016b) was used for all mass spectrometry search and protein quantifications. Raw files were searched using ‘Reporter Ion MS2’ type search, with a reporter mass tolerance of 0.01 Da. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin”, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. False discovery rates (FDR) for both protein and peptide identifications were set at 1%. ‘Match between Runs’ and ‘Requantify’ options were enabled. Default MaxQuant parameters were applied to all other settings. Downstream MS data processing was performed by Perseus (version 1.6.2.3) (Tyanova et al, 2016a). Briefly, Reporter Ion Intensities were Log2 transformed, followed by filtering of reverse hits, contaminants, and proteins only identified by modified peptides, before median subtraction normalisation. Linear models were then used to compare log fold-changes while controlling for the experimental batching.

### Publication Abstract
Identifying master regulators that drive pathologic gene expression is a key challenge in precision oncology. Here, we have developed an analytic framework, named PRADA, that identifies oncogenic RNA-binding proteins through the systematic detection of coordinated changes in their target regulons. Application of this approach to data collected from clinical samples, patient-derived xenografts, and cell line models of colon cancer metastasis revealed the RNA-binding protein RBMS1 as a suppressor of colon cancer progression. We observed that silencing <i>RBMS1</i> results in increased metastatic capacity in xenograft mouse models, and that restoring its expression blunts metastatic liver colonization. We have found that RBMS1 functions as a posttranscriptional regulator of RNA stability by directly binding its target mRNAs. Together, our findings establish a role for RBMS1 as a previously unknown regulator of RNA stability and as a suppressor of colon cancer metastasis with clinical utility for risk stratification of patients. SIGNIFICANCE: By applying a new analytic approach to transcriptomic data from clinical samples and models of colon cancer progression, we have identified RBMS1 as a suppressor of metastasis and as a post-transcriptional regulator of RNA stability. Notably, <i>RBMS1</i> silencing and downregulation of its targets are negatively associated with patient survival.<i>See related commentary by Carter, p. 1261</i>.<i>This article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 1241</i>.

### Keywords
Rbms1; tmt; rna binding protein

### Affiliations
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Chareterhouse square, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.
Barts Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Chareterhouse square, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.


