### Accession
PXD005436

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human follicular fluid in poor ovarian responders during in vitro fertilization

### Description
Poor ovarian response (POR) observed in controlled ovarian stimulation (COS) is often observed during in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer (IVF-ET) cycles and is a major problem. A POR has been found to be related to several factors, including advanced age, high body mass index, and history of ovarian or pelvic surgery. However, it is difficult to predict POR, as there are no specific biomarkers known. In this study, we used quantitative proteomic analyses to investigate potential biomarkers that can predict poor response during IVF based on follicular fluid samples. A total of 1,079 proteins were identified using a high-resolution orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled online to a nano flow liquid chromatography system. It is notable that 65 up-regulated and 66 down-regulated proteins were found to be functionally enriched in poor responders. We also validated these differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) using a triple-quadrupole (QQQ) mass spectrometer for quantification of targeted proteins. Of the DEPs, three proteins (pregnancy zone protein, renin, and sushi repeat-containing protein SRPX) were regarded as statistically significant (p < 0.05). These proteins (one known as an inhibitor of cell growth and another as a regulator of angiogenesis) are potential biomarkers candidates of POR in IVF.

### Sample Protocol
The Multiple Affinity Removal System (MARS) Column (4.6 x 100 mm) from Agilent (Palo Alto, CA) was used for the depletion of 14 highly abundant proteins. Depletion was performed with the Agilent 1100 series HPLC system. Each raw sample was mixed with MARS Buffer A and centrifuged at 16000 x g for 1.5 min with a 0.22 µm membrane filter (Agilent; Santa Clara, CA, USA) for removing particulates before depletion. After depletion, flow-through samples were concentrated with the Amicon Ultra 3 k filter (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany).  Protein concentrations after depletion were determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein concentration assay (Pierce, Rockford, IL). An equivalence of 60 µg of each depleted sample was mixed with SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6) and incubated at room temperature (RT) for 45 min. After incubating, samples were boiled to denature proteins for 10 min. Denatured samples were transferred to 30 kDa Microcon centrifugal filters (Millipore) and centrifuged in the filter (14000 x g, 40 min, 20°C). The buffer was exchanged three times with 200 µl of 8M urea and 0.1 M Tris pH 8.5. Alkylation to reduce cysteine bonds was performed with 0.05 M iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma). Next, three buffer exchanges of 8 M urea and 0.1 M Tris pH 8.5 and two buffer exchanges of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) were carried out. Trypsin was added to the sample at a 1:50 ratio, and the sample was incubated at 37°C overnight. Tryptic-digested peptides were harvested and desalted by a C18 spin column. Digested peptides were labeled with TMT isobaric tags (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Controls 1, 2, and 3 were labeled 126, 128, and 130, and POR samples 1, 2, and 3 were labeled 127, 129, and 131, respectively. The samples were pooled together and fractionated into 7 fractions by Accucore™ 150 C18 LC Columns (150 mm x 2.1 mm, 4 µm) on the Agilent 1100 series HPLC system. The gradient was as follows: 0–10 min, 5% B; 10–70 min, 35% B; 70–80 min, 70% B; 80–105 min, 5% B; 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) was mobile phase A, and 10 mM ammonium formate with 90% ACN (pH 10) was mobile phase B. Samples were collected and desalted with a C18 spin column.

### Data Protocol
The prepared samples were re-suspended in 0.1% FA and analyzed using a Q Exactive Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) along with the Easy-nLc 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient was linearly set up as follows: changing from 5% to 40% of solvent B in 180 min, changing from 40% to 80% of solvent B in 7 min, holding at 80% of solvent B for 20 min, and equilibrating the column with 1% of solvent B for 45 min. Next, a trap column (2 cm x 75 µm ID packed with 2 µm C18 resin) and an analytical column (50 cm x 75 µm ID packed with 2 µm C18 resin) were used to fractionate peptides depending on hydrophobicity. A data-dependent acquisition method was adopted, and the top 10 precursor peaks were selected and isolated for fragmentation. Ions were scanned in high resolution (70000 in MS1, 17500 in MS2, at 400 m/z) and in the MS scan range (400-2000 m/z) at both the MS1 level and the MS2 level. Precursor ions were fragmented with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Publication Abstract
Poor ovarian response (POR) in controlled ovarian stimulation is often observed during in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer cycles and it is a major problem. A POR has been found to be related to several factors, including advanced age, high body mass index, and history of ovarian or pelvic surgery. However, it is difficult to predict POR, as there are no specific biomarkers known. In this study, we used quantitative proteomic analyses to investigate potential biomarkers that can predict poor response during in vitro fertilization based on follicular fluid samples. A total of 1079 proteins were identified using a high-resolution orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled online to a nanoflow-LC system. It is notable that 65 upregulated and 66 downregulated proteins were found to be functionally enriched in poor responders. We also validated these differentially expressed proteins using a triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer for quantification of targeted proteins. Of the differentially expressed proteins, three proteins (pregnancy zone protein, renin, and sushi repeat-containing protein SRPX) were regarded as statistically significant (p &lt; 0.05).

### Keywords
Biomarker, Multiple reaction monitoring, Proteomics, Poor ovarian response, Follicular fluid

### Affiliations
Department of Applied Chemistry College of Applied Sciences, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do, 446-701
Kyung Hee University

### Submitter
Jaewon Oh

### Lab Head
Dr Kwang Pyo Kim
Department of Applied Chemistry College of Applied Sciences, Kyung Hee University, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do, 446-701


