### Accession
PXD015362

### Title
Proteomic profiling of murine ocular surface during Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics by bottom-up approaches enables the unbiased and sensitive profiling of cellular proteomes and extracellular environments. Recent technological and bioinformatic advances permit identifying of dual biological systems in a single experiment, supporting investigation of infection from the perspective of both a host and pathogen. At the ocular surface, P. aeruginosa are commonly associated with biofilm formation and inflammation of the ocular tissues, causing damage to the eye. The interaction between P. aeruginosa and the immune system at the site of infection describes limitations in clearance of infection and enhanced pathogenesis. Here, we profile the extracellular environment (eye wash) of murine ocular surfaces infected with a clinical isolate of P. aeruginosa and detect neutrophil marker proteins, indicating neutrophil recruitment to the site of infection. In addition, we define the deepest murine corneal proteome to date and detect proteins, categories, and networks critical to the host response to infection. Moreover, we provide the first identification of bacterial-specific proteins in response to the host during bacterial biofilm formation of the eye. We validate our findings through in silico comparisons and enzymatic profiling. Overall, our work provides comprehensive profiling of the host-pathogen interface and uncovers differences between general and site-specific host responses to infection.

### Sample Protocol
Eye wash samples were processed in quadruplicate per treatment and subjected to an in-solution digestion as previously described. Briefly, 5 µl of 8 M Urea containing 40 mM HEPES was added to the eye wash samples, followed by sonication in a water bath at 4°C for 15 min (30 s on/ 30 s off). Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), followed by enzymatic digestion with a mixture of LysC and trypsin (Promega, protein:enzyme ratio, 50:1) overnight at room temperature. Digestion was stopped with 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and all of the acidified peptides were loaded onto STop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips (consisting of three layers of C18) to desalt and purify according to the standard protocol.  Corneal samples were processed in quadruplicate per treatment and subjected to a total proteome extraction protocol as previously described with modifications. Briefly, samples were washed twice with 50 µl PBS, and resuspended in 300 µl of ice cold 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) containing a proteinase inhibitor cocktail tablet. Using a probe sonicator, samples were lysed in an ice bath for 3 cycles (30% power, 30 s on/3 s off), 2% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and 10 mM DTT was added and the samples incubated at 95°C for 10 min with shaking at 800 rpm. The samples were cooled, 55 mM IAA was added, incubated at room temperature for 20 min in the dark and then 100% ice cold acetone (final concentration of 80%) was added prior to storage at -20°C overnight. Samples were collected by centrifugation at 13,500 rpm at 4°C for 10 min, washed twice with 80% acetone, and air dried. Pellets were resolubilized in 8M Urea/40 mM HEPES, diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and digested overnight with LysC/trypsin enzyme mix mentioned above. Samples were purified on STAGE-tips and prepared for LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed together using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.26.). The derived peak list was searched with the built-in Andromeda search engine against the reference Mus musculus proteome (March 2019; 54,185 sequences) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 proteome (May 21, 2019; 5,564 sequences) from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org). The parameters were as follows: strict trypsin specificity, allowing up to two missed cleavages, minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification, N-acetylation of proteins and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. A minimum of two peptides required for protein identification and peptide spectral matches and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. ‘Match between runs’ was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min45. Relative, label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins used the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant using a minimum ratio count of two. ‘Split between taxonomy’ was enabled to search both proteome files. Further analysis of the MaxQuant-processed data (‘proteingroups.txt’ file) was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.2.2). Hits to the reverse database, contaminants, and proteins only identified with modified peptides were eliminated. LFQ intensities were converted to a log scale (log2), and only those proteins present in triplicate within at least one sample set were used for further statistical processing (valid-value filter of 3 in at least one group). Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 standard deviations). A Student’s t-test identified proteins with significant changes in abundance (p-value ≤0.05) with multiple hypothesis testing correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR cutoff at 0.05. A principal component analysis was performed, as well as a Pearson correlation with hierarchical clustering by Euclidean distance to determine replicate reproducibility, and a Student’s t-test for 1D annotation enrichment (FDR = 0.05) allowed for visualization of enrichment by gene ontology and keywords within the RStudio platform (http://www.R-project.org/). The STRING: functional protein association networks provided visualization of protein networks (https://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics enables the unbiased and sensitive profiling of cellular proteomes and extracellular environments. Recent technological and bioinformatic advances permit identifying dual biological systems in a single experiment, supporting investigation of infection from both the host and pathogen perspectives. At the ocular surface, Pseudomonas aeruginosa is commonly associated with biofilm formation and inflammation of the ocular tissues, causing damage to the eye. The interaction between P. aeruginosa and the immune system at the site of infection describes limitations in clearance of infection and enhanced pathogenesis. Here, the extracellular environment (eye wash) of murine ocular surfaces infected with a clinical isolate of P. aeruginosa is profiled and neutrophil marker proteins are detected, indicating neutrophil recruitment to the site of infection. The first potential diagnostic markers of P. aeruginosa-associated keratitis are also identified. In addition, the deepest murine corneal proteome to date is defined and proteins, categories, and networks critical to the host response are detected. Moreover, the first identification of bacterial proteins attached to the ocular surface is reported. The findings are validated through in silico comparisons and enzymatic profiling. Overall, the work provides comprehensive profiling of the host-pathogen interface and uncovers differences between general and site-specific host responses to infection.

### Keywords
Cornea, Quantitative proteomics, Neutrophils, Eye wash, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph
University of Guelph

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister, PhD
Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph


