### Accession
PXD006821

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis by Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry/Mass Spectrometry of Paracoccus denitrificans PD1222 under denitrifying conditions

### Description
In this work, the denitrification process carried out by Paracoccus denitrificans PD1222 has been followed up by a quantitative proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria growth under denitrifying conditions with different nitrogen sources were lysated as protein total extract fractions. After cleaning, proteins extracts were analysed by mass spectrometry in quadruplicate.

### Data Protocol
After data acquiring in a UHPLC Orbitrap Fusion, spectra were searched using MaxQuant software v 1.5.7.4. MS2 spectra were searched with Andromeda engines against a database of Paracoccus denitrificans PD1222 (UP000000361) taking into considerations several parameters. Peptides were validated by using Percolator and by filtering according with 1% FDR q-value. Proteins identified from only one peptide and identified in only one replicate were not considered in this analysis. Label-free quantification was carried out, after normalizing accordingly to the median, following the TOP3 quantification method. LFQ normalized intensity values were submitted to two-way Student-t test and error correction (p value < 0.05) by using the freely available software Perseus (v 1.5.6.0). Finally, results were filtered and only proteins with a p-value <0.05 and a fold change > 2 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Denitrification is a respiratory process that produces nitrous oxide as an intermediate, which may escape to the atmosphere before its reduction to dinitrogen through the nitrous oxide reductase NosZ. In this work, the denitrification process carried out by <i>Paracoccus denitrificans</i> PD1222 has been explored through a quantitative proteomic analysis. Under anaerobic conditions, with nitrate as sole nitrogen source, the synthesis of all the enzymes involved in denitrification, the respiratory nitrate, nitrite, nitric oxide, and nitrous oxide reductases, was increased. However, the periplasmic and assimilatory nitrate reductases decreased. Synthesis of transporters for alcohols, D-methionine, sulfate and copper, most of the enzymes involved in the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and proteins involved in other metabolic processes like lysine catabolism, fatty acids degradation and acetyl-CoA synthesis, was increased during denitrification in <i>P. denitrificans</i> PD1222. As consequence, an enhanced production of the central metabolite acetyl-CoA was observed. After establishing the key features of the denitrification proteome, its changes by the influence of a competitive electron acceptor, oxygen, or competitive nitrogen source, ammonium, were evaluated.

### Keywords
Nitrous oxide reductase, Liquid-chromatography, Nitrate, Paracoccus, Nitrate reductase, Proteomics, Denitrification, Nitrous oxide, Mass-spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Cordoba
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba (Spain)

### Submitter
Alfonso Olaya Abril

### Lab Head
Dr María Dolores Roldán Ruiz
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Córdoba (Spain)


