### Accession
PXD033090

### Title
ciliary proteins of Chlamydomonas

### Description
We revealed the systematic regulation of ciliary composition in WT and the transition zone muntants.

### Sample Protocol
The cilia of WT and the TZ mutants were isolated by the sucrose gradient method. A total of 150 μg of ciliary proteins from each sample was dissolved in RIPA buffer containing protease inhibitor. The dissolved proteins were precipitated and washed with acetone solution. Then, 100 μg of protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM HEPES with 1% SDC. Trypsin (1 μg) was used for protein digestion overnight at 37 °C. SDC and salt were removed, and the peptides were dried in a freeze dryer. The peptides, resuspended in 0.1% TFA, were separated using a Reprosil-Pur 120 C18 analytical column (100 μm ID ×15 cm, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch) on a nano-UPLC system (EASY-nLC1200). Then, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile/water (2:98) was used as mobile phase A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile/water (80:20) was used as mobile phase B. A Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA) was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode for sample analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data were searched by protein discoverer software (version2.4) against Creinhardtii_281_v5.6 Proteome database (18750 entries) using the following parameters: trypsin digestion, maximum of two missed cleavages, 10 ppm of precursor mass tolerance and 0.02Da of HCD MS2 mass tolerance. Carbamidomethyl/+57.021Da (C) was specified as fixed modification and acetylation/+42.011 Da (N-terminal), deamidated/+0.984 Da (N, Q) and oxidation /+15.995 Da (M) were considered as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on peptide and protein levels. Label-free quantification was performed exploiting both unique and razor peptides for protein abundance calculation using the Top3 method, and Label Free Quantitation value can be obtained by a combination of the spectral extraction of corresponding parent ion intensity from MS scans. Quantitative protein data were further normalized by a Protein Abundance Based approach.

### Publication Abstract
The transition zone (TZ) of the cilium/flagellum serves as a diffusion barrier that controls the entry/exit of ciliary proteins. Mutations of the TZ proteins disrupt barrier function and lead to multiple human diseases. However, the systematic regulation of ciliary composition and signaling-related processes by different TZ proteins is not completely understood. Here, we reveal that loss of TCTN1 in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii disrupts the assembly of wedge-shaped structures in the TZ. Proteomic analysis of cilia from WT and three TZ mutants, tctn1, cep290, and nphp4, shows a unique role of each TZ subunit in the regulation of ciliary composition, explaining the phenotypic diversity of different TZ mutants. Interestingly, we find that defects in the TZ impair the formation and biological activity of ciliary ectosomes. Collectively, our findings provide systematic insights into the regulation of ciliary composition by TZ proteins and reveal a link between the TZ and ciliary ectosomes.

### Keywords
Transition zone, Cilia

### Affiliations
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Muqing Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Muqing Cao
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine


