### Accession
PXD036985

### Title
Preliminary cell culture models for subclinical mastitis in sheep

### Description
Ovine mastitis is defined as the inflammation of the sheep udder, most commonly caused in response to intramammary infections. Based on the occurrence of clinical signs, mastitis is characterized as either clinical or subclinical (SCM). The impact of ovine SCM on the overall sustainability of dairy sheep farms has been documented underpinning the significance of efficient diagnosis. Although SCM can be detected in cows, the performance and the validity of the methods used do not transfer in dairy sheep. This fact challenges the development of evidence-based ovine udder health management protocols and renders the detection and control of ovine mastitis rather problematic. Currently, cell culture-based models are being successfully used in biomedical studies and have also been effectively used in the case of bovine mastitis. The objective of the present study was to culture ovine primary mammary cells for the development of 2D and 3D cell culture-based models for the study of ovine SCM. Cells were infected by mastitis-inducing pathogens mimicking the pathogenesis of SCM as derived by natural intramammary infections. The secreted proteins were subjected to mass-spectrometry resulting in the identification of 79 distinct proteins. Among those, several had already been identified in healthy or mastitic milk, while others were detected for the first time in the ovine mammary secretome. The development of cell-based models for the early detection and the overall study of SCM has the potential to be applicable and beneficial for the udder health management in dairy sheep.

### Sample Protocol
2D and 3D cultures of primary ovine mammary cells were infected with pathogens inducing mastitis (i.e. Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli). The supernatants were passed through 0.22 μm pore size filters and stored at -20 °C until further analysis. Next, samples were subjected to an in-solution tryptic digest using a modified version of the Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3) protocol. Samples were added to Sera-Mag Beads (Thermo Scientific, #4515-2105-050250, 6515-2105-050250) in 10 µl 15% formic acid and 30 µl of ethanol. Binding of proteins was achieved by shaking for 15 min at room temperature. SDS was removed by 4 subsequent washes with 200 µl of 70% ethanol. Proteins were digested overnight at room temperature with 0.4 µg of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, #V5111) in 40 µl Hepes/NaOH, pH 8.4 in the presence of 1.25 mM TCEP and 5 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, #C0267). Beads were separated, washed with 10 µl of an aqueous solution of 2% DMSO and the combined eluates were dried down. Peptides were reconstituted in 10 µl of H2O and reacted for 1 h at room temperature with 80 µg of TMT6plex (Thermo Scientific, #90061) label reagent dissolved in 4 µl of acetonitrile. Excess TMT reagent was quenched by the addition of 4 µl of an aqueous 5% hydroxylamine solution (Sigma, 438227). Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid, mixed to achieve a 1:1 ratio across all TMT-channels and purified by a reverse phase clean-up step (OASIS HLB 96-well µElution Plate, Waters #186001828BA). Peptides analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scentific). To this end, peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system (Dionex) equipped with a trapping cartridge (Precolumn C18 PepMap100, 5 mm, 300 μm i.d., 5 μm, 100 Å) and an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap 100. 75 × 50 cm C18, 3 mm, 100 Å) connected to a nanospray-Flex ion source. The peptides were loaded onto the trap column at 30 µl per min using solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and eluted using a gradient from 2 to 80% Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 90 min at 0.3 µl per min (all solvents were of LC-MS grade). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos was operated in positive ion mode with a spray voltage of 2.4 kV and capillary temperature of 275 °C. Full scan MS spectra with a mass range of 375–1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode using a resolution of 60,000 (maximum fill time of 50 ms or a maximum of 2e5 ions (AGC) and a RF lens setting of 30%. Fragmentation was triggered for 3 s cycle time for peptide like features with charge states of 2–7 on the MS scan (data-dependent acquisition). Precursors were isolated using the quadrupole with a window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 36. Fragment mass spectra were acquired in profile mode and a resolution of 15,000 in profile mode. Maximum fill time was set to 54 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed using IsobarQuant and Mascot V2.4 (Matrix Science) using a reverse OvisOme database including common contaminants. The following modifications were taken into account: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), TMT10plex (K, fixed), Acetyl (N-term, variable), Oxidation (M, variable) and TMT10plex (N-term, variable). The mass error tolerance for full scan MS spectra was set to 10 ppm and for MS/MS spectra to 0.02 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. A minimum of 2 unique peptides with a peptide length of at least seven amino acids and a false discovery rate below 0.01 were required on the peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mastitis, In vitro infection, Cell culture models, Ovine, Secreted proteins

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Animal Breeding & Husbandry, Department of Animal Science, Agricultural University of Athens, Athens, Greece
Agricultural University of Athens, Department of Animal Science, Laboratory of Animal Breeding & Husbandry

### Submitter
Georgios Theodorou

### Lab Head
Dr Georgios Theodorou
Laboratory of Animal Breeding & Husbandry, Department of Animal Science, Agricultural University of Athens, Athens, Greece


