### Accession
PXD031296

### Title
Subfractionation of Nuclear Matrix (NuMat)

### Description
NuMat is a residual structure resistant to solubilization by nucleases, detergents, and salt solutions that retains the morphology of the nucleus. Purported to be the basis of nuclear architecture, it has remained further undissected. We use a chaotrope to subfractionate the nuclear matrix and decipher its organization.

### Sample Protocol
NuMat is prepared from cytoplasmic contaminant-free nuclei and subjected to sequential extraction by different concentrations of GdnHCl to get 6 fractions which are then subjected to LC-MS-MS on Q-exactive HF platform.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant is used to analyze the raw data and the output is then manually parsed to get protein ID lists with at least 2 unique peptides and non-zero LFQ intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear matrix (NuMat) is the fraction of the eukaryotic nucleus insoluble to detergents and high-salt extractions that manifests as a pan-nuclear fiber-granule network. NuMat consists of ribonucleoprotein complexes, members of crucial nuclear functional modules, and DNA fragments. Although NuMat captures the organization of nonchromatin nuclear space, very little is known about components organization within NuMat. To understand the organization of NuMat components, we subfractionated it with increasing concentrations of the chaotrope guanidinium hydrochloride (GdnHCl) and analyzed the proteomic makeup of the fractions. We observe that the solubilization of proteins at different concentrations of GdnHCl is finite and independent of the broad biophysical properties of the protein sequences. Looking at the extraction pattern of the nuclear envelope and nuclear pore complex, we surmise that this fractionation represents easily solubilized/loosely bound and difficultly solubilized/tightly bound components of NuMat. Microscopic analyses of the localization of key NuMat proteins across sequential GdnHCl extractions of in situ NuMat further elaborate on the divergent extraction patterns. Furthermore, we solubilized NuMat in 8M GdnHCl and upon removal of GdnHCl through dialysis, en masse renaturation leads to RNA-dependent self-assembly of fibrous structures. The major proteome component of the self-assembled fibers comes from the difficultly solubilized, tightly bound component. This fractionation of the NuMat reveals different organizational levels within it which may reflect the structural and functional organization of nuclear architecture.

### Keywords
Nuclear organization, Nuclear matrix, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
CSIR-CCMB
CSIR - Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India

### Submitter
Ashish Bihani

### Lab Head
Dr Rakesh Kumar Mishra
CSIR - Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India


