### Accession
PXD010157

### Title
ChIP-MS for GR in liver from wild type and E47 mutant mice

### Description
Glucocorticoids (GCs) are widely prescribed effective drugs, but their clinical use is compromised by severe side effects including hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia and obesity. They bind to the Glucocorticoid Receptor (GR), which acts as a ligand-gated transcription factor. The transcriptional activation of metabolic genes by GR is thought to underlie these undesired adverse effects.  Using mouse genetics, ChIP-Seq, RNA-Seq and ChIP-MS, we found that the bHLH transcription factor E47 is required for the regulation of hepatic glucose and lipid metabolism by GR in vivo, and that loss of E47 prevents the development of hyperglycemia and hepatic steatosis in response to GCs. Here we show that E47 and GR co-occupy metabolic promoters and enhancers. E47 is needed for the efficient binding of GR to chromatin and for the adequate recruitment of coregulators such as Mediator. Taken together, our results illustrate how GR and E47 regulate hepatic metabolism, and how inhibition of E47 might provide an entry point for novel GC therapies with reduced side effect profiles. These ChIP-MS data sets show IPs for GR in both wildtype and E47 mutant mouse livers treated with the synthetic glucocorticoid Dexamethasone.

### Sample Protocol
ChIP-MS was performed in livers of Dex-injected Alb-Cre x E47flox/flox mice and control littermates in biological triplicates. Chromatin was sonicated to an average size of 200bp. After overnight immunoprecipitation with rabbit αGR (#24050-1-AP, Proteintech) and rabbit IgG (#2729, Cell Signaling), antibody-bait complexes were bound by protein G-coupled Dynabeads (Life Technologies) and washed three times with wash buffer A (50mM HEPES pH 7.5, 140mM NaCl, 1% Triton), once with wash buffer B (50mM HEPES pH 7.5, 500mM NaCl, 1% Triton) and twice with TBS. Precipitated proteins were eluted with an on-bead digest 45. Beads were incubated for 30min with elution buffer 1 (2M Urea, 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 2mM DTT, 20µg/ml trypsin) followed by a second elution with elution buffer 2 (2M Urea, 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10mM Chloroacetamide) for 5min. Both eluates were combined and further incubated over night at room temperature. Tryptic peptide mixtures were acidified with 1% TFA and desalted with Stage Tips containing 3 lavers of C18 reverse phase material and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Peptides were separated on 50‐cm columns packed in-house with ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ 1.9μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Liquid chromatography was performed on an EASY‐nLC 1200 ultra‐high‐pressure system coupled through a nanoelectrospray source to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated applying a non-linear gradient of 5–60% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250nl/min over 105min. Data acquisition switched between a full scan and 10 data‐dependent MS/MS scans. Multiple sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 25s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant (v1.5.3.54). Peak lists were searched against the mouse UniprotFASTA database (2015_08 release) combined with 262 common contaminants by the integrated Andromeda search engine. False discovery rate was set to 1% for both peptides (minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins. ‘Match between runs’ (MBR) with a maximum time difference of 0.7 min was enabled. Relative protein amounts were determined by the MaxLFQ algorithm with a minimum ratio count of two.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hormone, Steroid receptor, Chromatin, Coregulator

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Wierer

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany


