### Accession
PXD007943

### Title
Giardia duodenalis Assemblage B Proteome

### Description
Giardia duodenalis a species-complex of common gastrointestinal protists of major medical and veterinary importance. This complex is currently subclassifed as ‘Assemblages’, with Assemblage A and B infective to humans. To date, post-genomic proteomics are derived exclusively from Assemblage A, biasing understanding of these parasites’ biology. This bias is particularly notable, as Assemble B is the more prevalent cause of human infections. To address this gap, we quantitatively analysed proteomes of the intestinal ‘trophozoite’ stage of three Assemblage B isolates, including the genome reference (GS/M) and two clinical isolates (BRIS/91/HEPU/1279 and BRIS/92/HEPU/1487), during in vitro axenic culture. We used spectrum-to-peptide matching metrics to infer currently unknown intra-assemblage variation. We identified and quantified over 3000 proteins in the GS isolate, but demonstrated significant isolate-dependent losses in peptide and protein identifications in non-reference isolates, suggesting significant intra-assemblage variation. We also explore differential protein expression between in vitro cultured subpopulations enriched for dividing relative to feeding cells. This data is an important proteomic baseline for Assemblage B, and highlights unique differences heretofore avoided in post-genomic Giardia proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Isolates GS/M, BRIS/91/HEPU/1279 and BRIS/92/HEPU/1487 were cultured as previously described to late-log phase in biological triplicates [1]. For the GS/M isolate, non-adhered trophozoite material was collected from total decanted media and any sediment material, while adhered trophozoites were collected from all three isolates.  Cell viability after harvest of enriched trophozoites were verified by trypan blue exclusion dye assay (0.4%w/v). Proteins were extracted, protein concentration assayed using the BCA assay (Pierce) and trypsin digested (Promega) overnoight into peptides at a ratio of 100:1 protein to enzyme. Samples were desalted via SPE on in-house assembled stage-tips containing polystyrenedivylbenzene (SDB-RPS) (Empore), and 50ug of peptide material fractionated using a four-stage elution on SDB-RPS as previously described [2]. Samples were vacuum-centrifuged to dryness, and reconstituted with 0.1% FA, 2% ACN for LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC MS/MS was carried out on a LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) with a nanoESI interface in conjunction with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected to the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 3% v/v CH3CN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid for 6 min before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 100% v/v CH3CN in 0.l% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 0-6min at 3% B, (ii) 6-95 min, 3-20% B (iii) 95-105 min, 20-40% B (iv) 105-110 min, 40-80% B (v) 110-115 min at 80% B (vii) 115-117 min, 80-3% B and (viii) 117-125 min at 3% B. The LTQ Orbitrap Elite spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode with nanoESI spray voltage of 1.8kV, capillary temperature of 250oC and S-lens RF value of 55%. All spectra were acquired in positive mode with full scan MS spectra scanning from m/z 300-1650 in the FT mode at 240,000 resolution after accumulating to a target value of 1.0e6. Lock mass of 445.120025 was used. The top 20 most intense precursors were subjected to rapid collision induced dissociation (rCID) with normalized collision energy of 30 and activation q of 0.25. Dynamic exclusion with of 30 seconds was applied for repeated precursors.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was performed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.5.1) for label-free quantification (LFQ) [3], using the 5.1 release of the re-sequenced GS-B genome from Giardiadb.org. As Maxquant LFQ creates a normalised intensity profile relative to search groups and dimensions, isolate triplicates and their respective fractions were searched as GS/M, BRIS/91/HEPU/1279 and BRIS/92/HEPU/1487 separately from GS/M adhered and non-adhered trophozoites searches. Default parameters were used for target and decoy searching with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% imposed for peptide-to-spectrum matches, and the LFQ minimum ratio count set to 1 and matching between runs set to ‘match from and to’. Oxidation of methionine and N-acetylation of proteins’ N-termini were set to variable modifications and carbidomethylation of cysteine was considered fixed modification. The ‘proteingroups.txt’ output file from Maxquant was imported in Perseus [4] (version 1.5.5.3) and protein groups identified in the reverse database, contaminant database or only by site were removed. Protein groups used in further analyses were filtered to only include those reproducibly identified in biological triplicates within at least one sample group.

### Publication Abstract
Giardia duodenalis a species complex of gastrointestinal protists, with assemblages A and B infective to humans. To date, post-genomic proteomics are largely derived from Assemblage A, biasing understanding of parasite biology. To address this gap, we quantitatively analysed the proteomes of trophozoites from the genome reference and two clinical Assemblage B isolates, revealing lower spectrum-to-peptide matches in non-reference isolates, resulting in significant losses in peptide and protein identifications, and indicating significant intra-assemblage variation. We also explored differential protein expression between in vitro cultured subpopulations putatively enriched for dividing and feeding cells, respectively. This data is an important proteomic baseline for Assemblage B, highlighting proteomic differences between physiological states, and unique differences relative to Assemblage A.

### Keywords
Protozoa, Lc-ms/ms, Giardia, Giardia duodenalis, Orbitrap, Label-free, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Population Health and Immunity Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia   Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
Population Health and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research

### Submitter
Samantha Emery

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron Jex
Population Health and Immunity Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia   Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia


