### Accession
PXD040167

### Title
HRM Proteomic Profiling Discovery Study on  Therapeutic Drug Treated Plasma Samples

### Description
Reveal global quantitative protein differences between plasma samples from mice treated  with klotho protein or control (untreated)

### Sample Protocol
Chemicals and reagents All solvents were HPLC-grade from Sigma-Aldrich and all chemicals where not stated otherwise were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Sample preparation Plasma samples were shipped frozen on dry ice. 5 µl of sample were denatured using Biognosys’ Denature Buffer. Samples were reduced using Biognosys’ Reduction and Alkylation Solution for 1 h at 37 °C. Subsequently, digestion was carried out using 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) per sample overnight at 37 °C.  Clean-up for mass spectrometry Peptides were desalted using C18 MicroSpin columns (The Nest Group) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and dried down using a SpeedVac system. Peptides were resuspended in 20 µl LC solvent A (1 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid (FA)) and spiked with Biognosys’ iRT kit calibration peptides prior to mass spectrometric analyses. Peptide concentrations were determined using a UV/VIS Spectrometer (SPECTROstar Nano, BMG Labtech). HPRP Fractionation For HPRP fractionation, samples were pooled according to treatment. Ammonium hydroxide was added to both pools to a pH value > 10. The fractionation was performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RS Pump (Thermo Scientific) on an Acquity UPLC CSH C18 1.7 µm, 2.1x150mm column (Waters). The gradient was 1 % to 40 % Solvent B in 20 min, solvents were A: 20 mM ammonium formate in water, B: acetonitrile. Fractions were taken every 30 sec and sequentially pooled to 6 fraction pools. These were dried down and resolved in 17 µl solvent A. Prior to mass spectrometric analyses, they were spiked with Biognosys’ HRM kit calibration peptides. Peptide concentrations were determined using a UV/VIS Spectrometer (SPECTROstar Nano, BMG Labtech). Shotgun LC-MS/MS for spectral library generation For shotgun LC-MS/MS measurements, 2 µg of peptides were injected to an in-house packed C18 column (Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur, 1.9 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size; 75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length, New Objective) on a Thermo Scientific Easy nLC 1200 nano-liquid chromatography system connected to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a standard nano-electrospray source. LC solvents were A: 1 % acetonitrile in water with 0.1 % FA; B: 15 % water in acetonitrile with 0.1 % FA. The nonlinear LC gradient was 1 - 52 % solvent B in 60 minutes followed by 52 – 90 % B in 10 seconds, 90 % B for 10 minutes, 90 % - 1 % B in 10 seconds and 1 % B for 5 minutes. A modified TOP15 method was used (Scheltema et al., MCP, 2014, 13, 3698-3708). HRM mass spectrometry acquisition For the LC-MS/MS HRM measurements, 2 µg of peptides per sample were injected to an in-house packed C18 column (Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur, 1.9 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size; 75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length, New Objective) on a Thermo Scientific Easy nLC 1200 nano-liquid chromatography system connected to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a standard nano-electrospray source. LC solvents were A: 1 % acetonitrile in water with 0.1 % FA; B: 15 % water in acetonitrile with 0.1 % FA. The nonlinear LC gradient was 1 - 55 % solvent B in 120 minutes followed by 55 – 90 % B in 10 seconds, 90 % B for 10 minutes, 90 % - 1 % B in 10 seconds and 1 % B for 5 minutes. A DIA method with one full range survey scan and 22 DIA windows was used.

### Data Protocol
Database search of shotgun LC-MS/MS data The mass spectrometric data were analyzed using SpectroMine software (Biognosys), the false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 1 %. Data was searched against a mouse protein .fasta database (Mus musculus, 2018-07-01) allowing for 2 missed cleavages and variable modifications (N-term acetylation, oxidation (M), carbamylation (KR), deamidation (NQ)).  HRM data analysis HRM mass spectrometric data were analyzed using Spectronaut Pulsar X software (Biognosys). The false discovery rate on protein and peptide level was set to 1 %, data was filtered using row based extraction. The assay library (protein inventory) generated in this project was used for the analysis. The HRM measurements analyzed with Spectronaut were normalized using local regression normalization (Callister et al., 2006).

### Publication Abstract
Platelet factors regulate wound healing and can signal from the blood to the brain<sup>1,2</sup>. However, whether platelet factors modulate cognition, a highly valued and central manifestation of brain function, is unknown. Here we show that systemic platelet factor 4 (PF4) permeates the brain and enhances cognition. We found that, in mice, peripheral administration of klotho, a longevity and cognition-enhancing protein<sup>3-7</sup>, increased the levels of multiple platelet factors in plasma, including PF4. A pharmacologic intervention that inhibits platelet activation blocked klotho-mediated cognitive enhancement, indicating that klotho may require platelets to enhance cognition. To directly test the effects of platelet factors on the brain, we treated mice with vehicle or systemic PF4. In young mice, PF4 enhanced synaptic plasticity and cognition. In old mice, PF4 decreased cognitive deficits and restored aging-induced increases of select factors associated with cognitive performance in the hippocampus. The effects of klotho on cognition were still present in mice lacking PF4, suggesting this platelet factor is sufficient to enhance cognition but not necessary for the effects of klotho-and that other unidentified factors probably contribute. Augmenting platelet factors, possible messengers of klotho, may enhance cognition in the young brain and decrease cognitive deficits in the aging brain.

### Keywords
Mouse plasma dia

### Affiliations
Biognosys AG
Associate Professor, Neurology UCSF Weill Institute for Neurosciences School of Medicine University of California, San Francisco

### Submitter
Jakob Vowinckel

### Lab Head
Dr Dena Dubal
Associate Professor, Neurology UCSF Weill Institute for Neurosciences School of Medicine University of California, San Francisco


