### Accession
PXD007765

### Title
Dual protein kinase/ nucleoside kinase modulat ors for rationally designed polypharmacology

### Description
Masitinib, a highly selective protein kinase inhibitor, can sensitise gemcitabine-refractory cancer cell lines when used in combination with gemcitabine. A reverse proteomic approach has identified the target responsible for this sensitisation: the deoxycytidine kinase (dCK). Masitinib, as well as other protein kinase inhibitors such as imatinib, interact with dCK and provoke an unforeseen conformational-dependent activation of this nucleoside kinase, modulating phosphorylation of nucleoside analogue drugs. This phenomenon leads to an increase of prodrug phosphorylation of most of the chemotherapeutic drugs activated by this nucleoside kinase. The unforeseen dual activity of protein kinase inhibition/nucleoside kinase activation could be of great therapeutic benefit, through either reducing toxicity of therapeutic agents by maintaining effectiveness at lower doses or by counteracting drug resistance initiated via down modulation of dCK target.

### Sample Protocol
Masitinib-NH2 was cross-linked via its amino functional group to NHS-activated Sepharose 4 Fast Flow beads according to the manufacturer's instructions (GE Healthcare). Pull down experiments were performed using HMC-1.1 and HRT18 cell lysates. Briefly, cells were grown until 90% confluence and lysed in 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 1 mM EGTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100, 0.2% NaF, 1 mM orthovanadate, containing phosphates and proteases inhibitors. Beads cross-linked to the drug (20 µL) or control beads prepared in same conditions without the drug were added to soluble cell lysates (1 mL, 5 mg ml-1) and incubated for 2 hours at 4°C. Beads were washed in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 1 mM EGTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100). For quality control, 10% of proteins bound to beads were loaded, separated on NuPAGE™ 4%-12% Bis-tris acrylamide gels in Mops buffer according to the manufacturer's instructions (Invitrogen) and pull down proteins were visualised after silver staining. For mass spectrometry analysis, pull down proteins extracts (90%) were loaded on NuPAGE™ 4–12% Bis–tris acrylamide gels. Proteins containing bands were stained and visualised with Thermo Scientific Imperial Blue, cut from the gel, and following DTT reduction and iodoacetamide alkylation, digested with high sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Extracted peptides were concentrated before mass spectrometry analysis. Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out by LC-MSMS using a LTQ-Velos-Orbitrap (Thermo Electron) connected to a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid chromatography system (Dionex). In parallel to the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the data-dependent CID scans of the 10 most intense precursor ions were fragmented and measured in the linear ion trap. The fragment ion masses were measured in the linear ion trap to have a maximum sensitivity and the maximum amount of MS/MS data. Each sample was analysed in triplicate on the mass spectrometer. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background. Each pull down experiment was performed using two types of beads to select specific drug interactors from experimental contaminants: beads coupled to the drug and control beads without the drug.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis – Mass spectrometry analysis was carried out by LC-MSMS using a LTQ-Velos-Orbitrap (Thermo Electron) connected to a nanoLC Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid chromatography system (Dionex). 5 mL corresponding to 20% of whole sample were injected on the system. After pre-concentration and washing of the sample on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 2 cm × 100 μm i.d. 100 Å pore size, 5 μm particle size), peptides were separated on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (C18, 15 cm × 75 μm i.d., 100 Å, 2 µm particle size) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a two steps linear gradient (4-20% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1% formic acid for 90 min and 20-45% acetonitrile/H20; 0.1% formic acid for 30 min). The separation of the peptides was monitored by a UV detector (absorption at 214 nm). For peptides ionization in the nanospray source, spray voltage was set at 1.4 kV and the capillary temperature at 275°C. All samples were measured in a data dependent acquisition mode. The peptide masses were measured in a survey full scan (scan range 300-1700 m/z, with 30 K FWHM resolution at m/z=400, target AGC value of 1×106 and maximum injection time of 500 ms). In parallel to the high-resolution full scan in the Orbitrap, the data-dependent CID scans of the 10 most intense precursor ions were fragmented and measured in the linear ion trap (normalized collision energy of 35%, activation time of 10 ms, target AGC value of 1×104, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 2 Da). Parent masses obtained in orbitrap analyser were automatically calibrated on the 445.120025 ion used as lock mass. The fragment ion masses were measured in the linear ion trap to have a maximum sensitivity and the maximum amount of MS/MS data. Dynamic exclusion was implemented with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 30 s. Each sample was analysed in triplicates on the mass spectrometer. Each run was preceded by a blank MS run in order to monitor system background.  Data Analysis - Raw files generated from mass spectrometry analysis were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo fisher Scientific). This software was used to search data via in-house Mascot server (version 2.4.1; Matrix Science Inc.) against the Human subset (20,264 sequences) of the SwissProt database (version 2014-03). For the database search the following settings were used: a maximum of one misscleavage, oxidation as a variable modification of methionine, carbamido-methylation as a fixed modification of cysteine and trypsin was set as the enzyme. A peptide mass tolerance of 6 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da were allowed. Only peptides with high stringency Mascot Score were used for protein identification. Peptides FDR < 1% was used. Each pull down experiment was performed using two types of beads to select specific drug interactors from experimental contaminants: beads coupled to the drug and control beads without the drug.   To go further in the analysis, relative intensity-based label-free quantification was processed using Progenesis LC-MS software (Progenesis QI for Proteomics v1.0; Nonlinear Dynamics) according to manufacturer instruction (Supplementary Data 2,4). First, raw LC Orbitrap MS data were imported and LC-MS heatmap of retention time and m/z were generated. Features from these LC-MS were automatically aligned and filtered to retain signals crossing the following parameters; retention time 15-135 min, m/z 300-1700, charge state 2-6 and 3 or more isotopes. MS-MS spectra were exported into peak list as Mascot generic files (MGF) to allow protein identification using the following inclusion options; the 3 highest intensity precursors for each features and precursor intensity over 25%. MGF files were used to search data via in-house Mascot server (version 2.4.1; Matrix Science Inc.) against the Human database subset of the SwissProt database (version 2014.03). Database search were done using the following settings: a maximum of one trypsin miss-cleavage allowed, methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamido-methylation as fixed modification. A peptide mass tolerance of 6 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da were allowed for search analysis. Only peptides adjusted to 5% false discovery rate and with ion score cut-off of 20 were exported from Mascot results and imported back to Progenesis LC-MS for protein grouping and quantification. The raw abundances of all identified peptides were used to normalise LC-MS-MS intensities. Total ion intensity signal from each of the individual peptides generated protein quantification. Any conflicting peptide identifications were removed from the measurements of the quantified proteins. Univariate one-way analyses of variance (ANOVA) were performed within Progenesis LC-MS to calculate the protein p value according to the sum of the normalized abundances across all runs.

### Publication Abstract
Masitinib, a highly selective protein kinase inhibitor, can sensitise gemcitabine-refractory cancer cell lines when used in combination with gemcitabine. Here we report a reverse proteomic approach that identifies the target responsible for this sensitisation: the deoxycytidine kinase (dCK). Masitinib, as well as other protein kinase inhibitors, such as imatinib, interact with dCK and provoke an unforeseen conformational-dependent activation of this nucleoside kinase, modulating phosphorylation of nucleoside analogue drugs. This phenomenon leads to an increase of prodrug phosphorylation of most of the chemotherapeutic drugs activated by this nucleoside kinase. The unforeseen dual activity of protein kinase inhibition/nucleoside kinase activation could be of great therapeutic benefit, through either reducing toxicity of therapeutic agents by maintaining effectiveness at lower doses or by counteracting drug resistance initiated via down modulation of dCK target.

### Keywords
Human, Labelfree, Ltq-velos-orbitrap

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 
MaP, Marseille Proteomique  Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de  Marseille INSERM U1068/Institut Paoli-Calmettes 27, Bd Leï Roure, BP30059, 13273 Marseille CEDEX 9, France

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Audebert Stephane
MaP, Marseille Proteomique  Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de  Marseille INSERM U1068/Institut Paoli-Calmettes 27, Bd Leï Roure, BP30059, 13273 Marseille CEDEX 9, France


