### Accession
PXD040094

### Title
Proteomic response on ferroptosis induction via GPX4 KO in mouse embryonic fibroblasts

### Description
In the present study, we report proteome data of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF cells) and immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts which are 4-OH-TAM-inducible Gpx4−/− (Pfa1 cells). Ferroptosis in Pfa1 cells was induced with Tamoxifen (Tam) addition and three timepoints were collected: 0h, 24h and 48h. Wild-type MEF cells were also measured as an alternative control without Tam addition. Raw data for HEK293 cells are provided as an independent quality control. MEF  and Pfa1 cells (both kind gift from Marcus Conrad, Munich)  were cultured in RPMI-1640 media (2 g/L glucose, 10% FBS, 2 mM Gibco GlutaMAX Supplement, 1% pen/strep) at 37C with 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. Cells (300k) were seeded on Corning 100 mm tissue-culture treated culture dishes and incubated overnight. On the next day Pfa1 cells were treated with or without 1 µM Tam.

### Sample Protocol
The original trifluoroethanol (TFE) based protocol (10.1021/pr050160f) was modified for sample preparation. Cells (about 1 mln) were washed (x3) with PBS, then treated with 80% cold methanol, scraped out, incubated (1h, -80C), and centrifuged. The pellet was washed with cold acetone, centrifuged and dried on air. The proteins were redissolved by ultrasonication in 120 ul of 50 mM ammonium-bicarbonate (ABC) buffer pH 8.0 mixture with TFE (1:1), then: +5 mM TCEP (1h, 50C) and +15 mM iodoacetamide (1h, RT). The samples were diluted 4 times with ABC buffer, 2 ug of trypsin/LysC mix were added, incubated (overnight, 37C), and the reaction stopped by adding formic acid (1%). Peptides were dried in vacuum centrifuge (45C, 3h), redissolved and measured with BCA assay. Analyses were run on Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system coupled to a Q-exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. 1 µg of peptide mixture was loaded onto an Acclaim µ-Precolumn enrichment column (0.5 mm × 3 mm, 5 µm) at 10 μl/min flow for 1.5 min in isocratic mode using buffer C as the mobile phase (2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in DI water). Then the peptides were separated on an Acclaim Pepmap C18 HPLC column (75 μm × 150 mm, 2 μm) in gradient elution mode (flow rate 0.4 µl/min). Full method (110 min) was as follows: 2% B (1 min), 2 to 35% B (94 min), 35 to 99% (4 min), 99% B (5 min), 99 to 2% (2 min), 2% B (5 min) (A: 0.1% formic acid, B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in DI water). MS/MS-analysis was performed in positive ionization mode using a NESI source. The parameters for the MS/MS-analysis were as follows: emitter voltage: 2.1 kV, capillary temperature: 240°C. Panoramic scan: the mass range 390 - 1500 m/z, resolution 120,000. Tandem scan: mass range 100 m/z - precursor m/z, resolution 15,000. Isolation window: ± 1 Da. DDA mode was set to “top20”, the intensity cutoff limit for precursor selection: 400000 a.u., NCE: 29 units. Only charge states from +2 to +4 were accounted for tandem scanning. The maximum accumulation time was 50 ms for precursor ions and 100 ms for fragment ions. The AGC values for precursor ions: 1∙106, for fragment ions: 2∙105. All the measured precursor ions were dynamically excluded from the tandem MS/MS analysis for 20 s. Three biological replicates were prepared, and two technical replicates were acquired for each sample: all these LC-MS2 spectra are uploaded. One sample of HEK293 cells extracted from from lab cryostorage (-135°C) used as a QC standard were processed along with other samples.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were first converted by ThermoRawFileParser (mzML files). Closed database search was performed using MSFragger 3.5 (true precursor tolerance of 12 ppm, fragment mass tolerance  50 mDa, allowed missed cleavages: 3). Three variable modifications: methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and cysteine carbamidomethylation. We used proteome UP000000589 augmented with standard contaminants of the Philosopher package and with FBS contaminants measured previously in our lab on FBS samples with the same instrument (see FASTA file). Statistical refinement was performed with peptideProphet (MZID files) and proteinProphet (PROT.XML file). LFQ was done with IonQuant 1.8 with match-between-run option turned on (TSV files).

### Publication Abstract
Ferroptosis is a type of programmed cell death distinct from apoptosis and necroptosis that plays an essential role in pathophysiological conditions such as neurodegenerative diseases and tumorigenesis. Massive lipid oxidation in an iron-dependent manner is a hallmark of ferroptosis.This modality of cell death is also characterized by perturbation of several metabolic pathways, predominantly fatty acid metabolism, thiol metabolism, iron homeostasis and the mevalonate pathway. We aimed to acquire data from different timepoints of ferroptotic death in order to get information about the primary and delayed phases of the ferroptotic response. For this purpose, we used model Pfa1 cells, which are 4-OH-TAM-inducible <i>Gpx4<sup>-/-</sup></i> mouse immortalized fibroblasts [1]. GPX4 is one of the main intracellular ferroptosis regulators and inhibiting it is a classic approach to induce ferroptosis. Measuring protein fold changes at different ferroptotic stages and in nontreated Pfa1 cells could give useful information on the activation of genes involved in ferroptosis and non-genomic protein regulation during ferroptotic progression. Bottom-up proteomic data were acquired from samples obtained 24 and 48 hours after genetic induction of ferroptosis. Chromato-mass spectra were registered in DDA mode and are suitable for further label-free quantification. These data might be a valuable proteome basis for further investigation of ferroptosis and complement other available omics.

### Keywords
Pfa1, Cell death, Proteomics, Ferroptosis, Mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Glutathione peroxidase 4

### Affiliations
Federal Center of Brain Research and Neurotechnologies, Federal Medico-Biological Agency,  117513 Moscow, Russia
Federal Center of Brain Research and Neurotechnologies

### Submitter
Alexey Nesterenko

### Lab Head
Dr Vsevolod V. Belousov
Federal Center of Brain Research and Neurotechnologies, Federal Medico-Biological Agency,  117513 Moscow, Russia


