### Accession
PXD017039

### Title
Broad and thematic remodeling of the surface glycoproteome on isogenic cells tranformed with driving proliferative oncogenes

### Description
The cell surface proteome, the surfaceome, is the interface for engaging the extracellular space in normal and cancer cells. Here we apply quantitative proteomics of N-linked glycoproteins to reveal how a collection of some 700 surface proteins is dramatically remodeled in an isogenic breast epithelial cell line stably expressing any of six of the most prominent proliferative oncogenes, including the receptor tyrosine kinases, EGFR and HER2, and downstream signaling partners such as KRAS, BRAF, MEK and AKT. We find that each oncogene has somewhat different surfaceomes but the functions of these proteins are harmonized by common biological themes including up-regulation of nutrient transporters, down-regulation of adhesion molecules and tumor suppressing phosphatases, and alteration in immune modulators. Addition of a potent MEK inhibitor that blocks MAPK signaling brings each oncogene-induced surfaceome back to a common state reflecting their strong dependence on the MAPK pathway to propagate signaling. Using a recently developed glyco-proteomics method of activated ion electron transfer dissociation (AI-ETD) we found massive oncogene-induced changes in 142 N-linked glycans and differential increases in complex hybrid glycans especially for KRAS and HER2 oncogenes. Overall, these studies provide a broad systems level view of how specific driver oncogenes remodel the surface glycoproteome in a cell autologous fashion, and suggest possible surface targets, and combinations thereof, for drug and biomarker discovery.

### Sample Protocol
Please refer to the bioRxiv preprint (DOI https://doi.org/10.1101/808139) for detailed explanation of all sample processing protocols.

### Data Protocol
Please refer to the bioRxiv preprint (DOI https://doi.org/10.1101/808139) for detailed explanation of all data processing protocols.

### Publication Abstract
The cell surface proteome, the surfaceome, is the interface for engaging the extracellular space in normal and cancer cells. Here we apply quantitative proteomics of <i>N</i>-linked glycoproteins to reveal how a collection of some 700 surface proteins is dramatically remodeled in an isogenic breast epithelial cell line stably expressing any of six of the most prominent proliferative oncogenes, including the receptor tyrosine kinases, EGFR and HER2, and downstream signaling partners such as KRAS, BRAF, MEK, and AKT. We find that each oncogene has somewhat different surfaceomes, but the functions of these proteins are harmonized by common biological themes including up-regulation of nutrient transporters, down-regulation of adhesion molecules and tumor suppressing phosphatases, and alteration in immune modulators. Addition of a potent MEK inhibitor that blocks MAPK signaling brings each oncogene-induced surfaceome back to a common state reflecting the strong dependence of the oncogene on the MAPK pathway to propagate signaling. Cell surface protein capture is mediated by covalent tagging of surface glycans, yet current methods do not afford sequencing of intact glycopeptides. Thus, we complement the surfaceome data with whole cell glycoproteomics enabled by a recently developed technique called activated ion electron transfer dissociation (AI-ETD). We found massive oncogene-induced changes to the glycoproteome and differential increases in complex hybrid glycans, especially for KRAS and HER2 oncogenes. Overall, these studies provide a broad systems-level view of how specific driver oncogenes remodel the surfaceome and the glycoproteome in a cell autologous fashion, and suggest possible surface targets, and combinations thereof, for drug and biomarker discovery.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Mapk signaling pathway, Surfaceome, Oncogenes

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California - San Francisco
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Gary Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr James Wells
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California - San Francisco


