### Accession
PXD040761

### Title
Exploring the molecular mechanisms behind the potentiation of chemotherapy effects by durvalumab in lung adenocarcinoma cell lines

### Description
Immune checkpoint inhibitors are increasingly used in combination with chemotherapy for treatment of non-small cell lung cancer, yet the success of combination therapies is relatively limited. Thus, more detailed insight regarding the tumour molecular markers that may affect the responsiveness of patients to therapy is required. Here, we set out to explore the proteome of two lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (HCC-44 and A549) treated with cisplatin, pemetrexed, durvalumab, and the corresponding mixtures to establish the differences in post-treatment protein expression that can serve as markers of chemosensitivity or resistance.

### Sample Protocol
2 µg of peptides were injected onto a 0.3 × 5 mm trap-column (5 µm C18 particles, Dionex) from where they were eluted to an in-house packed (3 µm C18 particles, Dr Maisch) analytical 50 cm x 75 µm emitter-column (New Objective). Both columns were operated at 40oC. Peptides were separated at 250 nL/min with an 8-35% A to B 120 min gradient. Eluent B was 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid and eluent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. Eluted peptides were sprayed to a quadrupole-orbitrap Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) MS/MS using a nano-electrospray source and a spray voltage of 2.5 kV (liquid junction connection). The MS instrument was operated with a top-12 data-dependent acquisition strategy. One 350-1400 m/z MS scan (at a resolution setting of 60 000 at 200 m/z) was followed by a MS/MS (R=30 000 at 200 m/z) of the 12 most intense ions using higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energy of 26). The MS and MS/MS ion target and injection time values were 3×10^6 (50 ms) and 1×10^5 (41 ms), respectively. The dynamic exclusion time was limited to 45 s; only charge states +2 to +6 were subjected to MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed with the MaxQuant (version 1.6.15.0) software package. For the identification and quantification of raw MS proteome data, UniProt human reference proteome database was used. Methionine oxidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Tryptic digestion rule (cleavages after lysine and arginine without proline restriction) was used for in silico digestion of the database. Only identifications with at least 1 peptide ≥ 7 amino acids long (with up to 2 missed cleavages) were accepted and transfer of identifications between runs based on accurate mass and retention time was enabled. Label-free normalization with MaxQuant LFQ algorithm was also applied. Protein and LFQ ratio count (i.e., number of quantified peptides for reporting a protein intensity) was set to 1. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate was kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach. All other parameters were default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Resistance, Durvalumab, Proteomics, Chemosensitivity, Lung adenocarcinoma, Pemetrexed, Cisplatin

### Affiliations
University of Tartu, Institute of Chemistry
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Darja Lavogina

### Lab Head
Dr Darja Lavogina
University of Tartu, Institute of Chemistry


