### Accession
PXD019765

### Title
Arabidopsis plastoglobules 2D-gel separation

### Description
Protein complexes separation of isolated plastoglobules (PGs) from Arabidopsis thaliana (Col-0 ecotype). PGs were isolated from the plants when they were 4 weeks old under long day photoperiod ( during the morning in dark adapted plants,16 hours of light and 8 darkness photoperiod, LED light of 120 uE intensity). The PGs were solubilized with 1.1 % n-Dodecyl--D-Maltoside and separated in a Blue-Native gel. The gel lanes were excised and further separated in a denaturing second dimension by SDS-PAGE. The resulting gel was visualized by silver staining and the protein spots excised for in-gel trypsin digestion. Samples from the 2D gel were subjeted to shotgun proteomics. The protein samples were measured on an LTQ Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham Massachusetts, USA) coupled to a Rheos Allegro liquid chromatograph (Flux Instruments GmbH, Klaus Kaiser Hochstr. 48, 4002 Basel, CH).

### Sample Protocol
Plastoglobule isolation The method used in this study was based on the previously described in Espinoza-Corral et al. (2019). In brief, a number of 240 plants were used for each biological replicate grown for four weeks under normal or high light conditions. Plants rosettes were excised and grinded with Isolation buffer (13 mM Tris-HCl, 20 mM MOPS pH 7.6, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.1 % [w/v] BSA, 5 mM ascorbic acid, 5 mM reduced cysteine, 330 mM sorbit and a phosphatases inhibitors cocktail) followed by gauze filtration. Chloroplasts were pelleted with 5 minutes centrifugation at 1.500 g and 4ºC and washed twice with washing buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 5 mM ascorbic acid, 5 mM reduced cysteine, 330 mM sorbit and a phosphatases inhibitors cocktail). Washed chloroplasts were resuspended in osmotic stress buffer (10 mM Tricine pH 7.9, 1 mM EDTA, 0.6 M sucrose and a cocktail of proteases and phosphatases inhibitors) and incubated in darkness for 30 min in ice. The broken chloroplasts were centrifuged at 100.000 g for 1 hour and 4ºC to separate the stroma from membranes, which were then resuspended in 48 % (w/v) sucrose in HE buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 2 mM EDTA and a cocktail of proteases and phosphatases inhibitors) and sonicated with 4 pulses of 10 seconds and 20 % wattage. Sonicated chloroplast membranes were overlaid with 5 % (w/v) sucrose in HE buffer and centrifuged at 150.000 g for 1.5 hours and 4ºC. Plastoglobules were collected from the surface of the sucrose gradient where they formed a yellowish band.  Blue native gels Thylakoid membranes as wells as plastoglobules were solubilized in ACA buffer (50 mM Bis-Tris pH 7.0 and 750 mM aminocapronic acid) with n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (final concentration 1.1 % [w/v]). Blue native gel electrophoresis was performed as described by  Wittig et al. (2006). Gel lanes from the Blue natie gel were further separated in a denaturing second dimension with SDS-PAGE. The protein spots were visualized by silver staining as described by Blum et al. (1987).  Sample preparation and LC/MS proteomics Gel pieces containing the protein of interest were washed 3 times with LC-MS grade water and cut into smaller pieces (< 1 mm). Afterwards, the samples were washed another 3 times, alternating 100 µl ammonium bicarbonate (ABC, 20 mM) and 100 µl acetonitrile (ACN, 100 %), 10 min each, followed by 100 µl dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mM in 20 mM ABC) for reduction of disulfide bridges, 20 min at 56 °C. The samples were washed 10 min with 100% ACN, followed by 30min, 100 µl idoacetamide (IAA, 30 min, 55 mM in 20 mM ABC ) at darkness. After alkylation, the samples were washed 2 times with ABC and ACN, before trypsin digestion (0.1 µg/µl, 37 °C, overnight).  The protein samples were measured on an LTQ Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham Massachusetts, USA) coupled to a Rheos Allegro liquid chromatograph (Flux Instruments GmbH, Klaus Kaiser Hochstr. 48, 4002 Basel, CH). For analysis 3 µl were injected using a HTC PAL autosampler (CTC Analytics AG, Industriestr. 20, 4222 Zwingen, CH). The gradient turned from 0 to 23 % B within 40 min, increased to 85 % B within another 40 min, kept constant for 50 min before returning to 0% B and 30 min equilibration. The flow was set to 0.300 µl/min at room temperature. Buffer A contained 5% ACN in water and buffer B 5% water in CAN. Both included 0.1% formic acid (FA).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Data Analysis All LC-MS/MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software program, version 1.6.11.0 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Peak lists were searched with the embedded Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) against a concatenated forward and reverse database comprising the ARAPORT11 full peptide dataset (48359 unique protein entries downloaded from ‘www.arabidopsis.org’) plus the common contaminant list appended by MaxQuant. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Digestion mode was Trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. MS/MS tolerance of the first search was 20 ppm, and main search was 4.5 ppm, with individualized peptide mass tolerance selected. False discovery rate (FDR) at peptide spectrum match and protein levels was set as 0.01. The “primary gene model” for each protein group was identified as that with the highest number of Unique + Razor Peptide counts when compiled across all experiments. In the case of a tie, the lowest gene model number was selected, regardless of whether the protein group contained gene models from one or more gene loci. Filtering of resulting protein groups was performed manually at a fixed FDR of 0% by accepting protein IDs with the highest MaxQuant Scores until the first decoy protein ID was reached.

### Publication Abstract
Plants require rapid responses to adapt to environmental stresses. This includes dramatic changes in the size and number of plastoglobule lipid droplets within chloroplasts. Although the morphological changes of plastoglobules are well documented, little is known about the corresponding molecular changes. To address this gap, we have compared the quantitative proteome, oligomeric state, prenyl-lipid content and kinase activities of Arabidopsis thaliana plastoglobules under unstressed and 5-day light-stressed conditions. Our results show a specific recruitment of proteins related to leaf senescence and jasmonic acid biosynthesis under light stress, and identify nearly half of the plastoglobule proteins in high native molecular weight masses. Additionally, a specific increase in plastoglobule carotenoid abundance under the light stress was consistent with enhanced thylakoid disassembly and leaf senescence, supporting a specific role for plastoglobules in senescence and thylakoid remodeling as an intermediate storage site for photosynthetic pigments. In vitro kinase assays of isolated plastoglobules demonstrated kinase activity towards multiple target proteins, which was more pronounced in the plastoglobules of unstressed than light-stressed leaf tissue, and which was diminished in plastoglobules of the abc1k1/abc1k3 double-mutant. These results strongly suggest that plastoglobule-localized ABC1 kinases hold endogenous kinase activity, as these were the only known or putative kinases identified in the isolated plastoglobules by deep bottom-up proteomics. Collectively, our study reveals targeted changes to the protein and prenyl-lipid composition of plastoglobules under light stress that present strategies by which plastoglobules appear to facilitate stress adaptation within chloroplasts.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Pgs

### Affiliations
MSU
Plant & Soil Science Building 1066 Bogue St, Rm A494E East Lansing, MI 48824 Michigan State University, United states.

### Submitter
Roberto Espinoza Corral

### Lab Head
Dr Peter K. Lundquist
Plant & Soil Science Building 1066 Bogue St, Rm A494E East Lansing, MI 48824 Michigan State University, United states.


