### Accession
PXD016039

### Title
Age-associated changes in human CD4+ T cells point to mitochondrial dysfunction consequent to impaired autophagy

### Description
To gain understanding on the mechanisms that drive immunosenescence in humans, we examined CD4+ T cells obtained from younger (20-39 years-old) and older (70+ years-old) healthy participants of the Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging (BLSA).  We found that mitochondrial proteins involved in the electron transport chain were overrepresented in cells from older participants, with prevalent dysregulation of oxidative phosphorylation and energy metabolism molecular pathways.  Surprisingly, gene transcripts coding for mitochondrial proteins pertaining to oxidative phosphorylation and electron transport chain pathways were underrepresented in older individuals.  Paralleling the observed decrease in gene expression, mitochondrial respiration was impaired in CD4+ T cells from older subjects.  Though mitochondrial number in both naïve and memory cells visualized with electron microcopy was similar in older versus younger participants, there were a significantly higher number of autophagosomes, many of them containing undegraded mitochondria, in older individuals.  The presence of mitochondria inside the accumulated autophagic compartments in CD4+ T cells from older individuals was confirmed by immunofluorescence.  These findings suggest that older age is associated with persistence of dysfunctional mitochondria in CD4+ T lymphocytes caused by defective mitochondrial turnover by autophagy, which may trigger chronic inflammation and contribute to the impairment of immune defense in older persons.

### Sample Protocol
Subjects Twenty-two men (21-83 years-old) were enrolled.  Samples were taken from apheresis material from older donors from the BLSA and younger normal donors through the NIA Cytapheresis of Volunteer Donors protocol.  This study required a large quantity of WBCs that could only be obtained by apheresis.  Cell Preparation PBMCs were isolated from apheresis packs using Ficoll-Paque Plus (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) density gradient.  CD4+ T cells were obtained by positive selection using anti-human CD4 microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA, USA).  Cells were kept overnight at 4 ⁰C.  Protein Extraction 6x107 CD4+ T cells in 18 mL culture medium were plated.  Cells were rested overnight at 4 ⁰C in RPMI 1640 + 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 1% L-glutamine (P/S/G) + 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) medium.  Cells were then incubated for 4 hours in 5% CO2 at 37 ⁰C.  Cells were collected by centrifugation and used to prepare cytoplasmic extracts (CE) [29, 30].  CE proteins were quantified using the Bradford protein assay.  Protein Digestion and Labeling with iTRAQ Reagent Briefly, 50 µg of each extract were mixed with six volumes of cold acetone (-20 ⁰C) for overnight precipitation.  The samples were centrifuged at 4⁰C, acetone was removed, and pellets were air dried.  The pellets were then resuspended in dissolution buffer (0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate [TEAB], 0.2% SDS), then reduced and alkylated before digesting overnight at 37 ⁰C using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Maddison, WI) at a protein-to-enzyme ratio of 20:1 according to iTRAQ 8plex labeling protocol (ABSciex, Foster city, CA).  Using the iTRAQ kit (ABSciex, Foster City, CA), protocol peptides were then labeled with iTRAQ tags as seen in Table S1.  One common reference sample was used in all four different iTRAQ 8plex experiments, which would help in normalization among iTRAQ runs and also to compare samples from one iTRAQ to another.  We also used a technical control sample within an iTRAQ run and used three technical control samples between iTRAQ runs.  After stopping the labeling reaction, the resulting labeled peptides were all combined and dried.  The samples were then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid to a final volume of 1 mL and then desalted using Waters Oasis HLB 1cm cartridges (Milford, MA) per the manufacturer’s instruction.  The eluate was then dried and resuspended in reverse phase solvent buffer A (10 mM TEAB in water, pH 8.4-8.6).  The combined peptide digest was fractionated offline by basic reverse phase fractionation followed by online reverse phase liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry.  Peptide Fractionation Using Basic Reverse Phase Chromatography and LC-MS/MS Analysis The pooled mixture of iTRAQ-labeled peptides was fractionated using basic reverse phase chromatography on an Agilent 1200 HPLC using a XBridge C18 Column, 5um, 2.1x100 mm (Waters, Milford, MA).  A 60 min linear gradient from 0% to 40% Buffer B (10 mM TEAB in 90% Acetonitrile, pH 8.4-8.6)) was used to separate the peptides with a flow rate of 200 uL/min with a total run time of 90 minutes.  Fractions were collected at 1-minute intervals on a 96-well microplate with a total of 90 fractions.  The fractions were then pooled to a total of 12 fractions.  Each fraction was completely dried using a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) and then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid before injection for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Fractions were collected at 1-minute intervals on a 96-well microplate with a total of 90 fractions.  The fractions were then pooled to a total of 12 fractions.  Each fraction was completely dried using a SpeedVac and then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid before injection for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was performed using the Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra 1D plus system (Dublin, CA) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA).  Ten uL of peptide digest was first loaded onto a Zorbax 300SB-C18 trap column (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA) and then separated on a reverse-phase PicoFrit analytical column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) using a 40-min linear gradient of 5-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid with a flow rate of 250 nL/min.  LTQ-Orbitrap Elite settings were as follows: spray voltage 1.5kV; full MS range: m/z 300-2000, data-dependent acquisition.  A full MS-scan was followed by six data-dependent MS2 scans for precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification/Data Analysis Protein identification and quantitation using the MS/MS spectra was performed using the Proteome Discoverer v1.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, Boston, MA).  The search criteria were set to the following: database, Swiss-Prot (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics); taxonomy, human; enzyme, trypsin; miscleavages, 3; variable modifications, oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), iTRAQ 8plex tyrosine; fixed modifications, (MMTS) methyl methanethiosulfonate (C), N-terminal iTRAQ 8plex, iTRAQ 8plex lysine, MS peptide tolerance, 10 ppm; MS/MS tolerance, 0.05 Da.  Proteins where fold changes in protein expression were greater than 1.3 or less than 0.7 were examined.  Statistical Analysis Data were analyzed within each iTRAQ 8plex and also with all combined.  Differences between young and old were determined by Student’s t-test (two-tailed) and proteins that met the following criteria were ranked by significance (only p < 0.05 shown).  Proteins were selected that were up- or down-regulated (ratio >1.3 or <0.7 and had a p < 0.05).  Averages of ratios were calculated between old and young (averages [old] / averages [young]) after normalization using the common control sample used across iTRAQ 8plex experiments.  Two hundred and twenty-four proteins had ratios of 1.3 or greater and 56 proteins had ratios of <0.7 or smaller.  Proteins were then selected according their p-value (p < 0.05).  One hundred and four proteins fitted the criteria indicated above out of 3,510 proteins after this three-step analysis.  Twenty-nine of these 104 proteins were determined to be significantly up-regulated in the old after accounting for unique peptides (≥ 2, similar peptides sequences not counted), high confidence of the peptide sequences (medium and low confidence peptide sequences eliminated), and ion score of more than 30.  DAVID v.6.7 (bioinformatics tool) was then used to convert between protein identifiers/gene.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Proteomics, Aging, Autophagy, Cd4+ t cells

### Affiliations
NIH/NIA
Translational Gerontology Branch, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, USA

### Submitter
Arsun Bektas

### Lab Head
Dr Luigi Ferrucci
Translational Gerontology Branch, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, USA


