### Accession
PXD013688

### Title
Extracellular vesicles impose quiescence and confer DNA-damage on residual HSC in the AML niche

### Description
To understand the mechanism by which AML-EVs may enforce quiescence, we performed tandem mass tag (TMT) proteomic profiling of in vitro cultured c-Kit+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC) (to obtain the minimum required amount of protein lysates) treated with extracellular vesicles (EVs) for 48 hours from human HL-60 or Molm-14 cell cultures versus controls.

### Sample Protocol
Purified extracellular vesicles (EVs) from human Molm-14 or HL-60 AML cell cultures were used to dose C57BL/6J mice cKit+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC) cell cultures for 48 hours. EV preparations, cell culture conditions, protein extraction and processing have been described in {Huan, J., Hornick, N.I., Goloviznina, N.A., Kamimae-Lanning, A.N., David, L.L., Wilmarth, P.A., Mori, T., Chevillet, J.R., Narla, A., Roberts Jr, C.T. and Loriaux, M.M., 2015. Coordinate regulation of residual bone marrow function by paracrine trafficking of AML exosomes. Leukemia, 29(12), p.2285.}   Data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid instrument configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Scientific). Survey scans used the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 120000), and data-dependent MS2 scans used the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy = 35). Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution = 60000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation of the top 10 ions, and higher-energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy = 65).

### Data Protocol
The instrument binary files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 1.4) for extraction of reporter ion signals, peptide identification using SEQUEST, and statistical validation using Percolator. SEQUEST parameters were a Swiss-Prot canonical mouse proteins database (17K sequences) , tryptic enzymatic cleavages with up to two missed cleavages, 1.25 Da parent ion mass tolerance, 1.0005 Da fragment ion tolerance, monoisotopic masses, y- and b-ion series, variable oxidation of methionine, fixed alkylation of cysteine, and fixed TMT modifications at peptide N-terminus and lysine. Identified peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and parsimonious protein identification results files were exported as tab-delimited text files.  Python scripts (available at https://github.com/pwilmart/PAW_pipeline.git) were used to filter peptide-spectrum-matches (PSMs) by FDR (less than 5%), accurate mass (better than 20 PPM), and determine if PSMs uniquely matched single proteins. PSMs passing requirements were summed into protein-level total reporter ion quantities that were used for statistical testing. The statistical testing was performed with the Bioconductor R package edgeR where the reporter ion intensities were corrected for composition bias using the trimmed mean of M-values normalization method and conditions compared using an exact test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Proteomics, Aml-derived extracellular vesicles, Bone marrow, Tandem mass tags, Isobaric labeling, Acute myeloid leukemia (aml)

### Affiliations
Professor of Pediatrics Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia 3615 Civic Center Blvd Philadelphia, PA 19104
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Peter Kurre
Professor of Pediatrics Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia 3615 Civic Center Blvd Philadelphia, PA 19104


