### Accession
PXD020896

### Title
Metaproteomic analysis of viral concentrates reveals vertical shift of viral community and microbial metabolism in the ocean

### Description
Viral concentrates (VCs) contained both viral particles and cell-affiliated components. In this study, a shotgun metaproteomic approach was applied to characterize proteins in the VCs collected from chlorophyll maximum, mesopelagic (200 m) and bathypelagic (3000 m) waters in the South China Sea. Abundant viral proteins indicated the shift of viral community as depth. Whereas the remaining non-viral proteins suggested the diverse microbial metabolism distinct at different layers.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, separation and LC-ESI-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS data were converted to MGF files by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and the exported MGF files were searched using ipeak software. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to less than 1% at both PSM and protein level. Trypsin was selected as the specific enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages permitted per peptide. Parameters included fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation (C); variable modification: Oxidation (M), Deamidatioin (N, Q). Data were searched with a peptide mass tolerance of 20ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.05Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virus, Viral concentrate, Metaproteomics, Microbial metabolism

### Affiliations
Professor of College of the Environment and Ecology
BGI

### Submitter
He Yanbin

### Lab Head
Dr Dazhi Wang
Professor of College of the Environment and Ecology


