### Accession
PXD019201

### Title
Protein signature of human skin fibroblasts indicates the suitability to serve as in vitro model for neuromuscular diseases (AAAS-Data)

### Description
The elucidation of pathomechanisms leading to the manifestation of neuromuscular diseases (NMDs) represents an important step toward the understanding of the genesis of the respective disease and might help to define starting points for (new) therapeutic intervention concepts. However, these “discovery studies” are often limited by the availability of human biomaterial especially regarding the fact that muscle and nerve biopsies became less common in the diagnostic work-up of patients suffering from NMDs. Moreover, given that results of next-generation-sequencing approaches frequently result in the identification of ambiguous variants, testing of their pathogenicity is crucial but also depending on patient-derived material. To systematically address the question if human skin fibroblasts might serve as a valuable biomaterial for (molecular) studies of NMDs, using proteomic profiling we generated a protein library by decreasing protein complexity via pH8-based sample fractionation: cataloguing of 8280 proteins revealed the expression of a variety of such linked to genetic forms of motor neuron diseases, congenital myasthenic syndromes, neuropathies and muscular disorders. In silico-based pathway analyses revealed expression of a variety of proteins involved in muscle contraction and such decisive for neuronal function and maintenance suggesting the suitability of human skin fibroblasts to study the etiology of NMDs. Based on these findings, next we aimed to further demonstrate the suitability of this in vitro model to study NMDs by a use case: utilizing a data independent acquisition (DIA) approach, the proteomic signature of whole protein extracts of fibroblasts derived from an Allgrove-patient was studied. Paradigmatic dysregulated proteins were confirmed in muscle biopsy of the patient and protein-functions could be linked to neurological symptoms known for this disease. Moreover, LC-MS/MS-based investigation of nuclear protein composition allowed the identification of protein-dysregulations which accord with structural perturbations observed in the muscle biopsy.

### Sample Protocol
Snap-frozen fibroblasts were lysed in a buffer containing 1% SDS, 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.8 and cOmplete™ ULTRA protease inhibitor using the Bioruptor® (Diagenode) for 10 minutes at 4 °C. Afterwards, 20 µl of each sample was taken and diluted 1:4 with 10 mM Ammoniumbicarbonate buffer, pH 7.8 (ABC) to conduct a BCA-based determination of protein concentration. Reduction and Carbamidomethylation of the remaining samples were carried out using 10 mMTCEP for 30 min at 37 °C followed by application of 15 mM IAA for further 30 min at room temperature (RT). Samples were further processed using the S-Trap™ (Protifi) sample preparation procedure: after acidifying the samples by adding 12% aqueous phosphoric acid, they were diluted with S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol (MeOH), triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) 100 mM, pH 7.1). Protein-loading to S-Trap columns including centrifugation steps was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Filter-based tryptic digestion was carried out for 2 h at 47 °C using a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:20. Afterwards, peptides were eluted by applying multiple eluting steps as recommended. Drying of the eluted peptides was performed in a vacuum concentrator followed by dissolving of peptides in 0.1% TFA for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis or 10 mM ammonium acetate with 0.4 mM FA (pH 8.0) for subsequent pH8 reversed phase fractionation. All proteolytic digests were analyzed using monolithic column separation system (PepSwift monolithic PS-DVB PL-CAP200-PM, Dionex) on an inert Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex) by direct injection of 1 μg sample to proof effectiveness of tryptic digestion. For fractionation the peptides were separated on a C18 RP chromatography column (loading amount 50 μg). Doing so, peptides were loaded onto the column with solvent A (10 mM ammonium acetate, 0.4 mM formiate, pH 8.0) at a flow rate of 12.5 μl/min. Separation and fractionation were performed with the following gradient with solvent B (84% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium acetate, 0.4 mM formiate, pH 8.0): 3-10% in 10 min, 10-25% for 35 min, 25-40% for 20 min, 40-95% for 10 min, 95% for 5 min and 20 min equilibration at 3%. The individual fractions were collected in an interval of 60 s, with each sample divided into 15 fractions. The fractions were collected in combined form, so that after reaching the last fraction, the sample was collected again for one minute in fraction 1. After fractionation, the individual samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and dissolved in 0.1% TFA prior subsequent nano LC-MS/MS analysis (1 μg/μl). Given that setting up a spectral library is a prerequisite to perform a data independent LC-MS/MS-based sample analysis, all fractions derived from the pH8 fractionation mentioned above were analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS using 1 µg respectively: samples were loaded on an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation Liquid chromatography (RSLC) nano system with a ProFlow flow control device coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Scientific). After initial loading, peptides were concentrated on a trapping column (Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 100 µm, 2 cm) using 0.1% TFA at a flowrate of 10 µl/min. Following sample separation was accomplished on a reversed phase column (Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 75 µm 50 cm) using a binary gradient: 3% solvent B (84% ACN with 0.1% TFA) for 10 min, a linear increase of solvent B to 35% for 120 min, a linear increase of solvent B to 95% for 10 min followed by a linear decrease of solvent B to 3% for 5 min. MS survey scans were acquired on the Fusion Lumos using settings as follows: mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with full MS scans from 300 to 1500 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 (Orbitrap) using the polysiloxane ion at 445.12002 m/z as lock mass. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 2E5 and the maximum injection time to 50 milliseconds. The most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 5E3 were selected for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy (nCE) of 30% (HCD) in each cycle of the acquisition analysis, following each survey scan. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 15 seconds. Fragment ions were acquired in the linear ion trap with an AGC of 1E4 and a maximum injection time of 35 milliseconds.  For the data independent acquisition (DIA) approach, the same nano LC-MS/MS setup as for the DDA acquisition was used. Each sample analyzed was mixed with an appropriate amount of iRT standard (Biognosys) peptides and 1µg of each sample was subjected to the analysis. Full MS scans were acquired from 300-1100 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (Orbitrap) using the polysiloxane ion at 445.12002 m/z as lock mass. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5E5 and the maximum injection time to 20 milliseconds. Full MS scans were followed by 30 DIA windows acquired at a resolution 30,000 (Orbitrap) with an AGC set to 1E6, a maximum injection time of 60 milliseconds and nCE of 32 (HCD).

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were imported into the software Spectronaut (Biognosys). As proteome background the human proteome data was selected from UniProt (www.uniprot.org) containing 20,374 entries. The processing settings were set as following: enzyme was trypsin, the minimum and maximum peptide length was set to 7 and 52 respectively, missed cleavages was set to 2. Carbamidomethyl for cystein was set as fixed modification and acetyl (Protein N-term) and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modifications. All settings regarding the library generation including tolerances, identification, filters, iRT calibration and workflow were set to factory defaults. For the relative quantification, the option Top N max 3 was taken meaning that for each protein the average of the 3 most intense identified peptides are taken to give the protein the quantitative value.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Triple-a syndrome, Allgrove syndrome, Ataxin-2, Aladin, Aaas, Myopodin/synaptopodin-2

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften
Bioanalytics, Leibnizinstitut für analytische Wissenschaften-ISAS-e.V., Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Hentschel

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Hentschel
Bioanalytics, Leibnizinstitut für analytische Wissenschaften-ISAS-e.V., Germany


