### Accession
PXD027015

### Title
Determination of carry-over contaminations in recombinant major peanut allergen Ara h 2 produced in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves and analysis of proline hydroxylation patterns

### Description
The major peanut allergen Ara h 2 undergoes site-specific hydroxylation at three proline residues within repetitive IgE-binding DPYSPOHS sequences. There has been no report of recombinant Ara h 2 production with hydroxyprolines until now. We produced recombinant Ara h 2 in N. benthamiana leaves to determine host-related contaminants and to analyze site-specific hydroxylation of proline residues.

### Sample Protocol
rAra h 2 was expressed in N. benthamiana, purified and run under reducing condition on an SDS-PAGE, visualized by CBB staining, and excised from the gel.  Gel pieces were cut and washed in ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Disulfide bridges were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Following tryptic digestion, peptides were extracted from the gel by sonication. Peptide samples were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system with a 30 minutes acetonitrile gradient and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer running a data-dependent acquisition method: survey scans were acquired in a mass range of 350–1,500 m/z with lock mass on, at a resolution of 60.000 at 200 m/z. The AGC target value was set to 3E6 with a maximal injection time of 60 ms. The eight most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 Da with 0.2 m/z isolation offset and fragmented in the HCD cell with a normalized collision energy of 28 %. Spectra were recorded at a target value of 1E5 with a maximal injection time of 250 ms and a resolution of 30000. Peptides with unassigned charge state or a charge of +1 were excluded from fragmentation. The peptide match and exclude isotope features were enabled and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were interpreted with MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 (Cox and Mann, 2008) searching against the databases of N. benthamiana, TMV, contaminants and rAra h 2 sequences with tryptic specificity. Hydroxylation of proline and oxidation of methionine, HexNAc attachments on serine or threonine, and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification. The data were filtered at 1% false discovery rate at the level of peptide-spectrum matches and at protein level.  Spectra of hydroxyproline containing peptides were manually inspected.

### Publication Abstract
Peanut allergy is a potentially life-threatening disease that is mediated by allergen-specific immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies. The major peanut allergen Ara h 2, a 2S albumin seed storage protein, is one of the most dangerous and potent plant allergens. Ara h 2 is posttranslationally modified to harbor four disulfide bridges and three hydroxyprolines. These hydroxyproline residues are required for optimal IgE-binding to the DPYSP<sup>OH</sup>S motifs representing an immunodominant IgE epitope. So far, recombinant Ara h 2 has been produced in <i>Escherichia coli, Lactococcus lactis, Trichoplusia ni</i> insect cell, and <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i> chloroplast expression systems, which were all incapable of proline hydroxylation. However, molecular diagnosis of peanut allergy is performed using either natural or <i>E. coli</i>-produced major peanut allergens. As IgE from the majority of patients is directed to Ara h 2, it is of great importance that the recombinant Ara h 2 harbors all of its eukaryotic posttranslational modifications. We produced hydroxyproline-containing and correctly folded Ara h 2 in the endoplasmic reticulum of leaf cells of <i>Nicotiana benthamiana</i> plants, using the plant virus-based magnICON<sup>&#xae;</sup> transient expression system with a yield of 200 mg/kg fresh biomass. To compare prokaryotic with eukaryotic expression methods, Ara h 2 was expressed in <i>E. coli</i> together with the disulfide-bond isomerase DsbC and thus harbored disulfide bridges but no hydroxyprolines. The recombinant allergens from <i>N. benthamiana</i> and <i>E. coli</i> were characterized and compared to the natural Ara h 2 isolated from roasted peanuts. Natural Ara h 2 outperformed both recombinant proteins in IgE-binding and activation of basophils <i>via</i> IgE cross-linking, the latter indicating the potency of the allergen. Interestingly, significantly more efficient IgE cross-linking by the <i>N. benthamiana</i>-produced allergen was observed in comparison to the one induced by the <i>E. coli</i> product. Ara h 2 from <i>N. benthamiana</i> plants displayed a higher similarity to the natural allergen in terms of basophil activation due to the presence of hydroxyproline residues, supporting so far published data on their contribution to the immunodominant IgE epitope. Our study advocates the use of <i>N. benthamiana</i> plants instead of prokaryotic expression hosts for the production of the major peanut allergen Ara h 2.

### Keywords
Hydroxyproline, Peanut allergens

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Vienna
Department of Pathophysiology and Allergy Research, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Dorothea Anrather

### Lab Head
Dr Heimo Breiteneder
Department of Pathophysiology and Allergy Research, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria


