### Accession
PXD025792

### Title
Benchmark data set for MSPypeline, a python package for streamlined mass spectrometry-based proteomics data analysis

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics is increasingly employed in biology and medicine. To generate reliable information from large data sets and ensure comparability of results it is crucial to implement and standardize the quality control of the raw data, the data processing steps and the statistical analyses. The MSPypeline provides a platform for the import of MaxQuant output tables, the generation of quality control reports, the preprocessing of data including normalization and exploratory analyses by statistical inference plots. These standardized steps assess data quality, provide customizable figures and enable the identification of differentially expressed proteins to reach biologically relevant conclusions.

### Sample Protocol
H838 and H1975 cells were stimulated with 2 ng/μl recombinant human tumor growth factor (TGF)b (R&D Systems, 240-B-010) for 24 h or were left unstimulated. The protein concentration of the cell lysates was measured using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 23225) following the manufacturers’ instructions. Sample preparation for LS-MS analysis was performed following an adapted version of the single-pot, solid-phase enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol using 20 μg of protein. Protein disulfate bonds were reduced by adding 160mM 2-chlor-acetamide (CAA) (Merck, C0267) and alkylated with 40mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphin (TCEP) (Merck, C4706). Samples were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C in the T100 Thermal Cycler (Bio-Rad) and subsequently, the corresponding amount of hydrophobic and hydrophilic bead preparation (Merck, 45152105050250, 65152105050250; 1:1 mixture) was added. To initiate bead-to-protein binding, samples were complemented with ethanol (Merck, 1009831000) to a final concentration of 50% (v/v) and incubated at room temperature for 10 min at 1000 rpm. Samples were washed three times with 80% (v/v) ethanol in LC/MS grade H2O and then incubated for 16 h in digestion buffer at 37 °C at 1000 rpm (100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Merck, 7408), Trypsin Gold (10:1 protein: trypsin, Promega, V5280) in LC/MS grade H2O after 30 s of sonication in 65 °C water bath. Following protein digestion, samples were separated from the beads by holding the sample tubes on a magnet for bead attraction and transferring the supernatant to new tubes. To ensure purification of the digest from any beads, this step was repeated, the recovered peptides were transferred to low protein-binding microcentrifuge tubes (Nerbe plus, 04-212-3500), lyophilized using SpeedDry Vacuum Concentrator (CHRIST, RVC 2-18 CDplus), and stored at −20 °C. Nano-flow liquid chromatography MS/MS analysis was performed by coupling an EASY-nLC 1200 to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Lyophilized samples were reconstituted in 15 μl loading buffer (0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA), 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) in LC/MS grade H2O) and 2.5 μl were injected for each analysis. Technichal replicates were established by injecting 2.5 μl from one sample two times. All 24 probes were injected and measured randomized. Peptides were delivered to an analytical column (100 μm × 30 cm, packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch)) at a flow rate of 3 μl min−1 in 100% solvent A (0.1% (v/v) FA in LC/MS grade H2O). After loading, peptides were separated using an 84 min gradient from 2% to 98% of solvent B (0.1% (v/v) FA, 80% (v/v) ACN in LC/MS grade H2O) at 350 nl min−1 flow rate. The Orbitrap Exploris 480 was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 (m/z 200) resolution after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000 (300%).Tandem mass spectra were generated for up to 20 peptide precursors in the Orbitrap (isolation window 1.0 m/z) for fragmentation using higher-energy collisional dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 30% and a resolution of 15,000 with a target value of 100,000 (100%) charges after accumulation for a maximum of 22 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS spectra were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) for peak detection and quantification. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome database (downloaded on October 14th, 2020) by Andromeda search engine enabling contaminant detection and the detection of reversed versions of all sequences with the following search parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification and acetyl (Protein N-term), oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with up to three missed cleavages allowed. The mass accuracy of the precursor ions was determined by the time-dependent recalibration algorithm of MaxQuant. The maximum false discovery rate for proteins and peptides was 0.01 and a minimum peptide length of eight amino acids was required. As for the rest of the settings, they correspond to the default configuration of MaxQuant and and the calculation of LFQ intensities (including normalization) was selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Orbitrap exploris 480, H1975, H838, Nsclc, Tgfbeta

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, 69120, Germany

### Submitter
Alexander Held

### Lab Head
Dr Ursula Klingmüller
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, 69120, Germany


