### Accession
PXD037799

### Title
CD44 acts as a co-receptor to confer cell type-specific enhancement of signaling and regulatory T cell induction by TGM-1, a helminth parasite mimic of TGF

### Description
Long-lived parasites evade host immunity through highly evolved molecular strategies. The murine intestinal helminth, Heligmosomoides polygyrus, suppresses the host immune system through release of an immunoregulatory TGF-β mimic, TGM-1, which is a divergent member of the CCP (Sushi) protein family. TGM-1 comprises 5 domains, of which domains 1-3 (D1/2/3) bind mammalian TGFβ receptors, acting on T cells to induce Foxp3+ regulatory T cells; however, the roles of domains 4 and 5 (D4-5) remain unknown. We noted that a truncated TGM-1, lacking these domains, showed reduced potency. Combination of D1/2/3 and D4/5 as separate proteins did not restore full potency, suggesting that a physical linkage is required, and that these domains may not deliver an independent signal. Co-precipitation from cells treated with biotinylated D4/5, followed by mass spectrometry, identified the cell surface protein CD44 as a co-receptor for TGM-1.  Both full-length and D4/5 bound strongly to a range of primary cells and cell lines, while D1/2/3 binding was only marginally detectable. Ectopic expression of CD44 in non responding cells conferred responsiveness, while specific genetic depletion of CD44 abolished the enhancement effect of D4/5, and ablated the ability of full-length TGM-1 to bind to cell surfaces.  Moreover, CD44-deficient T cells showed attenuated induction of Foxp3 by full-length TGM-1, to levels similar to D1/2/3. Hence, a parasite protein known to bind two host cytokine receptor subunits has evolved a third receptor specificity, which serves to raise the avidity and cell type-specific potency of TGF-β signaling in mammalian cells.

### Sample Protocol
Ten µg of TGM-1 D4/5 was incubated with EZ-Link™ Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin (Pierce, 21335) for 30 minutes at RT°, the reaction was stopped by addition of 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4. The reaction was purified using a G-25 column (GE health, 28922529). For the pulldown cells were washed with PBS and then incubated with biotinylated protein(s) for 3 hr on ice.  After incubation the plates were washed 3x with PBS (Fresenius Kabi) and the cells were harvested in 1x Cell Lysis Buffer (Cell Signaling Technologies, 9803). After spinning the supernatant was incubated with Neutravidin beads (Pierce, 29201) for 1 hr at 4°C (rotating). Beads were washed 4x using lysis buffer and 3x using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich, 09830), with fresh LoBind tubes used for each wash(Eppendorf, 0030 108.116). The beads were resuspended in 250 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 250 ng of mass spec grade trypsin (Promega V5113), incubated overnight at 37°C (with agitation), after which peptides were recovered from the beads with a pre-washed 0.4 µm filter (Ultrafree MC HV, Millipore, UFC30HV00) and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis.  Digested peptides were desalted using StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007) and measured in an Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) trybrid mass spectrometer coupled to EASY-nLC 1200 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Digested peptides were separated using a 50 cm long fused silica emitter (FS360-75-15-N-5-C50, New Objective, Massachusetts, US) in-house packed with 1.9 µm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerburch-Entringen, Germany) and heated to 50ºC in a Column Oven for ESI/Nano Spray (Sonation, Germany). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using a gradient from 2% to 32% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for 30 min followed by column re-conditioning for 22 minutes. A Lock Mass of 445.12003 (polysiloxane) was used for internal calibration.  Data was acquired in a Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode with a TopSpeed method with cycle time of 3 s with a scan range of 400-1500 m/z and resolutions of 120,000 and 30,000 for MS1 and MS2, respectively, using in both cases the Orbitrap as detector. For MS2, an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and an HCD collision energy of 32% was applied. Precursors with a charge of 1 and higher than 6 were excluded from triggering MS2 as well as previously analyzed precursors with a dynamic exclusion window of 10s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data was analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.14.0 according to Tyanova et al(Tyanova et al, 2016a) with the following modifications: Maximum missed cleavages by trypsin was set to 2. Searches were performed against an in silico digested database from the mouse proteome including isoforms and canonical proteins (Uniprot, 22nd April 2021). Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), were set as variable modifications with a maximum of 3. Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled as fixed modification. Label-free quantification was activated not enabling Fast LFQ. The match between runs feature was activated with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
Long-lived parasites evade host immunity through highly evolved molecular strategies. The murine intestinal helminth, <i>Heligmosomoides polygyrus</i>, down-modulates the host immune system through release of an immunosuppressive TGF-&#x3b2; mimic, TGM1, which is a divergent member of the CCP (Sushi) protein family. TGM1 comprises 5 domains, of which domains 1-3 (D1/2/3) bind mammalian TGF-&#x3b2; receptors, acting on T cells to induce Foxp3<sup>+</sup> regulatory T cells; however, the roles of domains 4 and 5 (D4/5) remain unknown. We noted that truncated TGM1, lacking D4/5, showed reduced potency. Combination of D1/2/3 and D4/5 as separate proteins did not alter potency, suggesting that a physical linkage is required and that these domains do not deliver an independent signal. Coprecipitation from cells treated with biotinylated D4/5, followed by mass spectrometry, identified the cell surface protein CD44 as a coreceptor for TGM1. Both full-length and D4/5 bound strongly to a range of primary cells and cell lines, to a greater degree than D1/2/3 alone, although some cell lines did not respond to TGM1. Ectopic expression of CD44 in nonresponding cells conferred responsiveness, while genetic depletion of CD44 abolished enhancement by D4/5 and ablated the ability of full-length TGM1 to bind to cell surfaces. Moreover, CD44-deficient T cells showed attenuated induction of Foxp3 by full-length TGM1, to levels similar to those induced by D1/2/3. Hence, a parasite protein known to bind two host cytokine receptor subunits has evolved a third receptor specificity, which serves to raise the avidity and cell type-specific potency of TGF-&#x3b2; signaling in mammalian cells.

### Keywords
Complement control protein, Convergent evolution, Heligmosomoides polygyrus, Lymphocyte, Fibroblast, Tgf- mimic

### Affiliations
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville
Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine (CABIMER) - University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Román González-Prieto
Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine (CABIMER) - University of Seville


