### Accession
PXD014918

### Title
ScandiumIII

### Description
Recently, it has been reported that some metal complexes can act as artificial proteases. In particular, the Lewis acid scandium(III) triflate has been shown to catalyze the cleavage of peptide bonds N- and C-terminal to serine and threonine residues. Therefore, we investigated if this compound can also be used for the cleavage of proteins. For this purpose, several single proteins, the 20S immune-proteasome (17 proteins), and the Universal Proteomics Standard UPS1 (48 proteins) were analyzed by MALDI-MS and/or LC-MS. A high cleavage specificity N-terminal to serine and threonine residues was observed.

### Sample Protocol
Sc(III) triflate was applied to different protein samples. The experiments were performed with 100 mM Sc(III) triflate at 60°C for 16h in water. These reaction conditions were applied to ten individual proteins: (alpha-casein (bovine), concanvalin (Jack bean), alpha-crystallin (bovine), cytochrome c (horse), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (rabbit), beta-lactoglobulin (bovine), myoglobin (horse), ribonuclease A (bovine), thioredoxin (E. coli), and transferrin (human). The reaction products of 1 pmol starting material were analyzed by MALDI-MS and LC-MS, respectively. Furthermore, experiment was carried out using the immune-20s proteasome and the UPS2 standard as a more complex sample as well as with the therapeutic protein Filgrastim

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data were acquired using Xcalibur v2.5.5 and raw files were processed to generate peak list in Mascot generic format (*.mgf) using ProteoWizard release version 3.0.331. Database searches were performed using Mascot in-house version 2.4.0. A fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm, oxidation of methionines, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus as variable modifications were considered as search parameters for all analyses. For full- and semi-specific cleavage at serine and threonine residues, two missed cleavage sites were applied, whereas no missed cleavage site was used for the databases search without enzymatic cleavage specificity.

### Publication Abstract
Proteolytic digestion prior to LC-MS analysis is a key step for the identification of proteins. Digestion of proteins is typically performed with trypsin, but certain proteins or important protein sequence regions might be missed using this endoproteinase. Only few alternative endoproteinases are available and chemical cleavage of proteins is rarely used. Recently, it has been reported that some metal complexes can act as artificial proteases. In particular, the Lewis acid scandium(III) triflate has been shown to catalyze the cleavage of peptide bonds to serine and threonine residues. Therefore, we investigated if this compound can also be used for the cleavage of proteins. For this purpose, several single proteins, the 20S immune-proteasome (17 proteins), and the Universal Proteomics Standard UPS1 (48 proteins) were analyzed by MALDI-MS and/or LC-MS. A high cleavage specificity N-terminal to serine and threonine residues was observed, but also additional peptides with deviating cleavage specificity were found. Scandium(III) triflate can be a useful tool in protein analysis as no other reagent has been reported yet which showed cleavage specificity within proteins to serines and threonines.

### Keywords
Lewis acid, Endoproteinase, Scandium(iii) triflate, Protein cleavage, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Department of Biosciences

### Submitter
Christian Koehler

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Thiede
Department of Biosciences


