### Accession
PXD024375

### Title
Allicin inhibits SARS-CoV-2 replication and abrogates the antiviral host response in the Calu-3 proteome

### Description
The Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic causes a major health burden. Garlic organosulfur compounds, such as the diallyl thiosulfinate allicin exert strong antimicrobial activity against various respiratory pathogens. Here, we investigated the antiviral activity of allicin against SARS-CoV-2 in infected Vero E6 and Calu-3 lung cells. Allicin efficiently inhibited viral replication and infectivity in both cell lines. Proteome analyses of infected Calu-3 cells revealed a strong induction of the antiviral interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) signature (e.g. Mx1, IFIT, 2’5’OAS and ISG15), pathways of vesicular transport, tight junctions (KIF5A/B/C, OSBPL2, CLTC1, ARHGAP17) and ubiquitin modification (UBE2L3/5), as well as reprogramming of host metabolism, transcription and translation. Allicin abrogated the ISG host response and reverted the host cellular pathways to Mock levels, confirming the antiviral and immunomodulatory activity of allicin in the host proteome. Thus, biocompatible doses of garlic could be promising for protection of lung cells against SARS-CoV-2.

### Sample Protocol
The SARS-CoV-2 Munich isolate (BetaCoV/Munich/BavPat1/2020/EPI_ISL_406862) was used for infection assays of Calu-3 cells, under biosafety level 3 with appropriate personal protection.  Calu-3 cells were seeded at densities of 6 x 105 cells/ml in 6-well plates, respectively. After 24 h, cells were infected with SARS-CoV-2 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 and treated with 150 µM allicin 1 h post infection. Infected Calu-3 cells were incubated for 24 h at 37°C and harvested by centrifugation. The pellets were washed with PBS and alkylated under denaturing conditions in 200 µl urea/ iodoacetamide/ EDTA (UCE-IAM) buffer for 15 min at RT. Subsequently, the alkylated protein extracts were precipitated with trizol and 96% ethanol and washed four times with 1 ml 70% ethanol. The protein pellets were separated by a short 15% non-reducing SDS-PAGE, which was running for 15 min and stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue. The gel fractions were cut and in-gel tryptic digested. The eluted peptides were desalted using ZipTip-μC18 material (Merck Millipore) and dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid before LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide samples of non-infected Calu-3 cells (Mock) and SARS-CoV-2 infected Calu-3 cells with and without allicin treatment were subjected to nLC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd.). Peptides were separated with a linear gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min−1 by using eluent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and eluent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) on an Acclaim Pep Map trap column (100 Å pore size, 5 μm particle size, 0.3 × 5 mm, Thermo scientific). TriVersa NanoMate, Advion electrospray ion source was used for peptide ionization. The analysis was performed in positive mode using full MS scan analysis with an MS1 resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. The fragment ions (MS2) were scanned at a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained from LC-MS/MS were analysed using the Proteome Discoverer software (v2.2). Peptide identification of the human and SARS-CoV-2 proteome was performed by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SequestHT search engine. Human and SARS-CoV-2 proteins were identified by searching all tandem MS/MS spectra against the human proteome protein sequence database (20,286 entries) extracted from UniprotKB release 12.7 (UniProt Consortium, Nucleic acids research 2007, 35, D193-197) as well as against the European Virus Archive Global # 026V-03883 sequence database. Peptides were considered to be identified with high confidence at a target false discovery rate of ≤0.01 and with a medium confidence at ≤0.05, based on the q-values. Identified proteins were quantified by the 'Percursor Ions Quantifier' implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 based on peak intensities to estimate the abundance of the human and SARS-CoV-2 proteins in the peptide samples. Error tolerance for precursor ion mass and fragment ion mass was set to 3 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Methionine oxidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation and cysteine S-thioallylation by allicin (Cys+72.00337 Da for C3H5S1) were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2/ allicin/ vero e6/ calu-3/ proteome

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ
Institute for Biology-Microbiology Freie Universität Berlin Königin-Luise-Strasse 12-16 D-14195 Berlin Germany

### Submitter
Lorenz Adrian

### Lab Head
Dr Antelmann, Haike
Institute for Biology-Microbiology Freie Universität Berlin Königin-Luise-Strasse 12-16 D-14195 Berlin Germany


