### Accession
PXD042445

### Title
Shotgun Proteomics to characterize wastewater proteins

### Description
Wastewater has been extensively studied along the years. However, these studies have been focused on the analysis of small molecules. There are no studies about the proteins present in wastewater and let alone an established method to study them. We propose a method for the study of the proteins in wastewater overcoming their low concentration and the interference of other molecules. Moreover, we differentiate between the proteins that are soluble and the ones in the particulate. This method is based on concentration, lysis and clean-up steps. The samples were analyzed afterward using liquid chromatography coupled to high-resolution mass spectrometry (HR-LC/MS) and the data searched with Proteome Discoverer. Thus, this complete method has allowed us to characterize the proteomic composition of different wastewater samples with a low volume.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were separated in soluble and particulate fractions by ultracentrifugation. Soluble fraction was concentrated and particulate fraction lysed. Both fractions were concentrated in the head of SDS-PAGE gels and then in-gel digested with trypsin. Tryptic mixtures were analyzed with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive™ HF.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using the Proteome Discoverer software (version 3.0) and semiquantitative analysis carried out with in-house scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Classically, the characterization of wastewater components has been restricted to the measurement of indirect parameters (chemical and biological oxygen demand, total nitrogen) and small molecules of interest in epidemiology or for environmental control. Despite the fact that metaproteomics has provided important knowledge about the microbial communities in these waters, practically nothing is known about other non-microbial proteins transported in the wastewater. The method described here has allowed us to perform a large-scale characterization of the wastewater proteome. Wastewater protein profiles have shown to be very different in different collection sites probably reflecting their human population and industrial activities. We believe that wastewater proteomics is opening the doors to the discovery of new environmental and health biomarkers and the development of new, more effective monitoring devices for issues like monitorization of population health, pest control, or control of industry discharges. The method developed is relatively simple and combines procedures for the separation of the soluble and particulate fractions of wastewater and their concentration, and conventional shotgun proteomics using high-resolution mass spectrometry for protein identification. &#x2022;Unprecedented method for wastewater proteome characterization.&#x2022;Proteins as new potential biomarkers for sewage chemical-information mining, wastewater epidemiology and environmental monitoring.&#x2022;Wastewater protein profiles reflect human and industrial activities.

### Keywords
High-resolution mass spectrometry (hrms)., Sewage protein information mining (spim), Proteomics, Compartmentalized proteome, Wastewater-based epidemiology (wbe), Wastewater

### Affiliations
Department of Biological and Environmental Proteomics, Institute of Biomedical Research of Barcelona, Spanish National Research Council (IIBB-CSIC/IDIBAPS), 08036 Barcelona, Spain
IIBB-CSIC

### Submitter
Montserrat Carrascal

### Lab Head
Dr Montserrat Carrascal
Department of Biological and Environmental Proteomics, Institute of Biomedical Research of Barcelona, Spanish National Research Council (IIBB-CSIC/IDIBAPS), 08036 Barcelona, Spain


