### Accession
PXD033253

### Title
CRISPR-Cas9 Editing of TLR4 Improves the Outcome of Cardiac Cell Therapy

### Description
We developed and optimized a new electroporation protocol for CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing. This protocol achieved up to 68% success rate, when applied to isolated hMSCs from the heart and epicardial fat of patients with ischemic heart disease. While cell editing resulted lowered TLR4 expression in hMSCs, it did not affect classical markers of hMSCs and proliferation rate. Advanced protein mass spectrometry analysis revealed that edited cells secreted fewer proteins involved in inflammation and in extracellular matrix organization. The immunomodulatory effect of TLR4 editing was apparent in both free and EV-encapsulated proteins. Furthermore, edited cells expressed less NF-ƙB and secreted lower amounts of extracellular vesicles, pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic cytokines than unedited hMSCs. Cell therapy with edited and unedited hMSCs improved survival, left ventricular (LV) remodeling, and cardiac function after myocardial infarction (MI) in mice. Postmortem histologic analysis revealed clusters of edited cells that survived in the scar tissue 28 days after MI. Morphometric analysis showed that implantation of edited cells increased the area of myocardial islands in the scar tissue, reduced the occurrence of transmural scar, increased scar thickness, and markedly decreased expansion index, compared with unedited cells or saline.

### Sample Protocol
Medium samples were reduced carbaamidomethylated in 8M urea and trypsinized in 1M urea. THe resulted peptides were analyzed by LC-MSMS using the Q-exactive plus mass spectrometer. THe vesicle samples were extracted with SDS buffer, sonicateion and acetone precipitation. The proteins were trypsinized and analyed similar to the medium samples.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analyzed with MAXQUANt software followed by the perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammation and fibrosis limit the reparative properties of human mesenchymal stromal cells (hMSCs). We hypothesized that disrupting the toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) gene would switch hMSCs toward a reparative phenotype and improve the outcome of cell therapy for infarct repair. We developed and optimized an improved electroporation protocol for CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing. This protocol achieved a 68% success rate when applied to isolated hMSCs from the heart and epicardial fat of patients with ischemic heart disease. While cell editing lowered TLR4 expression in hMSCs, it did not affect classical markers of hMSCs, proliferation, and migration rate. Protein mass spectrometry analysis revealed that edited cells secreted fewer proteins involved in inflammation. Analysis of biological processes revealed that TLR4 editing reduced processes linked to inflammation and extracellular organization. Furthermore, edited cells expressed less NF-&#x199;B and secreted lower amounts of extracellular vesicles and pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic cytokines than unedited hMSCs. Cell therapy with both edited and unedited hMSCs improved survival, left ventricular remodeling, and cardiac function after myocardial infarction (MI) in mice. Postmortem histologic analysis revealed clusters of edited cells that survived in the scar tissue 28&#xa0;days after MI. Morphometric analysis showed that implantation of edited cells increased the area of myocardial islands in the scar tissue, reduced the occurrence of transmural scar, increased scar thickness, and decreased expansion index. We show, for the first time, that CRISPR-Cas9-based disruption of the TLR4-gene reduces pro-inflammatory polarization of hMSCs and improves infarct healing and remodeling in mice. Our results provide a new approach to improving the outcomes of cell therapy for cardiovascular diseases.

### Keywords
Cell therapy, Mesenchymal stromal cells, Tlr4

### Affiliations
Technion
Neufeld and Tamman Cardiovascular Research Institutes, Sheba Medical Center, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Leor
Neufeld and Tamman Cardiovascular Research Institutes, Sheba Medical Center, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.


