### Accession
PXD011330

### Title
Assessing Technical and Biological Variation in SWATH-MS -based Proteomics: A case study in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia

### Description
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is renowned for its variable clinical course and response to therapy, suggesting a role for precision medicine. However, the molecular basis of CLL variability remains incompletely understood. Recent developments in data independent acquisition (DIA) -MS technologies, such as SWATH (Sequential Windowed Acquisition of all THeoretical fragments), provide an opportunity to study the pathophysiology of CLL at the proteome level. This report describes the sample replication and data handling requirements for SWATH-MS analysis of clinical samples. A CLL-specific spectral library compromising over 1,500,000 spectra with digital information for over 150,000 peptides has been generated to enable the quantification of up to 7736 proteins. To assess the reproducibility of the assay, SWATH-MS analysis was performed on 6 cryopreserved CLL patient samples, incorporating biological (IGHV mutational status), sample preparation and MS technical replicates. Quantitative information was obtained for 5169 proteins (<1% FDR) across 54 SWATH-MS acquisitions. These analyses showed that SWATH-MS is a highly reproducible technique. However, replicate sample preparations on different days was identified as the main source of variation. To overcome the effect of variation between sample preparation batches, different computational approaches for batch correction were tested. All approaches successfully removed technical variability whilst retaining proteomic differences between clinical subgroups. Functional enrichment analysis of proteins associated to IGHV mutational status highlighted the importance of metabolic remodelling in the biology of CLL and overlapped significantly with previous studies based on gene expression profiling. Finally, an approach to perform statistical power analysis in proteomics studies was developed. This approach could be used to drive the design of future CLL SWATH-MS studies. These fundamental requirements for DIA approaches should be widely applicable to other clinical proteomics studies.

### Sample Protocol
Cryopreserved peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PMBCs) from 14 CLL patients at different stages of the disease were used to generate a CLL-specific spectral library. 2x10e7 cells were lysed in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 40 mM tris (pH 7.5), 4% CHAPS buffer. Protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) followed by overnight digestion with trypsin. Peptides were fractionated by strong cation exchange and desalted fractions were delivered into a Triple TOF 6600 (SCIEX) via an Eksigent NanoLC 415 System (SCIEX). DDA was performed using 25 MS/MS per cycle to optimise for quality and 30 MS/MS per cycle to optimise for coverage.  Replicate PBMC aliquots from 6 individual CLL patients were thawed, lysed and prepared as described above for SWATH-MS on three separate days over a period of 3 months. Triplicate SWATH-MS acquisitions were performed on each replicate sample preparation over a period of one month, taking into account changes in columns and traps and maintenance on the LC and MS systems. SWATH acquisitions were performed using 100 SWATH windows of variable effective isolation width to cover a mass range of 350-1250 m/z. A total of 54 SWATH acquisitions were performed.

### Data Protocol
To generate a CLL spectral library, data were searched using ProteinPilot 5.0 (SCIEX) and the Paragon algorithm (Sciex) against the SwissProt database (Nov 2015, 20,193 human entries) with MMTS as a fixed modification of cysteine residues and biological modifications allowed. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 10ppm. The data were also searched against a reversed decoy database and proteins lying within a 1% global false discovery rate (FDR) were included in the CLL library. In order to align SWATH data with the CLL library, only proteotypic peptides with no modifications were required. To this end, a ‘rapid’ search of the data was performed using ProteinPilot.  SWATH spectra were aligned using SWATH 2.0 in the PeakView software (SCIEX) against the CLL spectral library. Thirteen endogenous peptides were used for retention time calibration. Data were processed in PeakView using a XIC extraction window of 8 mins and XIC width of 75ppm. Peak areas from peptides with >99% confidence and <1% global false discovery rate were extracted using MarkerView (SCIEX). SWATH-MS protein expression data was normalised using the total area sums (sum of all peak areas used to compute the scaling factor) normalisation strategy in MarkerView and transformed on a log2 scale.  Various methods were then used to assess the technical and biological variability and correct for batch effects. Functional analysis was performed on protein found to be differentially expressed between clinical subgroups (UM-CLL vs. M-CLL) using a range of tools. Finally, statistical power and sample size calculations were performed.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) exhibits variable clinical course and response to therapy, but the molecular basis of this variability remains incompletely understood. Data independent acquisition (DIA)-MS technologies, such as SWATH (Sequential Windowed Acquisition of all THeoretical fragments), provide an opportunity to study the pathophysiology of CLL at the proteome level. Here, a CLL-specific spectral library (7736 proteins) is described alongside an analysis of sample replication and data handling requirements for quantitative SWATH-MS analysis of clinical samples. The analysis was performed on 6 CLL samples, incorporating biological (IGHV mutational status), sample preparation and MS technical replicates. Quantitative information was obtained for 5169 proteins across 54 SWATH-MS acquisitions: the sources of variation and different computational approaches for batch correction were assessed. Functional enrichment analysis of proteins associated with IGHV mutational status showed significant overlap with previous studies based on gene expression profiling. Finally, an approach to perform statistical power analysis in proteomics studies was implemented. This study provides a valuable resource for researchers working on the proteomics of CLL. It also establishes a sound framework for the design of sufficiently powered clinical proteomics studies. Indeed, this study shows that it is possible to derive biologically plausible hypotheses from a relatively small dataset.

### Keywords
Cll, Swath, Leukaemia

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
MRC Centre for Drug Safety Science, Dept. Molecular & Clinical Pharmacology, Institute for Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, UK.

### Submitter
Gina Eagle

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Rosalind Jenkins
MRC Centre for Drug Safety Science, Dept. Molecular & Clinical Pharmacology, Institute for Translational Medicine, University of Liverpool, UK.


