### Accession
PXD005878

### Title
Internally Tagged Ubiquitin: a Tool to Identify Linear Polyubiquitin-modified Proteins by Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Even though ubiquitination controls a plethora of cellular processes, modifications by linear polyubiquitin have so far only been linked with acquired and innate immunity, lymphocyte development and genotoxic stress response. Until now, a single E3 ligase complex (LUBAC), one specific deubiquitinase (Otulin) and a very few substrates have been identified. The existing methods for the study of lysine-based polyubiquitination are not suitable for the detection of linear polyubiquitin-modified proteins. Here, we present a novel approach to discovering linear polyubiquitin-modified substrates by combining lysine-less internally tagged ubiquitin (INT-Ub.7KR) with SILAC-based mass spectrometry. We applied our approach in TNFα-stimulated T-Rex HEK293T cells and afterwards validated newly identified linear polyubiquitin targets. Moreover, we demonstrated that linear polyubiquitination of the novel LUBAC substrate TRAF6 is essential for the NFkappaB signalling. Overall, we have established a powerful method for the detection of linear polyubiquitin substrates.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines HEK293T, T-REx™ HEK293T and T-REx™ HeLa were purchased. TRAF6-/- MEFs were obtained from Dr Jun-Ichiro Inoue. Strep-tag® INT-Ub, GST-Ube2S-UBD, GST-AMSH, GST-NIeL, GST-Cbl RF, MBP-HOIP RBR-C and 6xHis-USP2-cc proteins were purified according to Qiagen’s protocol or as previously described. After purification, Ube2S-UBD, Otulin and NIeL were then respectively cleaved with PreScission™ and TEV proteases to remove GST. HOIL-1L-6xHis, HOIP-6xHis, 6xHis-SEPT2, 6xHis-VDAC1 and 6xHis-TRAF6 were purified as previously described. HEK293T cells were transiently transfected with indicated plasmids using GeneJuice®. 24 to 48h post transfection cells were lysed and incubated with either GST- or MBP-fused proteins bound respectively to glutathione sepharose beads or amylose resin, followed by washing and elution. To test direct interactions, either eluted or cleaved recombinant GST- or MBP-tagged proteins were incubated respectively with MBP- or GST-fused proteins bound to amylose resin or glutathione sepharose resin, followed by washing and elution. GST-tagged superUBAN, superUBAN F305A and UBAN NEMO were purified as described above. HEK293T cells were transfected with indicated constructs using GeneJuice®. 24h post transfection cells were lysed in pull-down buffer, sonicated and treated with benzonase. Protein concentrations were measured, adjusted, and precleared. Cleared lysates were then incubated with GST, GST UBANx3, GST UBANx3 F305A or GST UBAN bound to glutathione sepharose, followed by washing and elution. The enzymes 6xHis-E1, UbcH5a, UbcH5c, 6xHis-Ubc13/Uev1 and UbcH7 were purchased. MBP-HDAC6 was purified, followed by overnight cleavage with factor Xa at RT. Reactions with Ube2S-UBD and AMSH, NIeL, Cbl RF, HOIP RBR-C and USP2-cc were performed as previously described. All the other reactions were performed by incubating E1, E2, E3, Ub or INT-Ub variants with or without ATP. Stable inducible T-REx™ HEK293T cell lines were metabolically labelled by SILAC approach. The stable T-REx™ HEK293T cell lines INT-Ub, INT-Ub.7KR and INT-Ub.∆GG were cultured in media containing heavy L-Arg (R10)/L-Lys (K8), medium L-Arg (R6)/L-Lys (K4) and light L-Arg (R0)/L-Lys (K0). When kept in medium containing zeocin and blasticidin, INT-Ub expression was silenced. A Strep-Tactin® Pull-down was performed as follows: stable HEK293T T-REx™ cell lines were either transfected and/or treated and expression of various INT-Ub mutants induced by doxycycline treatment. Cells were lysed, protein concentration was adjusted and samples precleared, followed by washing and elution. HA-IP was performed as Strep-Tactin® PD with the exception that anti-HA agarose conjugate was used. Linear Ub IP was performed as described previously. Myc-IP was performed similar to Strep-Tactin® PD, with the exception that cells were lysed in RIPA buffer and lysates were subsequently incubated with c-Myc antibody and protein G agarose. An expression of various INT-Ub variants was induced by doxycycline and followed by 16 h starvation (-FBS). For preliminary MS, cells were stimulated with TNF were lysed, precleared. Protein concentration was measured and lysates were merged in 1:1:1 ratio, followed by incubation with prewashed Strep-Tactin® resins, followed by washing and elution. In the case of the additional triplicate MS experiment, the following changes were introduced: cells were stimulated with TNF and lysed and precleared. Eluates were resolved by SDS-PAGE, each lane was cut into 8-15 slices, alkylated with chloroacetamide and trypsin-digested. Peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips. A preliminary MS screen was performed on an EASY-nLC™ II System coupled to an Orbitrap Elite. Peptides were separated on a 15 cm and 75 m ID PicoTip fused silica emitter in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur® C18-AQ 3 m resin. Peptides were eluted from the column using a segmented gradient of 5-50 % of solvent B at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min over 87 or 127 min. Spectra were recorded in a mass range from m/z 300 to 2,000 with a resolution of 120,000 (positive ion). The twenty most intense ions were selected for CID fragmentation. For targeted MS inclusion lists containing up to 115 peptide masses of interest (ubiquitinated TRAF6 peptides and Ub peptides) were exclusively selected for HCD fragmentation and MS/MS acquisition. Additional MS screening for the identification of novel linear polyUb targets was performed on an EASY-nLC™ 1200 System coupled to a Q Exactive™ HF. Peptides were separated using a segmented gradient of 5-50 % of solvent B at a constant flow rate of 200 nL/min over 87 min on a 20 cm and 75 m ID PicoTip fused silica emitter in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur® C18-AQ 1.9 m resin. Full scans were acquired from m/z 300 to 1650 with a resolution of 120,000 (positive ion). The seven most intense ions were fragmented by HCD and MS/MS spectra recorded with a resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
Obtained mass spectra were processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.1.0) using the internal search engine Andromeda and searched against either the Uniprot Homo sapiens (release 2014_02; 88,692 entries) database and a database containing INT-Ub and INT-Ub.7KR sequences or the Mus musculus (release 2014_02; 51402 entries) database. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and acetylation (Protein N-term), oxidation (M), GlyGly (K, N-term), deamidation (N, Q) were defined as variable modifications. In SILAC measurements, the amino acids K4/R6 and K8/R10 were defined as medium and heavy labels, respectively. Mass tolerance at the MS level was set to 4.5 ppm and to 0.5 Da at the MS/MS level (CID fragmentation), or 20 ppm (HCD fragmentation). The false discovery rate for peptides and proteins was set to 1 %. An arbitrary cut-off of 2-fold change was used to determine significantly SILAC ratios. A functional enrichment analysis of Gene Ontology and KEGG terms was performed in Perseus (version 1.5.0.15).

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination controls a plethora of cellular processes. Modifications by linear polyubiquitin have so far been linked with acquired and innate immunity, lymphocyte development and genotoxic stress response. Until now, a single E3 ligase complex (LUBAC), one specific deubiquitinase (OTULIN) and a very few linear polyubiquitinated substrates have been identified. Current methods for studying lysine-based polyubiquitination are not suitable for the detection of linear polyubiquitin-modified proteins. Here, we present an approach to discovering linear polyubiquitin-modified substrates by combining a lysine-less internally tagged ubiquitin (INT-Ub.7KR) with SILAC-based mass spectrometry. We applied our approach in TNF&#x3b1;-stimulated T-REx HEK293T cells and validated several newly identified linear polyubiquitin targets. We demonstrated that linear polyubiquitination of the novel LUBAC substrate TRAF6 is essential for NF&#x3ba;B signaling.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Human, Proteomics, Pull-down

### Affiliations
Tuebingen University
Institute of Biochemistry II Goethe University School of Medicine Germany

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Koraljka Husnjak
Institute of Biochemistry II Goethe University School of Medicine Germany


