### Accession
PXD029014

### Title
Phospho-proteomic analysis of DUSP6 deficient Caco-2 cells

### Description
Dual-specificity phosphatase 6 (Dusp6)-deficiency enhances baseline colon barrier integrity and confers amelioration of dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colonic injury. DUSP6 is a phosphatase, and therefore it is plausible that DUSP6 knockout alters the phosphorylation status of other proteins. To access the protein phosphorylation landscape and functional network in DUSP6 deficient Caco-2 cells, we applied phosphopeptide enrichment and isobaric labeling strategies with MS-based proteomics, and identified 1323 phosphorylation sites on 580 phosphoproteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted with 12 mM sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosine (MP Biomedicals), 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich), protease inhibitor cocktail (BioShop), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Bionavas). Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (BioShop) for 30 min, and carboxymethylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark for 30 min. Alkylated proteins were digested with Lys-C (1:100 w/w) (WAKO) for 2 h and then digested with trypsin protease (1:100 w/w) (Thermo Scientific) overnight. The peptide mixture was combined with an equal volume of ethyl acetate (Sigma-Aldrich) and then acidified with 10% sample volume of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) to pH < 3. The acidified sample was vortexed for 1 minute and then centrifuged at 15700 ×g for 2 minutes to separate the aqueous and organic phases, and collected the aqueous sample. Peptides were dried under vacuum and then resolved in 100 mM TEAB solution. 12 μL of 4% (v/v) formaldehyde-H2 (Sigma-Aldrich) and 4% (v/v) formaldehyde-D2 (Sigma-Aldrich) were added to the Caco-2 control and DUSP6 KO Caco-2 to be labeled with light and heavy dimethyl, respectively.  12 µL of freshly prepared 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each mixture. Each mixture was vigorously mixed and then reaction was allowed to proceed for 1 h at RT. 48 µL of 0.1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide (WAKO) were added on ice to stop the reaction, and added 30 µL of 10% (v/v) formic acid to further end the reaction and to acidify the sample . Finally, the light and heavy dimethyl-labeled samples were combined at 1:1 ratio. The phosphopeptide was enriched by aliphatic hydroxy acid-modified metal oxide chromatography (HAMMOC) and eluted with 0.5% and 5% solutions of piperidine (Sigma-Aldrich). The eluates were acidified with 10% TFA to pH < 3. The desalting was performed by using SDB-XC StageTips. NanoLC-MS/MS was performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Electron), equipped with a nanoACQUITY UPLC system. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a 2 cm × 180 μm capillary trap column and then separated in a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length C18 column BEH nanoACQUITY at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, where mobile phases was A [0.1% formic acid (FA)] and B (0.1% FA/80% ACN). A linear gradient of 10-40% B in 90 min and 40-85% B in 10 min was employed throughout this study. Mass spectra from survey full scans were acquired on the Orbitrap (m/z 300−1500). The resolution of the instrument was set to 60000 at m/z 400 with an automated gain control (AGC) value of 106. The top ten most-intense precursor ions were selected from the MS scan for subsequent collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scan by ion trap (AGC target at 7000). For each biological sample, duplicate nanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed. Three biological replicates and two technical replicates were performed.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS spectral information was processed for peak detection and quantitation by using MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8. Peptide identification was performed by using the Andromeda search engine against the Swiss-PROT human database version canonical (published 2017). Search criteria used in this study were trypsin specificity, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M), and phosphorylation (STY), and allowed for up to two missed cleavages. A minimum of seven amino acids in the peptide length was required. The precursor mass tolerance was 3 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was 0.5 Da. By using a decoy database strategy, peptide identification was accepted based on the posterior error probability with a false discovery rate of 1%. Precursor masses of already identified peptides were further searched and recalculated by using the “match between runs” option in MaxQuant. For multiple phosphopeptides, the localization probability of all putative phosphosites was determined by using the MaxQuant PTM score algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Caco-2 cells, Colorectal adenocarcinoma, Phosphoproteome, Dusp6

### Affiliations
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
national taiwan university


### Submitter
Chantal Hoi Yin  Cheung

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.


