### Accession
PXD027881

### Title
The pattern of apolipoprotein A-I lysine carbamylation as a probe of the environment within human atherosclerotic aorta

### Description
Protein lysine residue carbamylation is an irreversible post-translational modification, resulting in the generation of protein-bound homocitrulline (N--carbamyllysine). Carbamylation alters protein structure and can thus also alter protein function because of the loss of the charged -amino lysine moiety. Two distinct pathways can promote protein carbamylation. The first pathway occurs as a result of urea decomposition forming an equilibrium mixture of cyanate (CNO-) and the reactive electrophile isocyanate; the second (enzymatic) pathway occurs from myeloperoxidase (MPO)–catalyzed oxidation of thiocyanate (SCN-), yielding CNO- and isocyanate. We and others have previously shown that apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I), the major protein constituent of high density lipoprotein (HDL), is a target for MPO-catalyzed modification in vivo altering its function, converting the traditionally cardio-protective lipoprotein into a pro-atherogenic and pro-apoptotic one. We hypothesized that insights into the chemical environment within the human artery wall could be gained by monitoring site-specific carbamylation patterns of apoA-I recovered from human atherosclerotic aorta. Toward testing this hypothesis, we first mapped and quantified carbamyllysine obtained from in vitro carbamylation of apoA-I by: (i) the urea driven (cyanate) vs. the inflammatory driven (MPO) pathways; as well as (ii) in lipid-poor vs. lipidated apoA-I (reconstituted nascent HDL). Our in vitro studies, interpreted in the context of existing structural models, suggest lysine residues within regional proximity of the known MPO binding sites on HDL are preferentially targeted by the enzymatic (MPO) carbamylation pathway, whereas the non-enzymatic (cyanate) pathway leads to nearly uniform distribution of carbamylated lysine residues along the apoA-I polypeptide chain. Quantitative proteomic analyses of apoA-I recovered from human aortic atheroma identified 16 of the 21 total lysine residues as carbamylated and suggests that the majority of apoA-I carbamylation in vivo occurs via the non-enzymatic cyanate pathway, and on ‘lipid-poor’ apoA-I forms. Monitoring the patterns of post translational modification of apoA-I lysine residues in vivo can provide insights into the chemical environment within human atheroma.

### Sample Protocol
Protein preparations in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0 were digested overnight at 37°C with mass spectrometry-grade GluC protease (Promega, Madison, WI) at a ratio of 1:20 (w/w) of enzyme to substrate. Both in solution digestion and in gel digestion methods of excised Coomassie blue stained immunoaffinity precipitated apoA1 bands (monomer and dimer) were attempted. We noted improved and more expansive peptide coverage and recovery of carbamylated peptides using the in solution digestions. Therefore, we utilized in solution digestion (with GluC), as the method of choice for sample preparation unless otherwise indicated. Resulting peptides were injected onto an IntegraFrit sample trap (ProteoPep C18, 300 Å, 150 μm×2.5 cm, New Objective, Woburn, MA) at 1 μL/min with 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Subsequently, the peptides were fractionated through a column (75 μm×15 cm) packed in-house with XperTek 218TP, C18, 300 Å pore size, 150 μm particle size (Cobert Associates, St Louis, MO) at 200 nL/min with the use of a Proxeon Easy-nLC II system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and a gradient of 5% to 65% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid over 120 min into the mass spectrometer. An LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was used for LC-MS/MS analysis of in vitro carbamylation specimens and Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer was used for analysis of in vivo atherosclerotic plaque specimens (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos instrument was operated in a data dependent manner which involves cycling between an MS1 scan performed in the Orbitrap from 300-1700 Da at a resolution of 60,000 followed by MS/MS experiments performed in the ion trap on the 10 most abundant ions.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled for ions fragmented twice in 30 seconds and these ions were placed on an exclusion list for 60 seconds. The Fusion Lumos instrument was operated in a data dependent manner which involves cycling between an MS1 scan performed in the Orbitrap from 300-1700 Da at a resolution of 120,000 followed by MS/MS experiments performed in the ion trap on the most abundant ions for a cycle time of 3 seconds.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled for ions fragmented once in 30 seconds and these ions were placed on an exclusion list for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA). The resulting Unified Search Files (*.srf) were searched against the Uniprot FASTA of apoA-I. Modifications used for the searches included, oxidized methionine and tryptophan (variable), carbamylated lysine (variable mass addition 43 Da) and acetylated lysine (variable). GluC peptides with a maximum of 5 missed cleavage sites were allowed in the database searches. Monoisotopic precursor ions were searched with a tolerance of 10 ppm with 0.6 Da for the fragment ions on the data obtained from the hybrid LTQ-Orbitrap Lumos or LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometers. Unidentified fragment ions in all fragmentation spectra were manually validated with the use of Protein Prospector (University of California, San Francisco; https://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm). All carbamylated peptides presented have MS1 spectra consistent with carbamylation and not acetylation. The peak areas extracted from chromatograms corresponding to each fragmentation spectra were used for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Apolipoprotein a-i, Carbamylation, Urea., Homocitrulline, High density lipoprotein, Cardiovascular disease, Cyanate, Myeloperoxidase, Oxidation

### Affiliations
Cleveland clinic
Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Shawna battle

### Lab Head
Dr Stanley Hazen
Cleveland Clinic


