### Accession
PXD035235

### Title
Host cell response after infection with a virulent and a non virulent Acinetobacter baumannii IC2 OXA-23 strain

### Description
Acinetobacter baumannii is an emerging nosocomial pathogen that causes severe infections such as pneumonia or blood stream infections. As the incidence of multidrug-resistant A. baumannii infections in intensive care units increases, the pathogen is considered of greater clinical concern. Little is known about the molecular interaction of A. baumannii with its host yet. In order to study the host cell response upon A. baumannii infection, a complexome analysis was  performed. For this, we identified a virulent ( A. baumannii 2778) and a non virulent (A. baumannii 1372) clinical isolate of genetic similarity > 95 % (both isolates from IC 2 harboring OXA 23). HUVECs were infected with each strain and enriched mitochondrial fraction was used for complexome profiling. Complexome analysis identified dramatic reduction of mitochondrial protein complexes in the strain of greater virulence.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and infection: HUVECs from healthy donors were precultured in 174 cm²  cell culture flasks with endothelial cell growth medium [endothelial cell basal medium (Promocell), 10 U/ml Penicillin, 100 µg/ml Streptomycin, Supplement Mix (Promocell), 10% FCS]. HUVECs were seeded (without antibiotics) into collagen treated cell culture dishes (5x106 cells/dish, Greiner Bio One). Bacterial cultures were grown over night in lysogeny broth, inoculated to an OD600 of 0.05 on the day of infection and incubated until an OD600 of 0.4 - 0.5. Bacterial cell cultures were centrifuged and adjusted to a concentration of 2.5 x 107 bacteria/ml with endothelial cell growth medium. HUVECs were infected with a MOI of 10 (as determined by bacterial live cell plating). The samples were incubated in an humdified incubator for 16 hours. After incubation, the supernatent was aspirated and the cells were washed with cold PBS. HUVECs were harvested in PBS.    Blue native electrophoresis: Cells were homogenized using a pre-cooled motor-driven glass/Teflon Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer at 1300 rpm and 40 strokes in 83 mM sucrose, 3.3 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7, 0.3 mM EDTA, 1.7 mM 6-aminohexanoic acid. Homogenates were centrifuged for 5 min at 500 g to remove nuclei, cell debris, and intact cells. Mitochondria were pelleted by centrifugation for 10 min at 10´000g. Mitochondrial fraction from 20 mg HUVECs were resuspended in 35 µl solubilisation buffer (50 mM imidazole pH 7, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilized with 8 µl 20% digitonin (Serva) and centrifuged for 20 min at 22000g. Supernatants were supplemented with 2.5 µl 5% Coomassie G250 in 500 mM aminocaproic acid and 5 µl 0.1% Ponceau S in 50% glycerol. Equal protein amounts of samples were loaded on top of a 3 to 18% acrylamide gradient gel (dimension 14x14 cm). After native electrophoresis in a cold chamber, blue-native gels were fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie (0.025% Serva Blue G, 10% (v/v) acetic acid). Sample preparation for complexome profiling: Each lane of a BN-PAGE gel was cut into 48 equal fractions and collected in 96 filter well plates (30-40 µm PP/PE, Pall Corporation). The gel pieces were destained in 60% Methanol, 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 min at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C and alkylated for 45 min in 30 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were digested for 16 hours with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 37°C in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega) and 1 mM CaCl2. Peptides were eluted in 30% ACN and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96 well plate, dried in speed vac and resolved in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid. Mass spectrometry: Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% ACN, 0.1% formic acid to 25 % eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min followed by a second gradient to 50% B with a flow rate 300 nl/min and washout with 99% B for 5 min.  MS data were recorded by data-dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with a resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis MaxQuant v2.0.1.0 (Cox ela al., 2008), Proteins were identified using human reference proteome database UniProtKB with 79038 entries, released in 2/2022 and Acinetobacter baumannii with 3695 entries, released in 10/2021. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as a fixed modification on cysteines. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%. Sum of all IBAQ values of each samples were normalzed to control sample. Proteins were maximum normalized between samples. Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Complexome profiling, Host-pathogen interaction

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute for Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Göttig
Institute for Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany


