### Accession
PXD024578

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of the plant-pathogen interaction in resistant and susceptible peanut cultivars infected by Cylindrocladium parasiticum

### Description
Background: Cylindrocladium parasiticum Crous, Wingfield & Alfenas, the causal agent of Cylindrocladium black rot (CBR) of peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.), has leaded to economic losses in China. Learning about how peanut responds to C. parasiticum infection will be conducive to designing strategies for CBR control. However, the response of peanut plant to C. parasiticum is poorly understood.  Results: In this study, two contrasting peanut cultivars, T09 (C. parasiticum-resistant) and P562 (C. parasiticum-susceptible) were used for comparative analysis of protein profiles in the root segment of peanut plants in responses to C. parasiticum infection. Proteomic profiling identified 1647 and 391 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in A. hypogaea L. P562 and A. hypogaea L. T09, respectively, compared to controls. A total of 350 and 1095 DEPs were identified between A. hypogaea L. P562 and A. hypogaea L. T09 before and after 9 dpi, respectively. Functional categorization by GO annotation showed that C. parasiticum-responsive proteins were mainly involved in catalytic activity and binding. The results of KEGG pathway analysis indicated both resistant and susceptible peanut cultivars can regulate gene expression in the phenylpropanoid pathway, terpenoid backbone biosynthesis, SA, and JA pathways to induce defensive genes and protein expression which enhances plant defence capacity. However, the MAPK signal pathway was more pronounced in resistant peanut cultivar T09. We also observed an increase of CYP73A100 involved in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and flavonoid biosynthesis pathways in the susceptible peanut ecotype P562, while decrease in the resistant peanut ecotype T09, after 9 dpi. Additionally, there was a marked activation of brassinosteroid biosynthesis in the resistant T09, which indicated a possible involvement of activation of plant immune response in the resistant responses of peanut to C. parasiticum.  Conclusions: This study provides some insights into the molecular networks involved on cellular and physiological responses to C. parasiticum infestation.

### Sample Protocol
Two peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.) lines, T09 (a C. parasiticum-resistant peanut line isolated in previous research [18]) and P562 (a C. parasiticum-susceptible peanut line), were selected in this study. Seeds of two peanut lines (T09 and P562) were allowed to germinate in constant temperature incubator at 26 ± 1 °C. The seedlings were grown in greenhouse with 27 ± 1°C, 12 h photoperiod, and relative humidity of 60–80%. C. parasiticum Ci14017 (teleomorph Calonectria ilicicola), a highly virulent isolate of C. parasiticum, was isolated from the diseased peanut plant in Key Laboratory of Plant Pathology of Zhongkai University of Agriculture and Engineering (China), and used for fungal inoculation. The pathogenicity of the strain was investigated and confirmed through single cell culture by inoculation test (data not shown). Before inoculation, the rejuvenated strain was cultured on potato dextrose (PD) for 5 days at 25 °C, and a 6 mm diameter fungal sample obtained using a punch was resuspended with 100 ml sterile water (106/ml). Ten-day-old plants were inoculated with the conidial suspension. Control plants were inoculated with 100 ml sterile water. For each inbred line, the root segments from three treated seedlings were sampled at 9 days after inoculation. They were frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until protein extraction.  A. hypogaea L. T09 and A. hypogaea L. P562 plants were divided into two groups, and one was sampled directly (T, A. hypogaea L. T09 controls; P, A. hypogaea L. P562 controls), while the other was inoculated with C. parasiticum Ci14017 (TC, inoculated A. hypogaea L. T09; PC, inoculated A. hypogaea L. P562). Protein extraction At 9 days after Ci14017 infestation, six biological replicates of the root segments were sampled from T09 and P562 peanut plants, respectively. Approximately 0.5 g root segments were mixed with 4 volume of lysis buffer (1% TritonX-100, 10mM DTT,  1% PMSF, 50μM PR-619，3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA), ultrasonicated for 10 min, and then mixed with an equal volume of ice-cold phenol (Tris buffered, pH 8.0), and centrifuged at 20,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C to separate phenol and aqueous phases. After removed the upper aqueous phase, the phenol phase was extracted twice with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), then mixed with 5 volumes of cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol and left at -20 °C overnight to precipitate proteins. After centrifugation at 20,000 g for 20 min, the protein pellet was washed three times with 1 ml cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol and once with ethanol, and then resuspended in lysis buffer (8M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS). After centrifugation, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and the protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce). Extracted proteins were separated by 12% SDS-PAGE to evaluate the protein quality. In-Solution Protein Digestion Proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 56 °C, and then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted 1:2 with ultrapure water, 1 mM CaCl2 and digested with trypsin (Promega, V5113) at 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. After 4 h of digestion at 37 °C, samples were diluted 1:4 with the same buffers adding another aliquot of the same amount of trypsin and further incubated at room temperature overnight (~16 h). The resulting peptides were purified, lyophilized, and re-suspended in 25 µl of acetonitrile/formic acid (0.1%). Liquid Chromatography/Mass Spectrometric Analysis One microliter (1 µl, ~1 µg) of the re-suspended peptides were loaded on a C8 trap column (Thermo PepMap 100, 5 cm x 300 um) and then separated using a 400 nL/min 70-min gradient on a self-packed C18 column (75 um x 20 cm x 1.7 µm particles – Waters BEH C18) at 50°C in the CaptiveSpray (nanospray) source. The mobile phase consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B), and the LC gradient was for B: initial 6%, followed by 70 min ramp to 22%, 22-32% over 14 min, gradient of 32-80% over 3 min, hold at 80% for 3 min with a total run time of 90 min. MS + MS/MS data were acquired on a Bruker timsTOF PRO using the PASEF method over the 90 min gradient [19]. Capillary voltage was set to 1600 V, tims-on, PASEF-on (15 PASEF frames, overlap of 7; i.e. between MS acquisition), 100-1700 m/z mass range. Cycle time for 1 MS and 15 PASEF was set to 1.8 sec (approximately 120 MS/MS acquired per cycle).  For repeated acquisition: threshold 4X within 0.4 min (If the same peptide precursor is observed at a 4X intensity within the RT threshold, re-acquire MSMS). For active exclusion: release after 1 min (exclude from MS/MS the same peptide mass, notwithstanding the criteria above, and release after 1 min of elution) (Pepmap 100, Thermo Scientific; 5mm x 300um).

### Data Protocol
After mass spectrometric analyses, DTA files were created from raw files and were then searched against different databases for protein identification using MaxQuant1.5.2.8 software (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Munich, Germany). Identification of peptides and proteins using the Arachis hypogaea Gene from NCBI database was performed with full enzymatic cleavage, a maximum of two missed cleavages sites, 20 ppm first search tolerance, 20 ppm MS/MS tolerance, and 0.5 Da fragment ion tolerance. FDR estimation was enabled and a reversed decoy database was created and searched simultaneously. At least 2 peptides per protein and a strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% were required for positive protein hits. Proteins were retained for analysis when their spectral counts were ≥ 4 and their RSD among the biological replicates (n = 3) within each treatment less than 30%. Identified proteins were grouped based on common peptide segments. The signal intensity of a protein was calculated by normalizing the relative signal strength of a peptide segment. According to the relative signal strength of the protein, relative quantification was determined (i.e., the differential abundance of proteins between two different samples was calculated). Statistical and bioinformatic analyses  Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were analyzed using Gene Ontology (GO) annotation, UniProt databases (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/proteomes), and InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/), and qualitative and quantitative results were performed with further biological analysis. After C. parasiticum Ci14017 infection, proteins expressing a fold change (FC) greater than 2-fold () were identified as the differential proteins. The proteins were then analyzed the metabolic pathway enrichment by the KEGG pathway database (http://www.kegg.jp/kegg/mapper.html) as described previously [20]. KEGG pathways with corrected p-values <0.05 were considered to be significantly enriched in signaling pathway including proteins for which expression was altered in response to Ci14017. Heatmaps were constructed and visualized using the R Package pheatmap v2.0.3 (http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/cluster/). The prediction of protein-protein interaction was figured up by BLAST and R Package networkD3 (https://www.uniprot.org/blast/; http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/networkD3/.

### Publication Abstract
The <i>Cylindrocladium</i> black rot caused by <i>Calonectria ilicicola</i> is a destructive disease affecting a broad range of crops. Herein, we study virulence-associated genes of <i>C. ilicicola</i><i>Ci</i>14017 isolated from diseased peanut roots (<i>Arachis hypogaea</i> L.). <i>Ci</i>14017 was identified via phylogenetic analysis of the internal transcribed spacer region and standard Koch's postulate testing. Virulence-associated genes were based on genome analyses and comparative analysis of transcriptome and proteome profiles of sensitive and resistant peanut cultivars. <i>Ci</i>14017 identified as <i>C. ilicicola</i> has a 66 Mb chromosome with 18,366 predicted protein-coding genes. Overall, 46 virulence-associated genes with enhanced expression levels in the sensitive cultivars were identified. Sequence analysis indicated that the 46 gene products included two merops proteins, eight carbohydrate-active enzymes, seven cytochrome P450 enzymes, eight lipases, and 20 proteins with multi-conserved enzyme domains. The results indicate a complex infection mechanism employed by <i>Ci</i>14017 for causing <i>Cylindrocladium</i> black rot in peanuts.

### Keywords
Peanut; cylindrocladium parasiticum; proteome; plant defence

### Affiliations
Zhongkai University of Agriculture and Engineering
Innovative Institute for Plant Health, Zhongkai University of Agriculture and Engineering, Guangzhou, China

### Submitter
xinyu chen

### Lab Head
Dr Zhangyong Dong
Innovative Institute for Plant Health, Zhongkai University of Agriculture and Engineering, Guangzhou, China


