### Accession
PXD000297

### Title
Toxoplsama Gondii whole proteome study

### Description
MS/MS dataset for proteogenomics study of Toxoplasma gondii. The dataset was searched against the official v9 gene  model from ToxoDB, and the alternate panels of proteins predicted from RNA-SEQ evidences.

### Sample Protocol
Datasets of RH strain of T. gondii one-dimensional electrophoresis (1DE), 1DE of soluble and insoluble fractions (1DE SFIF), two-dimensional electrophoresis (2DE) and multidimensional protein identification technology (MudPIT) : T. gondii RH tachyzoites were separated either by 1D SDS-PAGE on a 12% (v/v) acrylamide gel or 2DE using pH 4-7 linear gradient and pH3-10 non-linear gradient strips. In total, 129 contiguous gel slices from the1DE experiment, 50 contiguous gel slices from the 1DE SFIF experiment and 1217 gel spots from the 2DE experiments were collected and digested with trypsin. The peptide mixtures were then analysed on a LC-MS/MS platform - an LTQ ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo-Electron, Hemel Hempstead, UK) coupled on-line to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Dionex Company, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) HPLC system. For the T. gondii MudPIT experiment, five tris-soluble replicates and four tris-insoluble samples of T. gondii RH tachyzoite were each subjected to MudPIT analysis using a quaternary Agilent 1100 series HPLC coupled to an LTQ-ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo, San Jose, CA, USA) with a nano-LC electrospray ionization source. Datasets of T. gondii “Orbitrap whole cell lysate” and “Orbitrap 1DE” :  In the “Orbitrap whole cell lysate” experiment, T. gondii RH tachyzoite proteins were solubilised and tryptically digested. In the Orbitrap 1DE experiment, T. gondii RH tachyzoites were separated by 1D SDS-PAGE on a 12% (v/v) acrylamide gel, from which 16 gel bands were excised and digested with trypsin. The digests were then pooled into eight samples for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide mixtures from both experiments were analyzed by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters MS technologies, Manchester, UK) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer equipped with the manufacturer’s nanospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
The data processing was performed using ProteoAnnotator - http://www.proteoannotator.org/

### Publication Abstract
Proteomics data can supplement genome annotation efforts, for example being used to confirm gene models or correct gene annotation errors. Here, we present a large-scale proteogenomics study of two important apicomplexan pathogens: Toxoplasma gondii and Neospora caninum. We queried proteomics data against a panel of official and alternate gene models generated directly from RNASeq data, using several newly generated and some previously published MS datasets for this meta-analysis. We identified a total of 201 996 and 39 953 peptide-spectrum matches for T. gondii and N. caninum, respectively, at a 1% peptide FDR threshold. This equated to the identification of 30 494 distinct peptide sequences and 2921 proteins (matches to official gene models) for T. gondii, and 8911 peptides/1273 proteins for N. caninum following stringent protein-level thresholding. We have also identified 289 and 140 loci for T. gondii and N. caninum, respectively, which mapped to RNA-Seq-derived gene models used in our analysis and apparently absent from the official annotation (release 10 from EuPathDB) of these species. We present several examples in our study where the RNA-Seq evidence can help in correction of the current gene model and can help in discovery of potential new genes. The findings of this study have been integrated into the EuPathDB. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD000297and PXD000298.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Proteogenomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Integrative Biology
Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Ritesh Krishna

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Jones
Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool


