### Accession
PXD006868

### Title
A linear diubiquitin-based probe for efficient and selective detection of the deubiquitinating enzyme OTULIN

### Description
The methionine1 (M1)-specific deubiquitinase OTULIN acts as a negative regulator of NF-ΚB signaling and immune homeostasis. By replacing G76 in distal ubiquitin by dehydroalanine we designed the diubiquitin (diUb) probe UbG76Dha-Ub (OTULIN ABP) that couples to the catalytic site of OTULIN and thereby captures OTULIN in its active conformation. OTULIN ABP displays high selectivity for OTULIN and is not labeling to other M1-specific DUB including CYLD. In fact, labeling of USP5/IsopeptidaseT was the only detectable cross-reactivity. Further, ATP-dependent association of UbG76Dha-Ub probe with E1 activating enzymes induces assembly of polyOTULIN ABP chains, but USP5 labelling and E1 binding was abolished by deleting the C-terminal glycine in proximal ubiquitin (UbG76Dha-UbΔG76: OTULIN ABPΔG76). Pull-downs demonstrate that substrate-bound OTULIN associates with the linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex (LUBAC). Thus, we present a highly selective DUB for OTULIN that will facilitate studying the cellular function of this critical deubiquitinase.

### Sample Protocol
OTULIN-probe immunoprecipitated samples eluates were diluted to 175 µl with ultra-pure water and reduced with 5 µl DTT for 30 minutes at room temperature. Samples were alkylated with 20 µl iodoacetamide (200 mM in 0.1 M Tris, pH 7.8) for 30 minutes at room temperature, followed by protein precipitation using a double methanol/chloroform extraction method. Protein samples were treated with 600 µl Methanol, 150 µl chloroform and 450 µl water, followed by vigorous vortexing. Samples were centrifuged at 17,000 g for 3 minutes, and the resultant upper aqueous phase was removed. Proteins were pelleted following addition of 450 µl water and centrifugation at 17,000 g for 6 minutes. The supernatant was removed, and the extraction process repeated. Following the second extraction process, precipitated proteins were re-suspended in 50 µl Urea (6M) and diluted to < 1M urea with 250 µl ultra-pure water. Protein digestion was carried out with 0.6 µg trypsin (3 µl; 20 µg in 100 µl Trypsin resuspension buffer) at 37 °C overnight. Following digestion, samples were acidified with 1% formic acid and desalted on C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (SOLA HRP C18 Cartridge), dried and re-suspended in 2 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for analysis by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed in biological quadruplicate using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoultra high pressure reverse phase chromatography coupled on-line to a Q Exactive High Field (HF) mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were separated on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (500 mm x 75 µm, 2µm particle size, Thermo Scientific) over a 60 minute gradient of 2-35 % acetonitrile in 5 % DMSO, 0.1% formic acid at 250 nl/min. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z and the top 12 most abundant precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files, were searched against the UniProtKB human sequence data base (retrieved 15.10.2014) and label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant Software (v1.5.2). Search parameters included carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications, 1 missed cleavage, matching between runs, and LFQ quantitation was performed using unique peptides. Label-free interaction data analysis was performed using Perseus (v.1.5.5.3) and volcano plots were generated using FDR=0.01 and s0=2.2 as cutoff parameters.

### Publication Abstract
The methionine 1 (M1)-specific deubiquitinase (DUB) OTULIN acts as a negative regulator of nuclear factor &#x3ba;B signaling and immune homeostasis. By replacing Gly76 in distal ubiquitin (Ub) by dehydroalanine we designed the diubiquitin (diUb) activity-based probe Ub<sub>G76Dha</sub>-Ub (OTULIN activity-based probe [ABP]) that couples to the catalytic site of OTULIN and thereby captures OTULIN in its active conformation. The OTULIN ABP displays high selectivity for OTULIN and does not label other M1-cleaving DUBs, including CYLD. The only detectable cross-reactivities were the labeling of USP5 (Isopeptidase T) and an ATP-dependent assembly of polyOTULIN ABP chains via Ub-activating E1 enzymes. Both cross-reactivities were abolished by the removal of&#xa0;the C-terminal Gly in the ABP's proximal Ub, yielding the specific OTULIN probe Ub<sub>G76Dha</sub>-Ub<sub>&#x394;G76</sub> (OTULIN ABP&#x394;G76). Pull-downs demonstrate that substrate-bound OTULIN associates with the linear ubiquitin chain assembly complex (LUBAC). Thus, we present a highly selective ABP for OTULIN that will facilitate studying the cellular function of this essential DUB.

### Keywords
Human, Otulin

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford  OX3 7FZ, UK
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt M Kessler
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford  OX3 7FZ, UK


