### Accession
PXD022172

### Title
Characterization of m-lipin using HDX-MS

### Description
This project consists of two experiments. The first is mapping the binding interface between the isolated m-lip domain of mouse lipin and liposomes. The second experiments is mapping the binding interface between full length mouse lipin and liposomes. Looking at the isolated m-lip domain, we found that residues 470-490 and 500-550 showed decreases in exchange upon liposome binding. The full-length lipin experiment saw decreases in exchnage in these same regions, as well as in the very C-terminus and very N-terminus regions of the protein. An order-disorder experiment was done on full length lipin where the protein was exposed to a short pulse of deuterium and compared to the fully-deuterated protein. In this instance, we established that the majority of the protein is relatively disordered and does not have secondary structure with high stability

### Sample Protocol
HDX-MS reactions were performed in a similar manner as is outlined in previous publications. (PMID: 29632185). For the m-lip domain experiment, HDX reactions were conducted in a final reaction volume of 20 µL with a mouse lipin-1 M-Lip domain concentration of 24 pmol (final 1.2 µM). Prior to the addition of deuterated solvent, 1 µL of the m-lip protein was allowed to incubate with either 1 µL of 4 mg/mL lipid vesicles (20 mol% POPA, 60 mol% POPC, 20 mol% POPE) or 1 µL of the corresponding lipid buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl). After a two minute incubation period, 18 µL D 2 O buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 94% D 2 O (v/v)) was added with a final %D2O was 84.9%. The reaction allowed to proceed for 3s, 30s, 300s, or 3000s at 18°C before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer, resulting in a final concentration of 0.6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% FA post quench. For the full-length m-lipin experiments, HDX reactions were conducted in a final reaction volume of 20 μL with lipin concentration of 12.6 pmol (final 0.63 μM). Prior to the addition of deuterated solvent, 1 μL of lipin was allowed to incubate with either 2 μL of 2 mM liposomes(20% phosphatidic acid, 80% phosphatidylcholine) or 2 μL of the corresponding lipid buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 0.1 M NaCl, 10 mM bME). After the two minute incubation period, 17 μL D2O buffer (20mM pH 7 HEPES, 100mM NaCl, 0.5 mM TCEP, 94% D2O) was added with a final %D2O of 80.1% (v/v). The reaction was allowed to proceed for 3s, 30s, 300s, or 3000s at 18°C before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer. All conditions and timepoints were created and run in triplicate. Samples were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until injection onto the ultra-performance liquid chromatography system for proteolytic cleavage, peptide separation, and injection onto a QTOF for mass analysis. For the order-disorder experiment, HDX reactions were conducted in 20 µl reaction volumes with a final concentration of 0.63 µM full length Lipin per sample. Exchange was carried out in triplicate for a single time point (3 s at 4 °C). Hydrogen deuterium exchange was initiated by the addition of 18 µl of D 2 O buffer solution (20 mM HEPES pH 7, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM TCEP) to the protein solution, to give a final concentration of 84.8% D 2 O. Exchange was terminated by the addition of acidic quench buffer at a final concentration 0.6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid. Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen at -80 °C. Fully deuterated samples were generated by first denaturing the protein in 6M guanidine for 1 hour at RT. Following denaturing, 18 μL of D2O bufferwas added to the denatured protein and allowed to incubate for 15 minutes at RT before quenching.

### Data Protocol
Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system kept in a cold box at 2 °C. The protein was run over either one (Trajan, ProDx Protease columns, PDX. PP01-F32) or two immobilized pepsin columns (Applied Biosystems; Porosyme 2-3131-00) at 200 μL/min for 3 min, and the peptides were collected onto a VanGuard Precolumn trap (Waters). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7 μm particle, 100 × 1 mm 2  C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 5%-36% Buffer B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid, Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 16 min. MS experiments were performed on an Impact II QTOF (Bruker) acquiring over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200 °C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV. Peptides were identified by running tandem MS (MS/MS) experiments run in data-dependent acquisition mode. The resulting MS/MS datasets were analyzed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS) and a false discovery rate was set at 1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. HDExaminer Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state and presence of overlapping peptides. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. The results for the experiment comparing lipin with and without liposomes are presented as relative levels of deuterium incorporation, and the only control for back exchange was the level of deuterium present in the buffer (either 84.9% or 80.1%). The fully deuterated sample in the order-disorder experiment allowed for a back exchange correction in this specific experiment during digestion and separation. Differences in exchange in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: &gt;5% change in exchange, &gt;0.4 Da difference in exchange, and a p-value &lt;0.01 using a two-tailed Student’s t-test. All compared samples were set within the same experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Phospholipid synthesis and fat storage as triglycerides are regulated by lipin phosphatidic acid phosphatases (PAPs), whose enzymatic PAP function requires association with cellular membranes. Using hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, we find mouse lipin 1 binds membranes through an N-terminal amphipathic helix, the Ig-like domain and HAD phosphatase catalytic core, and a middle lipin (M-Lip) domain that is conserved in mammalian and mammalian-like lipins. Crystal structures of the M-Lip domain reveal a previously unrecognized protein fold that dimerizes. The isolated M-Lip domain binds membranes both in vitro and in cells through conserved basic and hydrophobic residues. Deletion of the M-Lip domain in lipin 1 reduces PAP activity, membrane association, and oligomerization, alters subcellular localization, diminishes acceleration of adipocyte differentiation, but does not affect transcriptional co-activation. This establishes the M-Lip domain as a dimeric protein fold that binds membranes and is critical for full functionality of mammalian lipins.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, M-lipin, Mass spectrometry, M-lip domain

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr John Burke
University of Victoria


