### Accession
PXD036892

### Title
Infection cycle and phylogeny of a Polinton-like-virus virophage infecting Phaeocystis globosa

### Description
Virophages are small dsDNA viruses dependent on a nucleocytoplasmic large-DNA virus infection of a cellular host for replication. Putative virophages infecting algal hosts are classified together with Polinton-like viruses, transposable elements widely found in algal genomes, yet the lack of isolated strains raises questions about their existence as independent entities. We isolated and characterized a virophage (PgVV-14T) co-infecting Phaeocystis globosa with the Phaeocystis globosa virus-14T (PgV-14T).

### Sample Protocol
Proteome analysis was performed to free purified viral particles, infected and control cells. For viral particles three independent P. globosa cultures (20L, 20L and 4L) were grown until late exponential phase and infected with three independent PgV and PgVV lysates. An extra lysate of 10L was filtered through 0.45 µm and 0.2 µm to obtain a PgVV pure sample. Samples were prepared following the protocol described above for electron microscopy lysates preparation. For infection experiments, three time points were used for proteomic analysis, representing the early (4 hrs), middle (6 hrs) and late (8 hrs) stages of infection. For a preliminary experiment, one replicate at 6 hrs post-infection was fractionated in a gel and seven fractions were run and analyzed separately, while a viral lysate (4L) was cut into three fractions. All other samples were analyzed as a whole since the fractionation led to little improvement in resolution. Overall, three purified mixed viral lysates, one PgVV only lysate, three replicates for infected cells at each time point and one replicate for each time point of control cells were run in the mass spectrometer.  Frozen cells were resuspended with Tris-HCL pH 7.4 with a final concentration of 50 mM and 5% SDS and incubated at RT for 30-60 minutes. Cells were disrupted by beat beating for 2 minutes using 0.4-0.6 mm glass beads (Sartorius). Beads were pelleted by centrifugation (21,000 × g, 5 min, RT). Sonication of the samples was performed with a UP200St ultrasonic processor connected to Vialtweeter (Hielscher, Germany) using a cycle of 80% with amplitude of 100% for 10 min. The samples were centrifuged (21,000 × g, 10 min, RT) and 90% of the sample volume was recovered. One ml of purified viral particles were mixed with Tris-HCl pH 7.4 to a final concentration of 50 mM and 5% SDS, and incubated 60 min at RT. Protein SDS PAGE-sample buffer with 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol was added to 10 ug viral lysates, control and infection samples, and incubated overnight at RT. Samples were run in a GeneScript gel (4-20%). Purified viral lysates were prepared and analyzed following in-gel digestion as described before (PMID: 21427232). Infected and control samples were digested in-solution using S-TRAP™ (Protifi, USA). Seventy five microgram of each lysate were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) 1:100 ratio for 12 hours at 37°C. The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips or TopTip™ (PolyLC, USA) and eluted with 50 μL of 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA, dried to completeness and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA. Desalted peptides of the different samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using Q-Exacitive-Plus or Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to nano HPLC. The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 × 180 mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed-phase material (Dr. Maisch; GmbH, Germany). The peptides of in-gel digested samples (purified viruses) were eluted with a linear 60 min gradient of 5–28%, followed by a 15 min gradient of 28–95%, and a 10 min wash at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water (at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min). The peptides of in-solution digestion (infected and control samples) were eluted with a linear 120 min gradient of 6–30%, followed by a 15 min gradient of 30–95%, and a 15 min wash at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water (at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min). Mass spectrometry analysis by Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was in positive mode using a range of m/z 300–1800, MS1 resolution 70,000 with AGC target: 3E6; maximum IT: 20  ms. These were followed by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan. MS2 scans were done at 17,500 resolution, AGC target 1E5, maximum IT: 100msec, isolation window: 1.4 m/z; and HCD Collision Energy: 25%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds and the “exclude isotopes” option was activated. Mass spectrometry analysis by Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was in positive mode using a range of m/z 300–1800, MS1 resolution 120,000 with AGC target: 3E6; maximum IT: 20  ms. These were followed by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the 20 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan. MS2 scans were done at 15,000 resolution, AGC target 1E5, maximum IT: 60msec, isolation window: 1.3 m/z; and HCD Collision Energy: 27%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 seconds and the “exclude isotopes” option was activated.

### Data Protocol
Infected cultures and purified viral particles samples MS/MS spectra were analyzed with MSFragger version 3.5, via FragPipe version 18.0 (https://fragpipe.nesvilab.org/) while using IonQuant (version 1.8) and Philosopher (version 4.3). The searches were conducted using Fragpipe LFQ-MBR configuration. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm, cleavage type set to “Enzymatic”, the enzyme was defined as strict trypsin and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptide length was set to be between 7 to 50 amino acids and using default settings for label-free quantification. The searches were conducted against a database composed of viral proteins (PgVV, PgV), proteins encoded in the P. globosa integrated PLVs and P. globosa proteins. The set of proteins representing P. globosa was created by combining amino acid sequences encoded in the transcriptomes of three closely related strains: RCC851 (NCBI TSA HBRH00000000), RCC678 (HBRF00000000) and RCC739 (HBRB00000000). ORFs were predicted with TransDecoder v. 5.5.0 (https://github.com/TransDecoder) and the protein sequences were clustered at 100% identity level with cdhit v. 4.8.1. Orthogroups were identified with ProteinOrtho v. 6.0.25] using diamond v. 2.0.6.144  identity threshold of 90% and coverage threshold of 25%. Representative proteins were selected from orthogroups appearing in at least two of the three strains.

### Publication Abstract
Virophages are small double stranded DNA (dsDNA) viruses that can only replicate in a host by co-infecting with another virus. Marine algae are commonly associated with virophage-like elements such as Polinton-like viruses (PLVs) that remain largely uncharacterized. Here we isolated a PLV that co-infects the alga Phaeocystis globosa with the Phaeocystis globosa virus-14T (PgV-14T), a close relative of the "Phaeocystis globosa virus-virophage" genomic sequence. We name this PLV 'Gezel-14T. Gezel is phylogenetically distinct from the Lavidaviridae family where all known virophages belong. Gezel-14T co-infection decreases the fitness of its viral host by reducing burst sizes of PgV-14T, yet insufficiently to spare the cellular host population. Genomic screens show Gezel-14T-like PLVs integrated into Phaeocystis genomes, suggesting that these widespread viruses are capable of integration into cellular host genomes. This system presents an opportunity to better understand the evolution of eukaryotic dsDNA viruses as well as the complex dynamics and implications of viral parasitism.

### Keywords
Polinton-like-virus virophage, Phaeocystis globosa

### Affiliations
Technion
Oded Beja, Ph.D., Professor, The Louis and Lyra Richmond Chair in Life Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Oded Beja
Oded Beja, Ph.D., Professor, The Louis and Lyra Richmond Chair in Life Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel


