### Accession
PXD022816

### Title
RawBeans: a simple, vendor independent, raw-data quality control tool

### Description
Every laboratory performing mass spectrometry based proteomics strives to generate high quality data. Among the many factors that influence the outcome of any experiment in proteomics is performance of the LC-MS system, which should be monitored continuously. This process is termed quality control (QC). We present an easy to use, rapid tool, which produces a visual, HTML based report that includes the key parameters needed to monitor LC-MS system perfromance. The tool, named RawBeans, can generate a report for individual files, or for a set of samples from a whole experiment. We anticipate it will help proteomics users and experts evaluate raw data quality, independent of data processing. The tool is available here: https://bitbucket.org/incpm/prot-qc/downloads.

### Sample Protocol
The Pierce Thermo digestion standard, HeLa, was diluted to 50ng/uL with 97:3+0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Data was imported to RawBeans verison 1.5.1. It was also processed with MetaMorpheus in order to upload the data to ProteomeExchange. These results were not part of the manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Every laboratory performing mass-spectrometry-based proteomics strives to generate high-quality data. Among the many factors that impact the outcome of any experiment in proteomics is the LC-MS system performance, which should be monitored within each specific experiment and also long term. This process is termed quality control (QC). We present an easy-to-use tool that rapidly produces a visual, HTML-based report that includes the key parameters needed to monitor the LC-MS system performance, with a focus on monitoring the performance within an experiment. The tool, named RawBeans, generates a report for individual files or for a set of samples from a whole experiment. We anticipate that it will help proteomics users and experts evaluate raw data quality independent of data processing. The tool is available at https://bitbucket.org/incpm/prot-qc/downloads. The mass-spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD022816.

### Keywords
Qc, Quality control

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Yishai Levin
Weizmann Institute of Science


