### Accession
PXD037111

### Title
Quantitative proteomic dataset of  the moss Physcomitrium patens PpRALF knockout lines

### Description
RAPID ALKALINIZATION FACTOR (RALF) peptides are shown to regulate multiple physiological processes in plants, including modulation of immune response in angiosperms.  This family of cysteine-rich peptide hormones has considerably expanded during land plant evolution, but the ancestral roles of RALF peptides in stress response remains poorly understood. Here, we used the moss Physcomitrium patens as a model to gain insight into the function of PpRALF peptides in response to abiotic and biotic stress factors in non-vascular plants. The quantitative proteomic analysis revealed cooperative down-regulation of M6 metalloproteases and membrane proteins, including those involved in stress response, in PpRALF1, 2 and 3 knockout (KO) lines.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted by phenol extraction method (Faurobert et al., 2007). Plant tissue was homogenized in ice-cold extraction buffer (500 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 50 mM EDTA, 700 mM sucrose, 100 mM КCl, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 mM DTT), followed by 10 min incubation on ice. An equal volume of ice-cold Tris–HCl (pH 8.0)-saturated phenol was added, and the mixture was vortexed and incubated for 10 min with shaking. After centrifugation (10 min, 5500 × g, 4°C), the phenol phase was collected and re-extracted with an extraction buffer. Proteins were precipitated from the final phenol phase with four volumes of ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol overnight at −20°C. The pellets were rinsed with ice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol three times and with ice-cold acetone once and then dried. Resulting pellet dissolved in 8 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 10 mM Tris. Proteins were quantified by Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA USA). The 100 µg of proteins were reduced by 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 50 ˚C  and alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature. Proteins were dissolved in five times in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested by 1 ug sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37 ˚C overnight. Reaction was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to 1%. 20 µg of each sample was desalted by Empore octadecyl C18 extraction disks (Supelco, USA) and then was dried in a vacuum concentrator. iTRAQ  labeling (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) was conducted according to manufacturer’s manual.  Proteins were labelled with the iTRAQ tags as follows: Wild type – 113, 114, 115 isobaric tags; RALF1, RALF2 or RALF3 KO lines – 116, 117, 118 ones.

### Data Protocol
The database search was performed with the following parameters: a fragmentation mass tolerance of 0.05 Da; parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm; fixed modification – carbamidomethylation; variable modifications -  oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), and acetylation (Protein N-term). The results were filtered by a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PEAKS Q was used for iTRAQ quantification. Normalization was performed by averaging the abundance of all peptides. Median values were used for averaging. Differentially expressed proteins were filtered if their fold change was greater than 1.2 and significance threshold 15. contained two unique peptides with a statistical P-value (ANOVA test with Benjamini and Hochberg FDR correction) below 0.05, variance homogeneity test (P-value > 0.05), and normal distribution test (P-value > 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ralf peptides, Proteome, Itraq

### Affiliations
IBCH RAS

### Submitter
Igor Fesenko

### Lab Head
Dr Igor Fesenko
IBCH RAS


