### Accession
PXD037289

### Title
Proteins associated wth Trypanosoma brucei HNRNPF/H

### Description
We aimed to find proteins associated with HNRNPH in bloodstream-form _Trypanosoma brucei_. We integrated a sequence encoding a cleavable TAP (Tandem Affinity Purification) tag  into the genome upstream of, and in frame with, one _HNRNPH_ gene. The other allele was deleted. TAP-HNRNPH was purifed from triplicate lysates as shown under "Sample processing protocol". Sample processing protocol (30-5000chracters) The TAP-HNRNPH was bound to IgG beads, then released with Tobacco Etch Virus (TEV) protease. TAP-CFP served as the negative control.  The His-tagged TEV protease was then removed using Ni-NTA-magnetic beads. Eluted proteins were separated on a 1.5 mm NuPAGE™ Novex™ 4-12 % Bis-Tris protein gel. For details see doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0258903

### Sample Protocol
For tandem affinity purification from bloodstream forms, approximately 1x1010 trypanosomes expressing TAP tagged protein were harvested and used for tandem affinity purification as described in PMID: 11447124. Affinity purifications from procyclic forms were done using cells expressing V5 in situ tagged proteins. Briefly, 1x 109 cells were harvested washed in PBS supplemented with protease inhibitors. Cell lysis was done by adding buffer with low salt concentration (20mM Tris pH 7.5, 150mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2 , 0.05% IGEPAL, 0,5 mM DTT) supplemented with 10 ug/ml of aprotonin and 10 ug/ml of leupeptin. Cells were pipetted up and down, passed 20 times through a 21G x 11/2 needle and 20 times through a 27G x ¾ needle. The sample was clarified and the supernatant incubated with V5 magnetic beads (20 mg/mL of Dynabeads® M-280 Tosylactivated, Invitrogen, coupled with Anti V5-Tag Antibody, clone SV5-Pk1, Bio-Rad). Bound proteins were neutrally eluted with V5 peptide (V7754-4MG, SIGMA). The elute was run 2 cm into a 1.5 mm NuPAGE™ Novex™ 4-12% Bis-Tris protein gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific), stained with Coomassie blue and distained with distaining solution (10% acetic acid and 50% methanol). Nanoflow LC-MS2 analysis was performed at the ZMBH mass spectrometry facility, with an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system directly coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both Thermo-Fischer, Bremen, Germany). Samples were delivered to an in-house packed analytical column (inner diameter 75 µm x 20 cm; CS – Chromatographie Service GmbH, Langerwehe, Germany) filled with 1.9 µm ReprosilPur-AQ 120 ,C18 material (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in datadependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2.

### Data Protocol
For data analyses, the MaxQuant platform (version 1.5.3.30) was used for peak list picking, protein identification and validation. Protein identification was based on the T. brucei brucei 927 annotated protein database, release 9.0 from TriTrypDB. For validation, a minimum of seven amino acids for peptide length and two peptides per protein were required. In addition, a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01 was applied at both peptide and protein levels. Peptides shared between orthologues were assigned to the same protein group. Statistical analysis of the results was performed using the Perseus toolbox (version 1.6.2.1). Ratios were calculated from label-free quantification intensities. Missing values were imputed using the Perseus default settings of imputation (mean down shift = 0.3, standard deviation down shift = 1.8). A two sample t-test was performed comparing the natural logarithm of the intensities from the experiments and the control groups. To confirm the specificities of the purifications, data from TAP-GFP or V5-GFP purifications were used as controls for bloodstream- and procyclic-form purifications, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trypanosoma brucei; mrna; rna-binding protein; trans splicing; mrna decay

### Affiliations
University Heidelberg, ZMBH, Mass spectromerty and proteomics, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
University Heidelberg, ZMBH, Mass spectromerty and proteomics, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


