### Accession
PXD006121

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis of Neisseria meningitidis wildtype and dprA null mutant strains links DNA processing to pilus biogenesis

### Description
DNA processing chain A (DprA) is a DNA binding protein which is ubiquitous in bacteria and required for DNA transformation. However, the interaction of DprA with competence proteins and recombination is poorly understood.  Therefore, the proteomes of whole Neisseria meningitidis (Nm) wildtype and dprA mutant cells were compared. Such a comparative proteomic analysis increases our understanding of the interactions of DprA with other Nm components, and may elucidate its potential role beyond DNA processing in transformation. Using label-free quantitative proteomics, a total of 1057 unique Nm proteins were identified out of which 100 were quantified as differentially abundant (P ≤ 0.05 and fold change ≥ |2|) in the dprA null mutant. Proteins involved in homologous recombination (RecA, UvrD and HolA), pilus biogenesis (PilG, PilT1, PilT2, PilM, PilO, PilQ, PilF and PilE), and cell division, including core energy metabolism and response to oxidative stress were downregulated in dprA null mutant Nm. Immunoblotting was employed to validate the differences observed in two selected proteins. The analysis revealed reduced amounts of PilG in the dprA null mutant and reduced amounts of DprA in the Nm pilG null mutant. In conclusion, DprA interacts with proteins essential for Nm DNA recombination in transformation, pilus biogenesis and other functions associated with the inner membrane. Inverse downregulation of Nm DprA and PilG expression in the corresponding mutants indicate a link between DNA processing and pilus biogenesis demonstrated for the first time.

### Sample Protocol
A total cellular protein lysate were extracted using a lysis buffer containing 2% SDS, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 tablet per 50 ml EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail  and 1 tablet per 10 ml PhosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail. Proteins were pre-fractionated by 1.0 mm, 4%-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gel, at 80 V for 5 min followed by 20 min at 200 V. Colloidal Blue stained gel lane was divided into 6 fractions, and each fraction was subjected to in-gel reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Peptide products were analyzed by nano-LC–MS/MS using a Q Exactive hybrid quadropole-orbitrap mass spectrometer interfaced with an EASY-spray ion source (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific) and coupled to a nano-LC HPLC (UltiMate 3000, Dionex). Peptides were injected in triplicates into a pre-analytic column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75µm x 2cm, nanoviper, C18, 3µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC, C18, 2µm, 100Å, 50µm x 15cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 120 min solvent gradient and flow rate of 0.3 μL/min at 60°C. The gradient used was from 2% to 30% solvent B for 90 min followed by 30% to 45% solvent B from 90 to 100 min. Thereafter the gradient was kept at 90% solvent B from 100 to 120 min, using 0.1% formic acid (FA) in 3% acetonitrile (ACN) as solvent A and 0.1% FA in 97% ACN as solvent B (FA: LC-MS grade, Fluka; ACN: LC-MS grade, Merck Laboratories). The MS instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. The full MS scans were acquired at 70K resolution, with automatic gain control target of 1 × 106 ions, maximum injection time of 200 ms and MS scan range 300-1800 m/z. Higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) was used for peptide fragmentation with normalized collision energy set to 28. The MS/MS scans were performed using a data-dependent top10 method at a resolution of 17.5K with an automatic gain control target of 5×104 ions at maximum injection time of 100 ms and isolation window of 2.0 m/z units. An under fill ratio of 10% and dynamic exclusion duration of 30s were applied. Generation of raw files into MS/MS peak lists and quantifications were performed with MaxQuant (MQ) software package (version 1.4.0.5) as described by Cox and Mann (2008). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the UniProtKB FASTA database for the Nm serogroup B (strain MC58) (2001 entries, downloaded from www.UniProt.org April 2016) using reverse decoy databases and a selection of known contaminants provided by MQ. The following parameters were applied for the database search: Enzyme specificity was set as Trypsin/P, and a maximum of two missed cleavages and a mass tolerance of 0.5 Da for fragment ion were applied. The ‘re-quantify’ and ‘match between runs’ options were utilized with a retention time alignment window of 3 min. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and acetylation of the protein N-terminus, conversion of N-terminal glutamine and glutamic acid to pyroglutamic acid and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications for database searches. The first search for precursor ions was performed with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for calibration, while 6 ppm was applied for the main search. For protein identification, at least 1 unique peptide was required per protein group. Minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was required for identification. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 0.01 (1%) was set at both the peptide spectra matches and the protein group levels. For all other parameters, the default setting was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pilg, Neisseria meningitides, Proteomics, Dna processing, Pilus biogenesis, Dpra, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Genome dynamics group, Oslo University Hospital
Department of Microbiology, Institute of Clinical medicine, University of Oslo, Norway.

### Submitter
Shewit Kalayou

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Tone Tønjum
Department of Microbiology, Institute of Clinical medicine, University of Oslo, Norway.


