### Accession
PXD020751

### Title
Host-interactor screens of Phytophthora infestans RXLR proteins

### Description
Pathogens modulate host cell structure and function by secreting effectors into host tissues. Effectors generally function by associating with host molecules and co-opting or perturbing their activities. This study aimed at identifying the plant proteins associated with the RXLR class of host-translocated effectors of the potato blight pathogen Phytophthora infestans in order to identify the host processes targeted by these effectors. We carried out an in planta screen by transiently expressing P. infestans RXLR effectors in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves followed by co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). This generated an effector-host protein interactome matrix of 59 P. infestans RXLR effectors x 586 N. benthamiana proteins. Classification of the host interactors into putative functional categories revealed over 35 biological processes that are candidate effector-targeted pathways. We further characterized the PexRD12/31 family of RXLR-WY effectors, which associate and co-localize with components of vesicle trafficking machinery. One member of this family, PexRD31, increased the number of GFP-2xFYVE labeled vesicles in N. benthamiana cells. We also noted an accumulation of FYVE vesicles in areas of N. benthamiana leaves colonized by P. infestans indicating that this pathogen may enhance endosomal trafficking. We hope that the interactome dataset we generated will serve as a useful community resource for functional studies of P. infestans effectors.

### Sample Protocol
We performed anti-GFP immunoafinity enrichment of GFP-tagged effector and subsequent mass spectrometry detection of effector interacting protein candidates therein, as previously reported (Petre et al., 2015), using GFP_Trap_A beads (Chromotek, Munich, Germany), a hybrid mass spectrometer LTQ-Orbitrap XL (ThermoFisher Scientific, Carlsbad, California, USA) and a nanoflow-UHPLC system (NanoAcquity Waters Corp., Burnsville, Minnesota, USA). We used 0.075mm x 250mm 1.7um beads BEH column with 0.180mm x 20mm Symmetry C18 trap column in vented configuation.  Sample preparation for mass spectrometry. Affinity purified proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. Samples for liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis were prepared by excising bands from one-dimensional SDS-PAGE gels stained with Instant Blue (Expedeon, Cambridge). The gel slices were destained in 50% acetonitrile (ACN), and cysteine residues modified by a 30-min reduction in 10 mM DTT, followed by a 30-min alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. All the above-mentioned solutions used 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) as a buffer. After extensive washing with destaining solution (50:50 [vol/vol] ACN and 50 mM ABC) and 100% ACN, gel pieces were incubated with trypsin (Promega, Charbonnières, France) in 50 mM ABC and 5% ACN in water at 37°C overnight. Peptides were recovered by triple extraction with 5% formic acid (FA) and 50% ACN, were evaporated to dryness, and were dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a hybrid mass spectrometer LTQ-Orbitrap XL (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) and a nanoflow-ultra-high performance liquid chromatography system (nanoAcquity; Waters Corp.) The peptides were applied to reverse phase trap column (Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm; Waters Corp., Milford, MA, U.S.A.) connected to an analytical column (BEH 130 C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm; Waters Corp.) in vented configuration using nano-T coupling union in 0.1% ACN in 0.1% FA (solvent B). Peptides were eluted in a gradient of 3 to 40% of solvent B of acid over 50 min, followed by gradient of 40 to 60% of solvent B over 3 min at a flow rate of 250 nl per minute at 40°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with nano-electrospray ion source with ID 0.02 mm fused silica emitter (New Objective; Scientific Instrument Services, Inc., Ringoes, NJ, U.S.A.). Voltage +2 kV was applied via platinum wire held in a PEEK T-shaped coupling union. Transfer capillary temperature was set to 200°C, no sheath gas, and the focusing voltages in factory default setting were used. The Orbitrap full mass scan with 60,000 resolution at 400 m/z, range 300 to 2,000 m/z was used, automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 1,000,000 counts, and maximum inject time to 1,000 ms. In the linear ion trap, MS/MS spectra were triggered with data-dependent acquisition method for the five most intense ions. The threshold for triggering collision induced dissociation (CID) was 1,000 counts, normal scan rate, AGC accumulation target was set to 30,000 counts, and maximum inject time to 150 ms. A data-dependent algorithm was used to collect as many tandem spectra as possible from all masses detected in master scan in the Orbitrap analyzer. Orbitrap prescan functionality, isolation width 2 m/z, and collision energy set to 35% were used. The selected ions were then fragmented in the ion trap using CID. Dynamic exclusion was enabled, allowing for one repeat, 60 s, and m/z window ± 10 ppm from measured precursor masses, and with a maximal size of dynamic exclusion list of 500 items. Chromatography function to trigger a MS/MS event close to the peak summit was used with correlation set to 0.9 and expected peak width set to 7s. Charge state screening enabled allowed only charge states higher than 2+ to be selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Monoisotopic mass recognition was on.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists in format of Mascot generic files were prepared from raw data using Proteome Discoverer v1.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific) that (if required) were concatenated using in house–developed Perl script. Peak picking settings were as follows: m/z range set to 300 to 5,000, minimum number of peaks in a spectrum was set to 1, S/N threshold for Orbitrap spectra was set to 1.5, and automatic treatment of unrecognized charge states was used. Peak lists were searched on Mascot server v.2.4.1 (Matrix Science, Boston) against a Nicotiana benthamiana database with added constructs and typical proteomics contaminants such as keratins, trypsin, and others. Tryptic peptides only, up to two possible miscleavages and charge states +2, +3, +4, were allowed in the search. The modifications included in the search were oxidized methionine as variable modification and carbamidomethylated cysteine as static modification. Data were searched with a monoisotopic precursor and fragment ions mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively. Mascot results were combined in Scaffold v.4 (Proteome Software, Inc., Portland, OR, U.S.A.). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability (false discovery rate [FDR] < 0.17) by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability (FDR < 0.1) and contained at least two identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Pathogens modulate plant cell structure and function by secreting effectors into host tissues. Effectors typically function by associating with host molecules and modulating their activities. This study aimed to identify the host processes targeted by the RXLR class of host-translocated effectors of the potato blight pathogen Phytophthora infestans. To this end, we performed an in planta protein-protein interaction screen by transiently expressing P. infestans RXLR effectors in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves followed by coimmunoprecipitation and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. This screen generated an effector-host protein interactome matrix of 59 P. infestans RXLR effectors x 586 N. benthamiana proteins. Classification of the host interactors into putative functional categories revealed over 35 biological processes possibly targeted by P. infestans. We further characterized the PexRD12/31 family of RXLR-WY effectors, which associate and colocalize with components of the vesicle trafficking machinery. One member of this family, PexRD31, increased the number of FYVE positive vesicles in N. benthamiana cells. FYVE positive vesicles also accumulated in leaf cells near P. infestans hyphae, indicating that the pathogen may enhance endosomal trafficking during infection. This interactome dataset will serve as a useful resource for functional studies of P. infestans effectors and of effector-targeted host processes.

### Keywords
Nicotiana benthamiana, Phytophthora infestans, Rxlr effector proteins

### Affiliations
The Sainsbury Laboratory, Proteomics group, Norwich, UK
The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich, UK

### Submitter
Jan Sklenar

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Sklenar
The Sainsbury Laboratory, Proteomics group, Norwich, UK


