### Accession
PXD041826

### Title
Structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMCs) proteins are required for developmental DNA elimination in Paramecium tetraurelia

### Description
To study the role of structural maintenance of chromosome (SMC)4-1 and SMC4-2 during programmed genome rearrangement in Paramecium tetraurelia. Paramecium SMC4-1 and SMC4-2 was tagged with 3 FLAG and HA at its C-terminal separately. The recombinant plasmid was microinjected into macronuclear and used for co-immunoprecipitation and Mass spectrometry studies to identify interacting proteins of SMC4-1 and SMC4-2 that indicates the different functions between Paramecium SMC4s.

### Sample Protocol
Non-crosslinking was performed because the IP of SMC4-2 under crosslinking did not work at pH below 10.4. In detail, 400ml cells were harvest at 4 hours after 100% fragmentation, pellets were resuspended in 2 mL fresh lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.8, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 1% Triton X-100, 1× protease inhibitor complete tablet (Roche), and 10% glycerol) and sonicated until complete lysis. The cell lysates were spin down at 13,000× g, 4 °C for 30 min. 1 mL of the supernatant was incubated with 50 μL of Anti-HA affinity resin (Roche) overnight at 4 °C while rotating. Another 1 mL supernatant was frozen in liquid nitrogen and store at -80 °C for later using. Beads were washed with 1 mL IP buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.8, 150 mM NaCl, 0.01% NP-40, 1 mM MgCl2, 1× protease inhibitor and 5% glycerol) for three times before incubation. After overnight incubation, beads were washed with 1 mL IP buffer for five times. Washed beads were resuspended in 50 μL IP buffer, boiled with 25 μL 5× SDS loading buffer at 95 °C, after cooling down on ice, immediately used for SDS-PAGE – Western blot. Each lane from the SDS-PAGE was cut into six slices, and each slice was in-gel digested with trypsin as described elsewhere [Gunasekera K. et al. (2012) BMC Genomics, 13:556 doi:10.1186/1471-2164-13-556]. The digests were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS (EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher Scientific) with one injection of 5 μl digest. Peptides were were trapped on a µPrecolumn C18 PepMap100 (3 μm, 100 Å, 300 μm×5mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) and separated by backflush on a C18 column (C18, 3µm, 155Å, 0.075 mm i.d. x 150mm length, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) by applying a 40-minute gradient of 5% acetonitrile to 40% in water, 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Full MS (resolution 70’000, automatic gain control target of 1e6, maximum injection time of 50ms) and top10 MS2 scans (resolution 17’500, target of 1e5, 110 ms) were recorded alternatively in the range of 360 to 1400 m/z, with an inclusion window of 2 m/z, relative collision energy of 27, and dynamic exclusion for 20s.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data was interpreted with MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0 using a concatenated target and reverted decoy protein sequence database of Paramecium Tetraurelia (v2.0 downloaded from the Centre National de Séquençage website, https://www.cea.fr/) enriched with some common contaminating proteins applying full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to 3 missed cleavages, variable modification on protein N-termini with acetylation, oxidation on methionine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, and static modification with carbamidomethylation on cysteine, with a mass accuracy of 15 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Only proteins with at least 2 peptides identified with a 1% FDR level were accepted. The match between run option was activated but interpretation between different sample sets hindered by non-consecutive fraction numbering. Differential protein abundance analysis was based on the mean of the top3 (or LFQ) peptide intensities. For this, peptide intensities were normalized using the variance stabilization transformation (bioconductor package vsn.

### Publication Abstract
Chromosome (SMC) proteins are a large family of ATPases that play important roles in the organization and dynamics of chromatin. They are central regulators of chromosome dynamics and the core component of condensin. DNA elimination during zygotic somatic genome development is a characteristic feature of ciliated protozoa such as <i>Paramecium</i> This process occurs after meiosis, mitosis, karyogamy, and another mitosis, which result in the formation of a new germline and somatic nuclei. The series of nuclear divisions implies an important role of SMC proteins in <i>Paramecium</i> sexual development. The relationship between DNA elimination and SMC has not yet been described. Here, we applied RNA interference, genome sequencing, mRNA sequencing, immunofluorescence, and mass spectrometry to investigate the roles of SMC components in DNA elimination. Our results show that SMC4-2 is required for genome rearrangement, whereas SMC4-1 is not. Functional diversification of SMC4 in Paramecium led to a formation of two paralogues where SMC4-2 acquired a novel, development-specific function and differs from SMC4-1. Moreover, our study suggests a competitive relationship between these two proteins.

### Keywords
Paramecium tetraurelia, Mitosis, Structural maintenance of chromosome (smc), Meiosis, Dna elimination

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Department for BioMedical Research (DBMR), University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern 3012, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Mariusz Nowacki
Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern 3012, Switzerland


