### Accession
PXD041767

### Title
Computational design of Matrix Metalloprotenaise-9 (MMP-9) resistant to auto-cleavage

### Description
Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) is an endopeptidase that remodels the extracellular matrix and has been implicated as a major driver in cancer metastasis. Hence, there is a high demand for MMP-9 inhibitors for therapeutic purposes. For such drug design efforts, large amounts of MMP-9 are required. Yet, the catalytic domain of MMP-9 (MMP-9Cat) is an intrinsically unstable enzyme that tends to auto-cleave within minutes, making it difficult to use in drug design experiments and other biophysical studies. We set our goal to design MMP-9Catvariant that is active but stable to autocleavage. For this purpose, we first identified potential autocleavage sites on MMP-9Cat using mass spectroscopy and then eliminated the autocleavage site by predicting mutations that minimize autocleavage potential without reducing enzyme stability. Four computationally designed MMP-9Cat variants were experimentally constructed and evaluated for auto-cleavage and enzyme activity. Our best variant, Des2, with 2 mutations, was as active as the wild-type enzyme but did not exhibit auto-cleavage after seven days of incubation at 37°C. This MMP-9Cat variant, with an identical to MMP-9Cat WT active site, is an ideal candidate for drug design experiments targeting MMP-9 and enzyme crystallization experiments. The developed strategy for MMP-9Cat stabilization could be applied to redesign of other proteases to improve their stability for various biotechnological applications.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE gels were thoroughly stained using Coomassie blue and de-stained using the staining and de-staining solution. MMP-9 catalytic domain (MMP-9Cat) full-length and degradation product bands were carefully excised on a clean parafilm. Following excision, the bands were chopped into tiny cubes (about 1 x 1 x 1 mm). Gel pieces were destained (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 containing and acetonitrile (ACN) for 15 minutes at 50°C with gentile agitation. The de-staining solution was discarded, and gel pieces were incubated for 5 minutes in 100% ACN for 5 minutes. The slices were then treated with 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma Chem. Co.) in 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 for 30 min. at 37ºC, followed by sulfhydryl alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Chem. Co.) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Next, the proteins were digested by adding 0.4 µg of Trypsin (Mass Spectrometry grade, from Promega Corp., Madison, WI, USA) in 200 µl of 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 and incubation overnight at 37°C with gentle agitation. The released peptides were extracted by adding ACN and formic acid at final concentrations of 50% and 2.5%, respectively, followed by 10 min sonication and 30 min incubation at 50ºC. The tryptic peptides were desalted on C18 Stage tips [21]. Peptides were eluted using 80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid. For MS analysis, 0.25µg of eluted peptides was used for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform, version 1.6.17.0 [22]. Peak lists were searched against the MMP-9 protein sequence and common lab contaminants. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. Peptides with a minimum of seven amino-acid lengths were considered, and the required False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) is an endopeptidase that remodels the extracellular matrix. MMP-9 has been implicated in several diseases including neurodegeneration, arthritis, cardiovascular diseases, fibrosis and several types of cancer, resulting in a high demand for MMP-9 inhibitors for therapeutic purposes. For such drug design efforts, large amounts of MMP-9 are required. Yet, the catalytic domain of MMP-9 (MMP-9Cat) is an intrinsically unstable enzyme that tends to auto-cleave within minutes, making it difficult to use in drug design experiments and other biophysical studies. We set our goal to design MMP-9Cat variant that is active but stable to auto-cleavage. For this purpose, we first identified potential auto-cleavage sites on MMP-9Cat using mass spectroscopy and then eliminated the auto-cleavage site by predicting mutations that minimize auto-cleavage potential without reducing enzyme stability. Four computationally designed MMP-9Cat variants were experimentally constructed and evaluated for auto-cleavage and enzyme activity. Our best variant, Des2, with 2 mutations, was as active as the wild-type enzyme but did not exhibit auto-cleavage after 7 days of incubation at 37&#xb0;C. This MMP-9Cat variant, with an identical with MMP-9Cat WT active site, is an ideal candidate for drug design experiments targeting MMP-9 and enzyme crystallization experiments. The developed strategy for MMP-9CAT stabilization could be applied to redesign other proteases to improve their stability for various biotechnological applications.

### Keywords
Protein engineering, Matrix metalloproteases, Enzyme engineering, Mmp-9, Auto-cleavage, Auto-degradation

### Affiliations
The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciencs, the Hebrew University of Jerusalem Israel.
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem

### Submitter
Solomon Oguche

### Lab Head
Dr Julia M shifman
The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life Sciencs, the Hebrew University of Jerusalem Israel.


