### Accession
PXD038871

### Title
Extracellular vesicle membrane protein profiling and targeted mass spectrometry unveil novel plasma biomarkers for detection of colorectal cancer

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are valuable sources for the discovery of useful cancer biomarkers. This study explores the potential usefulness of tumor cell-derived EV membrane proteins as plasma biomarkers for early detection of colorectal cancer (CRC). EVs were isolated from the culture supernatants of four CRC cell lines by ultracentrifugation, and their protein profiles were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Bioinformatics analysis of identified proteins revealed 518 EV membrane proteins in common among at least three CRC cell lines. We next used accurate in-clusion mass screening (AIMS) in parallel with iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis to highlight candidate proteins and validated their presence in pooled plasma-generated EVs from 30 healthy controls and 30 CRC patients. From these, we chose 14 potential EV-derived targets for further quantification by targeted MS assay in a separate individual cohort comprising of 73 CRC and 80 healthy subjects. Quantitative analyses revealed significant increases in ADAM10, CD59 and TSPAN9 levels (2.19- to 5.26-fold, p <0.0001) in plasma EVs from CRC patients, with AUC values of 0.83, 0.95 and 0.87, respectively. Higher EV CD59 levels were significantly corre-lated with distant metastasis (p = 0.0475), and higher EV TSPAN9 levels were significantly asso-ciated with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.0011), distant metastasis at diagnosis (p = 0.0104) and higher TNM stage (p = 0.0065). A two-marker panel consisting of CD59 and TSPAN9 outper-formed the conventional marker CEA in discriminating CRC and stage I/II CRC patients from healthy controls, with AUC values of 0.98 and 0.99, respectively. Our results identify EV mem-brane proteins in common among CRC cell lines and altered plasma EV protein profiles in CRC patients, and suggest plasma EV CD59 and TSPAN9 as a novel biomarker panel for detecting early-stage CRC.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood samples were collected from healthy donors and histologically confirmed, treatment naive CRC patients at the Department of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan from 2016 to 2020. Plasma samples were prepared by collecting blood in EDTA tubes (10 mL from each subject) and left at room temperature (for a maximum of 30 min) until centrifugation. Plasma samples were centrifuged at 2,000 ×g for 10 min at room temperature to pellet the cells. After centrifuga-tion, samples were divided into 1.0 mL aliquots in sterile cryotubes and immediately fro-zen at −80°C for storage until use. The discovery cohort consisted of 30 healthy individuals and 30 CRC patients. The plasma samples from all individuals were pooled together into two groups for AIMS and iTRAQ based LC-MS/MS quantitation. For the verification study by product ion scanning MS quantification, 80 healthy subjects and 73 CRC patient’s plasma samples were included and EVs were isolated individually from both the control and cases. All CRC patients had histologically verified adenocarcinoma. Patients’ Charac-teristics were obtained from clinical and pathology records including gender, age, tumor location, histological grade, tumor stage, CEA level, preoperative laboratory data, operation date, operation method, tumor recurrence, follow-up date, and follow-up status. All pa-tients were subjected to a follow-up strategy that included regular outpatient visits, CEA test every 3 to 6 months, regular colonoscopy every 1 year to 2 years, and regular image studies (chest X-ray and liver sonography or computed tomography) every year. The plasma samples (1 ml plasma for each case) were diluted 10-fold with PBS and transferred to 50 mL tubes and then it was centrifuged sequentially at 500 × g for 5 min and 2,000 × g for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred to ultracentrifuge tubes and centri-fuged for 30 mins at 10,000 × g. After that the supernatant was collected and centrifuged for 2 h at 100,000 × g. Then the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was dissolved in PBS and filtered through a 0.2 µm filter and collected in fresh tubes and centrifuged for 90 mins at 100,000 × g. The pellet was resuspended in 200 µL PBS and stored at -80oC. All the centrifugations were performed at 4°C.

### Data Protocol
The raw files of resulting MS/MS spectra obtained from LTQ-Orbitrap MS were searched against the database which consists of 21219 entries of Homo sapiens in Swis-sProt-human database released in 20150429 using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA). The cleaved enzyme was set to "trypsin", with maximum one missed cleav-age site. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment ions mass toler-ance was set to 0.6 Da. The fixed modification was set to "carbamidomethylation at cyste-ine" and variable modifications were set to "acetylation at protein N-term ", "oxidation at methionine" and "deamidation at N-term glutamine". Following the Mascot search, the score threshold of protein was 20 and peptide was 15. The identification of peptide confi-dence was set to "1% false discovery rate (FDR)” in the workflow of Proteome Discoverer 1.4. Peptide Validator algorithm was applied in calculating FDR for peptide sequence analysis to distinguish true positives from random matches (decoy database).

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are valuable sources for the discovery of useful cancer biomarkers. This study explores the potential usefulness of tumor cell-derived EV membrane proteins as plasma biomarkers for early detection of colorectal cancer (CRC). EVs were isolated from the culture supernatants of four CRC cell lines by ultracentrifugation, and their protein profiles were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Bioinformatics analysis of identified proteins revealed 518 EV membrane proteins in common among at least three CRC cell lines. We next used accurate inclusion mass screening (AIMS) in parallel with iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis to highlight candidate proteins and validated their presence in pooled plasma-generated EVs from 30 healthy controls and 30 CRC patients. From these, we chose 14 potential EV-derived targets for further quantification by targeted MS assay in a separate individual cohort comprising of 73 CRC and 80 healthy subjects. Quantitative analyses revealed significant increases in ADAM10, CD59 and TSPAN9 levels (2.19- to 5.26-fold, p &lt; 0.0001) in plasma EVs from CRC patients, with AUC values of 0.83, 0.95 and 0.87, respectively. Higher EV CD59 levels were significantly correlated with distant metastasis (p = 0.0475), and higher EV TSPAN9 levels were significantly associated with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.0011), distant metastasis at diagnosis (p = 0.0104) and higher TNM stage (p = 0.0065). A two-marker panel consisting of CD59 and TSPAN9 outperformed the conventional marker CEA in discriminating CRC and stage I/II CRC patients from healthy controls, with AUC values of 0.98 and 0.99, respectively. Our results identify EV membrane proteins in common among CRC cell lines and altered plasma EV protein profiles in CRC patients and suggest plasma EV CD59 and TSPAN9 as a novel biomarker panel for detecting early-stage CRC.

### Keywords
Targeted mass spectrometry, Aims, Membrane protein, Colorectal cancer, Extracellular vesicles, Itraq

### Affiliations
Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University
1. Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan. 2. Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan. 3. Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou 33305, Taiwan. 4. Research Center for Food and Cosmetic Safety, College of Human Ecology, Chang Gung University of Science and Technology, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan.

### Submitter
Chia-Chun Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Jau Song Yu
1. Graduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan. 2. Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan. 3. Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou 33305, Taiwan. 4. Research Center for Food and Cosmetic Safety, College of Human Ecology, Chang Gung University of Science and Technology, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan.


