### Accession
PXD020219

### Title
Proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles and conditioned medium from human Adipose-derived Stem/Stromal Cells and Dermal Fibroblasts

### Description
Conditioned medium (CM) and extracellular vesicles (EV) from human Adipose-derived Stem/stromal cells (ASC) and Dermal fibroblasts (DF) can represent valid cell substitutes in regenerative medicine and other therapeutic applications. Whether one of the two cell products should be preferred over the other is still under debate and no direct comparison of their proteome has been reported yet. Here, we apply a comprehensive quantitative proteomics approach to explore the protein composition of conditioned medium and EV obtained from the two cell types. We identified 1977 proteins by LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis. Unsupervised clustering analysis and PCA clearly distinguished CM and EV as separate groups, regardless the cell source. We identified 68 and 201 proteins that were more abundant or exclusively detectable in CM and EV, respectively. CM were enriched in proteins of endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus and lysosomes, whereas EV contained a large amount of GTPases, ribosome and translation-related factors. Moreover, the analysis of ASC and DF secretomes (both CM and EV) revealed the presence of cell type-specific factors. ASC-CM and -EV carried factors involved in ECM organization (hyaluronan and glycosaminoglycan metabolism) and immunological regulation (e.g. macrophage and IkB/NFkB signaling regulation), respectively. On the other hand, DF-CM and –EV were both enriched in epithelium development associated factors, whilst DF-CM in proteins involved in cellular processes regulation and -EV in Wnt signaling factors. In conclusion, this comprehensive proteomic analysis of the secretome components of ASC and DF, provides evidence of a different protein composition between CM and EV and of the presence of cell type-specific bioactive mediators suggesting their specific future use as advanced therapy medicinal products.

### Sample Protocol
Primary cell cultures were obtained from waste tissues deriving from aesthetic or prosthetic surgery. In order to avoid gender-related variability, only female donors were selected for this study. Following well-established isolation procedures [1], 3 ASC (mean donor age: 50±21 y/o) and 3 DF (mean donor age: 39±12 y/o) populations were obtained. Cells were cultured in high glucose DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 2mM L-glutamine, 50U/ml penicillin and 50μg/ml streptomycin at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2. CM and EV were prepared following consolidated/ standardized protocols [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Upon reaching 80-90% confluence, cells were washed with PBS, incubated for 1 hour in phenol- and serum-free medium, complete with L-glutamine and antibiotics, and cultured in the same conditions for 72 hours. Conditioned media were then collected and centrifuged at 2,500g for 15 minutes at 4°C to remove dead cells, large apoptotic bodies and debris. For CM production, an aliquot of the collected media was concentrated by 40-50 times through centrifugation at 4°C, 4,000g, using Amicon Ultra 15 ml filters (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) with 3kDa MWCO (molecular weight cut-off). In parallel, EV isolation from the remaining conditioned media was accomplished by means of ultracentrifugation at 100,000g for 2 hours at 4°C. The obtained pellet was then resuspended in PBS to remove residual aggregates of macromolecules and ultracentrifuged once again under the same conditions. CM and EV samples from ASC and DF were analyzed by differential proteomics. 20µg of total proteins from each sample were in-solution digested using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol, as reported in literature [6]. Aliquots of the samples containing tryptic peptides were desalted using StageTip C18 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (ProxeonBiosystems, Odense, Denmark) and a nUPLC Easy nLC 1000 (ProxeonBiosystems, Odense, Denmark). Peptide separations occurred on a homemade (75µm i.d., 15cm long) reverse phase silica capillary column, packed with 1.9-µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH,Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). A gradient of eluents A (distilled water with 0.1% v/v formic acid) and B (acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid) was used to achieve separation (300nL/min flow rate). After 5 minutes at 2% of B, the acetonitrile phase was increased up to 40% B in 83 minutes, followed by a wash step at 90% of B. Full scan spectra were acquired with the lock-mass option, resolution set to 70,000 and mass range from m/z 300 to 2,000Da. The ten most intense doubly and triply charged ions were selected and fragmented. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (version 2.6, Matrix Science) search engine to search the human_proteome 20190508 (95,915 sequences; 38,065,794 residues). Searches were performed with the following settings: trypsin as proteolytic enzyme; 2 missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification; protein N-terminus-acetylation, methionine oxidation as variable modifications; mass tolerance was set to 5ppm and to 0.02Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. To quantify proteins, the raw data were loaded into the MaxQuant [7] software version 1.6.1.0. Label-free protein quantification was based on the intensities of precursors. The experiments were performed in technical triplicates. [1] Niada, S., Giannasi, C., Gualerzi, A., Banfi, G., Brini, A. T., Differential Proteomic Analysis Predicts Appropriate Applications for the Secretome of Adipose-Derived Mesenchymal Stem/Stromal Cells and Dermal Fibroblasts. Stem Cells Int 2018, 2018, 7309031. [2] Gualerzi, A., Niada, S., Giannasi, C., et al., Raman spectroscopy uncovers biochemical tissue-related features of extracellular vesicles from mesenchymal stromal cells. Sci Rep 2017, 7, 9820. [3] Brini, A. T., Amodeo, G., Ferreira, L. M., Milani, A., et al., Therapeutic effect of human adipose-derived stem cells and their secretome in experimental diabetic pain. Sci Rep 2017, 7, 9904. [4] Niada, S., Giannasi, C., Gomarasca, M., Stanco, D., et al., Adipose-derived stromal cell secretome reduces TNFalpha-induced hypertrophy and catabolic markers in primary human articular chondrocytes. Stem Cell Res 2019, 38, 101463. [5] Gualerzi, A., Kooijmans, S. A. A., Niada, S., et al., Raman spectroscopy as a quick tool to assess purity of extracellular vesicle preparations and predict their functionality. J Extracell Vesicles 2019, 8, 1568780. [6] Wisniewski, J. R., Zougman, A., Nagaraj, N., Mann, M., Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods 2009, 6, 359-362. [7] Cox, J., Neuhauser, N., Michalski, A., et al., Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res 2011, 10, 1794-1805.

### Data Protocol
Hierarchical clustering was obtained using MeV software (v. 4.9.0) [8] with p<0.005 considered for statistical significance. The lists of quantified proteins deriving from proteomics were manually checked prior to all subsequent analyses (PCA, clustering and statistics). In details, we filtered targets with valid values in 2 out of the 3 samples in at least 1 group. PCA and clustering were performed by Clustvis (https://biit.cs.ut.ee/clustvis) [9]. Statistical analyses were performed by Prism 5 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA) and Excel. For the comparisons between CM and EV differential p-values were FDR-corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg (FDR<0.01). Processes/ pathway analysis was performed by DAVID [10] version 6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp) (default settings). For ASC/DF comparison we applied less stringent statistical criteria (t test with p value <0.05). Processes/pathway analysis was performed by STRING [11] with default settings. Venn diagrams were obtained by Venny (http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny).  [8] Saeed, A., Sharov, V., White, J., Li, J., Liang, W., Bhagabati, N., et al. TM4: a free, open-source system for microarray data management and analysis. Biotechniques 2003, 34, 374-378. [9] Metsalu, T., Vilo, J., ClustVis: a web tool for visualizing clustering of multivariate data using Principal Component Analysis and heatmap. Nucleic Acids Res 2015, 43, W566-570. [10] Huang da, W., Sherman, B. T., Lempicki, R. A., Bioinformatics enrichment tools: paths toward the comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res 2009, 37, 1-13. [11] Szklarczyk, D., Franceschini, A., Wyder, S., Forslund, K., et al., STRING v10: protein-protein interaction networks, integrated over the tree of life. Nucleic Acids Res 2015, 43, D447-452.

### Publication Abstract
Conditioned medium (CM) and extracellular vesicles (EV) from Adipose-derived Stem/stromal cells (ASC) and Dermal fibroblasts (DF) represent promising tools for therapeutic applications. Which one should be preferred is still under debate and no direct comparison of their proteome has been reported yet. Here, we apply quantitative proteomics to explore the protein composition of CM and EV from the two cell types. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (identifier PXD020219). We identified 1977 proteins by LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis. Unsupervised clustering analysis and PCA recognized CM and EV as separate groups. We identified 68 and 201 CM and EV specific factors. CM were enriched in proteins of endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus and lysosomes, whereas EV contained a large amount of GTPases, ribosome and translation factors. The analysis of ASC and DF secretomes revealed the presence of cell type-specific proteins. ASC-CM and -EV carried factors involved in ECM organization and immunological regulation, respectively. Conversely, DF-CM and -EV were enriched in epithelium development associated factors and -EV in Wnt signaling factors. In conclusion, this analysis provides evidence of a different protein composition between CM and EV and of the presence of cell type-specific bioactive mediators suggesting their specific future use as advanced therapy medicinal products. SIGNIFICANCE: The use of cell secretome presents several advantages over cell therapy such as the lower risks associated to the administration step and the avoidance of any potential risk of malignant transformation. The main secretome preparations consist in concentrated conditioned medium (CM) and extracellular vesicles (EV). Both of them showed well-documented therapeutic potentials. However, it is still not clear in which case it should be better to use one preparation over the other and an exhaustive comparison between their proteome has not been performed yet. The choice of the cell source is another relevant aspect that still needs to be addressed. In order to shed light on these questions we explored the protein composition of CM and EV obtained from Adipose-derived Stem/stromal Cells (ASC) and Dermal Fibroblasts (DF), by a comprehensive quantitative proteomics approach. The analysis showed a clear distinction between CM and EV proteome. CM were enriched in proteins of endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus and lysosomes, whereas EV contained a large amount of GTPases, ribosome and translation-related factors. Furthermore, the analysis of ASC and DF secretomes revealed specific biological processes for the different cell products. ASC secretome presented factors involved in ECM organization (hyaluronan and glycosaminoglycan metabolism) and immunological regulation (e.g. macrophage and IkB/NFkB signaling regulation), respectively. On the other hand, DF-CM and -EV were both enriched in epithelium development associated factors, whilst DF-CM in proteins involved in cellular processes regulation and -EV in Wnt signaling factors. In conclusion, our study shed a light on the different protein composition of CM and EV of two promising cell types, spanning from basic processes involved in secretion to specific pathways supporting their therapeutic potential and their possible future use as advanced therapy medicinal products.

### Keywords
Dermal fibroblasts, Adipose-derived stromal cells, Label-free quantitative proteomics, Conditioned medium, Extracellular vesicles, Secretome

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Laboratorio di Applicazioni Biotecnologiche, Milan, Italy Department of Biomedical, Surgical and DentalSciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy
Ospedale San Raffaele

### Submitter
Annapaola Andolfo

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Teresa Brini
IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi, Laboratorio di Applicazioni Biotecnologiche, Milan, Italy Department of Biomedical, Surgical and DentalSciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy


