### Accession
PXD033021

### Title
Reduced mitochondria provide an essential function for the cytosolic methionine cycle

### Description
Since the discovery of eukaryotes without mitochondria, intestinal flagellates oxymonads, it was clear that the loss of mitochondria was facilitated by the remodelling of the FeS cluster synthesis. Yet, this remodelling is common for a broader linage including free-living species with reduced mitochondria and so question remains what the functions of their organelles are. We resolved to a high precision the proteome of one of them using Localisation of Organelle Proteins by Isotope Tagging (LOPIT) and demonstrate that it performs the synthesis of folate derivates bearing one carbon units. This pathway links to a previously localised glycine cleavage system (GCS) and its only conceivable client seems cytosolic methionine cycle recycling S-adenosine methionine. This observation gives a sense for the consistent presence of GCS in reduced mitochondria of free-living anaerobes and its absence in endobionts, which typically lose the methionine cycle and in the case of oxymonads also mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
Subcellular fractionation by differential centrifugation Prior fractionation, 6-7 L of P. pyriformis culture on exponential phase of growth was filtered through filter paper (80 g/m2) to remove bacterial aggregates, and subsequently sieved through a 3 µm polycarbonate filter (Whatman) followed by two washing steps with 10% (v/v) LB.  P. pyriformis cells were collected into a 50 mL tube and harvested by centrifugation at 1000 × g for 10 min at room temperature. Cell pellet (approximately 2 × 108) was resuspended in 2 mL of pre-cooled lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 25 mM sucrose, 2 mM magnesium acetate, 2 mM EDTA) supplemented with cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche). Subcellular fractionation by differential centrifugation was performed as described in (Geladaki et al., 2019) with slight modifications. Briefly, cells were disrupted by three rounds of sonication of 10 s with pulse 1s ON/ 1 s OFF at amplitude 20%, using a standard 1/8” diameter probe (Qsonica). After each round, cells were examined under the microscope and three rounds were sufficient to break 80-90% of cells. The sonicate was centrifuged twice at 200 × g and 4°C for 10 min to remove unbroken cells. Nine fractions pelleted at different centrifugation speeds were collected and the final supernatant after 120,000 × g represents the cytosol-enriched fraction. Collected pellets were resuspended in 50-100 µL of membrane solubilising buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 8 M urea, 0.2 % (w/v) SDS). Protein concentration was measured by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Sigma) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.   Protein digestion and TMT labelling   A total of 60 µg of protein from each fraction was bound to magnetic HILIC beads according to the SP3 protocol published by(Hughes et al., 2018). After washing out the buffer with 80% EtOH, the protein-bead mixture was resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), disulphide bridges were reduced with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and cysteines were modified with 50 mM chloroacetamide (one step reaction 30 min at 60 °C). To digest proteins, 2 µg of trypsin was added to the reaction and incubated overnight at 37 °C. The next day, samples were centrifugated and the collected supernatants were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration 1% (v/v). At this step, samples were divided into technical triplicates. Twenty µg of peptides were desalted on a homemade desalting column (Kulak et al., 2014), reconstituted in 17µL 100mM TEAB, and labelled with TMT 10plex isobaric tagging reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 0.8 mg of TMT 10plex reagents were resuspended in 42 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN). Then 6.4 µL of the TMT reagent was added to the each fraction sample and incubated for one hour at room temperature. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 1.5 μL of 5% (v/v) hydroxylamine. Subsequently, the respective indicated fractions were mixed. After evaporation, the sample was desalted on a Opti-trap cartridge C18 column (Optimize Technologies)  The resulting mixture was fractionated on a reverse phase at high pH, flow 2 µL/min, YMC column (300 mm, 0.3 mm, 1.9 µm), linear 60 min gradient (buffer A – 20 mM ammonium formate, 2% (v/v) ACN; buffer B – 20 mM ammonium formate, 80% (v/v) ACN) from 1% B to 60% B (Kulak et al., 2017). Fractions were collected for 64 minutes, and these were combined into 8 resulting pooled fractions by the farthest neighbour method described in (Wang et al., 2011) The fractionated peptides were resuspended in 1% (v/v) TFA + 2% ACN and roughly 1.5 µg were injected onto nanoHPLC Dionex UltiMate 3000RS (Thermo) in combination with Thermo Orbitrap Fusion. Thermo PepMap Trap column (pn: 160454) was used for peptides preconcentration and main separation was done on 50 cm EASY Spray Column Thermo (pn: ES903). Each fraction was separated on a 180 min gradient from 2% A to 35% B (A  –  0.1% (v/v) formic acid, B  – 99.9% ACN, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid). Cycle time was set to 4 s. The MS2 spectra for identification were measured in an ion trap with CID fragmentation, 60 ms maximum injection time, and the quantification MS3 spectra were measured in an Orbitrap with HCD fragmentation using the SPS function, 118 ms maximum injection time, 10 precursors for synchronous precursors selection feature (Le et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS data processing  Raw data from each biological replicate were searched with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo) with Sequest search engine. Method was based on predefined workflow for SPS MS3 isobaric quantification and was used with batch specific correction parameters for TMT 10plex label. Database of Paratrimastix pyriformis (13533 entries) was used for search along with common contaminants database and databases of selected bacterial taxa known to be co-cultivated with P. pyriformis (ASM2556v1 Enterobacter cloacae, ASM63591v2 Brevundimonas naejangsanensis, ASM64851v1 Citrobaster freundii, ASM76115v1 Pseudomonas rhizosphaerae, ASM383324v1 Paenibacillus xylanexedens, ASM385183v1 Pseudomonas chlororaphis and GCF_900105615.1 Clostridium sphenoides). Dynamic modifications were set as follows: Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M). Protein N-Terminal:  Acetyl / +42.011 Da, Met-loss / -131.040 Da (M), Met-loss+Acetyl / -89.030 Da (M).  Static Modifications: Carbamidomethyl / +57.021 Da (C), TMT6plex / +229.163 Da (K), Peptide N-Terminus:  TMT6plex / +229.163 Da.  To assess  FDR percolator was used. For reporter ions detection 20 pmm tolerance was set with most confident centroid peak integration. LOPIT-DC data processing Data were processed in R (version 4.0.4) using pRoloc package (version 1.30.0) (Gatto and Christoforou, 2014)  according to the published Bioconductor workflows (Breckels et al., 2018; Crook et al., 2019). Briefly, experimental replicates were first pre-processed to allow decontamination and normalisation. Bacterial and other contaminants were removed. Then, average reporter intensity was calculated for each feature based on three technical replicates of the LC-MS measurement. All proteins that contained one or more missing values across ten labelled fractions were removed from the dataset by filterNA function. Normalisation of protein intensity-interval was performed by the sum method (each reporter intensity was divided by the sum of the reporter ions intensities). After normalisation, four independent LOPIT-DC experiments were merged into one dataset containing 4541 proteins common for all four replicates. To search for the subcellular compartments, we used the HDBSCAN unsupervised clustering (Campello et al., 2013) available in the Python, and semi-supervised phenotype discovery algorithm (phenoDisco) (Breckels et al., 2013)  available in the pRoloc package of R. The following parameters applied for HDBSCAN were as follows: min_cluster_size=10, min_samples=8, cluster_selection_method =leaf'. Phenotype discovery was run several times with the group size (GS, minimum number of proteins per group) set to 10, 20 or 30. The content of newly found clusters by either HDBSCAN or PhenoDisco were carefully evaluated. Finally, by using these two methods as well as gene annotation, conserved domains, previous studies, and literature, a list of 226 manually curated proteins defining 11 cell sub-compartments (cytosol, proteasome, ribosome, nucleus, nucleus-chromatin, ER, Golgi, endomembrane vesicles, plasma membrane, MRO, food vacuole) was prepared. Different populations of endosomes were merged to form a single class, and the same was done in the case of 40S/60S ribosomal subunits. To assign proteins with unknown localisation into subcellular clusters two supervised machine learning approaches were used:  support vector machine (SVM) and t-augmented Gaussian mixture (TAGM) model (Crook et al., 2018) both available in pRoloc package. In the case of SVM first the parameters were optimised as described in (Breckels et al., 2018). The best sigma and cost parameters were chosen (sigma = 0.1, cost = 8) based on F1 score. For most clusters, extracted median was used to set up the threshold cut-off scores. Threshold scores were as follows: Cytosol = 0.55, Proteasome = 0.53, Ribosome = 0.63, Nucleus = 0.5, Nucleus-chromatin = 0.42, ER = 0.63, Golgi = 0.4, Endomembrane vesicles = 0.45, Plasma membrane = 0.53, MRO = 0.55, Food vacuole = 0.3. Any prediction of protein localisation with a score below these thresholds was labelled as unknown. TAGM MAP, the other used classification method, assigns proteins into sub-compartments based on a probabilistic approach (Crook et al., 2018). Uniform localisation threshold set to 99% probability was applied for this method. To reduce dimensions and visualise the data, principal component analysis (PCA) was used.

### Publication Abstract
The loss of mitochondria in oxymonad protists has been associated with the redirection of the essential Fe-S cluster assembly to the cytosol. Yet as our knowledge of diverse free-living protists broadens, the list of functions of their mitochondrial-related organelles (MROs) expands. We revealed another such function in the closest oxymonad relative, Paratrimastix pyriformis, after we solved the proteome of its MRO with high accuracy, using localization of organelle proteins by isotope tagging (LOPIT). The newly assigned enzymes connect to the glycine cleavage system (GCS) and produce folate derivatives with one-carbon units and formate. These are likely to be used by the cytosolic methionine cycle involved in S-adenosyl methionine recycling. The data provide consistency with the presence of the GCS in MROs of free-living species and its absence&#xa0;in most endobionts, which typically lose the methionine cycle and, in the case of oxymonads, the mitochondria.

### Keywords
Reduced mitochondria, Methionine cycle, One-carbon metabolism, Proteome, Lopit, Mitochondrial loss, Glycine cleavage system, Paratrimastix

### Affiliations
Charles University
Charles University, Faculty of Science, Department of Parasitology, BIOCEV, Vestec 252 50, Czech Republic.

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimír Hampl
Charles University, Faculty of Science, Department of Parasitology, BIOCEV, Vestec 252 50, Czech Republic.


