### Accession
PXD031017

### Title
Effects of contact allergens on THP-1 cells – LFQ- and SILAC-based untargeted proteomics

### Description
In this study, the effects of the contact allergens BQ, DNCB, NBB, Ni, and PPD were investigated in THP-1 cells. For this purpose, LFQ- and SILAC-based untargeted proteomics were applied.

### Sample Protocol
The THP-1 cells were exposed to the contact allergens for 24 h. Cells treated with pure medium or the same amount DMSO were generated as controls. A paramagnetic bead approach was applied for sample preparation. Obtained samples were analyzed on a nano-UPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, USA) coupled online to the mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, Thermo Scientific, USA) via a chip-based electrospray ionization source (Nanomate, Advion, USA).

### Data Protocol
Obtained raw data from LFQ and SILAC samples were processed together using MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 and UniprotKB entries (reference proteome including reviewed and unreviewed entries) of Homo Sapiens (7th October 2021). SILAC data resulted in fold changes (heavy medium control vs light treatment), which had to be reversed before further analyses, and LFQ data resulted in LFQ intensities for treatments and controls.

### Publication Abstract
Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) is the predominant form of immunotoxicity in humans. The sensitizing potential of chemicals can be assessed in vitro. However, a better mechanistic understanding could improve the current OECD-validated test battery. The aim of this study was to get insights into toxicity mechanisms of four contact allergens, p-benzoquinone (BQ), 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB), p-nitrobenzyl bromide (NBB) and NiSO<sub>4</sub>, by analyzing differential proteome alterations in THP-1 cells using two common proteomics workflows, stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and label-free quantification (LFQ). Here, SILAC was found to deliver more robust results. Overall, the four allergens induced similar responses in THP-1 cells, which underwent profound metabolic reprogramming, including a striking upregulation of the TCA cycle accompanied by pronounced induction of the Nrf2 oxidative stress response pathway. The magnitude of induction varied between the allergens with DNCB and NBB being most potent. A considerable overlap between transcriptome-based signatures of the GARD assay and the proteins identified in our study was found. When comparing the results of this study to a previous proteomics study in human primary monocyte-derived dendritic cells, we found a rather low share in regulated proteins. However, on pathway level, the overlap was high, indicating that affected pathways rather than single proteins are more eligible to investigate proteomic changes induced by contact allergens. Overall, this study confirms the potential of proteomics to obtain a profound mechanistic understanding, which may help improving existing in vitro assays for skin sensitization.

### Keywords
Thp-1, Contact allergens, Lfq, Silac

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Isabel Karkossa

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ


