### Accession
PXD035479

### Title
Supplementary Information for "Wax worm saliva and the enzymes therein are the key to polyethylene degradation by Galleria mellonella"

### Description
Chromatographic samples from Galleria mellonella saliva processed with ion exchange chromatography. Peaks 1, 2 and 3.

### Sample Protocol
For the size exclusion chromatography, 40 μl of ww saliva in the proper buffer (see “Wax worm saliva collection “) was thawed, pooled and centrifuged. The supernatant was filtered (0.45 µm cutoff, Ultrafree Millipore) and loaded to a size exclusion chromatography column Superdex 200 5-150 (Cytiva) equilibrated with 10 mM Tris-Cl, 50 mM NaCl, 2 mM DTT.  For the ion exchange chromatography, upon thawing, the sample was diluted to 100 µl with 10 mM Tris-Cl at pH 8, centrifuged, filtered and the supernatant loaded to a monoQ 5/50 GL ion exchange column (Cytiva). After a wash step, a 40ml gradient with buffer A (10 mM Tris-Cl pH8), and buffer B (same as A supplemented with 500 mM NaCl) was applied.  Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis. All peptide separations were carried out on an Easy-nLC 1000 nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, the sample was loaded into a precolumn Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted in a RSLC PepMap C18, 15 cm long, 50 µm inner diameter and 2 µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nl/min using 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient profile was set as follows: 5%–35% solvent B for 45 min, 35%-100% solvent B for 5 min, 100% solvent B for 10 min. Four ml of each sample were injected. MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For ionization, 1900 V of liquid junction voltage and 270 °C capillary temperature was used. The full scan method employed a m/z 400–1500 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 70000 (at m/z 200), a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3e6, and maximum injection times of 100 ms. After the survey scan, the 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV and MS/MS scans were acquired with a starting mass of m/z 100, AGC target was 2e5, resolution of 17500 (at m/z 200), intensity threshold of 8e4, isolation window of 2 m/z units and maximum IT was 100 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and equal or more than seven protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 20s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions. MS data analysis. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against an in –house specific database against Galleria_Proteins (12715 proteins entries), using the Sequest search engine through Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14) (Thermo Scientific). Search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethyl of cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Identified peptides were validated using the Percolator algorithm with a q-value threshold of 0.01. The protein identification by nLC-MS/MS was carried out in the Proteomics and Genomics Facility (CIB-CSIC), a member of ProteoRed-ISCIII network.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against an in –house specific database against Galleria_Proteins (12715 proteins entries), using the Sequest search engine through Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14) (Thermo Scientific). Search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethyl of cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Identified peptides were validated using the Percolator algorithm with a q-value threshold of 0.01. The protein identification by nLC-MS/MS was carried out in the Proteomics and Genomics Facility (CIB-CSIC), a member of ProteoRed-ISCIII network.

### Publication Abstract
Plastic degradation by biological systems with re-utilization of the by-products could be a future solution to the global threat of plastic waste accumulation. Here, we report that the saliva of Galleria mellonella larvae (wax worms) is capable of oxidizing and depolymerizing polyethylene (PE), one of the most produced and sturdy polyolefin-derived plastics. This effect is achieved after a few hours' exposure at room temperature under physiological conditions (neutral pH). The wax worm saliva can overcome the bottleneck step in PE biodegradation, namely the initial oxidation step. Within the saliva, we identify two enzymes, belonging to the phenol oxidase family, that can reproduce the same effect. To the best of our knowledge, these enzymes are the first animal enzymes with this capability, opening the way to potential solutions for plastic waste management through bio-recycling/up-cycling.

### Keywords
Biodegradation, Polyethylene, Enzyme, Wax worm, Oxidation, Plastic, Galleria mellonella, Insect, Saliva

### Affiliations
Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas Margarita Salas, CSIC, Madrid, Spain
Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas Margarita Salas, CSIC

### Submitter
Clemente Fernández Arias

### Lab Head
Dr Federica Bertocchini
Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas Margarita Salas, CSIC, Madrid, Spain


