### Accession
PXD025628

### Title
Protein landscape in acute myeloid leukemia reveals proteins susceptible for drug discovery

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a devastating cancer affecting the hematopoietic system. Although this disease represents only 35% of diagnosed leukemias, it accounts for nearly 50% of leukemia-related deaths, making it the leading cause of leukemia-related mortality. Although many AML initiating mutations have been identified, the downstream effects leading to disease progression are still largely unknown. Previous research has relied on RNA sequencing and microarray techniques to study the downstream effects, providing data at the transcriptional level. While these studies have proven efficacious, they fail to capture the changes that occur at the proteomic level. To interrogate the effect of protein expression alterations in AML, we performed a quantitative mass spectrometry analysis using mouse models to compare three tumor types to untransformed tumor-initiating population. In parallel, we performed RNA sequencing for the same populations. With these combined results, we identified 34 proteins whose expression was upregulated in AML tumors, but strikingly, were unaltered at the transcriptional level. These proteins are shown to be associated with mitochondrial function as well as RNA processing. These studies identify a set of proteins not previously associated with leukemia, and may ultimately serve as potential targets for therapeutic manipulation.

### Sample Protocol
cKit+ cells were isolated from WT BM and cKIT/Mac1/Gr1+ cells were isolated from splenic tumor cells using streptavidin mojosort beads. Samples were prepared and TMT-labeled per manufacturer’s protocol (ThermoFisher TMT10plex kit), cleaned with C18 tips, combined in equal concentration (Pierce colorimetric peptide assay kit), and fractionated using high pH reverse phase fractionation kit (ThermoFisher). Samples were speedvac to dry, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid before analysis. Samples were loaded onto trap column Acclaim PepMap 100 75µm x 2 cm C18 LC Columns (Thermo ScientificTM) at flow rate of 5µl/min then separated with a Thermo RSLC Ultimate 3000 (Thermo ScientificTM) from 5-20% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) from 10-98 minutes at 300nL/min and 50ºC with a 120 minutes total run time for fractions one and two. For fractions three to six, solvent B was used at 5-45% for the same duration. Eluted peptides were analyzed by a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo ScientificTM) mass spectrometer in a data dependent acquisition mode using synchronous precursor selection method. A survey full scan MS (from m/z 375-1500) was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The AGC target for MS2 in iontrap was set as 1x104 and ion filling time set as 150ms and fragmented using CID fragmentation with 35% normalized collision energy. The AGC target for MS3 in orbitrap was set as 1x105 and ion filling time set as 200ms with a scan range of 100-500 and fragmented using HCD with 65% normalized collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using proteome discoverer software version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by searching MS/MS data against the UniProt mouse protein database. The search was set up for full tryptic peptides with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites. Oxidation, TMT6plex of the amino terminus, GG and GGQ ubiquitination, phosphorylation, and acetylation were included as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation and TMT6plex of the amino terminus were set as fixed modifications. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was set at 10ppm for a maximum fragment mass error of 0.6 Da with a minimum peptide length of 6 and a maximum peptide length of 144. The significance threshold of the ion score was calculated based on a false discovery rate calculated using the percolator node. Protein accessions were put into Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (QIAGEN Inc.) to identify gene symbols and localizations. Gene ontology pathway analysis was performed using DAVID Bioinformatics Database 6.8 using the functional annotation tool.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a devastating cancer affecting the hematopoietic system. Previous research has relied on RNA sequencing and microarray techniques to study the downstream effects of genomic alterations. While these studies have proven efficacious, they fail to capture the changes that occur at the proteomic level. To interrogate the effect of protein expression alterations in AML, we performed a quantitative mass spectrometry in parallel with RNAseq analysis using AML mouse models. These combined results identified 34 proteins whose expression was upregulated in AML tumors, but strikingly, were unaltered at the transcriptional level. Here we focus on mitochondrial electron transfer proteins ETFA and ETFB. Silencing of ETFA and ETFB led to increased mitochondrial activity, mitochondrial stress, and apoptosis in AML cells, but had little to no effect on normal human CD34<sup>+</sup> cells. These studies identify a set of proteins that have not previously been associated with leukemia and may ultimately serve as potential targets for therapeutic manipulation to hinder AML progression and help contribute to our understanding of the disease.

### Keywords
Aml, Acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Department of Genetics, Cell Bioliogy, & Anatomy Buckley Lab University of Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, Nebraska United States of America

### Submitter
Samantha Swenson

### Lab Head
Dr Shannon Mychel Buckley
Department of Genetics, Cell Bioliogy, & Anatomy Buckley Lab University of Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, Nebraska United States of America


