### Accession
PXD036596

### Title
NP-6A4 activates a novel signaling network of protective autophagy in obese female rat heart and attenuates cardiac dysfunction and coronary microvascular damage

### Description
NP-6A4 activates a novel signaling network of protective autophagy in obese female rat heart and attenuates cardiac dysfunction and coronary microvascular damage

### Sample Protocol
All data are expressed as mean ± SEM and were analyzed with the use of GraphPad Prism 9.0. The Shapiro-Wilk test was used for assessing distribution. The 2-tailed Student t test and 1-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) were used for data that were normally distributed. Differences between groups were determined with the use of a 2-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test for multiple pairwise comparisons. A value of P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

### Data Protocol
All data are expressed as mean ± SEM and were analyzed with the use of GraphPad Prism 9.0. The Shapiro-Wilk test was used for assessing distribution. The 2-tailed Student t test and 1-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) were used for data that were normally distributed. Differences between groups were determined with the use of a 2-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test for multiple pairwise comparisons. A value of P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Rat, Dia proteomics, Cardiac dysfunction

### Affiliations
University of Missouri, Columbia
Professor of Medicine  Tufts University School of Medicine  Principal Investigator  Molecular Cardiology Research Institute  Tufts Medical Center  Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Brian Mooney

### Lab Head
Dr Lakshmi Pulakat
Professor of Medicine  Tufts University School of Medicine  Principal Investigator  Molecular Cardiology Research Institute  Tufts Medical Center  Boston, MA, USA


