### Accession
PXD003831

### Title
Analysis of CNK1-SAM domain phosphorylation sites

### Description
Scaffold proteins such as CNK1 are hubs for coordinating signalling pathways. Here, we demonstrate that CNK1 is a crucial transducer of growth factor-stimulated and oncogenic signalling. Activation of CNK1 depends on its dimerization executed by the N-terminal sterile motif alpha (SAM) domain. Accordingly, a CNK1 mutant lacking the SAM domain prevents CNK1-driven cell proliferation and matrix metalloproteinase 14 promoter activation. We identified phosphorylation of Ser22 by AKT as trigger for CNK1 dimerisation. Consistently, the mutant CNK1S22D mimicking constitutive phosphorylation stimulates CNK1 signalling, whereas the phosphoylation-dead mutant CNK1S22A does not. Searching the COSMIC database revealed Ser22 as target for oncogenic activation of CNK1. The mutant CNK1S22D and the oncogenic mutant CNK1S22F form clusters in serum-starved cells comparable to clusters of CNK1 in growth factor stimulated cells. Light-activatable CNK1, optoCNK1, based on the light-induced oligomerisation of cryptochrome 2 confirms that dimerization is the trigger for CNK1 activation. CNK1 dimers induced by activating Ser22 mutants or by light enhance cell invasion and ADP ribosylation factors 1 signalling associated with tumour formation. Positive and negative feedback mechanisms regulates CNK1 dimerisation and in this way its activity. Oncogenic mutants of CNK1 support the positive feedback while escape from negative feedback regulation.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro kinase assay Recombinant AKT was purchased from proteinkinase.de. In vitro kinase assays were performed with immunopurified HA-CNK1 overexpressed in HEK293T cells. In brief, immunopurified CNK1 was subjected to Lambda Phosphatase treatment (NEB). Followed by washing steps, AKT in vitro kinase assays were performed according to manufactures protocol (proteinkinase). Samples were boiled in sample buffer and subjected to SDS-PAGE.  EGF Stimulation CNK1-WT overexpressing HEK293T cells were stimulated with 20 ng/ml EGF. After immunopurifcation samples were processed asdescribed above. Bands corresponding to the CNK1 protein were cut out, destained and treated with 50 ng thermolysin (R+D Systems, Minneapolis, United States) for 2 h at 65 °C.  CNK1 samples were analysed on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with multiple stage activation (MSA) for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
CNK1 samples were analysed on an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with multiple stage activation (MSA) for peptide fragmentation. Peptide identification and mapping of the phosphorylation sites were performed via Mascot Daemon version 2.4.0 [26]. The samples were analyzed with no specific protease selected and phospho-Ser/Thr/Tyr, Lys-Acetylation and Met oxidation as variable modifications. The search was performed against a database containing CNK1 aswell as contamination proteins. A mascot score of 35 and a mascot delta score above 95% was set as threshold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cnk1 akt in vitro kinase egf stimulation

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Funktionelle Proteomics Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg Institut für Biologie II Schänzlestraße 1 79104 Freiburg

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Funktionelle Proteomics Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg Institut für Biologie II Schänzlestraße 1 79104 Freiburg


