### Accession
PXD020868

### Title
Nocardamine-dependent iron uptake in Pseudomonas aeruginosa : exclusive implication of the FoxA outer membrane transporter

### Description
Iron is a key nutrient for almost all living organisms and paradoxically poorly soluble and consequently poorly bioavailable. To get access to this metal, bacteria have developed many different strategies. One of the most common consists of the use of siderophores, small compounds chelating ferric iron with a very high affinity. Many bacteria are able to produce their own siderophores or use those produced by other microorganisms (exosiderophores) in a piracy strategy. Pseudomonas aeruginosa produces two siderophores, pyoverdine and pyochelin and is able to use a large panel of exosiderophores. We investigated the ability of P. aeruginosa to use nocardamine (NOCA) and ferrioxamine B (DFOB) as exosiderophores under iron-limited planktonic growth conditions. Proteomic and RT-qPCR approaches showed an induction of the transcription and expression of the outer membrane transporter FoxA in the presence of NOCA or DFO in the bacterial environment. Expression of the proteins of the heme or pyoverdine and pyochelin dependent iron uptake pathways were not affected in the presence of these two tris-hydroxamate siderophores. 55Fe uptake assays using foxA mutants demonstrated that ferri-NOCA was exclusively transported by FoxA, while ferri-DFO was transported by FoxA and at least one another unidentified transporter. The crystal structure of FoxA in complex with NOCA revealed very similar siderophore binding sites between NOCA and DFO. Iron uptake by hydroxamate exosiderophores in P. aeruginosa cells is discussed in the light of these results.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa PAO1 cells were grown overnight in CAA medium. Afterwards, bacteria were pellet and diluted in CAA medium at OD600 nm of 0.1 and grown for 8 hours in the absence or presence of 10 µM of one of the siderophores at 30°C. 5 x 108 cells were harvested and used for proteomic analysis. Each sample was prepared in biological triplicate for each cell culture condition. Cell pellets were resuspended in 200 µL of lysis buffer (UTCT buffer containing 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS and 20mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6) supplemented with nuclease and DNase. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assay using bovine serum albumin as standard. Proteins were further precipitated overnight with glacial 0.1M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol (5 volumes, - 20°C). After centrifugation at 12.000 g and 4°C during 15 min, the resulting pellets were washed twice with 0.1M ammonium acetate in 80% methanol and further dried under vacuum (Speed-Vac concentrator). Pellets were resuspended in 100µL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and submitted to reduction (5mM Dithiothreitol, 95°C, 10min) and alkylation (10mM Iodoacetamide, room temperature, 20min). Proteins were finally digested overnight with 150ng of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). The proteomic datasets were obtained by the injection of 750ng of each peptidic mixture on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC-1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) as described previously (Perraud et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained were converted into .mgf files with Proteome Discoverer Daemon software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, script “Export-to-mgf”, version 2.2). For both differential proteomic analyses, data were searched against the Pseudomonas aeruginosa UniprotKB sub- by guest on March 30, 2020 https://www.mcponline.org Downloaded from Phenotypical plasticity induced by exosiderophores 15 database with a decoy strategy (UniprotKB release 2016_12, taxon 208964, Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain PAO1, 5564 forward protein sequences). Peptides and proteins were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK). The following parameters were used: (i) Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme, (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed, (iii) methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-term were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, (iv) mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 10ppm, and at 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Mascot data were further imported into Proline v1.4 software (Bouyssié et al., 2020). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein from at least three independent biological replicates: this “BasicSC” value calculated by Proline includes all PSMs of all peptides, including the modified peptides (3 fixed and variable modifications) and the peptides shared by different protein set. After a column-wise normalization of the data matrix, the “BasicSC” spectral count values were submitted to a negative-binomial test using an edgeR GLM regression through R (R v3.2.5). The statistical test was based on the published msmsTests R package available in Bioconductor to process label-free LC-MS/MS data by spectral counts (Gregori et al., 2019). For each identified protein, an adjusted P-value (adjp) corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg was calculated, as well as a protein fold-change (FC).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Foxa, Nocardamine, Pseudomonas, Iron uptake

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
CNRS, UMR7242, UMR7242, Université de Strasbourg, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle Schalk
CNRS, UMR7242, UMR7242, Université de Strasbourg, ESBS, Bld Sébastien Brant, F-67412 Illkirch, Strasbourg, France


