### Accession
PXD035683

### Title
Human esopageal squamous cell carcinoma LC-MSMS

### Description
To analyze the changes of proteins in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma after treatment with Peptide 58

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 1% SDS, 8 M urea, 20 mM DTT, and protease inhibitors for 15 min on ice, followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 3000 ×g/ 4 °C. The total protein concentration in the supernatant was measured using BCA method. Proteins were then reduced (50 mM DTT, 60 min, 37 °C), alkylated (20 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, room temperature, in the dark), diluted with 1.5 M urea, and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at a 1:50 (enzyme: substrate) ratio for 8 h at 37 °C. The digestion was quenched with 1% TFA and the peptides were desalted with a desalting column (Thermo Fisher) before drying with vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were then resuspended in 20 µl buffer A (0.1% TFA), and 6 µl peptides were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an Easy nLC1000 online coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer through a nano-electrospray flex-ion source (all Thermo Fisher). The samples were applied to a precolumn (Acclaim PepMap C18, 100 μm x 2 cm, Thermo Fisher) at a flow rate of 3 μl/min, and then separated on an analysis column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm x 15 cm, Thermo Fisher) using a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were separated and directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using the linear gradient: 0-3 min, 4-7% B; 3-59 min,7-20% B; 59-80 min, 20-30% B; 80-82 min, 30-90% B.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using DIA mode. A full MS scan was acquired by analyzing 200-2000 m/z at resolution 120,000 (at m/z of 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 4.8E5 and maximum IT of 50 ms. After MS scan, twenty MS/MS scans were then obtained, each having a 30 000 resolution at a m/z of 200, AGC target 2E5, and collision energy as 32%, with the default charge state set to 2 and the maximum IT set to 72 ms. The cycles of the 20 MS/MS scans (center of isolation window) with three types of wide isolation window were as follows (m/z): 368.5, 399, 418, 432, 444.5, 455, 464.5, 473.5, 482.5, 491, 499.5, 508, 516.5, 525, 533, 541.5, 550, 558, 566.5, 575.5. The full cycle of MS and MS/MS scan acquisition was approximately 3 second in duration and was repeated throughout the LC/MS/MS analysis. Bioinformatic analyses, specifically, Gene Ontology (GO) annotation, KEGG annotation and enrichment analysis were undertaken.

### Publication Abstract
Emerging evidence indicates that SOX2 is an oncogene for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). However, direct targeting of SOX2 is not feasible given that this transcription factor plays important roles in the maintenance of tissues such as the brain. Here, we identified CDP (Homeobox protein cut-like 1 or CASP) as a unique SOX2 binding partner enriched in ESCC with Duolink proximity ligation assay, bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFc) and immunoprecipitation. We then screened a peptide aptamer library using BiFc and immunoprecipitation and identified several peptide aptamers, including P58, that blocked the CDP/SOX2 interaction, leading to the inhibition of ESCC progress in vitro and in vivo. Upon administration, synthetic peptide P58, containing the YGRKKRRQRRR cell-penetrating peptide and the fluorophore TAMRA, also blocked the growth and metastasis of ESCC in both mice and zebrafish. Therefore, targeting the SOX2 binding partner CDP with peptide P58 offers an alternative avenue to treat ESCC with increased SOX2 levels.

### Keywords
Therapy, Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, Peptide

### Affiliations
Xiamen University

### Submitter
Kuancan Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Kuancan Liu
Xiamen University


