### Accession
PXD039392

### Title
N-terminal COFRADIC on cytosolic proteins of HEK293T cells - UniProt search

### Description
N-terminal proteoforms stem from the same gene but differ at their N-terminus, and most of these are found to be truncated, though some are N-terminally extended caused by ribosomes starting translation from codons in the annotated 5’UTR, and/or carry modified N-termini different from those of the canonical protein. Biological functions of N-terminal proteoforms are emerging, however, it remains unknown to what extend N-terminal proteoforms further expand the functional complexity. To address this in a more global manner, we mapped the interactomes of several pairs of N-terminal proteoforms and their canonical counterparts. For this, we first generated an in-depth catalogue of N-terminal proteoforms in the cytosol of HEK293T cells. As the N-terminal region is the part that differs between the proteoforms, we performed N-terminal enrichment via COFRADIC on the cytosol of HEK293T cells. We combined three digestion enzymes to increase the depth of analysis. Data was searched twise: once with a regular UniProt database and a second time with a custom database (combining the sequences of UniProt proteins, UniProt isoforms and publicly available Ribo-seq data). Data was filtered and this resulted in a catalogue of 3,306 N-termini from which 20 pairs of canonical protein and N-terminal proteoform(s) were selected for interactome analysis. Our analysis of these pairs revealed that the overlap of the interactomes for both proteoforms is in general high, showing their functional relation. However, for all pairs tested we do report differences as well. We show that N-terminal proteoforms can be engaged in new/different interactions and as well can lose several interactions compared to the canonical protein.

### Sample Protocol
Cytosolic extracts were prepared from 2.5 x107 HEK293T cells by lysis in on ice a cell-free system buffer (CFS) containing digitonin which permeabilizes the membrane. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation and the supernatants (= cytosolic extract) were collected.  As digitonin interferes with LC-MS/MS samples were cleaned-up by using Pierce® Detergent removal spin columns according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Guanidinium hydrochloride was added to a final concentration of 4 M before proteins were reduced (with TCEP) and alkylated (with iodoacetamide). To enable the assignment of in vivo Nt-acetylation events, all primary protein amines were blocked using stable isotope encoded acetate, i.e. an NHS-ester of 13C1D3-acetate. Prior to digestion, the samples were desalted on a NAP-10 column in 50 mM freshly prepared ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.8. Samples were digested either with trypsin in a trypsin/protein ratio of 1/50 (w/w) and incubated overnight at 37 °C, chymotrypsin in a chymotrypsin/protein ratio of 1/20 (w/w) and incubated overnight at 25 °C or GluC in a GluC/protein ratio of 1/20 (w/w) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Samples were vacuum dried and re-dissolved in 80 µl loading solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA in ddH2O). All methionine’s were oxidized by adding 2 µl of 30% w/v H2O2 before sorting the N-terminal peptides by two subsequent reversed-phase (RP)-HPLC fractionations. Following 10 min isocratic pumping with solvent A(10 mM ammonium acetate in water/ACN (98:2 v/v),pH 5.5), a gradient was started of 1% solvent B increase per minute (solvent B was 10 mM ammonium acetate in ACN/water (70:30 v/v), pH 5.5). The column was then run at 100% solvent B for 5 min, switched to 100% solvent A and re-equilibrated for 20 min. The flow was kept constant at 80 mL/min. Fractions of 4 min wide were collected from 20 to 80 min after sample injection. Such primary fractions were dried and re-dissolved in 50 mL of 50 mM sodium borate (pH 9.5). Solution of TNBS (10 mL, 15 mM) in 50 mM sodium borate (pH 9.5) was added and reacted with free amines for. This last step was repeated four times without intermediate drying. TNBS-modified fractions were acidified with 5 mL of concentrated acetic acid, reloaded on the same RP-column and separated using the same gradient as during the primary run. Secondary fractions, highly enriched for N-terminal peptides, were collected in the same time interval as used for the primary fraction but now we used eight 30 s wide collection intervals. The collected secondary fractions were dried and re-dissolved in 20 mL water/ACN (98:2 v/v) and half of each analyte mixture was sampled by LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD). The peptides were separated on a 200 cm µPAC™ column (C18-endcapped functionality, 300 µm wide channels, 5 µm porous-shell pillars, inter pillar distance of 2.5 µm and a depth of 20 µm). The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50 °C. Peptides were eluted by a linear gradient reaching 33% MS solvent B (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) after 42 min, 55% MS solvent B after 58 min and 99% MS solvent B  at 60 min, followed by a 10-minutes wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The first 15 min the flow rate was set to 750 nl/min after which it was kept constant at 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full-scan MS spectra (300-1500 m/z) were acquired in 3 s acquisition cycles at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target AGC value of 200,000 with a maximum injection time of 250 ms. The precursor ions were filtered for charge states (2-7 required), dynamic range (60 s; +/- 10 ppm window) and intensity (minimal intensity of 5E3). The precursor ions were selected in the ion routing multipole with an isolation window of 1.6 Da and accumulated to an AGC target of 10E3 or a maximum injection time of 40 ms and activated using CID fragmentation (35% NCE). The fragments were analyzed in the Ion Trap Analyzer at rapid scan rate.

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS peak lists were searched with Mascot using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.6.0, Matrix Science). MS data was matched against the UniProt database. The Mascot search parameters were as follows: heavy acetylation of lysine side chains (with 13C1D3-acetate), carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide were set as fixed modifications. Variable modifications were acetylation of N-termini (both light and heavy due to the 13C1D3 label) and pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine (both at the peptide level). The enzyme settings were: endoproteinase semi-Arg-C/P (semi-Arg-C specificity with Arg-Pro cleavage allowed) allowing for two missed cleavages for the trypsin sample. For chymotrypsin and GluC, the enzyme settings were semi-Chymo and semi-GluC. For GluC, two missed cleavages were allowed while for chymotrypsin four missed cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm on the precursor ion and to 0.5 Da on fragment ions. In addition, the C13 setting of Mascot was set to 1. Peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put to ESI-TRAP. Raw DAT-result files of MASCOT were further queried using ms_lims.  Only peptides that were ranked first and scored above the threshold score set at 99% confidence were withheld. The FDR was estimated by searching a decoy database (a reversed version of the UniProt database) and resulted in an FDR of 0.44% for the trypsin sample, 0.14% for the chymotrypsin sample and 0.53% for the GluC sample. From this data set, N-terminal peptides were selected and classified. The selection workflow was built in KNIME (version 4.0.2, see https://www.knime.com/). Selection was done per enzyme, all identified peptides (co-translationally acetylated, heavy acetylated (blocked) peptides and N-terminally free peptides) were used as input.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
N-terminal peptides, Cofradic, Atis, 3 proteases, Lc-ms/ms, Cytosol, Hek293t cells

### Affiliations
VIB - Center for medical Biotechnology
Ghent University - Department of Biomolecular Medicine
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent  Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University,Ghent

### Submitter
Annelies Bogaert

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology, VIB, Ghent  Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University,Ghent


