### Accession
PXD022246

### Title
Exocyst Subunit Exo70B2 is Linked to Immune Signalling and Autophagy

### Description
During the immune response, activation of the secretory pathway is key to mount an effective response, while gaging its output is important to maintain cellular homeostasis. Exo70 subunit of the exocyst functions as a spatiotemporal regulator by mediating numerous interactions with proteins and lipids. However, a molecular understanding of the exocyst regulation remains challenging. We show that the Exo70B2 behaves as a bona fide exocyst subunit. Conversely, treatment with the salicylic acid (SA) defence hormone analogue Benzothiadiazole (BTH), or the immunogenic peptide flg22, induced Exo70B2 transport into the vacuole. We reveal that Exo70B2 interacts with ATG8 via two ATG8-interacting motives (AIMs) and its transport into the vacuole was dependent on autophagy. In line with its role in immunity, we discovered that Exo70B2 interacted with and was phosphorylated by the kinase MPK3. Mimicking phosphorylation had a dual impact on Exo70B2; first, by inhibiting localization at sites of active secretion, and second, it increased the interaction with ATG8. Phosphonull variants displayed higher Effector-Triggered Immunity (ETI) and were hypersensitive to BTH, which induce secretion and autophagy. Our results suggest a molecular mechanism by which phosphorylation diverts Exo70B2 from the secretory into the autophagy pathway for its degradation, to dampen secretory activity.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana (Col-0 accession) was used throughout this study. Seeds were surface sterilized and germinated on 1/2 Murashige Skoog media (pH 5.7) supplemented with 0.25% sucrose and 0.7% agar. The transgenic lines used in this study are: GFP-Exo70B2 #2, GFP-Exo70B2 S554/567A #3, GFP-Exo70B2 S554/567D #5. Additional used alleles: GFP-Exo70B2 #4, GFP-Exo70B2 S554/567A #4, GFP-Exo70B2 S554/567D #1. In vitro kinase assays were separated by SDS-PAGE. Coomassie G250 stained protein bands were excised, reduced with dithiotreithol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) and in-gel digested with trypsin. Peptides were desalted on in-house prepared C18 STAGE-Tips as described previously (Majovsky et al., 2014). Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN in water and injected into an EASY nLC-II liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using C18 reverse phase chemistry with a column length of 10cm, a column inner diameter (ID) of 75µm, a particle size of 3µm and a 60min gradient from 5 to 40% ACN in water and a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were electrosprayed on-line into an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS peptide sequencing was performed using a Top20 DDA inclusion list scan strategy to target specifically phosphorylated peptides containing the amino acid residues serine (S) and threonine (T) followed by proline (MAPK phosphorylation site motifs). Ex vivo immunoprecipitated proteins were separated and digested as above. Dried peptides were injected into an EASY nLC1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated as above with a column length of 50cm, ID of 75µm and a particle size of 2µm using a 90 min gradient and a flow rate of 250nl/min. Peptides were electrosprayed on-line into a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer from Thermo Fisher Scientific. A Top 10 DDA inclusion list scan strategy was used to target phosphorylated peptides as above. Peptides were identified and phosphorylation sites mapped as above, tolerating a precursor ion mass error of 5 ppm and a fragment ion mass error of 0.02 Da.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and phosphorylation sites mapped using the Mascot Software v. 2.5.0 (Matrix Science) linked to Proteome Discoverer v1.4. (PD, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to search the TAIR10 database (35934 sequences, 14486974 residues) and the phosphoRS module also in PD. A precursor mass error of 7ppm and a fragment ion mass error of 0.8Da was tolerated, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and phosphorylation of S and T were set as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) was determined with the target-decoy database approach, peptide spectral matches (PSMs) with a q-value <0.05 were accepted.

### Publication Abstract
During the immune response, activation of the secretory pathway is key to mounting an effective response, while gauging its output is important to maintain cellular homeostasis. The Exo70 subunit of the exocyst functions as a spatiotemporal regulator by mediating numerous interactions with proteins and lipids. However, a molecular understanding of the exocyst regulation remains challenging. We show that, in Arabidopsis thaliana, Exo70B2 behaves as a bona fide exocyst subunit. Conversely, treatment with the salicylic acid (SA) defence hormone analog benzothiadiazole (BTH), or the immunogenic peptide flg22, induced Exo70B2 transport into the vacuole. We reveal that Exo70B2 interacts with AUTOPHAGY-RELATED PROTEIN 8 (ATG8) via two ATG8-interacting motives (AIMs) and its transport into the vacuole is dependent on autophagy. In line with its role in immunity, we discovered that Exo70B2 interacted with and was phosphorylated by the kinase MPK3. Mimicking phosphorylation had a dual impact on Exo70B2: first, by inhibiting localization at sites of active secretion, and second, it increased the interaction with ATG8. Phosphonull variants displayed higher effector-triggered immunity (ETI) and were hypersensitive to BTH, which induce secretion and autophagy. Our results suggest a molecular mechanism by which phosphorylation diverts Exo70B2 from the secretory into the autophagy pathway for its degradation, to dampen secretory activity.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Secretion, Atg8, Signalling, Exo70b2, Vacuole, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Research Group Head Proteome Biology of Plant Interactions
IPB Halle

### Submitter
Steffen Neumann

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Hoehenwarter
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry Research Group Head Proteome Biology of Plant Interactions


