### Accession
PXD032055

### Title
Human NMDAR autoantibodies disrupt excitatory-inhibitory balance leading to hippocampal network hypersynchrony

### Description
Specific autoantibodies against the NMDA-receptor (NMDAR) GluN1 subunit cause severe and debilitating NMDAR-encephalitis. Autoantibodies induce prototypic disease symptoms resembling schizophrenia, including psychosis and cognitive dysfunction. Using a mouse passive transfer model applying human monoclonal anti-GluN1-autoantibodies, we observed CA1 pyramidal neuron hypoexcitability, reduced AMPA-receptor (AMPAR) signaling, and faster synaptic inhibition resulting in disrupted excitatory-inhibitory balance. Functional alterations were supported by widespread remodeling of the hippocampal proteome, including changes in glutamatergic and GABAergic neurotransmission. At the network level, anti-GluN1-autoantibodies amplified gamma oscillations and disrupted theta-gamma coupling. A data-informed network model revealed that lower AMPAR strength and faster GABAA-receptor current kinetics chiefly account for these abnormal oscillations. As predicted by our model and evidenced experimentally, positive allosteric modulation of AMPARs alleviated aberrant gamma activity and thus reinforced the causative effects of the excitatory-inhibitory imbalance. Collectively, NMDAR-hypofunction-induced aberrant synaptic, cellular, and network dynamics provide new mechanistic insights into disease symptoms in NMDAR-encephalitis and schizophrenia.

### Sample Protocol
Immediately after decapitation, several hippocampi were dissected and flash-frozen at -40°C and subsequently stored at -80°C. Hippocampi were thawed and transferred into Precellys® lysing kit tubes (Keramik-kit 1.4/2.8 mm, 2 ml (CKM)) containing 200 µl of PBS supplemented with 1 tab of cOmplete™, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor per 50 ml. For homogenization, tissues were shaken twice at 6000 rpm for 30 s using Precellys® 24 Dual (Bertin Instruments, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France) and the homogenate was transferred to new 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes. For each sample, 100 µl of homogenate was diluted with 2x lysis buffer (final concentrations: 2 % SDS, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.0), sonicated in a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode, Seraing, Belgium) for 10 cycles with 1 min ON and 30 s OFF with high intensity at 20 °C, and then heated at 95 °C for 10 min. A second sonication cycle was performed as described above. Lysates were stored at -80 °C until further processing. Lysates were thawed, sonicated as described above, and aliquots corresponding to 100 µg of protein were reduced using 10 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature and alkylated using freshly made 15 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently, proteins were acetone precipitated and digested using LysC (Wako sequencing grade) and trypsin (Promega sequencing grade), as described by Buczak et al. (cite ). The digested proteins were then acidified with 10 % (v/v) trifluoracetic acid and desalted using Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm following manufacturer instructions. The eluates were dried down using a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 5 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, samples were transferred to an MS vial, diluted to a concentration of 1 µg/µl, and spiked with iRT kit peptides (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) prior to analysis.

### Data Protocol
Approximatively 1μg of reconstituted were separated using a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA) was coupled online to the MS. Peptide mixtures were separated in trap/elute mode, using a trapping (Waters nanoEase M/Z Symmetry C18, 5μm, 180 μm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (Waters nanoEase M/Z Peptide C18, 1.7μm, 75μm x 250mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A, at 5 μL/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 300 nL/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a nonlinear fashion from 0% to 40% in 120 min. Total runtime was 145 min, including cleanup and column re-equilibration. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300 °C. The RF lens was set to 30%. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The filling time was set at maximum of 20 ms with an AGC target of 5 x 105 ions. Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) scans were acquired with 40 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. The HCD collision energy was set to 30%. MS/MS scan resolution in the Orbitrap was set to 30,000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200m/z after accumulation of 1x 106 ions or after filling time of 70ms (whichever occurred first). Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing Tune version 2.1 and Xcalibur 4.1 were employed. Raw DIA files were analysed in directDIA mode using Spectronaut Pulsar (v15, Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland). The data were searched against a species specific protein database (Uniprot Mus musculus release 2016_01) with a list of common contaminants. The data were searched with the following modifications: carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification, and oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term) as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. The search was set to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) at both protein and peptide levels. DIA data were then uploaded and searched against this spectral library using Spectronaut Professional (v.15) and default settings. Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each pairwise comparison using the replicate samples from each condition using default settings, except: Major Group Quantity = median peptide quantity; Major Group Top N = OFF; Minor Group Quantity = median precursor quantity; Minor Group Top N = OFF; Data Filtering = Q value; Normalization Strategy = Local normalization; Row Selection = Automatic; Exclude Single Hit Proteins = TRUE. Differential abundance testing was performed using an un-paired t-test between replicates. P values were corrected for multiple testing multiple testing correction with the method described by Storey (cite ). The data (candidate table) and protein quantity data report were exported and further data analyses and visualization were performed with R (v.4.0.5) and R studio server (v. 2022.02.0) using in-house pipelines and scripts. KEGG pathway and Gene Ontology over-representation analyses were performed with WebGestalt (cite ) using the significant protein groups (q<0.05) against a background of all the quantified protein groups. Significantly enriched pathways and GO terms were defined using a cut-off of FDR < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Anti-NMDA receptor autoantibodies (NMDAR-Abs) in patients with NMDAR encephalitis cause severe disease symptoms resembling psychosis and cause cognitive dysfunction. After passive transfer of patients' cerebrospinal fluid or human monoclonal anti-GluN1-autoantibodies in mice, we find a disrupted excitatory-inhibitory balance resulting from CA1 neuronal hypoexcitability, reduced AMPA receptor (AMPAR) signaling, and faster synaptic inhibition in acute hippocampal slices. Functional alterations are also reflected in widespread remodeling of the hippocampal proteome, including changes in glutamatergic and GABAergic neurotransmission. NMDAR-Abs amplify network &#x3b3; oscillations and disrupt &#x3b8;-&#x3b3; coupling. A data-informed network model reveals that lower AMPAR strength and faster GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor current kinetics chiefly account for these abnormal oscillations. As predicted in silico and evidenced ex&#xa0;vivo, positive allosteric modulation of AMPARs alleviates aberrant &#x3b3; activity, reinforcing the causative effects of the excitatory-inhibitory imbalance. Collectively, NMDAR-Ab-induced aberrant synaptic, cellular, and network dynamics provide conceptual insights into NMDAR-Ab-mediated pathomechanisms and reveal promising therapeutic targets that merit future in&#xa0;vivo validation.

### Keywords
Neural network modeling, Autoantibodies, Nmda receptor encephalitis, Excitatory-inhibitory imbalance, Nmda receptor, Theta-gamma coupling, Network oscillation

### Affiliations
Department for Neurology Section Translational Neuroimmunology Jena University Hospital Am Klinikum 1, D-07747 Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Geis
Department for Neurology Section Translational Neuroimmunology Jena University Hospital Am Klinikum 1, D-07747 Jena, Germany


