### Accession
PXD035711

### Title
Metal-induced Protein Precipitation in E. coli

### Description
Using a range of copper we have utilized Metal-induced Protein Precipitaiton (MiPP) technique to elucidate the copper midpoints of the proteins found in an E. coli proteome. Using bottem-up proteomics techniques and TMT-10 plex isobaric mass-tags we were able to use MiPP to classify proteins based off of their sensitivity to copper.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli lysates were subjected to a Stability of Proteins from Rates of Oxidation (SPROX) analysis using a protocol reported previously Strickland et al. The SPROX analysis involved combining 10 μL aliquots of a cell lysate (10 mg/mL) with 26 μL of a range of GdmCl-containing buffers at varying concentrations. This resulted in final concentrations of 2.8 mg/mL lysate and GdmCl concentrations ranging from 0.25 M to 2.5 M across 10 samples. Lysates were allowed to incubate with denaturants for 30 min at room temperature. Oxidation of exposed methionine residues was initiated upon addition of 4 μL of H2O2 (0.98 M final concentration) to each of the ten samples. The oxidation reaction was quenched by adding a 500 μL aliquot of 500 mM TCEP. Each of the quenched samples was subjected to a bottom-up proteomics sample preparation using an iFASP protocol described by McDowell et al. and similar to that for the CPP analysis described above. Each sample was transferred into a 10 kDa MWCO centrifugal filter unit. Buffer exchange was performed by adding 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5 followed by TCEP reduction, MMTS alkylation, digestion with trypsin, and TMT10-Plex labeling according to manufacturer’s protocol. Labeled peptides were centrifuged through the filters after addition of 0.5 M NaCl. Equal volumes from each TMT10-Plex labeled sample were combined into one final sample. The final sample was transferred to a C18 Macrospin column for desalting before undergoing methionine peptide enrichment using a Pi3 Methionine reagent kit according to manufacturer’s protocol. The enriched sample underwent one final C18 desalting step prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data generated in the protein expression experiments was searched using fixed MMTS modification on cysteine; TMT10-plex labeling of lysine side chains and peptide N-termini; variable oxidation of methionine; variable deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; and variable acetylation of the protein N-terminus. Trypsin (full) was set as the enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. For peptide and protein quantification, reporter abundance was set as intensity, and normalization mode and scaling mode were each set as none. All other settings were left as the default values. Data was exported at the protein-level for quantitation. Only proteins with FDR confidence labeled as "high" or “medium” (i.e., FDR < 1% or < 5%), PSMs ≥ 2, and having no TMT-tag abundances of zero were used for subsequent analyses. The data was normalized as previously described in reference Stickland et al.

### Publication Abstract
Metal cations have been exploited for their precipitation properties in a wide variety of studies, ranging from differentiating proteins from serum and blood to identifying the protein targets of drugs. Despite widespread recognition of this phenomenon, the mechanisms of metal-induced protein aggregation have not been fully elucidated. Recent studies have suggested that copper's (Cu) ability to induce protein aggregation may be a main contributor to Cu-induced cell death. Here, we provide the first proteome-wide analysis of the relative sensitivities of proteins across the Escherichia coli proteome to Cu-induced aggregation. We utilize a metal-induced protein precipitation (MiPP) methodology that relies on quantitative bottom-up proteomics to define the metal concentration-dependent precipitation properties of proteins on a proteomic scale. Our results establish that Cu far surpasses other metals in promoting protein aggregation and that the protein aggregation is reversible upon metal chelation. The bulk of the Cu bound in the protein aggregates is Cu1+, regardless of the Cu2+ source. Analysis of our MiPP data allows us to investigate underlying biophysical characteristics that determine a protein's sensitivity to Cu-induced aggregation, which is independent of the relative concentration of protein in the lysate. Overall, this analysis provides new insights into the mechanism behind Cu cytotoxicity, as well as metal cation-induced protein aggregation.

### Keywords
Cpp, Sprox, Precipitiation, Metal, Copper, E. coli

### Affiliations
Duke University
Chemistry, Fitzgerald lab, Duke University, USA

### Submitter
grace bertles

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Chemistry, Fitzgerald lab, Duke University, USA


