### Accession
PXD023654

### Title
Hybrid label-free quantification proteomics and QconCAT-assisted quantification of amylase-trypsin inhibitors from flours of 150 wheat varieties (3 field locations) by LC-MSE

### Description
Wheat (Triticum aestivum ssp. aestivum) contributes to 20% of the human protein supply, delivers essential amino acids and is of fundamental importance for bread and pasta quality. Wheat proteins are also involved in adverse human reactions like celiac disease, wheat allergy and the non-celiac wheat sensitivity (NCWS). Using LC-MS-based LFQ proteomics of aqueous flour extracts we determined 756 proteins across 150 wheat varieties grown in three environments. However, only 303 proteins were stably expressed across all environments in at least one variety underlining the large influence of environmental conditions on the expression of many proteins. Moreover, only 89 proteins were comparably expressed by all 150 varieties, with high coefficients of variation for the other proteins.  Heritability (h) ranged from 0-1 with 114 proteins having h² > 0.6. Therefore, the expression of the variable proteins should be amenable to targeted manipulation across the wheat supply chain by varietal choice and breeding. Our study provides a first approach towards a fast and high-throughput methodology for quantifying these proteins which is required to breed wheats with the desired properties. Amylase trypsin inhibitors (ATIs) appear as a potential trigger for NCWS inducing intestinal and extra-intestinal inflammation. Studies on the prevalence and genetic architecture of ATI proteins in wheat are lacking so far. Large differences in the content and composition of 8 ATIs in the different varieties were identified by QconCAT-assisted quantification. The ATI proteins had low coefficients of correlations with quality traits commonly analyzed in wheat breeding. However, heritability was quite low except for ATI 0.28 and ATI CM2. A genome wide association mapping revealed a complex genetic architecture built up on many small but few medium and two major quantitative trait loci (QTL). The latter were on chromosome 3B for ATI 0.19-like and 6B for ATI 0.28 explaining 70.6 and 68.7% of the genetic variance, respectively. Using the wheat reference genome sequence, seven potential candidate genes behind the medium and major QTL were described with only one showing polymorphism based on exome capture analysis. Consequently, wheat breeding could contribute to a reduction of ATI contents in wheat products if incidence of ATI on human health is further confirmed.

### Sample Protocol
- Generation of globulin/albumin extracts from wheat flours, - Spike-in of isotope-labeled QconCAT containing standard peptides for the quantification of ATI, - In-solution trypsin digestion + C18 desalting, - Microflow LC-MS using 20 min-gradients and DIA (i.e. MSE).

### Data Protocol
- Raw data processing and DB search using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS), - Targeted data extraction of isotopically labeled peptides and unlabeled forms, followed by absolute quantification at the MS1 level using Skyline, - LFQ proteomics analysis using ISOQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Wheat (<i>Triticum aestivum</i> ssp. <i>aestivum</i>) contributes to 20% of the human protein supply, delivers essential amino acids and is of fundamental importance for bread and pasta quality. Wheat proteins are also involved in adverse human reactions like celiac disease (CD), wheat allergy (WA) and non-celiac wheat sensitivity (NCWS). Using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS)-based label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics of aqueous flour extracts, we determined 756 proteins across 150 wheat cultivars grown in three environments. However, only 303 proteins were stably expressed across all environments in at least one cultivar and only 89 proteins thereof across all 150 cultivars. This underlines the large influence of environmental conditions on the expression of many proteins. Wheat cultivars varied largely in their protein profile, shown by high coefficients of variation across different cultivars. Heritability (h<sup>2</sup>) ranged from 0-1, with 114 proteins having h&#xb2; &gt; 0.6, including important proteins for baking quality and human health. The expression of these 114 proteins should be amenable to targeted manipulation across the wheat supply chain by varietal choice and breeding for designing healthier wheat with better quality. Further technical development is urgently required to assign functions to identifiable proteins labeled yet uncharacterized in databases and speeding up detection methods to routinely use proteomics in wheat supply chains.

### Keywords
Synapt g2-s, Non-celiac wheat sensitivity (ncws), Amylase-trypsin inhibitors (atis), Breeding, Proteomics, Label-free quantification (lfq), Data-independent acquisition (dia), Wheat varieties, Qconcat, Mse

### Affiliations
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Germany
University Medical Center Mainz

### Submitter
Malte Sielaff

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Germany


