### Accession
PXD009137

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics of Acutely Isolated Mouse Microglia Identifies Novel Immune Alzheimer's Disease-related Proteins

### Description
Microglia are innate immune cells of the brain that perform phagocytic and inflammatory functions in disease conditions. Transcriptomic studies of acutely-isolated microglia have provided novel insights into their molecular and functional diversity in homeostatic and neurodegenerative disease states. State-of-the-art mass spectrometric methods can comprehensively characterize proteomic alterations in microglia in neurodegenerative disorders, potentially providing novel functionally-relevant molecular insights that are not provided by transcriptomics. However, proteomic profiling of adult primary microglia in neurodegenerative disease conditions has not been performed. We performed quantitative proteomic analyses of purified CD11b+ acutely-isolated microglia adult mice in normal, acute neuroinflammatory (LPS-treatment) and chronic neurodegenerative states (5xFAD model of Alzheimer’s disease [AD]) using tandem mass tag mass spectrometry. Differential expression analyses were performed to characterize specific microglial proteomic changes in 5xFAD mice and identify overlap with LPS-induced pro-inflammatory changes. Our results were also contrasted with existing proteomic data from wild-type mouse microglia and from existing microglial transcriptomic data from wild-type and 5xFAD mice. Neuropathological validation studies of select proteins were performed in human AD and 5xFAD brains. Of 4,133 proteins identified, 187 microglial proteins were differentially expressed in the 5xFAD mouse model of AD pathology, including proteins with previously known (Apoe, Clu and Htra1) as well as previously unreported relevance to AD biology (Cotl1 and Hexb). Proteins upregulated in 5xFAD microglia shared significant overlap with pro-inflammatory changes observed in LPS-treated mice. Several proteins increased in human AD brain were also upregulated by 5xFAD microglia (Aβ peptide, Apoe, Htra1, Cotl1 and Clu). Cotl1 was identified as a novel microglia-specific marker with increased expression and strong association with AD neuropathology. Apoe protein was also detected within plaque-associated microglia in which Apoe and Aβ were highly co-localized suggesting a role for Apoe in phagocytic clearance of Aβ. We report the first comprehensive comparative proteomic study of adult mouse microglia derived from acute neuroinflammatory and AD models, representing a valuable resource to the neuroscience research community. We highlight shared and unique microglial proteomic changes in acute neuroinflammatory, aging and AD mouse models in addition to identifying novel roles for microglial proteins in human neurodegeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Animals: Female C57BL/6J and female 5xFAD mice (on a C57BL/6J background) used for the studies were housed in the Department of Animal Resources at Emory University under standard conditions with no special food/water accommodations. Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approval was obtained prior to in-vivo work and all work was performed in strict accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. Adult mice were given intraperitoneal LPS injections (10 µg/dose x 4 daily doses) to induce acute neuroinflammation [11, 12]. If ≥25% of weight loss was observed, animals were euthanized. Three groups of adult 6-7 mo old C57BL/6J mice (n=3 pools each, 2 mouse brains per pool) were used for our studies. Wild-type (WT) mice (untreated), WT mice treated with LPS for 4 consecutive days (IP, 20µg/dose) and 5xFAD mice were euthanized followed by extensive cardiac perfusion. Acute isolation and enrichment of CD11b+ microglia and brain mononuclear phagocytes: The brain was dissected and brain mononuclear cells were isolated as previously described by Percoll gradient centrifugation [12]. Mechanical homogenization of the brain was performed rather than enzymatic digestion due to two reasons: (1) in our experience, live microglial cell yield using enzymatic or mechanical dissociation methods are very similar (200,000 mononuclear cells per brain), and (2) enzymatic digestion may cleave cell surface proteins, thereby potentially decreasing the likelihood of identifying cell surface proteins by mass spectroscopy. Isolated cells were then further purified by CD11b positive selection using a MACS column (Miltenyi Biotec Cat#130-093-636) to selectively enrich microglia and brain mononuclear phagocytes. Positive selection enriched the CD11b+ population from 60% to 95% as confirmed by flow cytometry. On average, 200,000 live CD11b+ cells were isolated from each brain. Whole cell microglial lysates were prepared and processed for mass-spectroscopy. Sample preparation for mass-spectroscopic studies: Cell pellets were flash frozen and stored at -80 °C until ready for protein extraction. Cells were lysed in 8 M urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NaHPO4, pH 8.5) with HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher). Each sample was then sonicated for 3 cycles consisting of 5 seconds of active sonication at 30% amplitude followed by 15 seconds on ice. Samples were then centrifuged for 5 minutes at 15,000 g and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce) and 20µg of each sample was aliquoted.  Protein digestion and sample cleanup was performed as previously published [13].  Briefly, protein samples were reduced with 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 mins, alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for another 30 mins and then 8-fold diluted with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Overnight digestion was performed with 1:100 (w/w) Lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) followed by an additional 12-hour digestion with Trypsin at 1:50 (w/w). The peptide solutions were acidified, and desalted with a C18 Sep-Pak column (Waters).  A 2µg equivalent of each sample elution was used to create a global internal standard (GIS) and all samples were dried under vacuum.  Tandem mass tag (TMT) peptide labeling was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions and as previously described [13]. One batch of 10-plex TMT kits (Thermo Fisher) was used to label the 9 samples and one GIS mixtures. In this batch, TMT channel 131 was used to label the GIS standard, while the 9 remaining TMT channels were used to label each individual sample. Electrostatic repulsion-hydrophilic interaction chromatography (ERLIC) offline fractionation was performed as previously described [14]. Briefly, dried samples were re-suspended in 100 µL of ERLIC buffer A (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% acetic acid) and separated on a PolyWAX LP column (20 cm by 3.2 mm packed with 300Å 5 µm beads from PolyLC Incover a 45-minute gradient from 0 to 50% ERLIC buffer B (30% ACN with 0.1% FA). The original 44 fractions were concatenated as previously described into 21 and dried under vacuum.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS and TMT data acquisition: Assuming equal distribution of peptide concentration across all ERLIC fractions, 10 µL of loading buffer (0.1% TFA) was added to each of the fractions and 2 µL was separated on a 25 cm long 75 µm ID fused silica column (New Objective, Woburn, MA) packed in-house with 1.9 µm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin.  The LC-MS platform consisted of a Dionex RSLCnano UPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer with a Flex nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher). Sample elution was performed over a gradient of 3 to 30% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) over 105 mins (flow rate started at 300nl/min and ended at 350nl/min), from 30 to 60% B over 20 mins at 350nl/min, and from 60 to 99% B over 5 mins at 350nl/min.  The column was equilibrated with 1% B for 10 minutes at a flow rate that increased from 350 nl/min to 400nl/min. Data acquisition was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer as previously described [13]. The mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was operated in positive ion mode and utilized the synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 method for reporter ion quantitation. The full scan range was 380-1500 m/z at a nominal resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z and automatic gain control (AGC) set to 2 x 105. Collision-induced dissociation (CID)-Tandem MS/MS at 35% normalize collision energy (CE) and higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) SPS-MS3 at 65% normalized CE   were collected at top speed with 3 second cycles.  For SPS, the top 10 product ions were notched and fragmented.  Protein Identification and Quantification: Raw data files from Orbitrap Fusion were processed using Proteome Discover (version 2.1). MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProtKB Mouse proteome database (54,489 total sequences) in addition to adding human Aβ sequence, as previously reported [13]. SEQUEST parameters were specified as: trypsin enzyme, two missed cleavages allowed, minimum peptide length of 6, TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+ 229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+ 57.02146 Da) as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine residues (+ 15.99492 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (+0.984 Da) as a variable modification, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 daltons. Peptide spectral match (PSM) error rates were determined using the target-decoy strategy coupled to Percolator [15] modeling of true and false matches. Reporter ions were quantified from MS3 scans using an integration tolerance of 20 ppm with the most confident centroid setting. An MS2 spectral assignment false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was achieved by applying the target-decoy strategy. Following spectral assignment, peptides were assembled into proteins and were further filtered based on the combined probabilities of their constituent peptides to a final FDR of 1%. In cases of redundancy, shared peptides were assigned to the protein sequence with the most matching peptides, thus adhering to principles of parsimony. The search results and TMT quantification as well as raw LC-MS/MS files are included in the ProteomeXchange online repository.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain resident microglia, Cd11b-positive

### Affiliations
Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology
Emory University

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried
Emory University School of Medicine Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology


