### Accession
PXD006662

### Title
Proteomic characterization of transcription and splicing factors associated with a more invasive phenotype in colorectal cancer

### Description
To find new transcription and splicing factors associated with the metastatic phenotype we used a concatenated tandem array of consensus transcription factors response elements (catTFRE) on nuclear extracts of colon cancer cell lines. We used two different isogenic pairs of colorectal metastatic cells, KM12SM/KM12C and SW620/480. Proteins were pulled-down using biotinylated DNA sequences and streptavidin beads and analyzed by LC-MSMS.

### Sample Protocol
Pulled down -catTFRE protein complexes were reduced, alkylated and digested with 4 µg of Lys-C (Wako) for 2 h at 37 ºC and with 5 µg of trypsin overnight at 37 ºC. Resulting peptides were desalted using C18 OMIX tips (Agilent Technologies), vacuum-dried and reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Three technical replicates of each sample were injected onto a precolumn C18-A1 ASY-Column (2 cm, ID100 µm, 5µm) (Thermo Scientific) and run with a linear gradient of 2–35 % ACN in 0.1% aqueous solution of formic acid. The gradient was performed over 100 min using an Easy-nLC (Thermo Scientific) at a flow-rate of 200 nl/min onto a Biosphere C18 column (75 µm, 15 cm, 3 µm) (NanoSeparations). Peptides were scanned and fragmented with a linear ion trap-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific). The Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS. Survey full-scan MS spectra were acquired from m/z 400 to 2000 after accumulation to a target value of 106 in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. For internal mass calibration, we used the 445.0 ion for lock mass. Charge state screening was enabled and precursors with charge state unknown or 1 were excluded. After the survey scan, the 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for CID MS/MS fragmentation. For CID fragmentation, the target value was set to 10,000 and normalized collision energy to 35 %. Dynamic exclusion was applied during 30 s. MS data were searched against the human SwissProt database (version October 2013 with 20187 protein entries) using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the Maxquant environment software (10) version 1.4.0.5. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. For peptide identification, precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The maximum false peptide discovery rate for peptide and proteins was specified as 0.01 and protein identifications were filtered for common contaminants and reversed identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
We investigated new transcription and splicing factors associated with the metastatic phenotype in colorectal cancer. A concatenated tandem array of consensus transcription factor (TF)-response elements was used to pull down nuclear extracts in two different pairs of colorectal cancer cells, KM12SM/KM12C and SW620/480, genetically related but differing in metastatic ability. Proteins were analyzed by label-free LC-MS and quantified with MaxLFQ. We found 240 proteins showing a significant dysregulation in highly metastatic KM12SM cells relative to nonmetastatic KM12C cells and 257 proteins in metastatic SW620 versus SW480. In both cell lines there were similar alterations in genuine TFs and components of the splicing machinery like UPF1, TCF7L2/TCF-4, YBX1, or SRSF3. However, a significant number of alterations were cell-line specific. Functional silencing of MAFG, TFE3, TCF7L2/TCF-4, and SRSF3 in KM12 cells caused alterations in adhesion, survival, proliferation, migration, and liver homing, supporting their role in metastasis. Finally, we investigated the prognostic value of the altered TFs and splicing factors in cancer patients. SRSF3 and SFPQ showed significant prognostic value. We observed that SRSF3 displayed a gradual loss of expression associated with cancer progression. Loss of SRSF3 expression was significantly associated with poor survival and shorter disease-free survival, particularly in early stages, in colorectal cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Colon cancer, Lc-msms, Transcription, Splicing, Cell lines, Metastasis

### Affiliations
CIB-CSIC
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (CIB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Consuelo Marín-Vicente

### Lab Head
Dr J. Ignacio Casal Alvarez
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (CIB-CSIC), Madrid, Spain


