### Accession
PXD027213

### Title
Structural architecture and function of the human NALCN channelosome

### Description
Chemical cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry was used to study the subunit organization of the NALCN channelosome consisting of the proteins NALCN, FAM155A, UNC79 and UNC80. Cross-linking data was generated using the reagents disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS), pimelic dihydrazide (PDH), and 4-(4,6-Dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methylmorpholinium (DMTMM) chloride, and was analyzed in combination with data from cryo-electron microscopy.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking was performed according to previously described procedures (Leitner et al., Nat. Protoc., 2014; Mohammadi et al., Anal. Chem., 2021). Cross-linked proteins were digested in solution using endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin and fractionated by size-exclusion chromatography. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.  Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest/xProphet (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.5, against the sequences of the target proteins and identified contaminants (some of which were found to be interacting specifically with the core complex). The false discovery rate was controlled by searching against reversed sequences. Important xQuest search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 15 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 20 ppm. Reactive sites for the cross-linking reagents were defined as follows: K and protein N terminus for DSS, D and E for PDH, K with D and K with E for DMTMM. The false discovery rate was adjusted to <5% at the level of non-redundant cross-link peptide pairs.  Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
Depolarizing sodium (Na<sup>+</sup>) leak currents carried by the NALCN channel regulate the resting membrane potential of many neurons to modulate respiration, circadian rhythm, locomotion and pain sensitivity<sup>1-8</sup>. NALCN requires FAM155A, UNC79 and UNC80 to function, but the role of these auxiliary subunits is not understood<sup>3,7,9-12</sup>. NALCN, UNC79 and UNC80 are essential in rodents<sup>2,9,13</sup>, and mutations in human NALCN and UNC80 cause severe developmental and neurological disease<sup>14,15</sup>. Here we determined the structure of the NALCN channelosome, an approximately 1-MDa complex, as fundamental aspects about the composition, assembly and gating of this channelosome remain obscure. UNC79 and UNC80 are massive HEAT-repeat proteins that form an intertwined anti-parallel superhelical assembly, which docks intracellularly onto the NALCN-FAM155A pore-forming subcomplex. Calmodulin copurifies bound to the carboxy-terminal domain of NALCN, identifying this region as a putative modulatory hub. Single-channel analyses uncovered a low open probability for the wild-type complex, highlighting the tightly closed S6 gate in the structure, and providing a basis to interpret the altered gating properties of disease-causing variants. Key constraints between the UNC79-UNC80 subcomplex and the NALCN DI-DII and DII-DIII linkers were identified, leading to a model of channelosome gating. Our results provide a structural blueprint to understand the physiology of the NALCN channelosome and a template for drug discovery to modulate the resting membrane potential.

### Keywords
Chemical cross-linking; dss; pdh; dmtmm; ion channel; sodium leak channel; nalcn

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Alexander Leitner

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Zurich, Switzerland


