### Accession
PXD026203

### Title
Regulation of CHK1 inhibitor resistance by a c-Rel and USP1 dependent pathway C4PR_LIV

### Description
The ATR-CHK1 signalling pathway responds to single strand DNA breaks and is required for cancer cells to survive the high levels of DNA replication stress and genomic instability resulting from the activity of oncogenes such as MYC.  For this reason, inhibitors of CHK1 have great potential as anti-cancer drugs and are currently in clinical trials. However, overcoming de novo or acquired resistance to CHK1 inhibition is required if these are to be used as effective therapies. We discovered that lymphomas from the E-Myc mouse model of MYC driven B-cell lymphoma, with a deletion of the c-Rel NF-B subunit, have defective CHK1 activity and are resistant to treatment with the highly specific CHK1i CCT244747. Here we use quantitative (phospho)proteomics approaches to investigate how de novo resistance to CHK1i is acquired and can be overcome, offering potential therapeutic opportunity in patients developing resistance to Chk1i in the clinic.

### Sample Protocol
Splenic tumour tissue was necropsied from Eμ-Myc, Eμ-Myc/c-Rel-/- and Eμ-Myc/T505A mice 8 hours post-treatment with either CCT244747 or vehicle control. Proteins were extracted from the tumour tissue, digested with trypsin, and labelled with TMT 6-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific), with each 6-plex experiment containing 1 biological replicate of all 6 genotypes/conditions. TMT labelled peptides were mixed then fractionated using basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography, initially into 65 fractions which were concatenated into 5 pools. For each pool, 5% was subject to LC-MS/MS analysis for analysis of proteins whilst the remaining 95% was subject to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.   All samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCTM nano system (Dionex) coupled in-line with a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping column for 7 minutes then resolved on an analytical column using a gradient from 96.2% A (0.1% formic acid):3.8% B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) to 50% B over either 120 minutes or 240 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Full MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap over m/z 375-2000 (60K resolution at m/z 200). Data-dependent MS2 analysis was performed using a top speed approach (3 s cycle time) with peptides fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) (normalised collision energy (NCE) of 35%) and fragment ions detected in the ion trap. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 scan was performed on the top 10 most intense fragment ions, with SPS-MS3 precursors fragmented using higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) (NCE of 65%) and analysed using the Orbitrap over m/z 100-500 (50K resolution at m/z 200).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of MS data, with quantification of TMT reporter ion distributions, was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD 2.4) in conjunction with MASCOT (v2.6) and Percolator. For peptide identification from MS2 spectra, raw data files were converted to mzML format and searched in MASCOT against the Mouse UniProt reviewed database (Downloaded 25/04/2018; 16,966 sequences) with parameters set as follows: MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm; MS2 tolerance of 0.6 Da; enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT 6-plex modifications (on peptide N-termini and lysine side chains) were set as fixed modifications; oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications, with the addition of phosphorylation (at serine, threonine or tyrosine residues) for phosphopeptide-enriched samples.

### Publication Abstract
Previously, we discovered that deletion of c-Rel in the E&#xb5;-Myc mouse model of lymphoma results in earlier onset of disease, a finding that contrasted with the expected function of this NF-&#x3ba;B subunit in B-cell malignancies. Here we report that E&#xb5;-Myc/cRel-/- cells have an unexpected and major defect in the CHK1 pathway. Total and phospho proteomic analysis revealed that E&#xb5;-Myc/cRel-/- lymphomas highly resemble wild-type (WT) E&#xb5;-Myc lymphomas treated with an acute dose of the CHK1 inhibitor (CHK1i) CCT244747. Further analysis demonstrated that this is a consequence of E&#xb5;-Myc/cRel-/- lymphomas having lost expression of CHK1 protein itself, an effect that also results in resistance to CCT244747 treatment in vivo. Similar down-regulation of CHK1 protein levels was also seen in CHK1i resistant U2OS osteosarcoma and Huh7 hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Further investigation revealed that the deubiquitinase USP1 regulates CHK1 proteolytic degradation and that its down-regulation in our model systems is responsible, at least in part, for these effects. We demonstrate that treating WT E&#xb5;-Myc lymphoma cells with the USP1 inhibitor ML323 was highly effective at reducing tumour burden in vivo. Targeting USP1 activity may thus be an alternative therapeutic strategy in MYC-driven tumours.

### Keywords
['Phosphorylation', 'Mouse', 'Sps-ms3', 'Lc-ms/ms', 'Tmt']

### Affiliations
['University of Liverpool', 'Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB']

### Submitter
['Amy Campbell']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool, L69 7ZB', 'email': 'claire.eyers@liverpool.ac.uk', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Professor Claire E Eyers', 'id': '2253928'}]

