### Accession
PXD041512

### Title
Diamide-based screening method for isolation of improved oxidative stress tolerance phenotypes in Bacillus mutant libraries

### Description
The bacterium Bacillus subtilis is of high importance both as a model organism for Gram-positive bacteria and as an industrial work horse in the production of biomolecules. In recent years, advancements have been made to engineer the bacterium even further towards industrial applications. In this study, we present a novel screening method for mutant libraries using diamide, an oxidising agent that binds free thiols and creates disulfide bonds between them, thereby causing a so-called ‘disulfide stress’ in bacteria. The method shows promise to selectively identify phenotypes in B. subtilis with improved tolerance towards oxidative and disulfide-associated stress. Phenotypes initially identified by transposon mutagenesis were recreated through targeted gene deletions. Among the resulting deletion mutants, the largest difference in diamide tolerance compared to the parental strain was observed for pfkA and ribT deletion strains. A proteomics analysis showed that that diamide tolerance can be achieved through different routes involving increased expression of stress management proteins and reduced availability or activity of the RNA degradosome. We conclude that our screening method allows the facile identification of Bacillus strains with improved oxidative stress tolerance phenotypes

### Sample Protocol
Strains were streaked on LB plates and grown at 37 °C overnight. Baffled 125 mL shake flasks containing 10 mL of LB medium were inoculated in triplicate from plate and grown overnight at 37 °C at 180 rpm orbital shaking in an incubator (Infors HT Multitron II). The following day, the OD600 was measured by diluting the overnight cultures 1:10 in fresh LB medium. From the overnight cultures, baffled 250 mL shake flask containing 20 mL LB medium were inoculated to a starting OD600 of 0.1. These shake flasks were then placed in shakers (180 rpm orbital shaking) in a climatized room at 37 °C. When the OD600 of the cultures reached 1.0, a sterile filtered (0.22 µm) diamide solution in LB was added to a final concentration of 2 mM diamide in the culture. To negative controls, the same amount of LB was added.  Samples were then harvested at 30 min, 1 h and 4 h after diamide addition. For each sampling point and for each strain, 3 diamide-treated replicates and 3 non-treated replicates were harvested. The OD600 was measured, and the cell suspension was transferred to 15 mL centrifugation tubes. The bacteria were collected by centrifugation at 4,400 rpm for 5 min in a cooled 4 °C centrifuge (Thermo Scientific Heraeus Multifuge 3S-R). The supernatant was discarded, and the cell pellet was washed with 1 mL of 20 mM HEPES pH 7.0 buffer. The cell pellets were then flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen after which they were stored at -80 °C until further analysis. Cell pellets were resuspended in TE Buffer (10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.5) and mechanically disrupted using a FastPrep24 (MP Biomedicals, 3 cycles, 30 sec each, maximum acceleration). The resulting extract was centrifuged for 15 min at 14,400 g at room temperature and protein-containing supernatant fractions were recovered for further sample preparation. For samples corresponding to 30 min after the diamide stress onset, differential cysteine labelling was performed as described by Sievers et al. 2018 [28]. Briefly, natively reduced cysteines were first blocked upon disruption with standard iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich). Thereafter, reversibly oxidized cysteines were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP; Sigma-Aldrich) and subsequently labelled with heavy iodoacetamide-13C2, 2-d2 (Sigma-Aldrich). The labelling order was switched for the third biological replicate of each cultivation. The protein concentration of the resulting protein extracts was determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit, ThermoFisher Scientific). For all samples, 20 µg protein was tryptically digested using the S-Trap protocol according to the manufacturer (Protifi). Peptide concentration was determined using the Pierce quantitative fluorometric peptide assay. For liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), 2 μg of peptide mixture per biological replicate was desalted using U-C18 Zip Tips (Merck).  Peptide mixtures (1 µg) were separated on an Easy nLC 1000 coupled online to an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). In-house self-packed columns (i.d. 100 µm, o.d. 360 µm, length 200 mm) packed with 3.0 µm Dr. Maisch Reprosil C18 reversed-phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ) were loaded with 18 µl of buffer A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) at a maximum pressure of 220 bar. Peptide elution was performed in a 180 min non-linear gradient with buffer B (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in 95% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluted peptides were measured in the Orbitrap with a resolution of R = 30,000 with lock-mass correction activated. Following each MS-full scan, up to 20 dependent scans were performed in the linear ion trap after collision-induced dissociation fragmentation (CID) based on the precursor intensity.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were imported into MaxQuant (2.2.0.0) for data processing and protein identification. Protein database searches were performed against a forward reverse B. subtilis 168 database (UP000001570) with common contaminants added by MaxQuant with the following parameters: peptide tolerance, 4.5 ppm; min fragment ions match per peptide, 2; primary digest reagent, trypsin; missed cleavages, 2; variable modifications, carbamidomethyl C (+57.0215), heavy carbamidomethyl C (+61.04072, for samples with differential cysteine labelling only), oxidation M (+15.9949), acetylation N, K (+42.0106). Results were filtered for a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on spectrum, peptide, and protein levels. Processed data were analysed using Python 3.9. Numpy and Pandas libraries were used for data importation and cleaning coupled to an in-house pipeline. Normalized label-free quantitation (LFQ) was used for relative quantification of the identified proteins with a minimum of 2 valid values per condition. Scipy and Statsmodels packages were used for statistical analysis of the quantified proteins. Fold changes were calculated from averaged log2-transformed LFQ intensities and t-tested for significance. Resulting p-values were corrected using FDR correction (alpha = 0.01). Significance was considered for log2-transformed fold change (log2FC) > log2(1.5) (≈ 0.58) and adjusted p-value (adj. p) < 0.05.  For redox state determination, intensity ratios for one cysteine containing peptides were calculated and tested through unpaired t-test. P-values < 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
During their life cycle, bacteria are exposed to a range of different stresses that need to be managed appropriately in order to ensure their growth and viability. This applies not only to bacteria in their natural habitats but also to bacteria employed in biotechnological production processes. Oxidative stress is one of these stresses that may originate either from bacterial metabolism or external factors. In biotechnological settings, it is of critical importance that production strains are resistant to oxidative stresses. Accordingly, this also applies to the major industrial cell factory <i>Bacillus subtilis</i>. In the present study, we, therefore, developed a screen for <i>B. subtilis</i> strains with enhanced oxidative stress tolerance. The results show that our approach is feasible and time-, space-, and resource-efficient. We, therefore, anticipate that it will enhance the development of more robust industrial production strains with improved robustness under conditions of oxidative stress.

### Keywords
Screening, Mutagenesis, Bacillus subtilis, Diamide, Bacteria, Library

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Department of Microbial Proteomics, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Department of Microbial Proteomics, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


