### Accession
PXD025152

### Title
Comprehensive proteomics for Discovery vaccine candidates against Streptococcus equi Infections

### Description
Streptococcus equi subspecies equi (S. equi) is a major pathogen which cause strangles, a highly contagious respiratory infection, in horses and other equines.In this study, we discovered potential vaccine candidates using comprehensive proteomics and reverse vaccinology. As the initial step, we divided proteome of S. equi ATCC 39506 into whole cell lysate, secretory proteome, membrane proteome and extracellular vesicle and then, comparative proteomic analysis was performed to characterize the functional features of the proteome. Especially, extracellular vesicle of S. equi was evaluated at the first time. Total 114 potential vaccine candidates (PVCs) were selected using reverse vaccinology and knowledge based annotations. Comprehensive proteomic analysis confirmed that 60 PVCs were identified in S. equi ATCC 39506. Particularly, 32 PVCs were enriched in the EV proteome, suggesting that this cellular fraction may serve as vaccine.

### Sample Protocol
S. equi ATCC 39506 was provided by the Korean Culture Center of Microorganisms and cultivated in Todd-Hewitt broth with 1% yeast extract at 37.5 °C under a 5% CO2-rich atmosphere overnight, and subsequently cultured in fresh broth for 7–8 h until the mid-log phase (OD600 ≈ 0.4–0.6). The cultured bacteria were harvested by centrifugation at 5000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C and then washed three times with 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) for protein sample preparation. Each proteome fraction of S. equi ATCC 39506 was purified from bacterial culture using a previously described method (Choi et al., 2014), with some modifications. Briefly, the harvested bacteria were suspended in 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0) and disrupted five times using a French pressure cell (SLM Aminco, Urbana, IL, USA) at 20,000 lb/in2. The whole cell lysate was collected by centrifugation at 15,000 × g for 1 h at 4 °C. The membrane proteome was prepared by sodium carbonate precipitation of the supernatant. The supernatant was dissolved in a 10 mM sodium carbonate solution and precipitated by ultracentrifugation at 150,000 × g for 1 h at 4 °C. For the preparation of the secretory proteome, culture medium was filtered using a 0.45 μm filter (Corning bottle-top filter) and dissolved in 80% ammonium sulfate for 2 h at 4 °C. The sample solution was then precipitated by centrifugation at 5000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. To purify EVs, cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 8000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. The resulting supernatant was ultra-filtrated and concentrated with a QuixStand benchtop system (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, U.K.) using a 0.22 μm vacuum filter and a 500 kDa hollow fiber membrane, respectively, to remove any residual cells. The collected supernatant was precipitated by differential centrifugation at 8000 × g for 1 h at 4 °C and 150,000 × g for 3 h at 4 °C. Evs were quantified using a Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and stored at −80 °C until used.

### Data Protocol
Previously described in-gel digestion methods were used for proteome analysis (Lee et al., 2014). Each proteome was tryptic-digested and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using the orbitrap VELOS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). All MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode and were processed by MASCOT version 2.4 (Matrix Science). The genome of S. equi ATCC 39506 (CP021972.1) was used for protein identification. The following search parameters were used: missed cleavages, 2; peptide mass tolerance, ±0.8 Da; peptide fragment tolerance, ±0.8 Da; peptide charge, 2+, 3+, and 4+; static modifications, carbamidomethyl; and dynamic modification, oxidation (Met). Low-confidence peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate of at least 1%, using a target-decoy search strategy. To ensure fidelity, proteins identified more than two times in three replications were considered to be valid. For the comparative analysis, the emPAI value was normalized using log2 transformation and missing values were imputed under normal distribution (Bertin et al., 2013; Välikangas et al., 2017). Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were selected using the significance analysis of microarrays method (Tusher et al., 2001), by modifying the gene-specific t-statistic which was calculated by repeated permutation with the background.

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus equi subspecies equi is a pathogenic bacterium that causes strangles, a highly contagious respiratory infection in horses and other equines. The limitations of current vaccines against S. equi infection warrants the development of an affordable, safe, and effective vaccine. Because gram-positive extracellular vesicles (EVs) transport various immunogenic antigens, they are attractive vaccine candidates. Here, we purified the EVs of S. equi ATCC 39506 and evaluated them as a vaccine candidate against S. equi infection in mice. As an initial step, comparative proteomic analysis was performed to characterize the functional features of the EVs. Reverse vaccinology and knowledge-based annotations were then used to screen potential vaccine candidates (PVCs) for S. equi ATCC 39506. Finally, 32 PVCs were found to be enriched in the EV fraction, suggesting the usefulness of this fraction as a vaccine. Importantly, a significantly higher survival rate after S. equi infection was detected in mice immunized with S. equi-derived EVs via the intraperitoneal route than in mice immunized with heat-killed bacteria. Of note, immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry results validated various immunogenic antigens within the EV proteome. In conclusion, our results suggest that S. equi-derived EVs can serve as a vaccine candidate against S. equi infection.

### Keywords
Whole cell lysate, Lc-ms, Secretory proteome, Membrane proteome, Comprehensive proteome, Streptococcus equi, Label-free, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
a Research Center for Bioconvergence Analysis, 458 Korea Basic Science Institute, Ochang 28119, Korea b Center for Convergent Research of Emerging Virus Infection, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea
Korea basic science institute

### Submitter
Hayoung Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Seung Il Kim
a Research Center for Bioconvergence Analysis, 458 Korea Basic Science Institute, Ochang 28119, Korea b Center for Convergent Research of Emerging Virus Infection, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon 34114, Republic of Korea


