### Accession
PXD030521

### Title
Aggregation as a host defense mechanism

### Description
In this work, we hypothesized that the aggregation of proteins during wounding is a physiological host defense mechanism, which is triggered during pathogen invasion. Here, we demonstrate the ability of acute wound fluids (AWFs) to aggregate their protein content after exposer to bacterial endotoxins such as lipopolysaccharides (LPS). The composition of LPS-triggered aggregates clearly shows the enrichment of specific protein families, which are for example involved in the immune system, coagulation cascade, nuclear matrix, or lipid metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS on a fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in the positive data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed by Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptides were identified using SEQUEST HT against UniProtKB human database (release 2017-01-18).

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces rapid protein aggregation in human wound fluid. We aimed to characterize these LPS-induced aggregates and their functional implications using a combination of mass spectrometry analyses, biochemical assays, biological imaging, cell experiments, and animal models. The wound-fluid aggregates encompass diverse protein classes, including sequences from coagulation factors, annexins, histones, antimicrobial proteins/peptides, and apolipoproteins. We identified proteins and peptides with a high aggregation propensity and verified selected components through Western blot analysis. Thioflavin T and Amytracker staining revealed amyloid-like aggregates formed after exposure to LPS <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> in human wound fluid and <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> in porcine wound models. Using NF-&#x3ba;B-reporter mice and IVIS bioimaging, we demonstrate that such wound-fluid LPS aggregates induce a significant reduction in local inflammation compared with LPS in plasma. The results show that protein/peptide aggregation is a mechanism for confining LPS and reducing inflammation, further emphasizing the connection between host defense and amyloidogenesis.

### Keywords
Aggregation, Proteins, Host defense, Antimicrobial peptides, Innate immunity, Inflammation, Lps

### Affiliations
Division of Dermatology and Venereology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, SE-22184 Lund, Sweden
Dept. of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 221 85 Lund, Sweden

### Submitter
Charlotte Welinder

### Lab Head
Dr Jitka Petrlova
Division of Dermatology and Venereology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, SE-22184 Lund, Sweden


