### Accession
PXD006835

### Title
Direct identification of functional amyloid proteins in cell lysate by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry

### Description
Functional amyloids are important structural and functional components in many biofilm, yet our knowledge of these fascinating polymers is limited to a few examples for which the amyloid have been purified and characterized by mass spectrometry. Isolation of the functional amyloid from other cell components represents the major bottleneck in the identification of novel functional amyloids. Here we present a label-free quantitative mass spectrometry based method that allows identification of amyloid proteins directly in cell lysates treated with increasing concentrations of formic acid (0-100%). Many functional amyloids are only depolymerized in the presence of concentrated formic acid and provide a characteristic sigmoidal signature when protein abundance is plotted against the formic acid concentration. An automated data processing pipeline was developed to provide a shortlist of amyloid protein candidates based on the amyloid specific abundance signature. The method was evaluated using the E. coli curli and the Pseudomonas Fap system. The major amyloid subunit was confidently identified for both systems and the minor subunit was also identified for the curli system. In addition, very few false positive candidates were identified and these could easily be discarded bases on bioinformatics analysis. Finally, we provide evidence for the application of the method for complex samples with low diversity. This provides an opportunity to identify amyloid in e.g. clinical biofilms.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cell pellets were lysed by bead beating after adding protease and phosphatase inhibitors to prevent unwanted protein degradation. Cell lysates were lyophilized and suspended in 0, 20, 40, 60, 80, or 100% formic acid. These were lyophilized again and subjected to SDS-PAGE with an 8 M urea loading buffer. After short electrophoresis, short lanes of roughly 0.5 cm were subjected to tryptic in-gel digestion and subsequent desalting using C18 microcolumns.

### Data Protocol
Quadruplicate measurements were analyzed using MaxQuant and the MaxLFQ quantitation feature. Protein and peptide FDR were kept at 1% and the minimum number of ratios was set to 1. Subsequent visualization of LFQ value development between formic acid concentrations was done using in-house R scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Functional amyloids are important structural and functional components of many biofilms, yet our knowledge of these fascinating polymers is limited to a few examples for which the native amyloids have been isolated in pure form. Isolation of the functional amyloids from other cell components represents a major bottleneck in the search for new functional amyloid systems. Here we present a label-free quantitative mass spectrometry method that allows identification of amyloid proteins directly in cell lysates. The method takes advantage of the extreme structural stability and polymeric nature of functional amyloids and the ability of concentrated formic acid to depolymerize the amyloids. An automated data processing pipeline that provides a short list of amyloid protein candidates was developed based on an amyloid-specific sigmoidal abundance signature in samples treated with increasing concentrations of formic acid. The method was evaluated using the <i>E</i><i>scherichia</i><i>coli</i> curli and the <i>Pseudomonas</i> Fap system. It confidently identified the major amyloid subunit for both systems, as well as the minor subunit for the curli system. A few non-amyloid proteins also displayed the sigmoidal abundance signature. However, only one of these contained a sec-dependent signal peptide, which characterizes most of all secreted proteins, including all currently known functional bacterial amyloids.

### Keywords
Biofilm, Nanomaterials, Functional amyloids, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Aalborg University Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H 9220 Aalborg Denmark
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Florian-Alexander Herbst

### Lab Head
Dr Per Halkjær Nielsen
Aalborg University Fredrik Bajers Vej 7H 9220 Aalborg Denmark


