### Accession
PXD040861

### Title
Regional vulnerability of brain white matter in VWM

### Description
Vanishing white matter (VWM) is a leukodystrophy that primarily manifests in young children. In this disease, the brain white matter is differentially affected in a predictable pattern with telencephalic brain areas being more severely affected, while others remain allegedly completely spared. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we investigated the proteome patterns of the severely affected white matter in the frontal lobe and normal appearing pons in VWM and control cases to identify molecular bases underlying regional vulnerability. By comparing VWM patients to controls, we identified disease-specific proteome patterns. We showed substantial pathogenic changes in both the frontal white matter and pons at the protein level. Side-by-side comparison of brain region-specific proteome patterns further revealed regional differences. We found that different cell types are affected in the VWM frontal white matter than in the pons. Gene ontology and pathway analyses identified involvement of region distinct biological processes, of which pathways implicated in cellular respiratory metabolism were overarching features. In the VWM frontal white matter, proteome changes were associated with decrease in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and metabolism of various amino acids. By contrast, in the VWM pons white matter, we found a decrease in oxidative phosphorylation. Taken together, our data show that brain regions are affected in parallel in VWM, but to different degrees. We found region-specific involvement of different cell types and discovered that cellular respiratory metabolism is differently affected across white matter regions in VWM. These region-specific changes help explain regional vulnerability to pathology in VWM.

### Sample Protocol
Microdissected tissue samples were incubated in lysis buffer (6M guanidine hydrochloride, 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 10mM chloroacetamide and 100mM Tris-HCl in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 10 minutes at 99°C with mixing at 750RPM. Tissue lysates were then sonicated with 20mg protein extraction beads (Diagenode) using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) for 20 cycles with on/off pulses of 30 seconds. Protein digestion was performed using Lys-C in a 1:100 enzyme-to-substrate ratio at 37°C for 4 hours. Afterwards, samples were diluted to a final concentration of 2M guanidine hydrochloride followed by overnight digestion with trypsin at a 1:100 enzyme-to-substrate ratio at 37°C. Digestion was quenched by lowering the pH below 2 using 10% formic acid. Peptide samples were then desalted using C18 cartridges (Agilent Technologies) on the automated AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies). Cartridges were first primed and equilibrated using 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and 0.1% formic acid, respectively. Peptides were then loaded and washed with 0.1% formic acid, and eluted with 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Eluted peptides were dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge and stored at −20°C.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was conducted on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides (1.5µg/sample) were resuspended in 2% formic acid and loaded on a trap column (300µm i.d. x 5mm, 5µm particle size, reversed phase C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10µL/min in 100% buffer A (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were separated on a self-packed analytical column. Elution was performed over a 175 minutes gradient at a flow rate off 300nL/min with buffer B (80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid): 0–2.5 minutes 92% solvent A; 2.5– 57.5 minutes 8% solvent B; 157.5–161 minutes 35% solvent B; 161–165 minutes 100% solvent B; 165–175 minutes 92% solvent A. Data-dependent acquisition method was used to collect mass spectra. Briefly, first a full MS1 scan (m/z range = 315–1,500, resolution = 60,000, target = 3×106 ions) was acquired. Then the top 15 precursors were selected for MS2 analysis with higher-collision dissociation (target ions =  1×105, max ion fill time = 50 milliseconds, isolation window = 1.4m/z, normalized collision energy = 27%, resolution = 30,000). Dynamic exclusion was set to 16 seconds. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state as well as charge state of 1 and 6 or higher were excluded from fragmentation. RAW mass spectra files were searched against the Swiss-Prot human reference proteome database (20,431 entries, accessed on August 2019) and analyzed using MaxQuant (v1.6.6.0) [35]. “Match between runs” was enabled and the false discovery rate (FDR) threshold was set to 1%. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was conducted using the MaxLFQ algorithm with a minimal ratio count of 2. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. For variable modifications, peptide N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected. Furthermore, only peptides with a maximum of 2 trypsin cleavages, length ranging from 7 to 25 amino acids, mass tolerance of 20ppm, and fragmentation mass tolerance of 0.5Da were included for analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using the R statistical software (v1.3.1093). Differential protein expression analysis was analyzed using DEP R package [43]. Peptides recognized as contaminants, only by site modification or as decoy in the reverse database were excluded from the analysis. LFQ intensity values were then log2-transformed. Missing data were imputed using random draws from a Gaussian distribution with a minimal value of 0.05. Statistical significance was set to q-value < 0.05 with Benjamini-Hochberg’s (BH) test for multiple comparison adjustment. Principle component analysis was conducted using FactoMineR R package [20]. Cell type enrichment analysis was performed using the EWCE R package based on a single nuclei RNA sequencing dataset of 5291 cells from brain white matter tissue of 3 controls [2, 32]. These cells were divided into 7 clusters including astrocytes, immune cells, lymphocytes, neurons, oligodendrocytes, oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs), and vascular cells [2]. All proteins detected in our proteome analysis were used as the background set. Analysis was performed with 10,000 bootstrap lists. Statistical significance was set to q-value < 0.05 with BH test for multiple comparison correction.Functional gene ontology overrepresentation analysis was conducted using PANTHER Classification System (version 17.0) with a Fisher’s exact test [24, 34]. The following gene ontology databases were included: biological process, cellular component, and molecular function. For visualization, only the most specific subclasses are shown, which were selected by default hierarchical sorting. For biological pathway analysis, we used the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database in combination with g:Profiler (version 107_eg54_p17_bf42210) [16-18, 30]. Statistical significance for both analyses was set as q-value < 0.05 with BH test for multiple comparison adjustment. All proteins detected in our proteome analysis were set as background.

### Publication Abstract
Vanishing white matter (VWM) is a leukodystrophy that primarily manifests in young children. In this disease, the brain white matter is differentially affected in a predictable pattern with telencephalic brain areas being most severely affected, while others remain allegedly completely spared. Using high-resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we investigated the proteome patterns of the white matter in the severely affected frontal lobe and normal appearing pons in VWM and control cases to identify molecular bases underlying regional vulnerability. By comparing VWM patients to controls, we identified disease-specific proteome patterns. We showed substantial changes in both the VWM frontal and pons white matter at the protein level. Side-by-side comparison of brain region-specific proteome patterns further revealed regional differences. We found that different cell types were affected in the VWM frontal white matter than in the pons. Gene ontology and pathway analyses identified involvement of region specific biological processes, of which pathways involved in cellular respiratory metabolism were overarching features. In the VWM frontal white matter, proteins involved in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis and metabolism of various amino acids were decreased compared to controls. By contrast, in the VWM pons white matter, we found a decrease in proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation. Taken together, our data show that brain regions are affected in parallel in VWM, but to different degrees. We found region-specific involvement of different cell types and discovered that cellular respiratory metabolism is likely to be differentially affected across white matter regions in VWM. These region-specific changes help explain regional vulnerability to pathology in VWM.

### Keywords
Astrocytopathy, Leukodystrophy, Regional vulnerability, Vanishing white matter

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Centres, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC - Location VUMc

### Submitter
Jodie Man

### Lab Head
Dr Marianna Bugiani
Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Centres, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


