### Accession
PXD014338

### Title
A protein expression during development of S. coelicolor in liquid medium

### Description
In this paper we analyzed the S.coelicolor proteome at four points in time as it grew in liquid medium s i using three biological and two technical replicates. The proteome was measured  during exponential growth and its entry into the stationary phase at 20, 35, 50 and 65 hours. Differential expression analysis identified key metabolic pathways and their hierarchy of activation during population growth. 4 and 3 pathways were found significantly overrepresented only under 35 to 20 hours or 50 to 35 hours respectively. Six pathways were found to be overrepresented  within all three temporal groups (20 to 35 hours, 35 to 50 hours and 50 to 65 hours), with one pathway being significantly overrepresented exclusively in the 50-65 h interval. Central metabolic system enzymes involved in DNA replication were enriched in the late stages while the proteins involved in the  transcription and translation machinery were overrepresented in early stages and decreased over time. A strong correlation was found between   the expression of about a third of the proteins  and mRNA, while another third correlated negatively. The data presented here represents  quantitative evidence for the growing populations’  observed behaviour.

### Sample Protocol
Streptomyces coelicolor (S. coelicolor M145), a wild type strain, was used. For the MS analysis, bacteria were grown as was previously described in Smidova et al. 2019 {Šmídová, 2018 #1704} and Nieselt et al. {Nieselt, 2010 #1405}. Briefly, spores harvested from agar plates were germinated at 30°C for 5 hours in 2YT medium and were then inoculated into an Na-glutamate medium (pH7 was maintained during growth). Samples for MS were collected in the 20, 35, 50 and 65 hours after inoculation into Na-glutamate medium. Bacteria were pelleted and resuspended in 60 mM Tris pH7. Samples were sonicated at 15 x 10-s, amplitude 0.5, on ice. After sonication, SDS was added at a final concentration of 4% and  samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. The experiment was carried out  in three biological replicates.We harvested three independent samples in each cultivation point. The samples were on-filter digested by eFASP (enhanced Filter-aided sample preparation) based on {Erde, 2014 #1727}. Briefly, 50 ug of each sample were suspended and heated for 5 min in 60mM Tris-Cl (pH 6.8), 2% (w/v) SDS, reduced, alkylated, thoroughly washed and digested by trypsin on Microcon filters YM-10 (Merck). The resulting peptides were spun down, desalted on a C18 SPE column (PepClean, Thermo Scientific) and dried down. The redisolved  peptides were separated by nano-LC system (Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano, Dionex) on the Acclaim PepMap C18 column (75 um Internal Diameter, 250 mm length) using a 70 min elution gradient of water/acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The chromatographic column was connected through nanoESI to a tandem mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600, Sciex). We performed quantification of protein abundances in different stages of cultivation by label-free LC-MS data independent acquisition in the form of SWATH (https://www.mcponline.org/content/11/6/O111.016717). To maximize the performance of SWATH measurement, we first calculated the optimal variable window length across the mass range (m/z 350 – 1250). We measured two representative samples in a data-dependent manner in mass range m/z 350 – 1250. The variable window calculator (Sciex) created a method consisting of 50 consecutive mass windows overlapping by 1 Da that aimed to collect fragmentation spectra in mass range m/z 100 – 1600. In the quantitation sequence we always acquired three consecutive measurements of each biological replicate. The first run was acquired using a  data dependent method, the second and third runs were acquired using a  data independent method (optimized SWATH method).

### Data Protocol
All the DDA data, as well as common contaminants, were cross checked  against the database containing  all Streptomyces coelicolor proteins downloaded from Uniprot (Revised and Unrevised entries as of May 2018) in order to produce a library of all identified proteins. ProteinPilot 4.5 (Sciex) was used for identification. Trypsin was selected as protease, iodoacetamide as an alkylating agent, biological modifications as ID focus, thorough ID as search effort and False discovery analysis was included.  The library was then used for SWATH processing in PeakView 2.2 (Sciex). Retention time was aligned in all samples by selecting common peptides across the retention time range in all samples. Up to 30 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptide, a peptide confidence of 95% with a  false discovery rate threshold of 1% was set for quantitation. The final processing step produced a list of transitions, peptide and protein intensities for all the selected proteins that were  exported. The data normalization is described below.

### Publication Abstract
In this paper, correlation analysis of protein and mRNA levels in the soil dwelling bacteria Streptomyces coelicolor (S. coelicolor M145) is presented during development of the population as it grew in liquid medium using three biological and two technical replicates, measured during exponential growth, and its entry into the stationary phase. The proteome synthesis time series are compared with the gene expression time series measured previously under identical experimental conditions. Results reveal that about one third of protein/mRNA synthesis profiles are well correlated while another third are correlated negatively. Functional analysis of the highly correlated groups is presented. Based on numerical simulation, the negative correlation between protein and mRNA is shown to be caused by the difference between the rate of translation and protein degradation.

### Keywords
Swath ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry Czech Academy of Sciences
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Science

### Submitter
Martin Hubalek

### Lab Head
Dr Matin Hubalek
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry Czech Academy of Sciences


