### Accession
PXD021142

### Title
Phosphoproteomic response in nitrosamine-exposed mice

### Description
The aim of this study was to characterize ATM/ATR substrate motif specific phosphoproteome (phospho-SQ/TQ) in response to N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) in mice. Motif specific phosphorylation were measured using quantitative LC-MS/MS based on TMT labeling.

### Sample Protocol
Liver tissues were homogenized in 8M urea, followed by reduction with DTT and alkylation with iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin and desalted with Waters C18 Sep Pak cartridges.  Peptides were labeled with TMT10plex reagents. Phosphopeptides were enriched by immunoprecipitation and Fe-NTA based spin columns. Phosphopeptides were directly loaded onto an in-house made analytical capillary column, separated onto Agilent 1200 LC system and analyzed in data dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the mouse SwissProt database using Mascot version 2.4 (Matrix Science). Spectra were searched with mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 20 mmu for fragment ions. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, TMT labeled lysine and TMT labeled peptide N termini were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were searched as dynamic modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phospho-sq/tq, Atm substrates, Ndma

### Affiliations
 Department of Biological Engineering, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA 
Department of Biological Engineering and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

### Submitter
Ishwar Kohale

### Lab Head
Dr Forest Michael White
Department of Biological Engineering and Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.


