### Accession
PXD026558

### Title
The effect of exercise on heart proteome

### Description
Mice were divided in two groups, one group was sedentary while the other were trained by swimming for 5 days a week for 5 months. After 5 months animals were sacrificed and left ventricles isolated for proteomics profiling. Proteins were isolated, fractionated and digested. Peptide fractions were analyzed by Orbitrap Fusion coupled to nano LC.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins isolated from the left ventricles were normalized, electophoretically separated on a SDS-PAGE, and digested with trypsin. Samples were then analyzed using the Orbitrap Fusion coupled with nano LC by full scan followed by HCD and ETD fragmentation of peptides.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer using oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification and carbamidomethyl of cysteine as static modification. The ETD activation type included additional dynamic modifications: 4-HNE adduction to cysteine, histidine, lysine, leucine, methionine and arginine (+156.115 Da); 4-HNE+H2 for the Michael adducts in cysteine, histidine, lysine, leucine, methionine and arginine (+158.131 Da); and 4-HNE-H2O for the Schiff-bases in cysteine, histidine, lysine, leucine, methionine and arginine (+138.104 Da). Target decoy PSM Validator node was used for peptide validation with FDR of 0.01. For precursor ion quantification, Label-free quantification uses the Minora Feature Detection was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Left ventricle

### Affiliations
Anti Doping Lab Qatar
Qatar analytical bioresearch lab, anti doping lab Qatar, doha, Qatar

### Submitter
Afnan Al-Menhali

### Lab Head
Dr Afnan Saleh AlMenhali
Qatar analytical bioresearch lab, anti doping lab Qatar, doha, Qatar


