### Accession
PXD042951

### Title
Post-ischemic ubiquitination at the postsynaptic density reversibly influences the activity of ischemia-relevant kinases.

### Description
Posttranslational modifications with ubiquitin alter protein function and stability, thereby regulating cell homeostasis and viability, particularly under stress. Ischemic stroke induces protein ubiquitination at the periphery of the ischemic territory, wherein cells remain viable. Revealing the identity of ubiquitinated proteins, their cellular location, and the functional consequences of ubiquitin modification may shed light on the role of ubiquitination in ischemic injury. Here, we employed a proteomics approach to identify proteins ubiquitinated following ischemic stroke, induced by transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) in mice. We detected increased ubiquitination of 198 proteins, many of which localize to the postsynaptic density (PSD) of glutamatergic neurons. Among these were proteins essential for maintaining PSD architecture, such as PSD93, PSD95 and Shank3, as well as NMDA and AMPA receptor subunits. The largest enzymatic group at the PSD with high post-ischemic ubiquitination levels were kinases, such as CaMKII, PKC, Cdk5, and Pyk2, the aberrant activity of which contributes to post-ischemic neuronal death. Concurrent phospho-proteomics revealed altered phosphorylation patterns associated with the PSD, indicative of modified PSD kinase activity following stroke. CaMKII, PKC, and Cdk5 activity was decreased while Pyk2 activity was increased at the PSD after stroke, accompanied by the hypo- and hyper-phosphorylation of downstream targets, respectively. Removal of ubiquitin restored kinases’ activity to pre-stroke levels, identifying ubiquitination as the responsible molecular mechanism for post-ischemic kinase regulation. These findings unveil a previously unrecognized role of post-ischemic ubiquitination in the regulation of essential kinases involved in ischemic injury, and presents targeting ubiquitination as a potential new avenue for the treatment of ischemic stroke.

### Sample Protocol
Transient focal cerebral ischemia was induced in 8-12 weeks old C57BL6/J WT male mice (Jackson Laboratories) by middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) using an intraluminal filament. Litter mates underwent control sham surgery. After a 1h reperfusion period, mice were sacrificed, brains were removed, and six-mm cortical slices (+3.25 to -2.76mm bregma) were dissected from MCAO and control regions. Cortical tissue was mechanically homogenized in 15mM Tris pH7.5, 1mM MgCl2, 250mM sucrose, 2.5mM EDTA, 1mM EGTA, 1mM DTT, 20mM N-ethylmaleimide, 1X protease- and 1X phosphatase-inhibitor cocktail. Homogenates were spun at 10krpm for 10min at 4ºC, and resulting pellets were sonicated in the homogenization buffer at 4ºC for 10s at 20% amplitude (Branson Ultrasonics, Danbury, CT). Finally, Triton X100 and KCl were added to an end-concentration of 2% and 150mM, respectively, lysates were incubated for 1h rotating at 4ºC, and centrifuged at 10krpm for 10min at 4ºC to obtain Triton-insoluble pellets. Ubiquitinated proteome: Pellets obtained from 20 cortices were pooled and solubilized by sonication in 50mM phosphate buffer pH7, 7M urea, 2M thiourea, and 0.1% SDS. 3.6mg of protein per sample was reduced with 10mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 1h at 34°C, alkylated with 23mM iodoacetamide for 1h in the dark, and then quenched with a final concentration of 27mM DTT. Samples were diluted with 5 vol 25mM Tris pH8, exposed to 72µg trypsin (1:50 v/v) for 16h at 37°C, and cleaned up by loading on SCX PolySULFOETHYL Aspartamide cartridges (PolyLC Inc.) and washing with 10mM K3PO4 pH3 and 25% ACN. Peptides were eluted with 10mM K3PO4 pH3, 25% ACN, and 500mM KCl, desalted through Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters), and evaporated to dryness. Enrichment for ubiquitinated peptides was conducted with the PTM Scan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif [K-ε-GG] kit (Cell Signaling). Ub-peptides were eluted, pooled, dried, and reconstituted in 0.5% formic acid for label-free quantitative analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS, carried out using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano spray Flex Ion Source with high energy collision dissociation (HCD) and coupled with UltiMate3000 RSLCnano (Dionex). Data were acquired under Xcalibur 3.0 operation software and Orbitrap Fusion Tune 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Phospho-proteomics: 200µg protein per sample were dissolved in 50mM TEAB pH8.5, 7M urea, 2M thiourea, and 1% SDS, and reduced, alkylated, and quenched as described above. Then, phosphoric acid was added to samples at a final concentration of 1.2%, followed by 1:7 dilution (v/v) with 90% methanol in 100mM TEAB pH8.5. Samples were loaded onto S-Trap Mini Spin columns (Protifi) for S-trap-based tryptic digest. Digestion was performed by adding 100µL trypsin (80ng/µL; 1:25 w/w) in 50mM TEAB pH8.5 onto the spin columns, and incubation for 16h at 37°C. The digested peptides were eluted with each 50mM TEAB pH8.5, 0.2% FA, and 50% ACN in 0.2% FA. Eluates were pooled and dried for subsequent TMT8-plex labeling. Labeling was performed according to Thermo Fisher Scientific’s TMT Mass Tagging Kits and Reagents protocol. Labeled peptides were pooled, evaporated to dryness, and subjected to cleanup on MCX cartridges (Waters). Incorporation of the TMT label was verified using Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Two aliquots each containing 600µg labeled peptides were used for enrichment of phospho-peptides with titanium dioxide (TiO2) and ferric nitrilotriacetate (Fe-NTA), respectively. Fractions enriched by both TiO2 and Fe-NTA were pooled and analyzed with the same HPLC-MS instrumentation as described above. Global proteomics: Protein digestion and TMT8-plex labeling were performed as laid out in the phospho-proteomics section. An aliquot containing 400µg labeled peptides was used for first dimensional LC fractionation via high pH reverse phase (hpRP) chromatography. hpRP chromatography was performed as previously reported using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system with a built-in micro-fraction collector and UV detection (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, 400µg TMT8-plex-tagged tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 20mM NH4FA pH9.5) and loaded onto a XBridge® C18 column (Waters). LC was performed using a gradient of 10-45% buffer containing 85% ACN and 15% 20mM NH4FA for 30min at a flow rate of 200µL/min. Forty-eight fractions were collected at 1min intervals and pooled into 10 fractions based on UV absorbance at 214nm using a multiple fraction concatenation strategy. Each of the 10 fractions was dried and reconstituted in 2% ACN in 0.5% FA for nanoLC-MS/MS, performed with the same Orbitrap Fusion system described above, using high energy collision dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
Global, phospho- and ubiquitin-enriched MS-raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry) and Proteome Discoverer-Sequest (PD) 2.2. algorithms against the UniProt mouse database (UP000000589_10090, download 2018), respectively. Default settings for TMT8-plex reporter-ion quantitation were used for global proteins and phospho-peptide abundances. Ubiquitinated peptide abundances were determined by the label-free quantification (LFQ) MaxQuant algorithm. Two-missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed. MS-peptide mass tolerance was set to 10ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.03Da and 0.6Da for global, phospho- and ubiquitin enrichment raw data analysis, respectively. For analysis of TMT-labelled global proteome measurements, methionine oxidation and acetylation of amino-termini were specified as variable modifications, whereas cysteine carbamidomethylation, lysine TMT6-modifications and amino-terminal amines (for TMT labeled files) were specified as fixed modifications. For quantitative phospho-peptide analysis, phosphorylation on serine (S), threonine (T) and tyrosine (Y) residues were additionally specified as variable modifications. Estimated false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification sites were specified at maximum 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 6, and all other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. For analysis of ubiquitin-enrichment samples in MaxQuant, variable modification settings were changed to glycine-glycine at lysine, N-ethylmaleimide at cysteine, oxidation at methionine and acetylation of amino-termini. To confidently identify phosphorylation sites, the phosphoRS 3.0 node, which determines individual probability values for each putatively phosphorylated site within the validated peptide sequences, was integrated into the PD 2.2 workflow.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitin modifications alter protein function and stability, thereby regulating cell homeostasis and viability, particularly under stress. Ischemic stroke induces protein ubiquitination at the ischemic periphery, wherein cells remain viable, however the identity of ubiquitinated proteins is unknown. Here, we employed a proteomics approach to identify these proteins in mice undergoing ischemic stroke. The data are available in a searchable web interface ( https://hochrainerlab.shinyapps.io/StrokeUbiOmics/ ). We detected increased ubiquitination of 198 proteins, many of which localize to the postsynaptic density (PSD) of glutamatergic neurons. Among these were proteins essential for maintaining PSD architecture, such as PSD95, as well as NMDA and AMPA receptor subunits. The largest enzymatic group at the PSD with elevated post-ischemic ubiquitination were kinases, such as CaMKII, PKC, Cdk5, and Pyk2, whose aberrant activities are well-known to contribute to post-ischemic neuronal death. Concurrent phospho-proteomics revealed altered PSD-associated phosphorylation patterns, indicative of modified kinase activities following stroke. PSD-located CaMKII, PKC, and Cdk5 activities were decreased while Pyk2 activity was increased after stroke. Removal of ubiquitin restored kinase activities to pre-stroke levels, identifying ubiquitination as the responsible molecular mechanism for post-ischemic kinase regulation. These findings unveil a previously unrecognized role of ubiquitination in the regulation of essential kinases involved in ischemic injury.

### Keywords
Brain, Phospho-proteomics, Detergent-insoluble, Cerebral cortex, Mouse, Nanolc-ms/ms, Ubiquitin-enrichment, Ischemic stroke

### Affiliations
Cornell University

### Submitter
Qin Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Cornell University


