### Accession
PXD042971

### Title
Highly selective humanized DDR1 mAb  reverses immune exclusion by  disrupting collagen fiber alignment in  breast cancer

### Description
Discoidin domain-containing receptor 1 (DDR1) plays an important role in cancer progression. However, the DDR1 function in tumors is still elusive. We recently reported that DDR1 promoted collagen fiber alignment and formation of a physical barrier, which causes immune exclusion from tumors. We also demonstrated that our DDR1 ECD-targeting mAbs can disrupt collagen fiber alignment and increase T Cell infiltration in tumors. In this study, we humanized a DDR1 ECD-targeting mAb and showed significant antitumor efficacy in an immunocompetent mouse model. We determined the binding epitope using gene mutagenesis, hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), and X-ray crystallography. Mechanistically, we showed that the humanized mAb inhibited DDR1 phosphorylation and, more importantly, blocked DDR1 shedding and disrupted a physical barrier formed by collagen fiber alignment in tumors. This study not only paves a pathway for development of PRTH-101 as a cancer therapeutic, but also broaden our understanding of the roles of DDR1 in modulation of collagen alignments in tumor extracellular matrix and tumor immune microenvironment.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared using a Leap HDX-3 extended system (Trajan/LEAP technologies) for automated sample preparation, on-line digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis. The system was coupled to UltiMate NCS-3500RS pumps (Thermo Scientific) and an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For peptide identification, 100 pmol of DDR1 in non-deuterated sample buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.2) was mixed 1:1 with quench buffer (1 M glycine, 4 M GndHCl, 200 mM TCEP, pH 2.5) and injected into the LC/MS system. The protein was digested on-line on an Enzymate BEH Pepsin column (Waters Corporation) at a flow rate of 100 µL/min (0.4% formic acid in water) and peptides were trapped and desalted for 5 min in a peptide trap column (OPTI-TRAP for peptides, Optimize Technologies, Oregon City, OR, USA). Peptides were then eluted and separated on a Hypersil GOLD C18 Selectivity Reversed Phase HPLC Column (Thermo Scientific) using a two-step elution gradient from 8-35 % solvent B in 10 min at 40 µL/min (solvent A: 0.4% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.4% formic acid in acetonitrile). MS data was collected in data-dependent MS/MS acquisition mode (Orbitrap resolution 30000, 1 microscan, CID 35 with dynamic exclusion). Peptide identification was performed in triplicate. For HDX-MS, the DDR1 stock was diluted to 5 µM (50 pmol injection) in absence (apo state) and presence of 8 µM PRTH-101 with wt IgG1 Fc (ligand state) in non-deuterated sample buffer and kept at 1°C until labeling. For deuterium labeling, the samples were diluted 1:9 with deuterated labeling buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, pHread 7.2) and incubated for several time intervals (15 s, 1 min, 10 min, 1 h, 8 h) at 20°C. Samples were quenched by mixing 1:1 with quench buffer at 1°C and immediately injected into the LC-MS system for online pepsin digestion and peptide analysis by MS using the same workflow as for peptide identification except that MS data was acquired in MS-only mode. All time labeling time points were performed in triplicates.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, precursor and fragment ions were searched and matched against a local protein database containing the protein of interest and known contaminants in MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) using the Andromeda search engine. The digestion mode was set to “unspecific” and N-terminal acetylation, deamidation, oxidation and disulfide bond formation were included as variable modifications with a maximum number of 5 modifications per peptide. Peptides between 5 and 30 amino acids length were accepted. The MaxQuant default mass tolerances for precursor (4.5 ppm) and fragment (20 ppm) ions defined for the Thermo Orbitrap instrument were used for data search. The minimum score for successful identifications was set to 20 for unmodified and 40 for modified peptides. The identified peptide database was used for processing of HDX-MS data files in HDExaminer (Version 3.1, Sierra Analytics). After automated analysis, all peptides were inspected and curated if needed. In case of multiple charge states per peptide, the charge state that contained the highest quality spectra was used for each experimental state. Deuterium content calculation was based on peptide centroid mass. If peak distributions appeared to be visually bimodal, bimodal fitting was applied in HDExaminer and the higher deuterated peak distribution was used for HDX difference calculation (ligand – apo). For comparison of triplicate data, a two-sided Student’s t-test using deuteration differences from centroid analysis was used with the α-value set to 0.05. Significance criteria for HDX differences were defined as passing the t-test and exceeding the ∆D significance threshold calculated based on the confidence interval in HDExaminer.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Breast cancer, Prth-101, Ddr1, Mab

### Affiliations
Evotec SE
Texas Therapeutics Institute, Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA

### Submitter
Jasmin Dülfer

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Zhiqiang An
Texas Therapeutics Institute, Brown Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA


