### Accession
PXD038361

### Title
Proteomic anlaysis of Fabry iPSC derived cardiomyocytes treated with GLA modRNA

### Description
Recent studies in non-human model systems have shown therapeutic potential of modified mRNA (modRNA) treatments for lysosomal storage diseases. Here, we assessed the efficacy of a modRNA treatment to restore the expression of the α-galactosidase (GLA) gene in a human cardiac model generated from induced-pluripotent stem cell-derived from two patients with Fabry disease. In line with the clinical phenotype, cardiomyocytes from Fabry patient’s induced pluripotent stem cells show accumulation of the glycosphinolipid Globotriaosylceramide (GB3), which is an α-galactosidase substrate. Further, the patient-specific cardiomyocytes have significant upregulation of lysosomal associated proteins. Upon modRNA treatment, a subset of lysosomal proteins were partially restored to wildtype levels, implying the rescue of the molecular phenotype associated with the Fabry genotype. Importantly, a significant reduction of GB3 levels was observed in GLA modRNA treated cardiomyocytes demonstrating that α-galactosidase enzymatic activity was restored. Together, our results validate the utility of patient IPSC-derived cardiomyocytes as a model to study disease processes in Fabry disease and the therapeutic potential of GLA modRNA treatment to reduce GB3 accumulation in the heart.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 4% sodium deoxycholate in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 and heated at 95°C for 5 min followed by 10 sec tip-probe sonication. The lysate was centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 min and supernatant quantified by BCA. An aliquot was removed and normalised to 10 µg / 9 µl, and the sample reduced and alkylated by the addition of 1 µl solution of 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 400 mM 2-choloracetamide in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 and heated at 45°C for 5 min. The sample was cooled on ice briefly and digested overnight at 37°C with 0.2 µg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and 0.2 µg of sequencing-grade LysC (Wako). The digests were adjusted to final concentration of 50% isopropanol and then acidified to a final concentration of 1% trifluoracetic acid (TFA). Peptides were loaded directly onto in-house packed styrenedivinylbenzene- reverse phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) micro-columns, washed with 100 µl of 99% isopropanol, 1% TFA followed by 100 µl  of 99% ethyl acetate, 1% TFA followed by 100 µl of 5% acetonitrile, 1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with 60 µl of 80% acetonitrile, 1% ammonium hydroxide and drive by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA and store at -80°C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed on a Dionex 3500 nanoHPLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific) via electrospray ionization in positive mode with 1.9 kV at 275 °C and RF set to 30%. Separation was achieved on a 50 cm × 75 µm column packed with C18AQ (1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) (PepSep, Marslev, Denmark) over 75 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3–40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v FA) and the column was maintained at 50 °C. Electrospray ionization was performed at 1.9 kV with 50% RF lens and positively charged peptides detected via a full scan MS (360-1033 m/z, 250% normalised AGC, 120K resolution, 50 ms injection time) followed data-independent MS/MS analysis performed with HCD of 30% normalized collision energy (NCE) (13.7 m/z isolation, 38 windows with 1 m/z overlap, 2000% normalised AGC, 30K resolution, 55ms injection time). Data were processed with Spectronaut Spectronaut 16.0.220606.53000 searched against the Human UniProt database (June 2021) using directDIA. The minimum peptide length set to 7 amino acids with specific trypsin cleavage and search criteria included oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification. Data were filtered to 1% FDR at the peptide and protein level (Qvalue cut-off < 0.01). Quantification was performed at MS2 level using 3-6 fragment ions which included automated interference fragment ion removal as previously described [PMID: 25724911]. Dynamic mass MS1 and MS2 mass tolerance was enabled, and local (non-linear) regression was performed for retention time calibration. A dynamic extracted ion chromatogram window size was performed, and protein quantification performed with weighted peptide average values. Statistical analysis was performed in Perseus [PMID: 27348712]. Data was log-transformed, median normalised and statistical analysis performed with unpaired student t-tests including multiple hypothesis testing correction using Benajamini-Hochberg.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ipsc, Fabry, Cardiomyocytes

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


