### Accession
PXD001984

### Title
Deciphering molecular consequences of the prohormone convertase 1/3 inhibition in macrophages for application in immunotherapy - Cellular Extracts

### Description
The prohormone convertase 1/3 (PC1/3) is an enzyme playing an important role in the processing of precursor proteins involved in neuroimmune phenotype of neuroendocrine cells. The expression of PC1/3 is not only restricted to neuroendocrine tissues; recent studies reported a role of PC1/3 in Toll-like receptor immune response in macrophages. Here, using lentivirus strategy, we investigated the consequences of PC1/3 down-regulation with the aim of understanding the intracellular impact of such inhibition and its biological application to cancer therapy. Under sterile conditions, we demonstrated that PC1/3 inactivated macrophages express a M1-like phenotype characterized by filopodia extensions, pro-inflammatory chemokines and cytokines secretion (IL6, CXCL10; TNF) and TLR4 Myd88 dependent signaling activation. Under LPS challenge, PC1/3 KO cells secrete through store-operated calcium entry increase, a cocktail of pro-inflammatory factors including alarmins and chemokines conducting to attract naïve T helper lymphocytes (Th0) which favors cytotoxic response. Tests perform with the secreted factors by the challenged PC1/3 KO cells on breast and ovarian cancer cells (SKBR3, SKOV3) establish that the factors secreted are able to inhibit both viability and resistance to chemotherapies. Under inhibitory conditions using IL-10, the PC1/3 KO cells still continue to produce inflammatory cytokines and anti-tumoral factors. Taken together, these data establish that inhibition of PC1/3 can be used as a potential immune therapy for awaking intra-tumoral macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
NR8383 KO and NT cells were plated on sterile 6 wells plates to reach confluence. For LPS stimulation, the cells were starved overnight with Ham’s F12K medium supplemented with 2% FBS. The cells were stimulated with 200 ng/ml LPS in serum-free medium or left untreated. At 24 hours, cells were collected, washed once with ice-cold PBS and then lysed with RIPA buffer for total protein extraction . 0.1mg of total protein extraction was digested using FASP protocol. Samples were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Proxeon Easy-nLC system equipped with a Proxeon trap column (100 µm ID x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and a C18 packed-tip column (75 µm ID x 10 cm, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using an increasing amount of acetonitrile (5-35% over 100 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The chromatography system was coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer programmed to acquire in a data dependent Top 10 method. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70 000 at m/z 400.

### Data Protocol
All the MS data were processed with MaxQuant using Andromeda search engine. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against Decoy version of the complete proteome for Rattus norvegicus of the UniProt database (Release June 2014, 33675 entries) combined with 262 commonly detected contaminants. Trypsin specificity was used for digestion mode, with N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation selected as variable, carbarmidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and we allow up to two missed cleavages. For MS spectra an initial mass accuracy of 6 ppm was selected and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for HCD data. For identification, the FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein level was set to 0.01. Relative, label-free quantification of proteins was done using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant with the default parameters. Analysis of the proteins identified was done using Perseus software (version 1.5.0.31). The file containing the information from identification was used and hits to the reverse database, proteins only identified with modified peptides and potential contaminants were removed. Then the LFQ intensity were logarithmized (log2(x)). Categorical annotation of rows was used to defined different group depending 1) of the cell line (NT or KO), 2) of the treatment (Ctrl/LPS). Multiple-samples tests were performed using ANOVA test with a FDR of 5% and preserving grouping in randomization. To determine enrichment of categorical annotations (Gene Ontology terms and KEGG pathway) a fisher exact test was realized taking in account the result of the ANOVA test for each group. Normalization was achieved using a Z-score with a matrix access by rows. Only proteins presenting as significant by the ANOVA tests were used for statistical analysis. A Hierarchical clustering was first performed using the Euclidean parameter for distance calculation and average option for linkage in row and column trees using a maximum of 300 clusters. To quantify fold changes of proteins across samples, we used MaxLFQ. To visualize these fold changes in the context of individual protein abundances in the proteome, we projected them onto the summed peptide intensities normalized by the number of theoretically observable peptides. Specifically, to compare relative protein abundances between and within samples, protein length normalized log 2 protein intensities (termed “iBAQ” value in MaxQuant) were added to the MaxLFQ differences.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages provide the first line of host immune defense. Their activation triggers the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines recruiting other immune cells. In cancer, macrophages present an M2 anti-inflammatory phenotype promoting tumor growth. In this way, strategies need to be develop to reactivate macrophages. Previously thought to be expressed only in cells with a neural/neuroendocrine phenotype, the proprotein convertase 1/3 has been shown to also be expressed in macrophages and regulated as a function of the Toll-like receptor immune response. Here, we investigated the intracellular impact of the down-regulation of the proprotein convertase 1/3 in NR8383 macrophages and confirmed the results on macrophages from PC1/3 deficient mice. A complete proteomic study of secretomes and intracellular proteins was undertaken and revealed that inhibition of proprotein convertase 1/3 orient macrophages toward an M1 activated phenotype. This phenotype is characterized by filopodial extensions, Toll-like receptor 4 MyD88-dependent signaling, calcium entry augmentation and the secretion of pro-inflammatory factors. In response to endotoxin/lipopolysaccharide, these intracellular modifications increased, and the secreted factors attracted na&#xef;ve T helper lymphocytes to promote the cytotoxic response. Importantly, the application of these factors onto breast and ovarian cancer cells resulted in a decrease viability or resistance. Under inhibitory conditions using interleukin 10, PC1/3-knockdown macrophages continued to secrete inflammatory factors. These data indicate that targeted inhibition of proprotein convertase 1/3 could represent a novel type of immune therapy to reactivate intra-tumoral macrophages.

### Keywords
Shotgun proteomics, Macrophages

### Affiliations
University of Lille
Université de Lille, Sciences et Technologies - INSERM U1192 - Laboratoire PRISM, France

### Submitter
Maxence Wisztorski

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
Université de Lille, Sciences et Technologies - INSERM U1192 - Laboratoire PRISM, France


