### Accession
PXD008680

### Title
U2OS Adhesion Isolations +/- CytochalasinD and Neomycin

### Description
U2OS cells preferentially utilise integrin alphaV beta5 in adhesion complexes when grown under standard cell culture conditions for 3 days. AlphaV beta5 can be found in both classical 'Focal' adhesions and in novel 'Reticular' adhesions that do not associate with F-actin or other known adhesion protein components. In order to identify components of reticular adhesions, cells were treated with cytochalasinD in order to disrupt F-actin and promote loss of focal adhesions. Remaining reticular adhesion complexes were stabilised with DTBP crosslinking reagent before adhesion complexes were isolated.   Preliminary data suggested that depletion of PIP2 by Neomycin treatment would lead to disruption of reticular adhesions preferentially over focal adhesions and so this manipulation was included in these experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Adhesion complexes were isolated using protocols described previously (Jones et al., 2015). In particular, adhesion compelxes were stabilised by cross-linking (DTBP, 6 mM, 5 min) and cells were lysed by RIPA buffer incubation and a high pressure water wash. Isolated complexes were collected in biological tripliacte and proteins were seperated by SDS-PAGE until all protein material had migrated into the gel ('gel-top' approach). The gel was cut into small cubes, washed twice with 50% acetonitrile (in 12.5 mM NH4HCO3) and twice with undilted acetonitrile. Dried proteins were incubated in dithiothreitol (10 mM, 1 h, 56 °C) followed by iodoacetamide (55 mM, 45 min, room temperature in the dark). Gel pieces were washed twice in 25 mM NH4HCO3 follwed by acetonitrile. Proteins were digested with trypsin (12 µg/mL, overnight, 37 °C). Peptides were extracted with acetonitrile in 0.2 % formic acid and 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were desalted using OLIGO R3 beads and were analysed by LC-MSMS (UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC, Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer) using a 2 h LC gradient.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatics analyses were performed using Progenesis (http://www.nonlinear.com/progenesis/qi-for-proteomics/) and Mascot (v2.2.03). Raw files were pre-processed in Progenesis software and peak lists were exported to Mascot for database searching using the following parameters: fixed modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation; variabile modifications, methionine oxidation; tryptic peptides (max 1 missed cleavage); 2+ and 3+ monoisotopic precursor ions; peptide mass tolerance, 5 ppm; MSMS tolerance, 0.5 Da. Proteins identifications were imported into Progenesis software to enable MS1 intensity-based label-free relative quantification

### Publication Abstract
Adhesion to the extracellular matrix persists during mitosis in most cell types. However, while classical adhesion complexes, such as focal adhesions, do and must disassemble to enable mitotic rounding, the mechanisms of residual mitotic cell-extracellular matrix adhesion remain undefined. Here, we identify 'reticular adhesions', a class of adhesion complex that is mediated by integrin &#x3b1;v&#x3b2;5, formed during interphase, and preserved at cell-extracellular matrix attachment sites throughout cell division. Consistent with this role, integrin &#x3b2;5 depletion perturbs mitosis and disrupts spatial memory transmission between cell generations. Reticular adhesions are morphologically and dynamically distinct from classical focal adhesions. Mass spectrometry defines their unique composition, enriched in phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub>)-binding proteins but lacking virtually all consensus adhesome components. Indeed, reticular adhesions are promoted by PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub>, and form independently of talin and F-actin. The distinct characteristics of reticular adhesions provide a solution to the problem of maintaining cell-extracellular matrix attachment during mitotic rounding and division.

### Keywords
Human, U2os, Proteomics, Reticular, Cytod

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Professor of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology, Medicine & Health, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Matthew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Martin J Humphries
Professor of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology, Medicine & Health, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, United Kingdom


