### Accession
PXD027012

### Title
Microdissected tumor epithelium and tumor stroma from patients with breast cancer

### Description
Stratification of breast cancers into subtypes are generally based on immune assays on tumor cells and/or mRNA expression of tumor cell enriched tissues. Here, we have laser microdissected tumor epithelium and tumor stroma from 24 breast cancer biopsies (12 luminal-like and 12 basal-like). We hypothesized that the stromal proteome would separate patients with breast into groups independently of the traditional epithelial based subtypes.

### Sample Protocol
10 µm thick FFPE sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated and stained with haematoxylin. Tumor epithelium and stromal compartments were laser microdissected (PALM MicroBeam, Zeiss) and pressure catapulted into a tube cap (AdhesiveCap 500 opaque, Zeiss). Depending on the available tissue, 0.5-1.9×107 µm3 were microdissected. The samples were prepared using the FFPE-FASP protocol, which is described in detail elsewhere6. After enzymatic digestion of proteins, the resulting peptides were eluted from the FASP filters and desalted using Oasis HLB µElution plates (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The samples were analyzed (label-free) in its entirety during a 180 min reverse-phase gradient on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) connected to a Dionex Ultimate NCR.3500RS LC system.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry (MS) data was processed with MaxQuant (v1.6.0.16). Identified features were searched against an up-to-date human “reference proteome” database from UniProt.org. The processed MS data analyses were performed using the Perseus software (v1.6.14.0). Protein intensity data was log2-transformed. Identified proteins were filtered to retain only proteins with intensity data (valid value) in at least 50% of samples within one group.

### Publication Abstract
An electroreductive strategy for radical hydroxyl fluorosulfonylation of alkenes with sulfuryl chlorofluoride and molecular oxygen from air is described. This mild protocol displays excellent functional group compatibility, broad scope, and good scalability, providing convenient access to diverse &#x3b2;-hydroxy sulfonyl fluorides. These &#x3b2;-hydroxy sulfonyl fluoride products can be further converted to valuable aliphatic sulfonyl fluorides, &#x3b2;-keto sulfonyl fluorides, and &#x3b2;-alkenyl sulfonyl fluorides. Further, some of these products showed excellent inhibitory activity against Botrytis cinerea or Bursaphelenchus xylophilus, which could be useful for potent agrochemical discovery. Preliminary mechanistic studies indicate that this transformation is achieved through rapid O<sub>2</sub> interception by the alkyl radical and subsequent reduction of the peroxy radical, which outcompete other side reactions such as chlorine atom transfer, hydrogen atom transfer, and Russell fragmentation.

### Keywords
Human, Microdissection, Luminal, Proteomics, Breast, Basal-like, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Centre for Cancer Biomarkers (CCBIO), Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Kenneth Finne

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Akslen
Centre for Cancer Biomarkers (CCBIO), Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway


