### Accession
PXD003282

### Title
Clamping down on transcription: repression of archaeal RNAP by the novel viral regulator RIP

### Description
Little is known about how archaeal viruses perturbate the transcription machinery of their hosts. We provide the first example of a non-DNA binding archaeo-viral transcription factor that directly targets the host RNA polymerase and efficiently represses its activity. We have used cross-linking and mass spectrometry to identify how ORF145 binds in the DNA-binding channel of RNA polymerase.

### Sample Protocol
Purified RNAP-ORF145 complex (50 μg, 71 μl) was mixed with 225 μg BS3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) dissolved in 100 μl cross-link buffer (20 mM HEPES pH7.8, 20 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. The reaction was stopped by adding 1 μl of 2.5 M ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes at room temperature. The reaction mixture was separated on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel using MES SDS running buffer and Coomassie blue stain, followed by in-gel digestion using trypsin. The equivalent of 20 μg were injected directly in 6 portions, 2x 1 μg and 4x 3 μg, following desalting using self-made C18 StageTips prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Further fractionation of cross-linked RNAP-ORF145 peptides was carried out on 60% of the cross-linked sample (30 μg) using SCX-StageTips, yielding three fractions, followed by desalting using self-made C18 StageTips. Peptides were loaded directly onto a spray emitter analytical column (75 µm inner diameter, 8 µm opening, 250 mm length; New Objectives) packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm; Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using an air pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems). Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into a hybrid linear ion trap - Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were analyzed using a “high/high” acquisition strategy, detecting at high resolution in the Orbitrap and analyzing the subsequent fragments also in the Orbitrap. Survey scan (MS) spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap at 100,000 resolution. The eight most intense signals in the survey scan for each acquisition cycle were isolated with an m/z window of 2 Th and fragmented with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap. 1+ and 2+ ions were excluded from fragmentation. Fragmentation (MS2) spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 7500 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with 90 seconds exclusion time and repeat count equal to 1.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 using default parameters except the setting for “Top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da” being set to 100. Peak lists were searched against a database from the sequences of HSA using in-house software, Xi (ERI, Edinburgh) for identification of cross-linked peptides. Search parameters were MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; specificity, fully tryptic; allowed number of missed cleavages, four; cross-linker, BS3; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine. Linkage specificity for BS3 was assumed to be at lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N-termini.

### Publication Abstract
Little is known about how archaeal viruses perturb the transcription machinery of their hosts. Here we provide the first example of an archaeo-viral transcription factor that directly targets the host RNA polymerase (RNAP) and efficiently represses its activity. ORF145 from the temperate Acidianus two-tailed virus (ATV) forms a high-affinity complex with RNAP by binding inside the DNA-binding channel where it locks the flexible RNAP clamp in one position. This counteracts the formation of transcription pre-initiation complexes in vitro and represses abortive and productive transcription initiation, as well as elongation. Both host and viral promoters are subjected to ORF145 repression. Thus, ORF145 has the properties of a global transcription repressor and its overexpression is toxic for Sulfolobus. On the basis of its properties, we have re-named ORF145 RNAP Inhibitory Protein (RIP).

### Keywords
Virus, Rna polymerase, Bacteriophages, Transcription, Cross-linking and mass spectrometry, Archaea, Evolution, Repressor

### Affiliations
1. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom. 2. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.
Technische Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Adam Belsom

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1. Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3BF, United Kingdom. 2. Department of Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, 13355 Berlin, Germany.


