### Accession
PXD018827

### Title
Proteomic investigation of treatment with medicinal mushroom supplement Agarikon.1® in advanced colorectal cancer animal model

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most frequent cancer type in both males and females, with about 35% of patients being diagnosed in stage IV metastatic disease. Despite advancements in treatment, life expectancy in patients with metastatic disease is low. Due to frequent drug resistance during conventional and targeted cancer treatments, the development and testing of multi-target therapies is an important objective. Medicinal mushrooms specific compound isolates as well as complex extract mixtures have been studied in depth, and many mushroom species have been proven to be non-toxic multi-target inhibitors of specific oncogenic pathways, as well as potent immunomodulators. In this study, we have performed a tandem mass tags qualitative and quantitative proteomic analyses of CT26.WT colon cancer tumor tissues from Balb/c mice treated with proprietary medicinal mushroom extract Agarikon.1®, with or without 5-fluorouracil.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor tissue was mechanically grinded and homogenized in a mortar with liquid nitrogen. Homogenized tissue was dissolved in 1 mL of a lysis buffer [7 M urea/2 M thiourea (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), 4% (w/v) CHAPS (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% (w/v) dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich)] and 1× protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Switzerland). The obtained lysate was subjected to sonication with 4 mm probe, power of 6 W (MicrosonTM, PGC Scientifics, USA), four times for 10 s. After sonication, the samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with gentle agitation on the thermo shaker (Eppendorf, Germany). After that the samples were centrifuged for 45 min at 14,000 rpm and 4 °C (Eppendorf, Germany). The supernatant was collected, aliquoted and stored at −80 °C for further analyses. From each sample, acetone-precipitated proteins were dissolved in triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) and subjected to reduction, alkylation, digestion and labelled using 10-plex Tandem Mass Tag reagents according to manufacturer instructions (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). In short, 35 μg of total plasma proteins from samples and internal standard (pool of all samples) were dissolved in 50 μL 0.1M TEAB, reduced by adding 2.5 μL of 200 mM DTT (60 min, 55 °C) (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), alkylated by adding 2.5 μL of 375mM IAA (30 min, room temperature in the dark) (Sigma Aldrich, St. Lois, MO, USA) and acetone-precipitated (addition of 300 μL, overnight, −20 °C). Protein pellets were collected subsequently by centrifugation (8000×g, 4 °C), dissolved in 50 μL 0.1M TEAB and digested using 1 μL of trypsin (1 mg/mL, Promega; trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:35, at 37 °C overnight).  TMT label reagents were equilibrated to room temperature, resuspended in anhydrous acetonitrile LC-MS grade (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) and added to each sample. Labelling was performed for 1 hour at room temperature and then quenched by adding 5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) for 15 minutes. Samples were then combined at equal amounts and 5 μg of each mixed sample set was vacuum-dried and stored at - 80 °C for LC-MS/MS analysis. High resolution LC-MS/MS analysis of TMT-labelled peptides was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as described elsewhere [124]. In short, labelled peptides were desalted on the trap column for 12 min at the flow rate of 15 μL/min and separated on analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm×75 μm) using a linear gradient of 5–45% mobile phase B over 120 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, while B contained 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN. Ionisation was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, USA). The MS operated in positive ion mode using DDA Top8 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70,000, 120 ms injection time, AGC target 1×106, a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. HCD fragmentation was performed at step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500 and AGC target of 2×105. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state, as well as charge states of +1 and more than +7 were excluded from further fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification and relative quantification the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Database search against Mus musculus FASTA files downloaded from NCBI database (11/4/2019, 185475 entries) was performed according to the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M), and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using the Percolator algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer workflow and was set at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most frequent cancer type in both males and females, with about 35% of patients being diagnosed in stage IV metastatic disease. Despite advancements in treatment, life expectancy in patients with metastatic disease is still not satisfying. Due to frequent drug resistance during conventional and targeted cancer treatments, the development and testing of multi-target therapies is an important research field. Medicinal mushrooms specific isolated compounds as well as complex extract mixtures have been studied in depth, and many mushroom species have been proven to be non-toxic multi-target inhibitors of specific oncogenic pathways, as well as potent immunomodulators. In this study, we have performed a tandem mass tags qualitative and quantitative proteomic analyses of CT26.WT colon cancer tumor tissues from Balb/c mice treated with the studied medicinal mushroom extract mixture, with or without 5-fluorouracil. Besides significantly improved survival, obtained results reveal that Agarikon.1 alone, and in combination with 5-fluorouracil exert their anticancer effects by affecting several fundamental processes important in CRC progression. Bioinformatic analysis of up- and downregulated proteins revealed that ribosomal biogenesis and translation is downregulated in treatment groups, while the unfolded protein response (UPR), lipid metabolism and tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) are upregulated. Moreover, we found that many known clinical biomarkers and protein clusters important in CRC progression and prognosis are affected, which are a good basis for an expanded translational study of the herein presented treatment.

### Keywords
Animal model, Balb/c mice, Agarikon, Advanced colorectal cancer, Proteomics, Medicinal mushroom supplement, Tmt

### Affiliations
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia    Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia    Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


