### Accession
PXD009375

### Title
Direct visualization of ERAD nanocompartments within the cell

### Description
ER-associated degradation (ERAD) is an evolutionarily-conserved quality control mechanism where misfolded proteins are removed from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. While many ERAD-mediating proteins have been identified, it is unknown how they are spatially organized within the cell. Using in situ cryo-electron tomography to image the native molecular landscape of Chlamydomonas, we discovered that ERAD proteins are concentrated within ~200 nm cytosolic foci that contact the ER membrane away from the ER-Golgi interface. These ribosome-excluding ERAD nanocompartments consist of a core of clustered proteasomes surrounded by Cdc48. Active proteasomes directly engage with the ER membrane, indicating an additional Cdc48-independent mechanism for extraction of misfolded proteins. Our study reveals that ERAD has precise cellular architecture, which likely enables efficient protein quality control.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested by in-solution digestion protocol and peptides were fractionated to 3 SCX fractions via StageTip prior to LCMSMS analysis using Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant computational proteomics suite. Proteins and peptides were filtered at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
To promote the biochemical reactions of life, cells can compartmentalize molecular interaction partners together within separated non-membrane-bound regions. It is unknown whether this strategy is used to facilitate protein degradation at specific locations within the cell. Leveraging in situ cryo-electron tomography to image the native molecular landscape of the unicellular alga <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i>, we discovered that the cytosolic protein degradation machinery is concentrated within &#x223c;200-nm foci that contact specialized patches of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane away from the ER-Golgi interface. These non-membrane-bound microcompartments exclude ribosomes and consist of a core of densely clustered 26S proteasomes surrounded by a loose cloud of Cdc48. Active proteasomes in the microcompartments directly engage with putative substrate at the ER membrane, a function canonically assigned to Cdc48. Live-cell fluorescence microscopy revealed that the proteasome clusters are dynamic, with frequent assembly and fusion events. We propose that the microcompartments perform ER-associated degradation, colocalizing the degradation machinery at specific ER hot spots to enable efficient protein quality control.

### Keywords
Erad electron microscopy

### Affiliations
MaxPlanck Institute for Biochemistry, Core facility 
Department of Molecular Structural Biology, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Nagarjuna  Nagaraj

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang Baumeister
Department of Molecular Structural Biology, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


