### Accession
PXD036457

### Title
Super-killer CTLs are generated by single gene deletion of Bach2

### Description
Bach2 codes for a transcriptional regulator exerting major influences on T cell mediated immune regulation. Effector CTLs derived from in vitro activation of murine CD8+ T cells showed increased proliferative and cytolytic capacity in the absence of BACH2. Before activation, BACH2-deficient CD8+ T cells had a higher abundance of memory and reduced abundance of naïve cells compared to wild-type. CTLs derived from central memory T cells were more potently cytotoxic than those derived from naïve T cells, but even within separated subsets, BACH2-deficiency conferred a cytotoxic advantage. Immunofluorescence and electron microscopy revealed larger granules in BACH2-deficient compared to wild-type CTLs, and proteomic analysis showed an increase in granule content, including perforin and granzymes. Thus, the enhanced cytotoxicity observed in effector CTLs lacking BACH2 arises not only from differences in their initial differentiation state but also inherent production of enlarged cytolytic granules. These results demonstrate how a single gene deletion can produce a CTL super-killer.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation  Cell pellets were lysed in 400 μL lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP). Lysates were boiled and sonicated with a BioRuptor (30 cycles: 30 sec on, 30 sec off) before alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Lysates were subjected to the SP3 procedure for protein clean-up (39) before elution into digest buffer (0.1% SDS, 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5, 1mM CaCl2) and digested with LysC and Trypsin, each at a 1:50 (enzyme:protein) ratio. TMT labelling and peptide clean-up were performed as described previously (40). After labelling samples were eluted into 2% DMSO in water, combined and dried in vacuo. Samples were then fractionated using off-line high pH reverse phase chromatography: samples were loaded onto a 4.6 x 250 mm XbridgeTM BEH130 C18 column with 3.5 µm particles (Waters). Using a Dionex BioRS system, the samples were separated using a 25-  minute multistep gradient of solvents A (10 mM formate at pH 9 in 2% acetonitrile) and B (10 mM ammonium formate pH 9 in 80% acetonitrile), at a flow rate of 1 mL/min. Peptides were consolidated into 24 fractions which were dried then dissolved in 5% formic acid and analysed by LC-MS.  Liquid chromatography electrospray tandem mass spectrometry analysis (LC-ES-MS/MS)  1 μg per fraction was analysed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Dionex ultra high-pressure liquid chromatography system (nano RSLC). RP-LC was performed using a Dionex RSLC nano HPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were injected onto a 75 μm × 2 cm PepMap-C18 pre-column and resolved on a 75 μm × 50 cm RP- C18 EASY-Spray temperature controlled integrated column-emitter (Thermo) using a four-hour multistep gradient from 5% B to 35% B with a constant flow of 200 nL min-1. The mobile phases were: 2% ACN incorporating 0.1% FA (Solvent A) and 80% ACN incorporating 0.1% FA (Solvent B). The spray was initiated by applying 2.5 kV to the EASY-Spray emitter and the data were acquired under the control of Xcalibur software in a data dependent mode using top speed and 4 s duration per cycle, the survey scan is acquired in the Orbitrap covering the m/z range from 400 to 1400 Th with a mass resolution of 120,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2.0 e5 ions. The most intense ions were selected for fragmentation using CID in the ion trap with 30 % CID collision energy and an isolation window of 1.6 Th. The AGC target was set to 1.0 e4 with a maximum injection time of 70 ms and a dynamic exclusion of 80 s. During the MS3 analysis for more accurate TMT quantifications, 10 fragment ions were co-isolated using synchronous precursor selection using a window of 2 Th and further fragmented using HCD collision energy of 55%. The fragments were then analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. The AGC target was set to 1.0 e5 and the maximum injection time was set to 300 ms.

### Data Protocol
Processing and analysis of proteomics data  The data were processed, searched and quantified with the MaxQuant software package, version 1.5.8.3, Proteins and peptides were identified using the UniProt mouse database (SwissProt and Trembl) and the contaminants database integrated in MaxQuant using the Andromeda search engine (41, 42) with the following search  parameters: carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT modification on peptide N-termini and lysine side chains were fixed modifications, while methionine oxidation, acetylation of N-termini of proteins were selected as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 1% for positive identification at the protein and PSM level. The data set was filtered to remove proteins categorised as “contaminants”, “reverse” and “only identified by site”. Copy numbers were calculated as described (43) after allocating the summed MS1 intensities to the different experimental conditions according to their fractional MS3 reporter intensities. The accuracy of quantification was established using the following guidelines: proteins categorised as high accuracy had more than 8 unique and razor peptides and a ratio for unique/unique + razor greater than or equal to 0.75, proteins categorised as medium accuracy had at least 3 unique and razor peptides and a ratio for unique/unique + razor greater than or equal to 0.5, any proteins below these thresholds were classified as low accuracy

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bach2, T cell, Cd8, Proteomics, Ctl, Tmt

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Alejandro Brenes

### Lab Head
Dr Doreen A Cantrell
Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


