### Accession
PXD002688

### Title
Systematic Evaluation of Data-Independent Acquisition for Sensitive and Reproducible Proteomics – a Prototype Design for a Single Injection Assay

### Description
This dataset includes twelve DIA methods with various mass-isolation windows that analyze precursor ranges from 400-1250 m/z as well as shotgun acquired data with the same instrument and LC gradient.  The mass-isolation windows analyzed included 3, 6, and 26 m/z widths.  Each 3 m/z window method analyzed a 140 precursor m/z range, 6 m/z windows analyzed either a 200 or 280 precursor m/z range, and the 26 m/z isolation window method analyzed an 800 precursor m/z range from 400-1200 m/z.  All data were collected with a 5600+ Sciex QTOF with a 70 minute reverse phase gradient.  Shotgun analyses were collected with the sample samples, instrument, and gradient.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli strain BL21-DE3 was grown in 1000 ml of Luria broth (LB) overnight and centrifuged at 4000 x g for 10 min to pellet the cells.  The supernatant was decanted and the cells were frozen at -80oC.  The following day the cell pellet was resuspended and electrophoresed by SDS-PAGE and subjected to an in-gel trypsin digestion protocol with alkylation by iodoacetamide.  500 nanograms of E. coli peptides were injected for each analysis and every method was analyzed in technical triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Protalizer DIA software (Vulcan Analytical) was used to analyze every DIA file with QTOF settings.  The Swiss-Prot E. coli database downloaded March 17th 2015 was used as the reference proteome for all MS/MS searches.  A precursor and fragment-ion tolerance for QTOF instrumentation was used for the Protalizer Caterpillar spectral-library free identification algorithm.  Potential modifications included in the searches were phosphorylation at S, T, and Y residues, N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal loss of ammonia at C residues, and pyroglutamic acid at N-terminal E and Q residues.  Carbamidomethylation of C residues was searched as a fixed modification. The Protalizer tool for shotgun analysis was applied to analyze this data.  Peptide and protein identifications were made using the X! Tandem Sledgehammer search engine (version 2013.09.01.1) against the forward and reverse E. coli Swiss-Prot database used in the DIA analyses with a 50 ppm precursor and fragment-ion mass tolerance.  Potential and fixed modifications searched were the same as those described for the DIA data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Data-independent acquisition (DIA)-based proteomics has become increasingly complicated in recent years because of the vast number of workflows described, coupled with a lack of studies indicating a rational framework for selecting effective settings to use. To address this issue and provide a resource for the proteomics community, we compared 12 DIA methods that assay tryptic peptides using various mass-isolation windows. Our findings indicate that the most sensitive single injection LC-DIA method uses 6&#x2009;m/z isolation windows to analyze the densely populated tryptic peptide range from 450 to 730&#x2009;m/z, which allowed quantification of 4465 Escherichia coli peptides. In contrast, using the sequential windowed acquisition of all theoretical fragment-ions (SWATH) approach with 26&#x2009;m/z isolation windows across the entire 400-1200&#x2009;m/z range, allowed quantification of only 3309 peptides. This reduced sensitivity with 26&#x2009;m/z windows is caused by an increase in co-eluting compounds with similar precursor values detected in the same tandem MS spectra, which lowers the signal-to-noise of peptide fragment-ion chromatograms and reduces the amount of low abundance peptides that can be quantified from 410 to 920&#x2009;m/z. Above 920&#x2009;m/z, more peptides were quantified with 26&#x2009;m/z windows because of substantial peptide (13) C isotope distributions that parse peptide ions into separate isolation windows. Because reproducible quantification has been a long-standing aim of quantitative proteomics, and is a so-called trait of DIA, we sought to determine whether precursor-level chromatograms used in some methods rather than their fragment-level counterparts have similar precision. Our data show that extracted fragment-ion chromatograms are the reason DIA provides superior reproducibility. Copyright &#xa9; 2015 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.

### Keywords
Protalizer; dia; swath; pacific; label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine
Vulcan Analytical

### Submitter
Michael Heaven

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth D. Greis
Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine


