### Accession
PXD030482

### Title
Plasma proteomics data of hibernating and active wild Scandinavian brown bears

### Description
Here we provide mass-spectrometry based plasma proteomics data of hibernating and active wild Scandinavian brown bears (Ursus arctos arctos).  The brown bear hibernates for half the year. Despite obesity and the prolonged period of inactivity, bears show no signs of the harmful effects associated with these conditions in humans. Thus, the hibernating bear is a protentional translational model for addressing these complications in humans. We analyzed plasma samples from 14 subadult 2- to 3-year-old (y/o) bears (6 males and 8 females) collected both during hibernation and active state, and for some for the bears during two seasons, resulting in a total of 38 analyzed plasma samples. In triplicates, the proteins in the plasma samples were unfolded and reduced. To increase depth of the analysis and the chance to detect low molecular weight proteins and peptides, we filtered samples with a 50K MWCO filter with the aim to deplete larger proteins. The proteins in the permeate were then tryptically digested, desalted, and analyzed with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Protein identification and quantification was performed with the MaxQuant software searching against an Ursus arctos horribilis protein database.

### Sample Protocol
EDTA-plasma was collected from 14 hibernating and active wild Scandinavian brown bears (2- to 3-year-old, 6 males and 8 females). Some of the bears were sampled both when 2- and 3-years-old (two winters and two summers). All plasma samples were analyzed in triplicates, except for one which was analyzed in duplicate.  The plasma proteins were unfolded (by sodium deoxycholate, heating to 99 oC for 10 min), reduced (by tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine), and alkylated (by iodoacetamide). Samples were filtered with a 50K MWCO centrifugal filter with the aim to deplete larger proteins, such as albumin. The samples were digested with trypsin (porcine, Promega). Sodium deoxycholate was removed by precipitation by adding formic acid to ~2.0%, centrifuging, and saving the supernatant. Protein digests were desalted using StageTips (consisting of two C18-discs, and Poros R3 and R2 resin) The 113 samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a quadrupole Orbitrap (Q Exactive HF) mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Scientific). 5 µL peptide sample (0.5 µg total peptide) was injected at a flow rate of 8 uL/min onto a reverse phase Acclaim™ PepMap™ Nano Trap column [100 µm i.d. × 2 cm, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å (Thermo Scientific)] in solvent A (0.1% formic acid) followed by separation on a reverse phase Acclaim™ PepMap™ RSLC analytical column [C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. × 50 cm (Thermo Scientific)]. Peptides were eluted using a stepwise gradient from 5 to 100% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) over 60 min at a constant flow of 300 nL/min. MS was operated in positive ionization mode and data dependent top-20 mode, were the top 20 most intense MS1 parent ions were selected for fragmentation by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at 28 eV using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z. A full MS scan in the m/z range 400-1200 was acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z and a maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z and a maximum ion injection time of 45 ms. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 106 for MS and 105 for MS/MS. The underfill ratio was set to 3.5%, a dynamic exclusion of 30 s was applied, and Peptide Match and Exclude Isotopes were enabled. Default charge state was set to 2 and charge state exclusion enabled for unassigned precursors or a charge state of 1 or >6.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed in MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification; methionine oxidation and acetylation of the protein N-term was set as variable modifications; digestion mode was set to Trypsin/P and semi-specific; minimum peptide length was 5; peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate was set to 1%; match between runs and dependent peptides were selected. The Ursus arctos horribilis protein database from NCBI (taxonomy ID: 116960, downloaded on October 30, 2018, 43,159 entries) were applied. Additionally, we applied a peptide hormone database with 256 entries, where we manually extracted the mature hormone sequences from the preprohormone sequences based on how the human preprohormones are processed according to UniProt.

### Publication Abstract
In this article, we present mass-spectrometry based plasma proteomics data from hibernating and active free-ranging Scandinavian brown bears (<i>Ursus arctos</i>). The brown bear hibernates for half the year. Despite obesity when entering the den and the prolonged period of inactivity, the bear shows no signs of the harmful effects associated with these conditions in humans. Thus, the hibernating bear is a potential translational model for addressing these complications in humans. We analyzed plasma samples from fourteen 2- to 3-year-old bears (6 males and 8 females) collected both during hibernation and the active state, and for some of the bears during two seasons, resulting in a total of 38 analyzed plasma samples. In triplicates, the plasma proteins were unfolded and reduced. To increase the chance of detecting low-molecular-weight proteins and peptides, we filtered the samples using a 50&#xa0;K molecular weight cut-off filter with the aim to deplete larger abundant proteins, including albumin, and thereby increase the depth of the analysis. The proteins in the permeate were then tryptically digested, desalted, and analyzed with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Protein identification and quantification was performed with the MaxQuant software searching against an <i>Ursus arctos horribilis</i> protein database. Here, we provide the raw data, a list with identified proteins in the plasma samples, and the databases applied for protein identification. Based on the provided data, differentially expressed proteins in hibernation compared to active state can be identified. These proteins may be involved in the bears' adaptions to hibernation physiology and hold potential as novel therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Plasma, Ursus arctos, Hibernation, Proteomics, Brown bear, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Faculty of Engineering and Science, Aalborg University, Denmark
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Aalborg University

### Submitter
Anne Mette Frøbert

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Toft Overgaard
Department of Chemistry and Bioscience, Faculty of Engineering and Science, Aalborg University, Denmark


