### Accession
PXD009451

### Title
Quantitative proteomics identification of seminal fluid proteins in male Drosophila  melanogaster

### Description
Seminal fluid contains some of the fastest evolving proteins currently known. These seminal fluid proteins (Sfps) play crucial roles in reproduction, such as supporting sperm function, and – particularly in insects – modifying female physiology and behaviour. Identification of Sfps in small animals is challenging, and often relies on samples taken from the female reproductive tract after mating. A key pitfall of this method is that it might miss Sfps that are of low abundance due to dilution in the female-derived sample or rapid processing in females. Here we present a new and complimentary method, which provides added sensitivity to Sfp identification. We applied label-free quantitative proteomics to Drosophila melanogaster male reproductive tissue – where Sfps are unprocessed, and highly abundant – and quantified Sfps before and immediately after mating, to infer those transferred during copulation. We also analysed female reproductive tracts immediately before and after copulation to confirm the presence and abundance of known and candidate Sfps, where possible. Results were cross-referenced with transcriptomic and sequence databases to improve confidence in Sfp detection. Our data was consistent with 124 previously reported Sfps. We found 8 high-confidence novel candidate Sfps, which were both depleted in mated versus unmated males and identified within the reproductive tract of mated but not virgin females. We also identified 31 more candidates that are likely Sfps based on their abundance, known expression and predicted characteristics, and revealed that four proteins previously identified as Sfps are at best minor contributors to the ejaculate. The estimated copy numbers for our candidate Sfps were lower than for previously identified Sfps, supporting the idea that our technique provides a deeper analysis of the Sfp proteome than previous studies. Our results demonstrate a novel, high-sensitivity approach to the analysis of seminal fluid proteomes, whose application will further our understanding of reproductive biology.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were stored at -80°C until sample preparation for proteomic analysis. The samples were macerated with a clean pestle and washed with 25µl of Pierce RIPA Buffer. Then they were digested using the standard gel-aided sample preparation (GASP) protocol.  In brief, samples were reduced with 50 mM DTT for 10 to 20 minutes. Protein lysate was mixed with an equal volume of 40% acrylamide/Bis solution (37.5:1) and left at room temperature for 30 minutes to facilitate cysteine alkylation to propionamide. 5ul TEMED and 5 ul 10% APS were added to trigger acrylamide polymerization. The resulting gel plug was shredded by centrifugation through a Spin-X filter insert without membrane. Gel pieces were fixed in 40% ethanol /5% acetic acid before 2 successive rounds of buffer exchange with 1.5 M Urea, 0.5 M Thiourea and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate which were removed with acetonitrile. Immobilized proteins were digested with trypsin overnight and peptides extracted with two rounds of acetonitrile replacements. Peptides were first dried before desalting and resuspended in 2% ACN, 0.1 % FA buffer prior LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide samples were analysed on a LC-MS/MS platform consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 and a Q-Exactive (Male Dataset 2) or Q-Exactive HF (other datasets) mass spectrometer. After peptide loading in 0.1% TFA in 2% ACN onto a trap column, peptides were separated on an easy spray column with a gradient 2% ACN to 35% ACN in 0.1% formic acid in 5% DMSO. MS spectra were acquired in profile mode with a resolution of 70,000 with an ion target of 3e6. The instrument was set to pick the 15 most intense features for subsequent MS/MS analysis at a resolution of 17,500, a maximum acquisition time of 128 ms, an AGC target of 1e5, an isolation width of 1.6 Th and a dynamic exclusion of 27 seconds.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were imported into Progenesis QIP using default settings. MS/MS spectra were exported as MGF files using the 200 most intense peaks without deconvolution for searching.  The Drosophila melanogaster UniProt reference proteome was used as a search target in all cases (retrieved 30/03/2015 for Male Dataset 1, 15/02/2017 for Male Dataset 2 and 07/06/2017 for the remaining datasets). Male Dataset 1 was searched in PEAKS 7.  The other datasets were searched in Mascot 2.5.1.  In both search engines we used the following parameters: 10 ppm precursor mass accuracy, 0.05 Da fragment mass accuracy, Oxidation (M), Deamidation (N, Q) and Propionamide (K) as variable modifications, Propionamide (C) as a fixed modification, and 2 missed cleavage sites. We applied 1% FDR at peptide level and an additional Mascot ion score cutoff of 20 before importing search results into Progenesis, where protein quantification was calculated using the Top3 method.

### Publication Abstract
Sperm competition favors large, costly ejaculates, and theory predicts the evolution of allocation strategies that enable males to plastically tailor ejaculate expenditure to sperm competition threat. While greater sperm transfer in response to a perceived increase in the risk of sperm competition is well-supported, we have a poor understanding of whether males (<i>i</i>) respond to changes in perceived intensity of sperm competition, (<i>ii</i>) use the same allocation rules for sperm and seminal fluid, and (<i>iii</i>) experience changes in current and future reproductive performance as a result of ejaculate compositional changes. Combining quantitative proteomics with fluorescent sperm labeling, we show that <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> males exercise independent control over the transfer of sperm and seminal fluid proteins (SFPs) under different levels of male-male competition. While sperm transfer peaks at low competition, consistent with some theoretical predictions based on sperm competition intensity, the abundance of transferred SFPs generally increases at high competition levels. However, we find that clusters of SFPs vary in the directionality and sensitivity of their response to competition, promoting compositional change in seminal fluid. By tracking the degree of decline in male mating probability and offspring production across successive matings, we provide evidence that ejaculate compositional change represents an adaptive response to current sperm competition, but one that comes at a cost to future mating performance. Our work reveals a previously unknown divergence in ejaculate component allocation rules, exposes downstream costs of elevated ejaculate investment, and ultimately suggests a central role for ejaculate compositional plasticity in sexual selection.

### Keywords
Drosophila melanogaster; seminal fluid; lfq

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Edward Grey Institute, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Stuart Wigby
Edward Grey Institute, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK


