### Accession
PXD026773

### Title
Integrated analysis of proteomics on rat hearts with aging and hypertension

### Description
Hypertension is a most important risk factor of cardiovascular diseases (CVD), and its incidence is greatest among older adults, which indicates that aging is an independent risk for both hypertension and CVD. To date, the studies on the proteomics and phosphoproteomics of the aged hypertensive hearts for studying their impacts on the pathogenesis of CVD are limited. Here we present a dataset by using proteomics and phosphor-proteomics analysis on young and aged healthy and spontaneous hypertensive (SHR) rats. The dataset has following features: 1) numerical description of average 4000 total proteins and 1500 phosphor-proteins of detectable proteins in each group; 2) proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiles of their expression patterns; 3) Pathways for individual factor (age or hypertension) and their interaction and association with CVDs. Therefore, the integrated analysis of the dataset revealed the underlying pathways of aging and/or hypertension and their interaction on cardiovascular remodelling. In summary, the dataset provides a searchable multi-omics for the researchers to explore the interaction of aging and hypertension on the pathogenesis of CVD.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing protocol Heart samples acquired in each group was treated liquid nitrogen quickly and then kept in -80 °C fridge.  Each group included three samples. About 150 mg heart tissue for each sample was extracted for protein and used to proteomics study. For total protein extraction, sample was ground individually in liquid nitrogen and lysed with lysis buffer which containing 100 mM NH4HCO3(pH 8), 6 M Urea and 0.2% SDS, followed by 5 min of ultrasonication on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4℃ and the supernatant was transferred to a clean tube. Extracts from each sample were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56℃, and subsequently alkylated with sufficient iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Then samples were completely mixed with 4 times volume of precooled acetone by vortexing and incubated at -20℃ for at least 2 h. Samples were then centrifuged and the precipitation was collected. After washing twice with cold acetone, the pellet was dissolved by dissolution buffer，which containing 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and 6 M urea. Finally, Use the Bradford Protein Quantitative Kit and follow the instructions for quality control of protein.  For TMT Labeling of Peptides, 120 μg of each protein sample was taken and the volume was made up to 100 μL with lysis buffer, 3 μL of 1 μg/μL trypsin and 500 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer were added, sample was mixed and digested at 37 °C overnight. Equal volume of 1% formic acid was mixed with digested sample and centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with 1 mL of washing solution (0.1% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile) 3 times, then eluted twice by 0.4 mL of elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 75% acetonitrile). The eluents of each sample were combined and lyophilized. 100 μL of 0.1 M TEAB buffer was added to reconstitute, and 41 μL of acetonitrile-dissolved TMT labeling reagent was added, sample was mixed with shaking for 2 h at room temperature. Then, the reaction was stopped by adding 8% ammonia. All labeling samples were mixed with equal volume, desalted and lyophilized. Note: For multiple labelled groups, a common reference was created by pooling an equal quantity of each sample.  For separation of fractions, mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile, adjusted pH to 10.0 using ammonium hydroxide) and B (98% acetonitrile, adjusted pH to 10.0 using ammonium hydroxide) were used to develop a gradient elution. The lyophilized powder was dissolved in solution A and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at room temperature. The sample was fractionated using a C18 column (Waters BEH C18 4.6×250 mm, 5 μm) on a Rigol L3000 HPLC system, the column oven was set as 50°C. The detail of elution gradient was shown in Table 1. The eluates were monitored at UV 214 nm, collected for a tube per minute and combined into 10 fractions finally. All fractions were dried under vacuum, and then, reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in water. LC-MS/MS Analysis Peptide and protein identification and quantification.  For transition library construction, shotgun proteomics analyses were performed using an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) coupled with an Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) operating in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. 1 μg sample was injected into a home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (2 cm×75 μm, 3 μm). Peptides were separated in a home-made analytical column (15 cm×150 μm, 1.9 μm), using a linear gradient elution. The separated peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), with ion source of Nanospray Flex™（ESI）, spray voltage of 2.3 kV and ion transport capillary temperature of 320°C. Full scan range from m/z 350 to 1500 with resolution of 60000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3×106 and a maximum ion injection time was 20 ms. The top 40 precursors of the highest abundant in the full scan were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in MS/MS, where resolution was 15000 (at m/z 200) for 6 plex（45000 for 10 plex, m/z 200）, the automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 5×104 the maximum ion injection time was 45 ms, a normalized collision energy was set as 32%, an intensity threshold was 1.9×105 , and the dynamic exclusion parameter was 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files for full proteome were processed using Proteome Discoverer2.2 software with the follow settings: “Max.Missed Cleavage Sites is 2, Precursor Mass Tolerance is 10 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance is 0.02 Da”. MS/MS spectra were searched against the database (X101SC19101792-Z01+X101SC19101794-Z01-rat-NCBI.fasta; 56110 sequences). Carbamidomethyl was specified in Proteome Discoverer2.2 as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine (M), acetylation of the N-terminus and TMT 10-plex of tyrosine and lysine were specified in Proteome Discoverer2.2 as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 miscleavage sites were allowed. In order to improve the quality of the analysis results and reduce the false positive rate, Proteome Discoverer2.2 software further filtered the retrieval results. The identified protein contains at least 1 unique peptide with FDR no more than 1.0%. Proteins containing similar peptides that could not be distinguished by MS/MS analysis were identified as a same protein group. Reporter Quantification (TMT 10-plex) was used for TMT quantification. We only keep the credible peptide spectrum and proteins, and do FDR verification. The protein quantitation results were statistically analyzed by Mann-Whitney Test, for proteins whose quantitation significantly different between experimental and control groups, (with P.Value < 0.05 and FC >1.2 or FC < 0.83), were defined as differentially expressed proteins (DEP). Lists of DEPs were selected and used for downstream bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Rat, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Aging and hypertension

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Medical Electrophysiology of the Ministry of Education, and Medical Electrophysiological Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Institute of Cardiovascular Research, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan
Key Laboratory of Medical Electrophysiology of the Ministry of Education, and Medical Electrophysiological Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Institute of Cardiovascular Research, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan 646000, China Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, the Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan 646000, China

### Submitter
Tangting Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoqiu Tan
Key Laboratory of Medical Electrophysiology of the Ministry of Education, and Medical Electrophysiological Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Institute of Cardiovascular Research, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan 646000, China Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, the Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, Sichuan 646000, China


