### Accession
PXD013367

### Title
ATOMS analyses of MMP cleavage sites in WRS

### Description
Human tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (WRS) was digested by human MMPs, and digestion mixtures were subjected to terminal amine oriented mass spectrometry of substrates (ATOMS) protocol and LC-MS/MS analysis to identify MMP cleavage sites in WRS.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase was incubated with MMPs or buffer. Samples were denatured with Guanidine-HCl, cysteines were reduced with DTT, and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Excess iodoacemtamide was quenched with DTT and primary amines were labeled with heavy (+MMP) or light (-MMP) formaldehyde with sodium cyanoborohydride. Samples were mixed, split in two, and digested with either trypsin or GluC. After desalting samples were analyzed by nanoLC-Q-TOF (Bruker Impact II) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.0.1 and searched against a database customized to include tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase, all MMPs used in the study, and 247 common protein contaminants. Enzyme specificity was semi-specific for free N-termini. Fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteines and variable modifications were set as methionine oxidation and asparagine deamidation. Delta score-based false discovery rates were set to 0.01 and 0.05 for peptide and protein identifications respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mmp, Protease, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
UBC
Professor and Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Proteinase Proteomics and Systems Biology at the University of British Columbia, Centre for Blood Research

### Submitter
Parker Jobin

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Mark Overall
Professor and Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Proteinase Proteomics and Systems Biology at the University of British Columbia, Centre for Blood Research


