### Accession
PXD017832

### Title
Glycosylation analysis of pgl enzyme from C fetus in ecoli

### Description
Analysis of purified glycoproteins to assess the impact of pgl enzymes on the construction of the C.fetus N-linked glycan

### Sample Protocol
His purified glycoproteins were gel seperated, bands isolated and subjected to in gel digestion with trypsin. Gel extracted peptides were isolated with C18 microcolumn, desalted, dried down and stored at -20C. Samples were resuspend in buffer A* and run on a Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Samples were searched with Maxquant 1.6.3.4 against the campylobacter jejuni cmeA protein sequence using the standard maxquant setting with the additon of the Cj N-linked glycan. Analysis of glycosylation was undertaken by manually assessing scan event which contained the HexNAc oxonium ion 204.08. A list of identified glycopeptides are provide within the file "Glycopeptide_analysis.xlsx"

### Publication Abstract
<i>Campylobacter fetus</i> is commonly associated with venereal disease and abortions in cattle and sheep, and can also cause intestinal or systemic infections in humans that are immunocompromised, elderly, or exposed to infected livestock. It is also believed that <i>C. fetus</i> infection can result from the consumption or handling of contaminated food products, but <i>C. fetus</i> is rarely detected in food since isolation methods are not suited for its detection and the physiology of the organism makes culturing difficult. In the related species, <i>Campylobacter jejuni</i>, the ability to colonize the host has been linked to N-linked protein glycosylation with quantitative proteomics demonstrating that glycosylation is interconnected with cell physiology. Using label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics, we found more than 100 proteins significantly altered in expression in two <i>C. fetus</i> subsp. <i>fetus</i> protein glycosylation (<i>pgl</i>) mutants (<i>pglX</i> and <i>pglJ</i>) compared to the wild-type. Significant increases in the expression of the (NiFe)-hydrogenase HynABC, catalyzing H<sub>2</sub>-oxidation for energy harvesting, correlated with significantly increased levels of cellular nickel, improved growth in H<sub>2</sub> and increased hydrogenase activity, suggesting that N-glycosylation in <i>C. fetus</i> is involved in regulating the HynABC hydrogenase and nickel homeostasis. To further elucidate the function of the <i>C. fetus pgl</i> pathway and its enzymes, heterologous expression in <i>Escherichia coli</i> followed by mutational and functional analyses revealed that PglX and PglY are novel glycosyltransferases involved in extending the <i>C. fetus</i> hexasaccharide beyond the conserved core, while PglJ and PglA have similar activities to their homologs in <i>C. jejuni</i>. In addition, the <i>pgl</i> mutants displayed decreased motility and ethidium bromide efflux and showed an increased sensitivity to antibiotics. This work not only provides insight into the unique protein N-glycosylation pathway of <i>C. fetus</i>, but also expands our knowledge on the influence of protein N-glycosylation on <i>Campylobacter</i> cell physiology.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Glycosylation, Campylobacter

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
University of Georgia, United States

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Szymanski
University of Georgia, United States


