### Accession
PXD018804

### Title
Extensive proteomic dataset of Vero E6 cells infected by Italy-INMI1 SARS-CoV-2 virus at Day 4 post-infection

### Description
Next-generation proteomics of Vero E6 cells infected by Italy-INMI1 SARS-CoV-2 virus for defining relevant viral peptides for detection. Cells from Day4 post-infection at 0.01 multiplicity of infection.

### Sample Protocol
After virus heat inactivation, proteins were extracted. Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE gel for a short electrophoretic migration, excised as five polyacrylamide bands along their molecular weight, digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol: MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT and viral peptides were analyzed in terms of intensity, retention time, and sequence conservation amongst known viruses.

### Publication Abstract
Detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a crucial tool for fighting the COVID-19 pandemic. This dataset brief presents the exploration of a shotgun proteomics dataset acquired on SARS-CoV-2 infected Vero cells. Proteins from inactivated virus samples were extracted, digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were identified by data-dependent acquisition tandem mass spectrometry. The 101 peptides reporting for six viral proteins were specifically analyzed in terms of their analytical characteristics, species specificity and conservation, and their proneness to structural modifications. Based on these results, a shortlist of 14 peptides from the N, S, and M main structural proteins that could be used for targeted mass-spectrometry method development and diagnostic of the new SARS-CoV-2 is proposed and the best candidates are commented.

### Keywords
Virus, Sars-cov-2, Host response, Coronavirus, Viral particle, Covid-19, Severe acute respiratory syndrome, Kinetics, Detection

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


