### Accession
PXD036791

### Title
Global mapping of GalNAc-T isoform-specificities and O-glycosylation site-occupancy in a tissue-forming human cell line

### Description
Mucin-type-O-glycosylation on proteins is integrally involved in human health and disease and is coordinated by an enzyme family of 20 N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases (GalNAc-Ts). Detailed knowledge on the biological effects of site-specific O-glycosylation is limited due to lack of information on specific glycosylation enzyme activities and O-glycosylation site-occupancies. Here we present a systematic analysis of the isoform-specific targets of all GalNAc-Ts expressed within a tissue-forming human skin cell line, and demonstrate biologically significant effects of O-glycan initiation on epithelial formation. We find over 300 unique glycosylation sites across a diverse set of proteins specifically regulated by one of the GalNAc-T isoforms, consistent with their impact on the tissue phenotypes. Notably, we discover a high variability in the O-glycosylation site-occupancy of 70 glycosylated regions of secreted proteins. These findings revisit the relevance of individual O-glycosylation sites in the proteome, and provide an approach to establish which sites drive biological functions.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of differential proteomes and glycoproteomes: For differential glycoproteomic analysis, three biological replicate N/TERT-1 GALNT knockout clones and three technical replicates of wildtype N/TERT-1 cell lines were expanded in three 100 mm petri dishes per sample to ~90-100% monolayer confluency and cell pellets were harvested by scarping. Glycoproteomic sample preparation methods were adapted from previous reports27.  Cell pellets were lysed by sonication in 0.5 mL 0.1% RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters) in ammonium bicarbonate and protease activity was inactivated by heating to 80°C. Extracted proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (Sigma), alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma) and digested with trypsin (1:40) (Roche) overnight at 37°C. Digested samples were acidified using trifluoric acid (TFA) to precipitate the RapiGest and inactivate trypsin, supernatant was collected and desalted on Sep-Pak C18 1cc 100 mg columns (Waters). Purified peptides were quantified using colorimetric peptide quantification kit (Thermo) and 400 µg peptide from each sample was labeled using 1.6 mg tandem mass tag (TMT) sixplex labels (Thermo). Labeled peptide samples were then mixed in equimolar amounts and treated with neuraminidase from Clostridium perfringens (Sigma) to remove sialic acids. O-glycopeptides were enriched by lectin weak affinity chromatography (LWAC) using agarose-bound jacalin lectin (Vector Labs), which specifically enriches for peptide carrying T and Tn antigen. After washing, bound glycopeptides were eluted with 0.8 M D-galactose. Eluted fractions were desalted using self-made Stage Tips (combined C18 and C8 sorbent from Empore 3M), and fractionated using Pierce high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo). About 100 µg material from the LWAC flow-through was fractionated as well and used to obtain the differential proteomes. Glycoproteome and proteome samples were dissolved in 12 and 20 µL 0.1% formic acid, respectively, prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.    Preparation of N/TERT-1 lysates and secretome for occupancy determination:  Three technical replicates of both wildtype and COSMC knockout N/TERT-1 cells were grown in 100 mm petri dishes. When cells reached ~50% confluency, media was exchanged with 7 mL K-SFM without BPE supplement. After 24 h, conditioned media was collected and new BPE-free media was added. This was process was then repeated twice more, at which point cells would be close to  ~100% confluency and a total of 20-21mL conditioned media had been collected. Cells were washed once in 10 mL PBS, and cell pellets were collected using a cell scraper. Conditioned media was passed through a 0.45 µM filter membrane and proteins were precipitated by mixing with 1 g/mL trichloroacetic acid (TCA) in a 10:1 ratio. Solutions were kept on ice for 1 h allowing proteins to precipitate before centrifugation at 21.000 x g at 4 °C for 15 min. Supernatants were discarded and protein pellets were washed twice with ice-cold acetone with centrifugation steps in-between at 21.000 x g at 4 °C for 10 min. After removal of acetone from the second wash step the protein pellets were left to air dry. Pellets were resuspended in 0.05% RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and incubated at 70°C for 20min followed by reduction with 5 mM dithiothreitol (45 min, 60 °C) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, room temperature). From each sample, 300 µg protein was digested with trypsin (Roche) overnight at 37 °C using a 1:40 protein to trypsin ratio. Total cell lysates (TCL) from cell pellets were prepared as described for differential glycoproteomes in the previous section. After digestion, both secretome samples and TCLs were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 1cc 100 mg columns (Waters). Eluted peptides were dried and reconstituted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer followed by overnight incubation with 3U PNGase F (Roche) at 37 °C. Peptides were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 and quantified using a colorimetric peptide quantification kit (Thermo). Before LC-MS/MS, 100 µg of each sample were separated into four fractions (12.5%, 17,5% 22.5% and 50% acetonitrile) using Pierce high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo), dried and dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
TMT-labeled proteome and glycoproteome samples were analyzed as previously described (Mao et al. Anal. Chem. 2021). Briefly, samples were analyzed using an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to, either an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoSpray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), or an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a PicoView nanoSpray ion source (New Objectives). The nanoLC system was operated using a single analytical column setup packed with Reprosil-Pure-AQ C18 phase (Dr. Maisch, 1.9 μm particle size, 17-19 cm column length) in a PicoFrit Emitter (New Objectives, 75 μm inner diameter).  All samples, dissolved in Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, FA), were injected (12 µL for glycoproteome samples and 2 µL for proteome samples) onto the column. For the Lumos setup, samples were eluted in a gradient from 3 to 32% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) in 95 min, from 32 to 100% in 10 min, followed by isocratic elution at 100% for 15 min (total elution time 120 min). For the Fusion setup, samples were eluted in a gradient from 2 to 20% Buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) in 95 min, from 20 to 80% in 10 min, followed by isocratic elution at 100% for 15 min (total elution time 120 min). The mass spectrometers were set to acquire full scan MS spectra (m/z 355-1700; positive polarity) for a maximum injection time of 50 ms on Lumos, and 100 ms on Fusion, at a mass resolution of 120K and an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 2.0-4.0 × 10^5. Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD)-only and HCD+electron-transfer dissociation (ETD) methods were used for proteome and glycoproteome samples, respectively, with a cycle of 10 scans in data dependent mode. In HCD scans, the AGC target value was set to 5.0 × 10^4 and stepped collision energy was used with resolution at 50K. In ETD scans, the AGC target was set to 1 × 10^5 and the maximum injection time was 150 ms with resolution at 60K. All MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap in profile mode. Charge states 2 to 6 on Lumos, and 2 to 7 on Fusion, were targeted for fragmentation, using dynamic exclusion with an exclusion window of 25 ppm.   For samples used for occupancy measurements, two microliter per sample (10% of total) was injected per analysis onto the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer-set up as described above. A 2 h LC method was used with a gradient from 3% to 32% of solvent B in 95 min, from 32% to 100% B in the next 10 min and 100% B for the last 15 min at 200 nL/min. A precursor MS scan (m/z 350-1700, positive polarity) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a nominal resolution of 120K, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS/MS at a nominal resolution of 50K of the 15 most abundant precursors in the MS spectrum (charge states 2 to 6). A minimum MS signal threshold of 30,000 was used to trigger data-dependent fragmentation events. HCD was performed with an energy of 27% ± 5%, applying a 20 s dynamic exclusion window.

### Publication Abstract
Mucin-type-O-glycosylation on proteins is integrally involved in human health and disease and is coordinated by an enzyme family of 20 N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases (GalNAc-Ts). Detailed knowledge on the biological effects of site-specific O-glycosylation is limited due to lack of information on specific glycosylation enzyme activities and O-glycosylation site-occupancies. Here we present a systematic analysis of the isoform-specific targets of all GalNAc-Ts expressed within a tissue-forming human skin cell line, and demonstrate biologically significant effects of O-glycan initiation on epithelial formation. We find over 300 unique glycosylation sites across a diverse set of proteins specifically regulated by one of the GalNAc-T isoforms, consistent with their impact on the tissue phenotypes. Notably, we discover a high variability in the O-glycosylation site-occupancy of 70 glycosylated regions of secreted proteins. These findings revisit the relevance of individual O-glycosylation sites in the proteome, and provide an approach to establish which sites drive biological functions.

### Keywords
Differential glycoproteomics., Crispr, 3d tissue models; oragnoid, Galnt ; fibronectin; ldlr; lrp; col17a1

### Affiliations
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Mathias Ingemann Nielsen

### Lab Head
Dr Hans H. Wandall
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen


