### Accession
PXD013006

### Title
Interleukin 13 disrupts type 2 pneumocyte stem cell activity

### Description
Chronic lung disease is increasing in prevalence and there is urgent need to advance our understanding of human lung biology in order to improve diagnosis and current treatments.  The Th2 inflammatory cytokine Interleukin 13 (IL13) has been associated with both obstructive and fibrotic lung diseases, but its specific effect on the epithelial stem cells in the gas exchange compartment of the lung (alveolar space) has not been explored.   Here, we use in vivo lung models of homeostasis and repair, ex vivo organoid platforms, and novel quantitative proteomic techniques to show that IL13 can directly disrupt the self-renewal and differentiation of both murine and human type 2 alveolar epithelial cells (AEC2s).  We also show that IL13 promotes ectopic expression of markers typically associated with bronchiolar airway cells and commonly seen in the alveolar region of lung tissue from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF).  Furthermore, we identify a number of proteins that are differentially secreted by AEC2s in response to IL13, suggesting that protein-based biomarkers may identify subsets of patients with pulmonary disease that is driven by “Th2-high” biology.   This would allow us to understand some of the biological heterogeneity that exists in patients with chronic lung disease and to identify subsets of patients who may be more likely to respond to targeted anti-IL13 treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets in residual sorting buffer were adjusted to 0.2% acid-labile surfactant (ALS1) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8 (AmBic) followed by probe sonication. After centrifugation, protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assay, and 10 µg of each sample was was reduced with 10 mM DTT at 80 °C for 5 min and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide at room temp for 30 min. Excess IAM was quenched with an additional 10 mM DTT, and proteins were digested overnight with 1:25 (w/w) trypsin:protein as previously described.75  Proteins digests were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters) coupled to a Fusion Lumos high resolution accurate mass tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo) via a nanoelectrospray ionization source. Briefly 800 ng of peptide was trapped on a Symmetry C18 180 µm × 20 mm trapping column (5 μl/min at 99.9/0.1 v/v H2O/MeCN) followed by an analytical separation using a 1.7 µm Acquity HSS T3 C18 75 µm × 250 mm column (Waters) with a 90 min gradient of 5 to 30% MeCN with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nl/min and column temperature of 55 °C. Data collection on the Fusion Lumos MS was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a 240,000 resolution (@ m/z 200) full MS scan from m/z 375 to 1600 with a target AGC value of 2e5 ions and 50 ms maximum injection time (IT) and advanced precursor determination and internal calibration (eIC) enabled. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using charge state filtering (2-5), monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) and a dynamic exclusion of 20 s. MS/MS was performed using HCD with a collision energy of 30 ± 5% with detection in the ion trap using rapid scanning, an AGC target of 1e4, max IT of 30ms. A time-dependent (1 s) method was used.  Proteomic analysis of conditioned media. 500 microliters of conditioned media was concentrated using Millipore Amicon Ultra-0.5 centrifugal filters (10 kDa) followed by buffer exchange with 50 mM triethammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5 (TEAB) and Bradford assay. 100 micrograms of each sample was adjusted to 5% (w/v) deoxycholate and reduced and alkylated as above, and digested with 1:10 (w/w) TPCK-trypsin for 4 h. Samples were acidified with a final 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and 2% (v/v) MeCN followed by centrifugation, and supernatants were lyophilized. Peptides were reconstituted in 200 mM TEAB followed by labeling with TMT11 reagents (Thermo) according to manufacturer protocol. Labeling was as follows: 127N, control rep1; 127C, control rep 2; 128N, control rep 3; 129N, IL13 rep 1; 129C, IL13 rep2; 130N, IL13 rep 3; 130C, control media rep 1; 131N, control media rep 2; 131C, control media rep 3. After quenching with hydroxylamine, TMT reactions were combined to a single sample and lyophilized.  Labeled peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 550 µg of total peptide was fractionated using high pH reversed phase (HPRP). Briefly, peptides were fractionated using a 2.1 mm x 5 cm BEH C18 column (Waters) and Agilent 1100 HPLC. Separations utilized a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min and column temperature of 55 C, and mobile phases consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10 (MPA) and neat MeCN (MPB). Separations used a gradient of 7-35% MPB over 50 min and 35-90% MPB over 10 min. Ninety-six equal fractions were collected over 60 minutes (~0.25 ml each fraction) and re-concatenated into 24 fractions (e.g. fraction 1 was pooled from wells 1, 25, 49 and 73) followed by lyophilization and reconstitution in 1% TFA/2% MeCN. Individual fractions were analyzed using microflowLC-MS/MS using a Waters ACQUITY LC interfaced to a Thermo Q-Exactive HF-X MS. Briefly, ~20 µg of fractionated peptide was separated on a 1 mm x 15 mm 1.7 µm CSH C18 column using a flow rate of 100 µl/min, a column temperature of 55 C and a gradient of 3-28% (v/v) MeCN:H2O containing 0.1% formic acid over 60 min and interfaced to the HF-X via a heated electrospray ionization (HESI) source with default tune parameters for the 100 µl/min flow rate. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) used a 120,000 resolution precursor ion (MS1) scan from 375-1500 m/z, AGC target of 3E6 and maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms. MS/MS used a top10 method with 45,000 resolution, AGC target of 5e4 and minimum of 1e4 and 86 ms IT, a NCE of 33, isolation width of 0.8 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 20s.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v. 2.2 (Thermo). For label-free quantitation of the AEC2 proteome, MS/MS data was searched against a Uniprot database with mus musculus taxonomy (downloaded on 09/05/17) which contained additional entries for eGFP, tdTomato, bovine serum albumin and yeast alcohol dehydrogenase 1 (16,898 total entries). Search parameters included: trypsin specificity, up to 2 missed cleavage, 5 ppm precursor and 0.6 Da product ion tolerances, fixed modification on Cys (carbamidomethyl) and variable deamidation (NQ), GlnpyroGlu and acetyl protein N-terminus. Percolator was used for estimation of false discovery rate (FDR) and data was annotated at a 1% peptide and protein FDR. Label-free quantitation used the Minora Feature Detection and Feature Mapper nodes with chromatographic alignment using fine parameter tuning, a max rt shift of 5 min and tolerance of 5 ppm; and feature linking using a 2 min rt tolerance, 5 ppm mass tolerance and min s/n threshold of 1. Protein quantitation used unique and razor peptides. Data was normalized to total peptide quantity across with the exclusion of serum albumin peptides. Paired ratios were calculated using summed peptide abundances, imputation used low abundance resampling, and p-values were calculated using ANOVA.  For TMT quantitation of the organoid secretome, database searching used Sequest HF as described above with semi-tryptic specificity, a 0.02 Da product ion tolerance, fixed Cys carbamidomethylation, Lys and peptide N-terminal TMT label, and variable deamidation. The Reporter Ion Quantifier processing node used a 10 ppm integration tolerance, and the Reporter Ion Quantifier consensus node used unique + razor peptides, a co-isolation threshold of 50% and an average reported S/N threshold of 10. Normalization was to the total peptide amount and was scaled to an average of 100 for each reported ion. Paired ratios were calculated based on summed peptides, there was no imputation applied, and p-value calculations used ANOVA.

### Publication Abstract
The T helper 2 (Th2) inflammatory cytokine interleukin-13 (IL-13) has been associated with both obstructive and fibrotic lung diseases; however, its specific effect on the epithelial stem cells in the gas exchange compartment of the lung (alveolar space) has not been explored. Here, we used in vivo lung models of homeostasis and repair, ex vivo organoid platforms, and potentially novel quantitative proteomic techniques to show that IL-13 disrupts the self-renewal and differentiation of both murine and human type 2 alveolar epithelial cells (AEC2s). Significantly, we find that IL-13 promotes ectopic expression of markers typically associated with bronchiolar airway cells and commonly seen in the alveolar region of lung tissue from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Furthermore, we identify a number of proteins that are differentially secreted by AEC2s in response to IL-13 and may provide biomarkers to identify subsets of patients with pulmonary disease driven by "Th2-high" biology.

### Keywords
Alveolar epithelial cell, Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, Secretome

### Affiliations
Duke University

### Submitter
Matthew Foster

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Barkauskas
Duke University


