### Accession
PXD000666

### Title
Deep proteomic evaluation of primary and cell line motoneuron disease models delineates major differences in neuronal characteristics

### Description
The fatal neurodegenerative disorders amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) are the most common motoneuron disease and genetic cause of infant death, respectively. Various in vitro model systems have been established to investigate motoneuron disease mechanisms - in particular immortalized cell lines and primary neurons. By quantitative mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics we here compare the proteomes of primary motoneurons to motoneuron-like cell lines NSC-34 and N2a as well as to non-neuronal control cells at a depth of 10,000 proteins. We use this resource to evaluate the suitability of murine in vitro model systems for cell biological and biochemical analysis of motoneuron disease mechanisms. Individual protein and pathway analysis indicate substantial differences between motoneuron-like cell lines and primary motoneurons, especially for proteins involved in differentiation, cytoskeleton and receptor signaling, whereas common metabolic pathways were more similar. The ALS-associated proteins themselves also showed distinct differences between cell lines and primary motoneurons, providing a molecular basis for understanding fundamental alterations between cell lines and neurons with respect to neuronal pathways with relevance for disease mechanisms. Our study provides a proteomics resource for motoneuron research and presents a paradigm of how MS-based proteomics can be used to evaluate disease model systems

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis in 4 % SDS, 10 mM Hepes pH 8.0, acetone precipitation, tryptic digest in urea, peptides desalted on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber, Mann et al. 2007). Peptides separated on a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system, 50 cm columns (75 µm inner diameter) packed with 1.9 µm C18 particles, peptides loaded in buffer A (0.5% formic acid) and separated with a gradient from 7 % to 60 % buffer B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.5 % formic acid) within 3.5 h at 200 nl/min. A quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Michalski A 2011) was directly coupled to the LC via a nano electrospray source. The Q Exactive was operated in a data dependent mode. The survey scan range was set to 300 to 1,650 m/z, with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Up to the 10 most abundant isotope patterns with a charge ≥ 2 were subjected to HCD fragmentation (Olsen, Macek et al. 2007) at a normalized collision energy of 25, an isolation window of 2 Th and a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. To limit repeated sequencing, dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 30 s. Thresholds for ion injection time and ion target values were set to 20 ms and 3*106 for the survey scans and 60 ms and 106 for the MS/MS scans, respectively. Data was acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
We employed the MaxQuant software (v 1.3.10.18)(Cox and Mann 2008). We used the Andromeda (Cox, Neuhauser et al. 2011) to search MS/MS spectra against the UniProtKB FASTA database (version of June 2012). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin allowing cleavage N-terminal to proline and up to 2 miss cleavages. Peptides had to have a minimum length of 7 amino acids to be considered for identification. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, acetylation (N-terminus) and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein level.  Nonlinear retention time alignment of all measured samples was performed in MaxQuant. ‘Match between runs’, which allows transfer of peptide identifications in the absence of sequencing, was enabled with a maximum retention time window of 1 min. Protein identification required at least 1 razor peptide. A minimum ratio count of 2 was required for valid quantification events via MaxQuant’s Label Free Quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ). Data were filtered for common contaminants to which laminin sequences were added to avoid a bias resulting from the laminin-coating of plates in case of the primary motoneuron culture. Peptides only identified by site-modification were excluded from further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The fatal neurodegenerative disorders amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and spinal muscular atrophy are, respectively, the most common motoneuron disease and genetic cause of infant death. Various in vitro model systems have been established to investigate motoneuron disease mechanisms, in particular immortalized cell lines and primary neurons. Using quantitative mass-spectrometry-based proteomics, we compared the proteomes of primary motoneurons to motoneuron-like cell lines NSC-34 and N2a, as well as to non-neuronal control cells, at a depth of 10,000 proteins. We used this resource to evaluate the suitability of murine in vitro model systems for cell biological and biochemical analysis of motoneuron disease mechanisms. Individual protein and pathway analysis indicated substantial differences between motoneuron-like cell lines and primary motoneurons, especially for proteins involved in differentiation, cytoskeleton, and receptor signaling, whereas common metabolic pathways were more similar. The proteins associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis also showed distinct differences between cell lines and primary motoneurons, providing a molecular basis for understanding fundamental alterations between cell lines and neurons with respect to neuronal pathways with relevance for disease mechanisms. Our study provides a proteomics resource for motoneuron research and presents a paradigm of how mass-spectrometry-based proteomics can be used to evaluate disease model systems.

### Keywords
Neuron, Quantitative proteomics, Neurodegeneration, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Als, Motoneuron

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry


