### Accession
PXD003428

### Title
Succinylation proteome analysis of seedling leaves of Bd21

### Description
Protein lysine succinylation, an emerging protein post-translational modification widespread among microbiology, animals and plants, represents an important regulator of cellular processes. In our study, we took the first succinylation proteome analysis in the seedling leaves of Bd21 to draw a schematic map. With high accuracy nano LC-MS/MS combined with affinity purification, a total of 605 succinylated peptides in 323 proteins were identified and were implicated in various molecular functions and cellular biological processes. More than half (53.4%) of the proteins only have one lysine succinylated site. These identified proteins are involved in a variety of cellular functions such as amino acids transport/metabolism, post-translational modification, translation/ribosomal structure and lipid metabolism, especially energy and carbohydrate metabolism via GO, conservation analysis, protein interaction network and other bioinformatics analysis. Motif-X analysis of the succinylation sites identified fourteen significantly enriched succinylation motifs (-Ksucc-----K-, -Ksucc------G- etc) for the first time in plants and will provide possible succinylation binding locus for future studies. Secondary structure analysis showed that the succinylation sites occurred predominantly in alpha helix and coil structures which similar with acetylation. 155 (59.2%) of the homologous succinylated proteins were also identified in other three species (E. coli, S. cerevisiae and H. sapiens). 119 (45.4%) succinylated proteins and 115 (19%) sites were also to be acetylated at the same time. Our succinylated protein data set provides a promising starting point for further functional analysis of succinylation in B. distachyon, which could facilitate the elucidation of the entire metabolic network in the model monocot plant.

### Sample Protocol
Brachypodium distachyon 21 (Bd21) was used as plant material in this study. Bd21 seed surfaces were sterilized with 15% sodium hypochlorite for 3 min and then rinsed four times in sterile distilled water. Following this, the seeds were incubated in water for 12 h at room temperature and then transferred to a wet filter paper to germinate in darkness for 24 h (22-25°C). The seeds that germinated uniformly were selected and grown in plastic pots containing Hoagland solution, which were changed every 2 days. In a greenhouse, the experimental conditions included a daily photocycle of 16 h light/8 h dark (26°C/18°C) and 65-75% air humidity. The seedling leaves in the three-leaf stage were sampled and frozen at −80°C for subsequent protein extraction. Samples were first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the cell powder was transferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA,10 mM DTT and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail VI). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4CO3, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit (Amersham Bioscience, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The final protein solution was stored at −80°C for later use.  These samples were then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions, Then, the peptides were combined into 8 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging.  After that, to enrich Ksu peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mMNaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 Zip Tips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.  Three parallel analyses for each fraction were performed. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 5% to 20% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 20 min, 20% to 35% for 8 min and climbing to 80% in 2 min then holding at 80% for the last 5 min, all at a constant flow rate of 30 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q Exactive TM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 30; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 10.0s dynamic exclusion. The electro spray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5E4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt Brachypodium distachyon database (29,942 sequences) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, succinylation on Lys and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Protein acetylation and succinylation are the most crucial protein post-translational modifications (PTMs) involved in the regulation of plant growth and development. In this study, we present the first lysine-acetylation and lysine-succinylation proteome analysis of seedling leaves in Brachypodium distachyon L (Bd). Using high accuracy nano LC-MS/MS combined with affinity purification, we identified a total of 636 lysine-acetylated sites in 353 proteins and 605 lysine-succinylated sites in 262 proteins. These proteins participated in many biology processes, with various molecular functions. In particular, 119 proteins and 115 sites were found to be both acetylated and succinylated, simultaneously. Among the 353 acetylated proteins, 148 had acetylation orthologs in Oryza sativa L., Arabidopsis thaliana, Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, and Glycine max L. Among the 262 succinylated proteins, 170 of them were found to have homologous proteins in Oryza sativa L., Escherichia coli, Sacchayromyces cerevisiae, or Homo sapiens. Motif-X analysis of the acetylated and succinylated sites identified two new acetylated motifs (K---K and K-I-K) and twelve significantly enriched succinylated motifs for the first time, which could serve as possible binding loci for future studies in plants. Our comprehensive dataset provides a promising starting point for further functional analysis of acetylation and succinylation in Bd and other plant species.

### Keywords
Succinylation analysis seedling leaves of  bd21

### Affiliations
Capital normal university
Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Proteomics, College of Life Science, Capital Normal University,  Beijing, China.

### Submitter
Shoumin Zhen

### Lab Head
Dr Yueming Yan
Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Proteomics, College of Life Science, Capital Normal University,  Beijing, China.


