### Accession
PXD019040

### Title
Identification of RNG140 (caprin2)-associated proteins in CHO cells

### Description
Regulation of gene expression at the translational level is key to determining cell fate and function. An RNA-binding protein RNG140 (caprin2) plays a role in cell differentiation such as eye lens development and has been reported to function in translational regulation. To identify RNG140-associated proteins, we generated CHO cells stably expressing GFP and RNG140-GFP, and performed immunoprecipitation (IP) with GFP antibody from those cells followed by mass spectrometry. We identified about 400 proteins specifically co-immunoprecipitated with RNG140-GFP but not with GFP. Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis revealed that the eIF3 subunit proteins and small ribosomal subunit proteins were significantly enriched in the RNG140-associated complex.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates from the stable cell lines of GFP and RNG140-GFP were added to anti-GFP-agarose beads. After rocking for 2 h at 4°C, the beads were washed three times with PBS containing protease inhibitors. Proteins in immunoprecipitates were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Gel slices with corresponding protein bands were excised, and the proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin and then extracted from the gel. The extracted proteins were analyzed with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated from raw data using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peak-list files were searched against the NCBI nonredundant rattus protein database (20150514; 84,126 sequences) (National Center for Biotechnology Information) using Mascot software (version 2.6.1, Matrix Science).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Rng140, Caprin2, Rna-binding protein, Cho

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Neuronal Cell Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki, Aichi
National Institute for Basic Biology

### Submitter
Kaori Nakazawa

### Lab Head
Dr Nobuyuki Shiina
Laboratory of Neuronal Cell Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki, Aichi


