### Accession
PXD000543

### Title
Quantitative analysis of murine T-cells

### Description
1D-LC-MS/MS analysis of OGE-prefractionated and TMT labeled mouse samples consiting of 2 unstimulated and 2 stimulated T-cell samples. The acquired raw-files were converted to the mascot generic file (mgf) format using the msconvert tool (part of ProteoWizard, version 3.0.4624 (2013-6-3)). Using the MASCOT algorithm (Matrix Science, Version 2.4.0), the mgf files were searched against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of mus musculus (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 16/05/2012) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 33,832 sequences) generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (Version 1.0.13.13). The precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.01 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 2 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT6plex (K and peptide n-terminus) were set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) as a variable modification. Next, the database search results were imported to the Scaffold Q+ software (version 4.1.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and the protein false identification rate was set to 1% based on the number of decoy hits. Specifically, peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 94.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the scaffold local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 6.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet program (Nesvizhskii, et al, Anal. Chem. 2003; 75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. For quantification, acquired reporter ion intensities in the experiment were globally normalized across all acquisition runs. Individual quantitative samples were normalized within each acquisition run. Intensities for each peptide identification were normalized within the assigned protein. The reference channels were normalized to produce a 1:1 fold change. All normalization calculations were performed using medians to multiplicatively normalize data. A list of identified and quantified proteins is available in the xls file.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Alternative polyadenylation is a cellular mechanism that generates mRNA isoforms differing in their 3' untranslated regions (3' UTRs). Changes in polyadenylation site usage have been described upon induction of proliferation in resting cells, but the underlying mechanism and functional significance of this phenomenon remain largely unknown. To understand the functional consequences of shortened 3' UTR isoforms in a physiological setting, we used 3' end sequencing and quantitative mass spectrometry to determine polyadenylation site usage, mRNA and protein levels in murine and human naive and activated T cells. Although 3' UTR shortening in proliferating cells is conserved between human and mouse, orthologous genes do not exhibit similar expression of alternative 3' UTR isoforms. We generally find that 3' UTR shortening is not accompanied by a corresponding change in mRNA and protein levels. This suggests that although 3' UTR shortening may lead to changes in the RNA-binding protein interactome, it has limited effects on protein output.

### Keywords
T-cells, Tmt labeling, Mouse, Quantitative analysis

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head


