### Accession
PXD018808

### Title
Rescue of oxytocin response and social behavior in a rodent model of autism

### Description
One of the most fundamental challenges in developing treatments for autism-spectrum disorders is the heterogeneity of the condition. More than one hundred genetic mutations confer high risk for autism, with each individual mutation accounting for only a small fraction of autism cases. Subsets of risk genes can be grouped into functionally-related pathways, most prominently synaptic proteins, translational regulation, and chromatin modifications. To possibly circumvent this genetic complexity, recent therapeutic strategies have focused on the neuropeptides oxytocin and vasopressin  which regulate aspects of social behavior in mammals. However, whether genetic risk factors might predispose to autism due to modification of oxytocinergic signaling remains largely unknown. Here, we report that an autism-associated mutation in the synaptic adhesion molecule neuroligin-3 (Nlgn3) results in impaired oxytocin signaling in dopaminergic neurons and in altered social novelty responses in mice. Surprisingly, loss of Nlgn3 is accompanied by a disruption of translation homeostasis in the ventral tegmental area.  Treatment of Nlgn3KO mice with a novel, highly specific, brain-penetrant inhibitor of MAP-kinase interacting kinases resets mRNA translation and restores oxytocin and social novelty responses. Thus, this work identifies an unexpected convergence between the genetic autism risk factor Nlgn3, translational regulation, and oxytocinergic signaling.  Focus on such common core plasticity elements might provide a pragmatic approach to reduce the heterogeneity of autism phenotypes. Ultimately, this would allow for mechanism-based stratification of patient populations to increase the success of therapeutic interventions.

### Sample Protocol
brain tissue were collected and lysed in 100 μl lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 0.1 M TRIS, 10 mM TCEP, pH = 8.5) using strong ultra-sonication (10 cycles, Bioruptor, Diagnode). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a small sample aliquot. Sample aliquots containing 50 μg of total proteins were reduced for 10 min at 95 °C and alkylated at 15 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min at 37 °C. Proteins were digested by incubation with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1/50, w/w; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) overnight at 37°C. To each peptide samples an aliquot of a heavy reference peptide mix containing 10 chemically synthesized proteotypic peptides (Spike-Tides, JPT, Berlin, Germany) was spiked into each sample at a concentration of 5 fmol of heavy reference peptides per 1µg of total endogenous protein mass. Then, the peptides were cleaned up using iST cartridges (PreOmics, Munich) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were dried under vacuum and stored at -80 °C until further use. Sample aliquots prepared above containing 10 ug of peptides were dried and labeled with tandem mass isobaric tags (TMTpro 16-plex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To control for ratio distortion during quantification, a peptide calibration mixture consisting of six digested standard proteins mixed in different amounts were added to each sample before TMT labeling as recently described (PMID:27345528). After pooling the differentially TMT labeled peptide samples, peptides were again desalted on C18 reversed-phase spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Macrospin, Harvard Apparatus) and dried under vacuum. TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase separation using a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column (3,5 µm, 130 Å, 1 mm x 150 mm, Waters) on an Agilent 1260 Infinity HPLC system. Peptides were loaded on column in buffer A (ammonium formate (20 mM, pH 10) in water) and eluted using a two-step linear gradient starting from 2% to 10% in 5 minutes and then to 50% (v/v) buffer B (90% acetonitrile / 10% ammonium formate (20 mM, pH 10) over 55 minutes at a flow rate of 42 µl/min. Elution of peptides was monitored with a UV detector (215 nm, 254 nm). A total of 36 fractions were collected, pooled into 12 fractions using a post-concatenation strategy as previously described (PMID:21500348), dried under vacuum.  1µg of peptides were LC-MS analyzed as described previously (PMID:27345528). Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 37 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Aliquots of 1 μg total peptides were analyzed per LC-MS/MS run using a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 20 seconds. Total cycle time was approximately 1 s. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a maximum time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, accumulation time of 100 ms and a resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge state were excluded from triggering MS2 events. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.1 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw-files were searched against a protein database containing sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of mus musculus (www.ebi.ac.uk, release date 2019/03/27), the six calibration mix proteins (PMID:27345528) and commonly observed contaminants (in total 17,412 sequences) using the SpectroMine software (Biognosys, version 1.0.20235.13.16424) and the TMT 16-plex default settings. In brief, the precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. The search criteria were set as follows: full tryptic specificity was required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues unless followed by proline), 3 missed cleavages were allowed, carbamidomethylation (C), TMTpro (K and peptide n-terminus) were set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) as a variable modification. The false identification rate was set to 1% by the software based on the number of decoy hits. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Acquired reporter ion intensities in the experiments were employed for automated quantification and statically analysis using a modified version of our in-house developed SafeQuant R script (v2.3, PMID:27345528). This analysis included adjustment of reporter ion intensities, global data normalization by equalizing the total reporter ion intensity across all channels, summation of reporter ion intensities per protein and channel, calculation of protein abundance ratios and testing for differential abundance using empirical Bayes moderated t-statistics. Finally, the calculated p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini−Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
A fundamental challenge in developing treatments for autism spectrum disorders is the heterogeneity of the condition. More than one hundred genetic mutations confer high risk for autism, with each individual mutation accounting for only a small fraction of cases<sup>1-3</sup>. Subsets of risk genes can be grouped into functionally related pathways, most prominently those involving synaptic proteins, translational regulation, and chromatin modifications. To attempt to minimize this genetic complexity, recent therapeutic strategies have focused on the neuropeptides oxytocin and vasopressin<sup>4-6</sup>, which regulate aspects of social behaviour in mammals<sup>7</sup>. However, it is unclear whether genetic risk factors predispose individuals to autism as a result of modifications to oxytocinergic signalling. Here we report that an autism-associated mutation in the synaptic adhesion molecule Nlgn3 results in impaired oxytocin signalling in dopaminergic neurons and in altered behavioural responses to social novelty tests in mice. Notably, loss of Nlgn3 is accompanied by a disruption of translation homeostasis in the ventral tegmental area. Treatment of Nlgn3-knockout mice with a new, highly specific, brain-penetrant inhibitor of MAP kinase-interacting kinases resets the translation of mRNA and restores oxytocin signalling and social novelty responses. Thus, this work identifies a convergence between the genetic autism risk factor Nlgn3, regulation of translation, and oxytocinergic signalling. Focusing on such common core plasticity elements might provide a pragmatic approach to overcoming the heterogeneity of autism. Ultimately, this would enable mechanism-based stratification of patient populations to increase the success of therapeutic interventions.

### Keywords
Autism, Prm, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Switzerland


