### Accession
PXD034328

### Title
Proteomic modifications associated with obesity and periodontitis: longitudinal comparation in women during pregnancy and after delivery

### Description
Aim: This study aimed to analyze the salivary proteomic profile related to obesity and periodontitis in women during pregnancy and after delivery. Materials and methods: The sample assisted during the 3rd trimester of pregnancy (T1) and after childbirth (T2) was divided into: with obesity and periodontitis (OP = 8); with obesity and without periodontitis (OWP = 10); with normal BMI but with periodontitis (NP = 10); with normal BMI and without periodontitis (NWP = 10). The proteins were extracted and processed individually by label-free proteomics (nLC-ESI-MS/MS). ProteinLynx GlobalServer software was used to process and search the data, and the proteins were analyzed by their access number by UniProt catalog. Results: The up-regulation of Heat shock protein (HSP) 70 kDa 1A, 1B and 1-like were related to both obesity and periodontitis, separately. Albumin and thioredoxin were up-expressed in periodontitis cases, while Cystatins (mainly S, SA, SN) and Lactotransferrin were down-expressed. The high abundance of Submaxillary gland androgen-regulated protein 3B, S100A8, Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9), HSP 70 kDa 2 and 6, Putative HSP 70 kDa 7, HSP 71 kDa, Haptoglobin and Plastin-1 were significant in the combination of obesity and periodontitis. Conclusion: Obesity and periodontitis remarkably altered the proteome of the saliva during pregnancy with substantial alterations after delivery. Proteins related to humoral immune response and antibacterial humoral response were highly expressed in women with periodontitis, while proteins related to glycolytic, carbohydrate catabolic, glucose metabolic, organophosphate metabolic and carbohydrate derivative metabolic processes were more expressed in individuals with obesity.

### Sample Protocol
The samples (1000 uL) were analyzed individually. Proteins were extracted using a solution (1000 uL) containing 6M urea, 2M thiourea in 50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.8. Samples were three times vortexed for 10 min at 4ºC, sonicated for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,817g at 4ºC for 10 min. Then, the samples were concentrated in Amicon tubes (Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units—Merck Millipore®, Tullagreen, County Cork, Ireland) to a volume of approximately 150 μL. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 40 min at 37°C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark. Samples were digested for 14 hours at 37°C by addition of 2% trypsin (w/w) (Thermo Scientific Pierce Trypsin Protease, Rockford, Illinois, United States). Digestion was stopped by the addition of 10 μL of 5% formic acid and then the samples were desalted and purified using C18 Spin columns (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, Illinois, United States). An aliquot of 1 μL was taken from each sample for total protein quantification by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, United States). The samples were then resuspended in a solution containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and subjected to Mass Spectrometry (nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS) (Waters, Manchester, New Hampshire, United Kingdom).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using a Xevo G2 QTof mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoACQUITY system (Waters, Manchester, New Hampshire, United Kingdom). The Xevo G2 Q-TOF mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionic nanoelectrospray mode and data were collected using the MSE method at high energy (19-45 V), which allows data acquisition of both precursor ions and fragment ions, in a single injection. Data acquisition scan range was 50–2000 Da. The lockspray used to ensure accuracy and reproducibility was operated with a solution of [Glu1] fibrinopeptide (1 pmol/µL) at a flow of 1 µL/min.  ProteinLynx GlobalServer (PLGS) version 3.0 software (PLGS, v 2.2.5, Waters Co., Manchester, United Kingdom) was used to process and search the continuous LC-MSE data. Proteins were identified using the software's ion counting algorithm, and a search was performed on the Homo sapiens database (reviewed only, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot) downloaded in December 2020 by UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org/). UniProt was used to analyze each protein by their access number. Repeated and reverse proteins, as well as fragments were excluded. All proteins identified with a confidence level greater than 95% were included in the quantitative analysis. The difference in expression between groups was expressed as p < 0.05 for the down-regulated proteins and 1-p > 0.95 for the up-regulated proteins.5 The difference in expression between the groups was analyzed by dependent t test (p < 0.05). The relevant comparations were performed intergroups and periods. Protein categories was based on gene ontology (GO) annotation of the broad biological process, molecular function, immune system process and cell component using ClueGo® plugins of the Cytoscape® 3.8.2 Software. The functional distribution of proteins identified with differential expression (up and down-regulated) in the comparison between groups and periods was done. Terms of significance (κ = 0.04) and distribution were according to the percentage of the number of associated genes.  STRING® database (https://string-db.org/cgi/network.pl) was accessed for the interaction networks, establishing the interaction between up-regulated proteins identified in each group during pregnancy.

### Publication Abstract
Obesity and pregnancy may have synergistic effects on periodontal condition, and proteomics could be an ideal approach to highlight the pathophysiological mechanisms associated with these outcomes. This study analyzed the salivary proteomics related to obesity and periodontitis in women during pregnancy (T1) and after delivery (T2). Initially, 126 women were recruited and forty were allocated into groups: with obesity and periodontitis (OP); with obesity, but without periodontitis (OWP); with normal BMI, but with periodontitis (NP); with normal BMI and without periodontitis (NWP). Whole-mouth saliva was collected in T1 and T2, and proteins were extracted and individually processed by label-free proteomics (<i>nLC-ESI-MS/MS</i>). The up-regulations of <i>Heat shock 70 kDa protein 1A</i>, <i>1B</i>, and <i>1-like</i> were related to both obesity and periodontitis, separately. <i>Albumin</i> and <i>Thioredoxin</i> were up-regulated in periodontitis cases, while <i>Cystatins</i> (mainly <i>S</i>, <i>SA</i>, <i>SN</i>) and <i>Lactotransferrin</i> were down-regulated. The high abundances of <i>Submaxillary gland androgen-regulated protein 3B</i>, <i>Protein S100-A8</i>, <i>Matrix metalloproteinase-9</i>, <i>Heat shock 70 kDa protein 2</i> and <i>6</i>, <i>Putative Heat shock 70 kDa protein 7</i>, <i>Heat shock 71 kDa protein</i>, <i>Haptoglobin</i> and <i>Plastin-1</i> were significant in the combination of obesity and periodontitis. Obesity and periodontitis remarkably altered the proteome of the saliva during pregnancy with substantial alterations after delivery.

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Obesity, Periodontitis, Proteomics, Saliva

### Affiliations
Pediatric Dentistry, Orthodontics and Public Health, Bauru School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil
Pediatric Dentistry, Orthodontics and Public Health, Bauru School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo

### Submitter
Gerson Foratori Junior

### Lab Head
Dr Gerson Aparecido Foratori Junior
Pediatric Dentistry, Orthodontics and Public Health, Bauru School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Bauru, São Paulo, Brazil


