### Accession
PXD001809

### Title
Mesenchymal stem cell integrin-associated complexes

### Description
The composition and stiffness of the extracellular matrix (ECM) environment that surrounds Multipotent mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) stem cells dictates transcriptional programming, thereby affecting stem cell lineage decision-making. Cells sense force  between themselves and their microenvironment controlling the capability of MSCs to differentiate into adipocytes, osteocytes and chondrocytes. Force sensing is transmitted by integrin receptors and their associated adhesion signalling complexes. To identify regulators of MSC force sensing we sought to catalogue MSC adhesion complex composition. Therefore we isolated integrin-associated adhesion complexes formed in MSCs plated on the ECM ligand fibronectin.  We identifed proteins using mass spectrometry that define a MSC specific subset of adhesion complex proteins consisting of key linkages to the actin cytoskeleton together with integrin signalling and force sensing components.

### Sample Protocol
Adhesion complexes were isolated from MSC cells plated on fibronectin using high pH (NH4OH), detergent (0.1% Triton X-100) and soncication according to a published protocol (Robertson J. et al Nature Communication 2015). Adhesion complexes were run on SDS-PAGE gels and subjected to standard in-gel trypsin digestion protocols (Humphries JD et al Sci. Sig. 2009). Peptides were analysed by by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer or a NanoAcquity LC (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled to a LTQ Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer.. Peptides were concentrated on a pre-column (20 mm ×180 μm i.d, Waters). The peptides were then separated using a gradient from 99% A (0.1% FA in water) and 1% B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) to 25% B, in 45 min at 200 nL min-1, using a 75 mm × 250 μm i.d. 1.7 μM BEH C18, analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependant analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were processed with Mascot-Daemon (version 2.4) (Matrix Science, London, UK).  MASCOT was set up to search a database based on Uniprot Human 2013_05 database. Data was then analysed using Scaffold software (version Scaffold_4.4.1.1) (Proteome Software, Oregon, USA) (http://www.proteomesoftware.com) with the following settings. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 0.5 Da for  LTQ Velos data and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 5 ppm for Orbitrap Elite data. Iodoacetamide derivative of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification. For protein identification scaffold was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii and Aebersold, 2004). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Integrin, Cell adhesion, Extracellular matrix, Focal adhesions, Msc

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester
Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, UK

### Submitter
Jon Humphries

### Lab Head
Dr Martin J Humphries
Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, UK


