### Accession
PXD034348

### Title
IFI16 phase separation via multi-phosphorylation drives 
innate immune signaling

### Description
Fractionaion of nuclear periphery and core, followed by DDA in primary HFFs at 1 hour post infection with ICP0-RF HSV-1; IP-PRM of IFI16 in primary HFFs at 1 hpi; in vitro kinase assay with IFI16 and select kinases and quantification on phosphorlyated peptides by PRM.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were first reduced and alkylated in 5 mM TCEP, 15mM chloroacetamide for 20 minutes at 70 °C, then acidified to 1.2% phosphoric acid prior to protein extraction. Digestion was performed with trypsin (1:25 of trypsin to sample protein) and suspension trapping columns (S-Trap, Protifi) for 1 hour at 47 °C, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Following digestion, peptide eluates were resuspended in 10 µL of 1% FA, 1% ACN at a concentration of 1 μg/μL prior to loading on instrument.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed by Proteom Discoverer v2.4. In short, the Proteome Discoverer processing workflow used a FASTA file containing human protein sequences (downloaded from Uniprot in January 2021) and common contaminants, and the SEQUEST HT algorithm to analyze MS/MS spectra. SEQUEST was set to search for tryptic peptides with ≤2 missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, carbamidomethyl cysteine (C) modifications, dynamic deamidation of asparagine, dynamic oxidation of methionine, and dynamic loss of methione plus acetylation of the protein N terminus. Matched spectra were validated by the Percolator node.

### Publication Abstract
The interferon inducible protein 16 (IFI16) is a prominent sensor of nuclear pathogenic DNA, initiating innate immune signaling and suppressing viral transcription. However, little is known about mechanisms that initiate IFI16 antiviral functions or its regulation within the host DNA-filled nucleus. Here, we provide in vitro&#xa0;and in vivo evidence to establish that IFI16 undergoes liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) nucleated by DNA. IFI16 binding to viral DNA initiates LLPS and induction of cytokines during herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection. Multiple phosphorylation sites within an intrinsically disordered region (IDR) function combinatorially to activate IFI16 LLPS, facilitating filamentation. Regulated by CDK2 and GSK3&#x3b2;, IDR phosphorylation provides a toggle between active and inactive IFI16 and the decoupling of IFI16-mediated cytokine expression from repression of viral transcription. These findings show how IFI16 switch-like phase transitions are achieved with temporal resolution for immune signaling and, more broadly, the multi-layered regulation of nuclear DNA sensors.

### Keywords
Human, Hsv-1, Ptm

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, New Jersey, USA

### Submitter
Dawei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, New Jersey, USA


