### Accession
PXD003230

### Title
Whole saliva baseline proteome profile - head and neck cancer

### Description
Oral mucositis (OM) is a common, painful and often treatment-limiting side effect of radiotherapy (RT) for head and neck cancer (HNC) patients. Unstimulated saliva was collected before the first radiotherapy application in 50 HNC patients. 41 out of 50 patients developed OM (grade III) during radiotherapy, of which 14 patients even displayed an early OM (grade III) at low radiation dose of 30 Gy. Nine patients did not develop OM (grade III). Using an LC-MS/MS approach 5,323 tryptic peptides were assigned to 487 distinct proteins (≥2 peptides) in the data set. The levels of 48 proteins differed significantly (p<0.05) between patients developing OM or not. 17 proteins displayed increased levels (≥1.3-fold) and 31 proteins decreased in level in OM, respectively. Furthermore, using partial least square analysis proteins patterns could be used to distinguish subjects which did not develop grade III OM even after 70 Gy total dose (n=9) and those displaying early OM (grade III at <30 Gy total dose, n=14). Using leave one out cross validation 37 of 41 patients (90%) developing OM could be correctly assigned indicating that prognostic proteome signatures may help to identify patients that should be specifically monitored to increase overall effectiveness of RT treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Patient selection Patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (oral cavity, oropharynx, hypopharynx, and larynx) who were to receive primary or adjuvant radiochemotherapy R(C)T at the Department of Radio Oncology of the University Medical Center Freiburg were eligible for this study. Patients were older than 18 years; and had an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0 to 2; at least two of eight areas of the oral or the oropharyngeal mucosa (hard palate, soft palate, tongue, and bottom of the mouth, upper- and lower lip, cheek left and right) were planned to receive at least 50 Gy. Key exclusion criteria were as follows: tumor of unknown primary site, prior radiation to the head and neck region or prior chemotherapy. Study design and radiochemotherapy treatment This prospective study was conducted in Freiburg, Germany and followed the declaration of Helsinki principles. The protocol was accepted by the ethics committee of the University of Freiburg. All patients provided informed consent before any study-related procedure. Patients were enrolled between March 2010 and June 2012 and saliva analysis was performed in the Department of Functional Genomics, Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, Greifswald. All patients received Intensity-modulated radiation (IMRT). For patients with inoperable locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma 70 Gy were administered to gross tumor volume (GTV) and to regional lymph nodes >2 cm; 60 Gy were given to nodes >1 cm and ≤2 cm and 50 Gy to nodal areas suspected to be involved. Daily fractions of 2 Gy were administered five times weekly; patients in a good clinical condition received concomitant chemotherapy up to three doses cisplatin (100 mg/m2 per day) every 21 days. Patients with prior surgery and a high risk for recurrence underwent RT with 60-66 Gy in total; concomitant chemotherapy of two doses cisplatin (100 mg/m2 per day) every 21 days were given to patients with minimal residual disease (R1) or extracapsular spread [18]. The Oncentra Master-plan (V1.5/3.0 Nucletron B.V) was used as 3D treatment planning system. 6-10 MV photons of a linear accelerator were used (Varian Clinac, Varian medical systems, USA and Elekta synergy, Elekta corporate, Sweden). Clinical assessment of oral mucositis Oral mucositis (OM) was assessed by region of the oral cavity including lips, tongue, right and left buccal mucosa, soft palate, hard palate and floor of mouth and eventual reactions were scored using the National Cancer Institute – Common Toxicity Criteria (NCI-CTC v3.0). Twice-weekly assessments (at least 3 +/-1 days apart) continued throughout R(C)T till the end of therapy. Whenever possible the same evaluator assessed the patients throughout treatment. The exact time point and therefore irradiated total dose until the appearance of grade III mucositis (NCI-CTC vs. 3.0) was recorded. Saliva sampling Saliva was collected from patients at least three days before the radiotherapy started. The whole saliva collection was carried out between 9 am and 12 am. Patients were asked not to drink, to eat or to smoke at least one hour before the collection. Five minutes after rinsing the mouth with water the unstimulated collection of saliva started. The patients were asked to sit head forward and to let saliva just float out of the mouth for 10 min into a funnel placed onto a 50 mL Falcon tube, kept in an ice cup. Collected saliva was immediately centrifuged at 3,000 rpm, for 15 min and 4°C to remove insoluble material. One ml of the supernatant was pipetted and mixed with 2 µL protease inhibitor cocktail as well as 3 µL of 1 mM sodium orthovanadate solution (both Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA)., aliquoted and stored at -80°C until proteome analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein composition of whole saliva and preparation for proteome characterization The volume of whole saliva ranged from 0.2 to 1.7 mL (average 0.9 ±0.3 mL, coefficient of variation (CV) =0.39) and displayed high variability. Whole saliva proteins (aliquots of 0.5 mL) were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at a final concentration of 10% (v/v) and dithiothreitol (0.12% w/v) as described [13]. Protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea/ 2 M thiourea buffer and the protein concentrations were measured which resulted in values that varied from 0.4 to 10.4 µg/µL (average 3.3 ±2.8 µg/µL). The amount of total protein available for further analysis ranged from 13 µg to 312 µg per subject, which was sufficient for processing for LC-MS analysis. In total, 4 µg of protein lysate were reduced (2.5 mM DTT for 1 h at 60°C) and alkylated (10 mM iodacetamide for 30 min at 37°C). Proteolysis was performed overnight using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) using an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:25 at 37°C. Tryptic digestion was stopped by adding acetic acid to a final concentration of 1%, followed by desalting and purification using ZipTip-µC18 tips (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Samples were measured in a randomized design to minimize systematic error during our analysis. Proteolytically cleaved peptides were separated prior to mass spectrometric analyses by reverse phase nano HPLC on a 15 cm Acclaim PepMap100-column (C18, 3 µm, 100 Å) using an EASY-nLC Proxeon system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. Separation was achieved using a linear gradient of buffer B from 5% up to 25% within 63 min with 0.1% acetic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water (solvent A) and 0.1% acetic acid in 100% acetonitrile (solvent B). Separated peptides were monitored using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source operated with PicoTip Emitters (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). After a first survey scan (r=30,000) MS/MS data were recorded for the 20 highest mass peaks in the linear ion trap at a collision induced energy of 35%. The exclusion time to reject masses from repetitive MS/MS fragmentation was set to 60 sec and the minimal ion signal for MS/MS was 2,000. Raw data from the Orbitrap Velos instrument was processed using the Refiner MS 7.5 module (Genedata, Basel, Switzerland). Refiner MS performed peak detection, noise analysis, peak integration, isotope grouping and retention time alignment of the LC-MS data. Generated peak lists were searched against a human FASTA-formatted database containing 20,268 unique entries (human_uniprot_swissprot_2011_10.fasta) using an in-house Mascot server v2.3.2 (Matrix Science, London, GB). Database searches were performed with carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Enzyme specificity was selected to trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed using 10 ppm peptide ion tolerance and 0.6 Da MS/MS tolerances. Only ranked 1 peptide hits and a Mascot ion score >23 were considered as identified. After peak annotation, the data were further processed in Analyst v7.5. We performed a label-free protein quantification which relies on the sum intensities of identified peptides. First, the protein intensities were log10 transformed to reduce the standard deviation of high values and to receive normally distributed values. Second, the log10 data were median (target value =1) normalized to allow relative intensity comparison among the patients. Statistical data evaluation was performed in Analyst v7.5 (Genedata, Basel, Switzerland). A value of p<0.05 was considered as statistically significant. A Partial Least Square (PLS) analysis was applied as classical means of dimensionality reduction and visualization of multivariate data.

### Publication Abstract
Saliva as major human body fluid may act as an indicator of oral disease status. Oral mucositis is a common and often treatment-limiting side effect of radiotherapy for head and neck cancer patients. In this dataset, we provide the complete proteome dataset (raw and search files) of the patients at baseline of radiotherapy treatment in patients undergoing radiotherapy analyzed by nano liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In the data set, 5323 tryptic peptides were identified which can be assigned to 487 distinct proteins (&#x2265;2 peptides). The MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange ("ProteomeXchange provides globally coordinated proteomics data submission and dissemination" [1]) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PRIDE: PXD003230. The data are associated with the previously published work, "Differences in the whole saliva baseline proteome profile associated with development of oral mucositis in head and neck cancer patients undergoing radiotherapy" [2].

### Keywords
Lc-ms/-ms, Whole saliva

### Affiliations
University Medicine Greifswald Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics Department of Functional Genomics Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Str. 15a 17475 Greifswald, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Völker
University Medicine Greifswald Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics Department of Functional Genomics Friedrich-Ludwig-Jahn-Str. 15a 17475 Greifswald, Germany


