### Accession
PXD043908

### Title
A T-cell receptor targeting a shared neoantigen mediates elimination of primary human acute myeloid leukemia in vivo

### Description
This paper presents a T-cell receptor (TCR) reactive to the recurrent D835Y driver mutation in the FLT3 tyrosine-kinase domain. TCRFLT3D/Y-redirected T cells selectively eliminated primary human AML cells harboring the D835Y mutation in vitro and in vivo. The TCRFLT3D/Y cells rejected both CD34+ and CD34- AML in mice engrafted with primary leukemia from patients, reaching minimal residual disease negative levels, and eliminated primary CD34+ AML leukemia-propagating cells in vivo. Thus, T cells targeting a single shared mutation can provide efficient immunotherapy towards selective elimination of clonally involved primary AML cells in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Mono-allelic B721.221 cells expressing HLA-A*02:01 were transduced using retroviral supernatant encoding the mutant FLT3 amino acid sequence VLVTHGKVVKICDFGLARYIMSDSNYVVRGNARLPVK. One hundred million cells from the B721.221 and four hundred million cells from the patient samples (patient 1 and 3) were each lysed in PBS containing 1% lauryl maltoside, 0.5mM EDTA, 1mM PMSF and Sigma protease inhibitors (1:200) for 1h at 4°C (1 mL lysis buffer per 100 million cells). The clarified cell lysates (12.000 RPM, 15 min), were then added to 200uL of AminoLink plus bead slurry (ThermoFisher Scientific) coated with pan HLA class I specific antibody (W6/32, BioXcell) and incubated for 3h at 4°C. The HLA class I antibody was coupled to the AminoLink plus bead slurry, following the manufacturers suggestions (10 mg of W6/32 antibody was coupled to 2 mL of amino link plus bead slurry). Following the 3h incubation with cell lysates, the beads were washed with 3 mL of 0.1M Tris-HCl/150mM NaCl, 3 mL of 0.1M Tris-HCl/400mM NaCl, and again with 3 mL of 0.1M Tris-HCl/150mM NaCl and finally with 3 mL of 0.1 M Tris-HCl. The HLA bound peptides were then eluted with 1 mL of 1% TFA, followed by another two elutions, each with 1mL of 1% TFA. The peptide elutions were pooled and loaded onto the Discovery DSC-C18 SPE column for desalting before MS analysis. The peptides were vacuum concentrated and dissolved in 25 L of 3% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA, following spike-in with 200 picograms of heavy isotope labelled peptide (YI(13C6,15N)MSDSNYV) prior to targeted MS analysis. The peptide solution (5 L) was analyzed using an Easy nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano electrospray ion source. For liquid chromatography separation, an EASY-Spray ES902 column (C18, 2 µm beads, 100 Å, 75 μm inner diameter) capillary of 25 cm bed length was used.  A flow rate of 300nL/min was employed with a solvent gradient of 7-35% B in 55 min, to 90% B in 3 min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/90% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) mode, to specifically target the presence of endogenous FLT3 mutant (m/z=1091.47381+) and spiked-in isotope labelled peptide (m/z=1098.49281+), eluting within a retention time window of 27-31 minutes, as determined using synthetic analog. The MS/MS spectra using higher-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) were acquired with the resolution R = 15,000, after accumulation to a target of 1e5. The normalized collision energy was set to NCE 27, isolation window was m/z = 2.0. The maximum allowed ion accumulation for the MS/MS spectrum was 120ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using the XcaliburTM software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Cellular immunotherapy, Prm, Acute myeloid leukemia

### Affiliations
Head, Dept of Immunology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Ullernchausséen 70, 0379 Oslo, Norway
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Ravi Chand Bollineni

### Lab Head
Dr Johanna Olweus
Head, Dept of Immunology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Ullernchausséen 70, 0379 Oslo, Norway


