### Accession
PXD012700

### Title
Bolt: A new age peptide search engine for comprehensive MS/MS sequencing through vast protein databases in minutes

### Description
The standard platform for proteomics experiments today is mass spectrometry, particularly for samples derived from complex matrices. Recent increases in mass spectrometry sequencing speed, sensitivity and resolution now permit comprehensive coverage of even the most precious and limited samples, particularly when coupled with improvements in protein extraction techniques and chromatographic separation.  However, the results obtained from laborious sample extraction and expensive instrumentation are often hindered by a sub optimal data processing pipelines.  One critical data processing piece is peptide sequencing which is most commonly done through database search engines. In almost all MS/MS search engines users must limit their search space due to time constraints and q-value considerations. In nearly all experiments, the search is limited to a canonical database that typically does not reflect the individual genetic variations of the organism being studied. Searching for posttranslational modifications can exponentially increase the search space thus careful consideration must be used during the selection process. In addition, engines will nearly always assume the presence of only fully tryptic peptides. Despite these stringent parameters, proteomic data searches may take hours or even days to complete and opening even one of these criteria to more realistic biological settings will lead to detrimental increases in search time on expensive and custom data processing towers. Even on high performance servers, these search engines are computationally expensive, and most users decide to dial back their search parameters. We present Bolt, a new search engine that can search more than nine hundred thousand protein sequences (canonical, isoform, mutations, and contaminants) with 31 post translation modifications and N-terminal and C-terminal partial tryptic search in a matter of minutes on a standard configuration laptop. Along with increases in speed, Bolt provides an additional benefit of improvement in high confidence identifications, as demonstrated by manual validation of unique peptides identified by Bolt that were missed with parallel searching using standard engines. When in disagreement, 67% of peptides identified by Bolt may be manually validated by strong fragmentation patterns, compared to 14% of peptides uniquely identified by SEQUEST. Bolt represents, to the best of our knowledge, the first fully scalable, cloud based quantitative proteomic solution that can be operated within a user-friendly GUI interface.

### Sample Protocol
Sample: All experiments were carried out with the HeLa digest standard and the Pierce Retention Time Calibration Standard (PRTC), both from Thermo Fisher. The PRTC was diluted with 0.1% formic acid to a total concentration of 50 fmol/µL. This solution of PRTC was used to reconstitute and dilute the HeLa digest standard. The HeLa standard was diluted to allow multiple injections ranging from 20ng to 500ng of peptide digest on column.  Two LC-MS systems were used for data acquisition as described: An Orbitrap Fusion 1 system equipped with Tune version 3.0 installed in January 2018 with an EasyNLC 1200 system using 0.1% formic acid as Buffer A and 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid as buffer B. EasySpray 25cm columns with PepMap C-18 with 2um particle size and equivalent 2cm precolumn trap was used for all experiments described. Files from employing 2 distinct LC gradients were evaluated, with a total run time of 60 and 130 minutes, respectively. The gradients began a 5% B, ramping to 28% B within by 75% of their total acquisition time, to 50% B in the next 10%, followed by a rapid ramp to 98% B. Column equilibration to baseline conditions was performed automatically at the beginning of each run.  Additional files were acquired on a Q Exactive HF system using Exactive Tune 2.9 and equipped with MaxQuant Live 1.0.1. All source and chromatography conditions match that of the Fusion system as described above, with the exception that the system was an EasyNLC 1000. All components described are the products of Thermo Fisher Scientific.

### Data Protocol
SEQUEST/Proteome Discoverer:  Proteome Discoverer 2.2 was used for the comparative searches, using the vendor provided default workflow for Q Exactive Basic Peptide ID. This consists of the SequestHT search engine with 10ppm MS1 tolerance, and 0.02 Da MS/MS tolerance. Dynamic modifications for iodoacetamide modification of cysteines and dynamic modifications were allowed for acetylation on the protein-N terminus, as well as for the oxidation of any methionine. Percolator was used for FDR according to manufacturer default settings. Up to 2 missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed. The files were searched against a UniProt/SwissProt FASTA downloaded in February 2018 that was parsed within the vendor software on the term “sapiens”. An in house generated contaminants database consisting of a combination of the MaxQuant common contaminants and the cRAP database (https://www.thegpm.org/crap/) was used to flag contaminants in both the processing and consensus workflows Bolt:  The client-side processing (e.g., on the acquisition computer or user laptop) is used to read the vendor RAW file and extract the MS/MS spectra. The  data is then sent for secondary processing to a high performance server (in our case Microsoft’s Azure Virtual Machine).The server has been pre-configured  to a specific set of parameters that are commonly used for analysis of human proteomics samples. It currently holds a combination of human protein and contaminant sequences. As shown in Table 1, we used a combined database that contains 909,583 protein sequences. Approximately 12% of the protein sequences from the XMAn database are not considered in the current version of Bolt as those could not be mapped to the appropriate non-mutated protein sequence. We decided to use the entire Bovin database for this study of the cultured human HeLa cell line as we found more than 7,800 peptide sequences present in the Bovin database that are also present in the Trembl or SwissProt-Isoform database but not present in the SwissProt or Contaminant database. If we do not include the Bovin database, there is the risk of misidentifying a potential Bovin peptide as an isoform or a non-reviewed Trembl human peptide. The standard digestion configuration is for a tryptic digestion with two missed cleavage sites, partial tryptic search on both N- and C- terminus, Carboxymethyl or Carbamidomethyl as the alkylation agent along with the following 31 Post Translation Modifications: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S), phosphorylation (T), phosphorylation (Y), methylation (K), methylation (R), pyroglutamate (N), pyroglutamate (Q), deamidation (N), deamidation (Q), hydroxyl (K), hydroxyl (P), formylation (S), formylation (T), formylation (K), formylation (N-term), dimethylation (K), dimethylation (R), dimethylation (N-term), trimethylation (K), trimethylation (R), acetylation (N-term), acetylation (K), carbamylation (K), carbamylation (C), carbamylation (R), carbamylation (n), propionylation (K), propionylation (N-term), GlyGly (K), lipoylation (K). Percolator is utilized to calculate a q-value using the target and decoy results. The Azure VM has 32 vCPUs to search in parallel. Once the high confidence target peptides are identified (user defined q-value <= 0.01), those are then transferred back to the client machine for further processing.  Some rules are followed to reduce the search time and make the analysis easier. The number of PTMs was limited to 1 per peptide, but oxidation and N-terminal acetylation can still be considered as a second PTM. Peptides that have the same sequence but are different by only Leucine vs. Isoleucine are combined into single search. Aspartic acid is preferred over deamidation of asparagine if the rest of the sequence is the same. Single PTM is preferred over two PTMs if there is no additional evidence; similarly, unmodified peptide is preferred over peptide with PTM if there is no additional evidence. Search tolerant is set as 10ppm for MS1 and 20ppm for MS/MS. Additionally, PTMs and partial cleavage peptides are allowed only for canonical database peptides. Pinnacle: In the current study, Bolt was run inside the Pinnacle software v 91 to help visualize and export results.

### Publication Abstract
Recent increases in mass spectrometry speed, sensitivity, and resolution now permit comprehensive proteomics coverage. However, the results are often hindered by sub-optimal data processing pipelines. In almost all MS/MS peptide search engines, users must limit their search space to a canonical database due to time constraints and q value considerations, but this typically does not reflect the individual genetic variations of the organism being studied. In addition, engines will nearly always assume the presence of only fully tryptic peptides and limit PTMs to a handful. Even on high-performance servers, these search engines are computationally expensive, and most users decide to dial back their search parameters. We present Bolt, a new cloud-based search engine that can search more than 900,000 protein sequences (canonical, isoform, mutations, and contaminants) with 41 post-translation modifications and N-terminal and C-terminal partial tryptic search in minutes on a standard configuration laptop. Along with increases in speed, Bolt provides an additional benefit of improvement in high-confidence identifications. Sixty-one percent of peptides uniquely identified by Bolt may be validated by strong fragmentation patterns, compared with 13% of peptides uniquely identified by SEQUEST and 6% of peptides uniquely identified by Mascot. Furthermore, 30% of unique Bolt identifications were verified by all three software on the longer gradient analysis, compared with only 20% and 27% for SEQUEST and Mascot identifications respectively. Bolt represents, to the best of our knowledge, the first fully scalable, cloud-based quantitative proteomic solution that can be operated within a user-friendly GUI interface. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012700.

### Keywords
Hela, Mutations, Snp, Bolt

### Affiliations
Optys Tech Corporation

### Submitter
Amol Prakash

### Lab Head
Dr Amol Prakash
Optys Tech Corporation


