### Accession
PXD037602

### Title
Analyses of FBXL6 interaction with newly synthesized proteins.

### Description
HEK cells were grown in light media for two weeks. One day before experiments, cells were transfected with FBXL6-flag or B-gal (control). At t=0, cells  were switched to heavy media  for 3h and then Flag immunoprecipitation were performed. Pulled down protein were analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were loaded on a 10% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and proteins were visualized by Colloidal Blue staining. Migration was stopped when samples had just entered the resolving gel and the unresolved region of the gel was cut into only one segment. Each SDS-PAGE band was cut into 1 mm x 1 mm gel pieces. Gel pieces were destained in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature. Proteins were first reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at 56°C then alkylated in 100 mM iodoacetamide, 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 60 min at room temperature and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were rehydrated with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min at room temperature. Before protein digestion, gel pieces were shrunk in ACN for 10 min and dried at room temperature. Proteins were digested by incubating each gel slice with 10 ng/µl of trypsin (V5111, Promega) in 40 mM NH4HCO3, rehydrated at 4°C for 10 min, and finally incubated overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel by three steps: a first incubation in 40 mM NH4HCO3 for 15 min at room temperature and two incubations in 47.5% ACN, 5% formic acid for 15 min at room temperature. The three collected extractions were pooled with the initial digestion supernatant, dried in a SpeedVac, and resuspended with 0.1% formic acid. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis were performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC Nano-UPHLC system (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled to a nanospray Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA). Each peptide extracts were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific, USA) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. After a 3 min desalting step, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EasySpray column (75 µm ID, 2 µm C18 beads, 100 Å pore size, ES903, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 4-40% linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) in 57 min. The separation flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 2.0 kV needle voltage. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.4 software in a data-dependent mode. MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were recorded at a resolution of R = 120000 (@ m/z 200) and an AGC target of 4×105 ions collected within 50 ms, followed by a top speed duty cycle of up to 3 seconds for MS/MS acquisition. Precursor ions (2 to 7 charge states) were isolated in the quadrupole with a mass window of 1.6 Th and fragmented with HCD@28% normalized collision energy. MS/MS data was acquired in the ion trap with rapid scan mode, AGC target of 3x103 ions and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Selected precursors were excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) were done in Proteome Discoverer 2.5. MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT and Mascot 2.5 algorithms were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against a Uniprot Homo sapiens database (79 057 entries, release June 06, 2021). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed for the trypsin. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Oxidation (M), acetylation (K), SILAC modifications (K, R) were searched as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as static modification. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm [ref] and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false discovery rate at peptide level. Minora feature detector node (LFQ) was used along with the feature mapper and precursor ions quantifier. The normalization parameters were selected as follows : (1) Unique peptides (2) Precursor abundance based on intensity (3) No normalization was applied (4) Protein abundance calculation : summed abundances (5) Protein ratio calculation : pairwise ratio based and (6) Imputation mode : Low abundance resampling and (7) Hypothesis test : t-test (background based).). Quantitative data were considered for master proteins, quantified by a minimum of 2 unique peptides, a fold changes above 2 and a statistical p-value lower than 0.05. The results are presented in a plot using protein log2 fold changes and their corresponding adjusted (-log10adjp) to highlight up regulated and down regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
In mammals, about 99% of mitochondrial proteins are synthesized in the cytosol as precursors that are subsequently imported into the organelle. The mitochondrial health and functions rely on an accurate quality control of these imported proteins. Here, we show that the E3 ubiquitin ligase F box/leucine-rich-repeat protein 6 (FBXL6) regulates the quality of cytosolically translated mitochondrial proteins. Indeed, we found that FBXL6 substrates are newly synthesized mitochondrial ribosomal proteins. This E3 binds to chaperones involved in the folding and trafficking of newly synthesized peptide and to ribosomal-associated quality control proteins. Deletion of these interacting partners is sufficient to hamper interactions between FBXL6 and its substrate. Furthermore, we show that cells lacking FBXL6 fail to degrade specifically mistranslated mitochondrial ribosomal proteins. Finally, showing the role of FBXL6-dependent mechanism, FBXL6-knockout (KO) cells display mitochondrial ribosomal protein aggregations, altered mitochondrial metabolism, and inhibited cell cycle in oxidative conditions.

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Pulsed silac

### Affiliations
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux
Laboratoire Maladies Rares: Génétique et Métabolisme- INSERM U1211, 33000 Bordeaux, France

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Giovanni Bénard
Laboratoire Maladies Rares: Génétique et Métabolisme- INSERM U1211, 33000 Bordeaux, France


