### Accession
PXD036399

### Title
Proteomic analysis of NDUFS4 KO hearts

### Description
we performed whole heart proteomic analyses in both WT and NDUFS4 heart-specific cKO mice (n = 5 mice/group).

### Sample Protocol
Muscle tissue from the HMDP were lysed in 6 M guanidine HCL (Sigma; #G4505), 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 containing 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (Sigma; #75259) and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma; #22790) by tip-probe sonication. The lysate was heated at 95°C for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was diluted 1:1 with water and precipitated overnight with five volumes of acetone at -20°C. The lysate was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C and the protein pellet was washed with 80% acetone. The lysate was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 5 min at 4°C and the protein pellet was resuspended in Digestion Buffer (10% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol (Sigma; #96924)) in 100 mM HEPEs pH 8.5). Protein was quantified with BCA (ThermoFisher Scientific) and normalized in Digestion Buffer to a final concentration of 2 µg/µl. Protein was digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma; #T6567) and sequencing grade LysC (Wako; #129-02541) at a 1:50 enzyme:substrate ratio overnight at 37°C with shaking at 2000 x rpm. Peptides were purified directly by Styrene Divinylbenzene - Reversed-Phase Sulfonate (SDB-RPS) microcolumns, washed with 99% isopropanol containing 1% TFA and eluted with 80% acetonitrile containing 2% ammonium hydroxide followed by vacuum concentration.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA and analysed on a Dionex 3500 nanoHPLC, coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific) via electrospray ionization in positive mode with 1.9 kV at 275 °C and RF set to 40%. Separation was achieved on a 50 cm × 75 µm column packed with C18AQ (1.9 µm; Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) (PepSep, Marslev, Denmark) over 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted over a linear gradient of 3–40% Buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v FA) and the column was maintained at 50 °C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition mode with an MS1 spectrum acquired over the mass range 360–1033 m/z (60,000 resolution, 2.5 x 106 automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximum injection time) followed by MS/MS analysis with HCD of 50 x 13.7 m/z with 1 m/z overlap (30% normalized collision energy, 30,000 resolution, 1 x 106 AGC, 55 ms injection time).  Data were searched against the UniProt mouse database (June 2021; UP000000589_109090 and UP000000589_109090_additional) with Spectronaut 15.7.220308.50606 using default parameters with peptide spectral matches, peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1%. All data were searched with oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine set as the variable modification and carbamidomethylation set as the fixed modification. For analysis of phosphopeptides, phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine was set as a variable modification. Quantification was performed using MS2-based extracted ion chromatograms employing 3-6 fragment ions >450 m/z with automated fragment-ion interference removal as described previously [PMID: 25724911]. Data were processed with Perseus [PMID: 27348712] to remove decoy data and  potential contaminants. Data were Log2-transformed and normalized by subtracting the median of each sample. Data were filtered to contain phosphosites quantified in at least 3 biological replicates of a single group and statistical analysis performed with ANOVA and t-tests including correction for multiple hypothesis testing using Benjamini Hochberg FDR with q<0.05 defined as a significance cut-off.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ndufs4

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


