### Accession
PXD041933

### Title
Determination of protein level changes following inhibition of the mechanistic target of rapamycin

### Description
This study aimed to identify changes in protein level after inhibiting the mechanistic target of rapamycin using mass spectrometry analysis

### Sample Protocol
Mouse embryonic fibroblast were treated with inhibitors of the mechanistic target of rapamycin for 24hrs. Cells were lysed and protein was quantified. Samples were then reduced with TCEP and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Half of each sample was precipitated by methanol/chloroform, and the resulting precipitated protein was resuspended in 200 mM EPPS. Protein digestion was performed using LysC (1:50, protease: protein) and typsin (1:100)

### Data Protocol
12 fractions from the total proteome HPRP set were analyzed on an Orbitrap Lumos Mass Spectrometer using 1 180-minute MS3 method with real-time search. Peptides were detected (MS1) and quantified (MS3) in the Orbitrap and sequenced (MS2) in the ion trap. MS2 spectra were searched using the SEQUEST algorithm against a Uniprot composite database derived from the mouse proteome containing its reversed complement and known contaminants. Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using a target-decoy strategy combined with linear discriminal analysis. The proteins from the 12 runs were filtered toa <1% FDR. Proteins were quantified only from peptids with a summed SN threshold of >=200.

### Publication Abstract
Cells maintain and dynamically change their proteomes according to the environment and their needs. Mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a key regulator of proteostasis, homeostasis of the proteome. Thus, dysregulation of mTOR leads to changes in proteostasis and the consequent progression of diseases, including cancer. Based on the physiological and clinical importance of mTOR signaling, we investigated mTOR feedback signaling, proteostasis, and cell fate. Here, we reveal that mTOR targeting inhibits eIF4E-mediated cap-dependent translation, but feedback signaling activates a translation initiation factor, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3D (eIF3D), to sustain alternative non-canonical translation mechanisms. Importantly, eIF3D-mediated protein synthesis enables cell phenotype switching from proliferative to more migratory. eIF3D cooperates with mRNA-binding proteins such as heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein F&#xa0;(hnRNPF), heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (hnRNPK), and Sjogren syndrome antigen B (SSB) to support selective mRNA translation following mTOR inhibition, which upregulates and activates proteins involved in insulin receptor (INSR)/insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R)/insulin receptor substrate (IRS) and interleukin 6 signal transducer (IL-6ST)/Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) signaling. Our study highlights the mechanisms by which cells establish the dynamic change of proteostasis and the resulting phenotype switch.

### Keywords
Mechanistic target of rapamycin, Mouse embryonic fibroblast

### Affiliations
University of Illinois at Chicago
Department of physiology and biophysics  University of Illionis College of Medicine Chicago, IL 60612

### Submitter
Sang-Oh Yoon

### Lab Head
Dr Yoon, Sang-Oh
Department of physiology and biophysics  University of Illionis College of Medicine Chicago, IL 60612


