### Accession
PXD013476

### Title
Effects of a phosphomimetic mutation and nucleotide binding on the interaction of Hsp90a with co-chaperone Aha1 analyzed by chemical cross-linking with mass spectrometry

### Description
Complex conformational dynamics are essential for the chaperone function of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90), including transient, ATP-biased N-domain dimerization establishing ATPase competence. Biochemical data demonstrate that the intrinsic, but weak, ATP hydrolyzing activity of Hsp90 is markedly enhanced by the co-chaperone Aha1. However, cellular concentration of Aha1 is substoichiometric relative to Hsp90.  In cells, interaction of this important co-chaperone with Hsp90 is up-regulated by posttranslational modifications (PTMs), including phosphorylation of a highly conserved tyrosine (Y313 in Hsp90a). Here we use chemical cross-linking with mass spectrometry to explore the the impacts of a phosphomimetic mutation (Y313E) and binding of a non-hydrolyzable ATP analog (AMP-PNP),on the structure Hsp90a and its interaction with Aha1.

### Sample Protocol
1.18 nmol of wild-type (WT) or Y313E Hsp90a was incubated in the presence or absence of 10 mM AMP-PNP in 50 µL of 25 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl pH 7.3 for 10 min on ice.  Aha1-His was added to Hsp90a-WT or Hsp90a-Y313E at an equimolar ratio and the mixture was incubated for 30 min on ice. Following incubation, the proteins were cross-linked for 30 min at room temperature by the addition of BDP-NHP cross-linker at a final concentration of 1 mM. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide and proteins were digested with trypsin (1:100 ratio) for 16 h at 37C.  Digests were desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges, concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, and adjusted to 100 µL final volume with 0.1% formic acid before LC-MS analysis. Velos-FTICR mass spectrometer coupled with a Waters nano-Acquity. The instrument was operated using ReACT, a realtime adaptive method to selectively target cross-linked peptide pairs. Ions with a charge state of 4 or greater are subjected to high resolution MS2. An on the fly check for the PIR mass relationship (mass precursor = mass peptide 1 + mass peptide 2 + mass reporter ion) is performed. If statisfied within 20 ppm mass error the released peptides are sequentially analyzed by MS3 to obtain their primary sequence information. A selection of 22 cross-linked peptide pairs were subsequently quantified by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis performed on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled with an Easy-nLC.

### Data Protocol
Comet v.2018.01.2 was used to search the data from the Velos-FTICR. Comet settings included: searching a database comprised of forward and reverse Hsp90 alpha WT & Y313 and Aha1 protein sequences, a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm allowing for -1,0,1,2, or 3 13C offsets, allowing for only fully tryptic peptide sequences with up to 3 missed cleavage sites, up to two occurrences per peptide of oxidation of Met (15.9949 Da) as a variable modification and a single occurrence the BDP cross-linker residual mass (197.032422 Da) on Lys as a required modification, carbamidomethylation of Cys (57.021464 Da) as a fixed modification, fragment ion tolerance of 1.0005 Da with a bin offset of 0.4, and a digest mass range from 600 to 5,000 Da. The Comet search resulted in a total of 162 non-redundant fully assigned cross-linked peptide pairs, including 147 target sequences and 15 decoys (peptide pair containing at least one reverse sequence peptide) for a maximum estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of 10.2% at the non-redundant peptide pair level (Table S4). From this set of 147 target peptide pairs, 22 confidently (maximum estimated FDR 2.2%) assigned cross-linked peptide pairs, including five inter-protein links between Hsp90 and Aha1, were selected for targeted quantitative PRM analysis. PRM data were analyzed with Skyline v.3.5.0.9319 using the Cross-link Transition Calculator tool (https://skyline.ms/skyts/home/software/Skyline/tools/details.view?name=Cross-link%20Transition%20Calculator).

### Publication Abstract
Complex conformational dynamics are essential for function of the dimeric molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90), including transient, ATP-biased N-domain dimerization that is necessary to attain ATPase competence. The intrinsic, but weak, ATP hydrolyzing activity of human Hsp90 is markedly enhanced by the co-chaperone Aha1. However, the cellular concentration of Aha1 is substoichiometric relative to Hsp90. Here we report that initial recruitment of this cochaperone to Hsp90 is markedly enhanced by phosphorylation of a highly conserved tyrosine (Y313 in Hsp90&#x3b1;) in the Hsp90 middle domain. Importantly, phosphomimetic mutation of Y313 promotes formation of a transient complex in which both N- and C-domains of Aha1 bind to distinct surfaces of the middle domains of opposing Hsp90 protomers prior to ATP-directed N-domain dimerization. Thus, Y313 represents a phosphorylation-sensitive conformational switch, engaged early after client loading, that affects both local and long-range conformational dynamics to facilitate initial recruitment of Aha1 to Hsp90.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Phosphorylation, Cross-linking, Xl-ms, Chaperone, Aha1, Ptm, Heat shock

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Urologic Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA

### Submitter
Juan Chavez

### Lab Head
Dr Len Neckers
Urologic Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA


