### Accession
PXD039806

### Title
Evaluation of the African swine fever virus-induced host shutoff using dynamic stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)

### Description
African swine fever is a viral disease of swine caused by the African swine fever virus (ASFV). Currently, ASFV is a serious threat to the global pig industry. A viral strategy to undermine host cell response is to establish a global shutoff of host protein synthesis (virus-induced shutoff, vhs). Here, we characterize ASFV-induced shutoff in primary porcine macrophages by measurement of relative protein synthesis rates based on stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). The impact of ASFV infection on the synthesis of >2000 individual host proteins showed a high degree of variability ranging from complete shutoff to a strong induction of proteins that are absent from naïve cells. By GO-term enrichment analysis the cellular pathways that were most efficiently impacted by vhs were identified. The experimental setup is suitable to quantify vhs after infections with different viruses.

### Sample Protocol
For the generation of samples, macrophages were cultured in SILAC medium supplemented with light 12C6 L-leucine and 12C6 L-arginine. Upon infection, a medium with the corresponding 13C6 heavy isotopomers was applied. After 16h (PrV) or 24 h (ASFV) the cells were harvested, proteins extracted and digested with trypsin. Peptides were then subjected to quantitative LC/MS with a shotgun proteomics approach using a timsTOF Pro instrument. For each sample group, three biological replicates were collected.

### Data Protocol
Database queries for protein identifications were conducted in Fragpipe version v.18 using a sequence databases compiled from the host (S. scrofa), ASFV-Georgia, (GenBank FR682468.2) and PrV-Kaplan (Genbank NC_006151). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.1%, 2 missed cleavages were tolerated.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification, in addition to the SILAC labels the oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal amidation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were chosen as optional modifications. Identification and quantification results from Fragpipe were processed in statistical programming language R. Porcine identifiers were referenced to human HGNC symbols with gProfiler. Relative synthesis rates of proteins were calculated from the isotope ratios of identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
African swine fever is a viral disease of swine caused by the African swine fever virus (ASFV). Currently, ASFV is spreading over the Eurasian continent and threatening global pig husbandry. One viral strategy to undermine an efficient host cell response is to establish a global shutoff of host protein synthesis. This shutoff has been observed in ASFV-infected cultured cells using two-dimensional electrophoresis combined with metabolic radioactive labeling. However, it remained unclear if this shutoff was selective for certain host proteins. Here, we characterized ASFV-induced shutoff in porcine macrophages by measurement of relative protein synthesis rates using a mass spectrometric approach based on stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). The impact of ASFV infection on the synthesis of &gt;2000 individual host proteins showed a high degree of variability, ranging from complete shutoff to a strong induction of proteins that are absent from na&#xef;ve cells. GO-term enrichment analysis revealed that the most effective shutoff was observed for proteins related to RNA metabolism, while typical representatives of the innate immune system were strongly induced after infection. This experimental setup is suitable to quantify a virion-induced host shutoff (vhs) after infection with different viruses.

### Keywords
Vhs, Virus host shutoff, African swine fever virus, Silac

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut

### Submitter
Axel Karger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Karger
Institute of Molecular Virology and Cell Biology, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut


