### Accession
PXD043992

### Title
Uncoupling Metabolic Health from Thermogenesis via BCAA Flux in Brown Fat

### Description
Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is best known for thermogenesis. Whereas numerous studies in rodents found tight associations between the metabolic benefits of BAT and enhanced whole-body energy expenditure, emerging evidence in humans suggests that BAT is protective against Type 2 diabetes independent of body-weight. The underlying mechanism for this dissociation remained unclear. Here, we report that impaired mitochondrial flux of branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) in BAT, by deleting mitochondrial BCAA carrier (MBC, encoded by Slc25a44), was sufficient to cause systemic insulin resistance without affecting whole-body energy expenditure or body-weight. We found that brown adipocytes catabolized BCAAs in the mitochondria as essential nitrogen donors for the biosynthesis of glutamate, N-acetylated amino acids, and one of the products, glutathione. BAT-selective impairment in mitochondrial BCAA flux led to elevated oxidative stress and insulin resistance in the liver, accompanied by reduced levels of BCAA-nitrogen derived metabolites in the circulation. In turn, supplementation of glutathione restored insulin sensitivity of BAT-specific MBC knockout mice. Notably, a high-fat diet rapidly impaired BCAA catabolism and the synthesis of BCAA-nitrogen derived metabolites in the BAT, while cold-induced BAT activity is coupled with an active synthesis of these metabolites. Together, the present work uncovers a mechanism through which brown fat controls metabolic health independent of thermogenesis via BCAA-derived nitrogen carriers acting on the liver.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of Mitochondrial Proteomes Proteomes were reduced with 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide, further reduced with 5 mM DTT, and precipitated using TCA (final concentration of 20%). The precipitated samples were washed three times with ice-cold acetone. Proteins were solubilized in digestion buffer (1M urea, 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5) and digested with Lys-C overnight. The samples were further digested with trypsin for 6 hours at 37o C for six hours. The digested samples were labelled with TMTPro reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following incubation at room temperature for 2 hours, the reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). Following TMT labeling, the samples were combined and the pooled sample was de-salted using a Sep-pak.   Off-line basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) fractionation Labeled peptides were fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific).  A total of 6 fractions were collected. Samples were subsequently acidified with 1% formic acid and vacuum centrifuged to near dryness. Each consolidated fraction was desalted by StageTip, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.   Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS3) Data were collected on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribird mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 for online sample handling and peptide separations. The 100 µm capillary column was packed in-house with 35 cm of Accucore 150 resin (2.6 μm, 150Å; ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were separated using a 180 min linear gradient from 5% to 32% buffer B (90% ACN + 0.1% formic acid) equilibrated with buffer A (5% ACN + 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 550 nL/min across the column. Data was collected using an SPS-MS3 method. The scan sequence for the Fusion Lumos Orbitrap began with an MS1 spectrum collected in the Orbirap (resolution - 120,000; scan range - 350 – 1,500 m/z; AGC target – 1,000,000; normalized AGC target – 250%;  maximum ion injection time 50 ms; dynamic exclusion - 180 seconds). MS2 spectra were collected in the ion trap following collision induced dissociation (AGC target – 15,000; normalized AGC target - 150%; NCE (normalized collision energy) – 35; isolation window - 0.5 Th; maximum injection time - 50ms). MS3 scans were collected in the Orbitrap following higher-energy collision dissociation (resolution – 50,000; AGC target – 100,000; normalized AGC target – 200%; collision energy – 55%; MS2 isolation window – 2; number of notches – 10; MS3 isolation window – 1.2; maximum ion injection time – 200 ms.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data analysis Database searching included all entries from the mouse UniProt Database (downloaded in May 2021). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in the reversed order [PMID: 17327847]. Raw files were converted to mzXML, and monoisotopic peaks were re-assigned using Monocle [PMID: 33190505].  Searches were performed with Comet [PMID: 23148064] using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and fragment bin tolerance of 1.005. TMTpro labels on lysine residues and peptide N-termini +304.207 Da), as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using a linear discriminant after which proteins were assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1% analysis [PMID: 21183079]. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. More specifically, reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. Peptides were filtered to include only those with a summed signal-to-noise (SN) ≥ 100 across all TMT channels and < 0.5 precursor isolation specificity. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed (for a given protein).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brown adipose tissue (bat), Branched-chain amino acids (bcaa)

### Affiliations
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
Howard Hughes Medical Institute Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Anthony Verkerke

### Lab Head
Dr Shingo Kajimura
Howard Hughes Medical Institute Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Harvard Medical School


