### Accession
PXD013757

### Title
Proteome of Human breast cancer cell line (MDA-MB-231) with sileced MASTL vs NT control

### Description
MASTL (Microtubule associated serine-threonine kinase-like) is a relatively recently identified mitotic accelerator. There are also indications of its role in cancer progression, especially in breast cancer, but the molecular mechanisms behind this and the cell cycle independent functions of MASTL are poorly understood. Regulation of cell adhesion and actin dynamics play a central role in governing cell contractility, migration and cell division in normal and cancer cells. Here, we identify MASTL as regulator of cell contractility and activator of the transcriptional co-activator MTRF-A. We show that depletion of MASTL increases cell contact with the extracellular matrix, reduces contractile actin stress fibers in normal and breast cancer cells. Importantly, depletion of MASTL also leads to strongly impairs motility of breast cancer cells. Our transcriptome and proteome profiling revealed that depletion of MASTL impairs transcription and expression of several MRTF-A target genes implicated in cellular movement and actomyosin contraction, including Rho Guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2 (GEF-H1, ARHGEF2) and tropomyosin 4.2 (TPM4). Mechanistically, we find that MASTL is necessary for serum-induced activation of SRF/MTRF-A transcription and that exogenous expression of GEF-H1 in MASTL depleted cells is sufficient to restore cell contractility. Taken together, our results suggest that MASTL is a previously undescribed key regulator of cell morphology and the actin cytoskeleton through transcriptional control of multiple adhesion and actin cytoskeleton regulating genes with key roles in contractility, cell adhesion and migration.  MASTL (Microtubule associated serine-threonine kinase-like) is a relatively recently identified mitotic accelerator. There are also indications of its role in cancer progression, especially in breast cancer, but the molecular mechanisms behind this and the cell cycle independent functions of MASTL are poorly understood. Regulation of cell adhesion and actin dynamics play a central role in cell migration, morphology and cancer progression, but the role of MASTL in these processes has not been evaluated. Here, we show that depletion of MASTL increases cell contact with the extracellular matrix in breast cancer cells. Importantly, depletion of MASTL also leads to reduction of contractile actin stress fibers and decreased cell motility. Further, our transcriptome and proteome profiling revealed that mechanistically depletion of MASTL impairs transcription and expression of regulators of cellular movement and actomyosin contraction, including Rho Guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2 (GEF-H1, ARHGEF2) and tropomyosin 4.2 (TPM4). Further, we show that the transcriptional changes are caused by defectiveness of the serum response factor (SRF) signalling. Importantly, this study reveals advanced role for MASTL in interphase cells that activates a transcriptional program strongly impacting on the expression of regulators of cellular motility and actomyosin contraction.

### Sample Protocol
For quantitative MS analysis SILAC cells were labelled by culturing them in DMEM without Arg/Lys (A14431-01), 200 µM L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin streptomycin, (110mg/L -  1mM) sodium pyruvate and 10 % 10 KDa dialyzed serum (F0392, Sigma). The media for Light labelling was supplemented with Arg 0 (84 mg/ml, A6969, Sigma) and Lys 0 (146 mg/ml, L8662, Sigma) and for Heavy labelling with Arg10 (CNLM-539-H, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and Lys8 (CNLM-291-H, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Incorporation of the isotopes was confirmed after six passages. SiControl and siMASTL silenced samples were prepared two times with light and heavy labelled cells obtaining four experimental replicates. For each independent experiment, SiControl and siMASTL silenced samples were mixed using a label-swap replication strategy (i.e. SiControl-light mixed with siMASTL silenced-heavy generates forward replicate 1; siMASTL silenced-light with SiControl -heavy generates reverse replicate 1, etc.). 48 h after silencing the cells were lysed with 4 % SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6 and boiled for 5 min at 95°C. Samples were sonicated, centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min at 4°C, and transferred into a clean tube.     Proteomic Sample Preparation. Proteins obtained from total cell lysates were precipitated in two steps using 24% and 10% solution of trichloroacetic acid. In both steps, pellets were incubated at 4 °C for 10 min and centrifuged at 18,000 g for 5 min. Supernatants were carefully aspirated and pellets were washed with water until the supernatant reached neutral pH. Pellets were reconstituted and digested, first using endoproteinase Lys-C (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate, Alpha Laboratories) for 1 h at room temperature (24 °C), then with trypsin (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate, Promega) overnight at 35 °C.   Off-line HPLC Fractionation. Protein digests were fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography. A C18 column (150 × 2.1mm i.d. - Kinetex EVO (5 μm, 100 Å)) was used with an HPLC system (Agilent, LC 1260 Infinity II, Agilent). Modules were controlled by Chemstation rev 01.07 SR2. Solvent A (98% water, 2% acetonitrile) and solvent B (90% acetonitrile and 10% water) were adjusted to pH 10 using ammonium hydroxide. Samples were injected manually through a Rheodyne valve onto the RP-HPLC column equilibrated with 1% solvent B and kept at this percentage for 3 min. A two-step gradient was applied at a flow-rate of 200 μl/min (from 1–25% B in 42 min, then from 25–43% B in 8 min) followed by a 8 min washing step at 100% solvent B and a 8 min re-equilibration step. Column eluate was monitored at 220 and 280 nm via a variable wavelength detector and collected using a Agilent 1260 infinity fraction collector. Column eluate was collected from 4 to 63 min and divided in 21 fractions.

### Data Protocol
The MS Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software [Cox, J. and M. Mann, Nat Biotech, 2008. 26(12): p. 1367-1372]  version 1.5.5.1 and searched with Andromeda search engine [Cox, J., et al., J Proteome Res, 2011. 10(4): p. 1794-1805.], querying UniProt [The UniProt Consortium. Nucleic Acids Res, 2010. 38 p. D142-D148] Homo sapiens (09/07/2016; 92,939 entries). For quantification, multiplicity was set to 2 and Arg0/Arg10, Lys0/Lys8 were used for ratio calculation of SILAC labelled peptides. First and main searches were performed with precursor mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %. MaxQuant output was further processed and analysed using Perseus software version 1.5.5.4. Quantification was done using the ProteinGroups.txt file, Reverse and Potential Contaminant flagged proteins were removed, and at least one uniquely assigned peptide and a minimum ratio count of 2 were required for a protein to be quantified. To identify regulated proteins, the two-sided Significance B algorithm [Cox, J. and M. Mann, Nat Biotech, 2008. 26(12): p. 1367-1372] with a threshold value of 0.05 (Benjamini–Hochberg FDR used for truncation) was applied to each replicate sample. Protein abundance changes were considered significant if they passed the Significance B test in at least three replicates out of the four analysed.

### Publication Abstract
Microtubule-associated serine/threonine-protein kinase-like (MASTL) is a mitosis-accelerating kinase with emerging roles in cancer progression. However, possible cell cycle-independent mechanisms behind its oncogenicity remain ambiguous. Here, we identify MASTL as an activator of cell contractility and MRTF-A/SRF (myocardin-related transcription factor A/serum response factor) signaling. Depletion of MASTL increased cell spreading while reducing contractile actin stress fibers in normal and breast cancer cells and strongly impairing breast cancer cell motility and invasion. Transcriptome and proteome profiling revealed MASTL-regulated genes implicated in cell movement and actomyosin contraction, including Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor 2 (GEF-H1, ARHGEF2) and MRTF-A target genes tropomyosin 4.2 (TPM4), vinculin (VCL), and nonmuscle myosin IIB (NM-2B, MYH10). Mechanistically, MASTL associated with MRTF-A and increased its nuclear retention and transcriptional activity. Importantly, MASTL kinase activity was not required for regulation of cell spreading or MRTF-A/SRF transcriptional activity. Taken together, we present a previously unknown kinase-independent role for MASTL as a regulator of cell adhesion, contractility, and MRTF-A/SRF activity.

### Keywords
Cell adhesion, Breast cancer, Silac, Mastl, Cell contractility, Cell migration

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


