### Accession
PXD048330

### Title
Sty1 kinase-dependent phosphosite mapping on Atf1

### Description
In the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe, heterochromatic silencing is quite stable at pericentromeres but unstable at the mating-type (mat) locus under chronic heat stress. We found that the compromised gene silencing at the mat locus at elevated temperature is linked to the phosphorylation status of Atf1 (a member of the ATF/CREB superfamily) by Sty1, one of the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs). To gain a full picture of Sty1-dependent phosphosite map of Atf1 under heat stress, we purified HA-Atf1 protein from cultures of wild type and sty1Δ strains shifted from 25℃ to either 30℃ or 37℃ for 5 hr followed by immunoprecipitation. Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE, and Coomassie blue-stained gel slices were excised and submitted for mass spectrometry analyses.

### Sample Protocol
After staining of gels with Coomassie blue, excised gel segments were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and dried. Samples were analyzed on a nanoElute (Bruker) coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker) equipped with a CaptiveSpray source. Peptides were dissolved in 10 μL 0.1% formic acid and were auto-sampled directly onto a homemade C18 column (35 cm X 75 μm i.d., 1.9 μm 100Å). Samples were then eluted for 60mins with linear gradients of 3-35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectra data were acquired with a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) operated in PASEF mode. The timsTOF Pro was operated in PASEF mode using Compass Hystar 6.0. Mass Range 100 to 1700m/z, 1/K0 Start 0.6 V⋅s/cm2 End 1.6 V⋅s/cm2, Ramp time 110.1ms, Lock Duty Cycle to 100%, Capillary Voltage 1600V, Dry Gas 3 L/min, Dry Temp 180°C, PASEF settings: 10 MS/MS scans (total cycle time 1.27sec), charge range 0-5, active exclusion for 0.4 min, Scheduling Target intensity 10000, Intensity threshold 2500, CID collision energy 42eV.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed by PEAKS Studio Xpro software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). Data was searched against the S. pombe proteome sequence database (Uniprot database with 5117 entries of protein sequences at https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000002485). De novo sequencing of peptides, database search and characterizing specific PTMs were used to analyze the raw data; false discovery rate (FDR) was set to ≤1%, and [-10*log(p)] was calculated accordingly where p is the probability that an observed match is a random event. The PEAKS used the following parameters: (i) precursor ion mass tolerance, 20 ppm; (ii) fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.05 Da (the error tolerance); (iii) tryptic enzyme specificity with two missed cleavages allowed; (iv) monoisotopic precursor mass and fragment ion mass; (v) a fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation; and (vi) variable modifications including N-acetylation of proteins and oxidation of Met.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic cells are constantly exposed to various environmental stimuli. It remains largely unexplored how environmental cues bring about epigenetic fluctuations and affect heterochromatin stability. In the fission yeast <i>Schizosaccharomyces pombe</i>, heterochromatic silencing is quite stable at pericentromeres but unstable at the mating-type (<i>mat</i>) locus under chronic heat stress, although both loci are within the major constitutive heterochromatin regions. Here, we found that the compromised gene silencing at the <i>mat</i> locus at elevated temperature is linked to the phosphorylation status of Atf1, a member of the ATF/CREB superfamily. Constitutive activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling disrupts epigenetic maintenance of heterochromatin at the <i>mat</i> locus even under normal temperature. Mechanistically, phosphorylation of Atf1 impairs its interaction with heterochromatin protein Swi6<sup>HP1</sup>, resulting in lower site-specific Swi6<sup>HP1</sup> enrichment. Expression of non-phosphorylatable Atf1, tethering Swi6<sup>HP1</sup> to the <i>mat3M</i>-flanking site or absence of the anti-silencing factor Epe1 can largely or partially rescue heat stress-induced defective heterochromatic maintenance at the <i>mat</i> locus.

### Keywords
Atf1，phosphorylation，sty1，fission yeast (schizosaccharomyces pombe)

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China
School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University

### Submitter
Quan-wen Jin

### Lab Head
Dr Quan-wen Jin
State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China


