### Accession
PXD017284

### Title
Mouse germ cell proteome from spermatogonia to round spermatids analysis by LC-MSMS

### Description
The data contains 135 raw data produced from mass spectrometry (QExactive HF, Thermo Scientific), the bio-samples were sperm cells collected at nine sub-stages of mouse spermatogenesis. Proteins from each bio-samples were extracted and digested to peptides, then separated to five fractions and triplicated analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.2% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4), supplemented with 1 mM DTT, 1 x cocktail protease inhibitor (Promega). The proteins in lysates were reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 55 mM IAM and digested with trypsin. Peptides from each sample were fractionated to five fractions by high-pH RP separation and each fraction was further separated by a Ultimate 3000 liquid system and analyzed by Q Exactive HF mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Swissprot mouse databases (downloaded 11-19-2018) using MaxQuant (v 1.5.3.30) with a 1% FDR at peptide and protein level. The search parameters for a peptide were set as, trypsin digestion only, maximum of two missed cleavages of trypsin, minimum length of six amino acids, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. The ‘Match Between Runs’ option was used. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was estimated with MaxLFQ algorithm, using a minimum ratio count of 1.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular mechanism associated with mammalian meiosis has yet to be fully explored, and one of the main reasons for this lack of exploration is that some meiosis-essential genes are still unknown. The profiling of gene expression during spermatogenesis has been performed in previous studies, yet few studies have aimed to find new functional genes. Since there is a huge gap between the number of genes that are able to be quantified and the number of genes that can be characterized by phenotype screening in one assay, an efficient method to rank quantified genes according to phenotypic relevance is of great importance. We proposed to rank genes by the probability of their function in mammalian meiosis based on global protein abundance using machine learning. Here, nine types of germ cells focusing on continual substages of meiosis prophase I were isolated, and the corresponding proteomes were quantified by high-resolution MS. By combining meiotic labels annotated from the mouse genomics informatics mouse knockout database and the spermatogenesis proteomics dataset, a supervised machine learning package, FuncProFinder (https://github.com/sjq111/FuncProFinder), was developed to rank meiosis-essential candidates. Of the candidates whose functions were unannotated, four of 10 genes with the top prediction scores, Zcwpw1, Tesmin, 1700102P08Rik, and Kctd19, were validated as meiosis-essential genes by knockout mouse models. Therefore, mammalian meiosis-essential genes could be efficiently predicted based on the protein abundance dataset, which provides a paradigm for other functional gene mining from a related abundance dataset.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Proteome, Meiosis

### Affiliations
BGI-Shenzhen,China
BGI-Shenzhen

### Submitter
Qidan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Siqi Liu
BGI-Shenzhen,China


