### Accession
PXD004370

### Title
To compare the proteome of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia grown in normal and iron depleted condition

### Description
As an approach to identify the iron depleted responsive protein, ITRAQ approach was used to analyze the supernatant of S. maltophilia strains [clinical (CS17) and environmental (LMG959)] grown in iron depleted condition. Appendix A and B lists the up-regulated proteins identified with ≥95% confidence including their respective ratio and peptides. A total of 480 and 358 proteins were identified in replicate 1 and replicate 2 which represent two independent analysis of the experiments for both strains that met the criteria of a minimum unused score cut of >1.3 which indicates >95% confidence in correct sequence identification. Figure 4 showed that 687 proteins were detected in which 151 proteins were commonly present in replicates, 329 and 207 proteins being unique to replicate 1 and replicate 2 respectively. From 687 proteins detected, a total of 122 proteins were seen with altered expression in response to iron depleted condition among both strains. Of these, 36 proteins upregulated and 7 down-regulated in LMG959 while for CS17, 60 proteins upregulated and 19 down-regulated (Appendix A).In another comparison, CS17 and LMG959 grown in normal condition were compared. ITRAQ identified 81 differently regulated proteins with 40 proteins up-regulated and 41 proteins down-regulated in CS17 when compared to LMG959 grown in normal condition.

### Sample Protocol
ITRAQ is a quantitative proteomics based mass spectrometry (MS) which labels the protein peptides instead of protein amino acid. Thus, this will directly give the relative and absolute quantification using internal peptides standards. The ITRAQ analysis was outsourced to Proteomic International, Perth, WA, Australia. Basically, protein pellet that was extracted by iced cold TCA-ethanol was reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested rendering to the ITRAQ protocol (Applied Biosystems). The digested peptides were labeled using ITRAQ reagents. The peptides were desalted on a strata-x 33um polymeric reversed phase column(phenomenex) followed by fractionation of strong cation exchange liquid chromatography (SCX) on an agilent 1100 HPLC system using polysulfoethyl column (4.6 x 100mm,5um, 300A). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 0-400mM KCL. SCX fractions were collected and desalted on strata-X columns and were furthered loaded onto Agilent zorbax 300SB-C18, 3.5uM (Agilent technologies) running on a Shimadzu Prominence nano HPLC system. The eluted peptides were resolved with a gradient of 10%-40% acetonitrile (0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid) for 160 minutes and analyzed on a 5600 Triple-TOF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The analysis of the spectral data was done through the Swiss-Prot database using ProteinPilot 4.0 Software.

### Publication Abstract
This study investigates the twitching ability of 28 clinical and five environmental strains of <i>S. maltophilia</i> grown under iron-depleted condition through <i>in-silico</i>, phenotypic and proteomics approaches. Rapid Annotations using Subsystem Technology (RAST) analysis revealed the presence of 21 targets of type IV pilus shared across <i>S. maltophilia</i> strains K279a, R551-3, D457 and JV3. The macroscopic twitching assay showed that only clinical isolates produced a zone of twitching with a mean of 22.00 mm under normal and 25.00 mm under iron-depleted conditions. (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.002). Environmental isolates did not show any significant twitching activity in both conditions tested. Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantification (ITRAQ) analysis showed altered expression of twitching motility protein PilT (99.08-fold change), flagellar biosynthesis protein FliC (20.14-fold change), and fimbrial protein (0.70-fold change) in response to iron-depleted condition. Most of the strains that have the ability to twitch under the normal condition, exhibit enhanced twitching during iron limitation.

### Keywords
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Proteome, Iron depleted

### Affiliations
Universiti Putra Malaysia
Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang 43400, Malaysia.

### Submitter
Narcisse Kharthic

### Lab Head
Dr Associate Professor Dr. Vasantha Kumari Neela
Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang 43400, Malaysia.


