### Accession
PXD018397

### Title
Salinity adaptation in the principal arboviral vector Aedes aegypti characterized by larval cuticle changes

### Description
Aedes aegypti, the principle global vector of arboviral diseases, has been widely regarded to only lay eggs and undergo preimaginal development in fresh water collections. Recent observations however show that it has adapted to develop in anthropogenic brackish water habitats of up to 50% sea water in coastal areas in different continents. This adaptation is characterised by greater salinity tolerance in adult oviposition preference, larvae and changes in sizes of anal papillae. The physiological basis for salinity tolerance in either Ae. aegypti or any of the known salinity-tolerant species of Anopheles malaria vectors is not established. To address this knowledge gap which is of fundamental biological interest and important for control of major diseases we performed RNAseq analysis of gut, anal papillae, and rest of the carcass of Ae. aegypti collected in the field from brackish water (BW) and fresh water habitats (FW) and then maintained as laboratory colonies in BW and FW respectively. We also examined the cuticle structure of larvae, pupae and adult BW and FW Ae. aegypti by microscopy and performed proteomic analysis of the shed cuticles of fourth instar larvae (L4) when they transformed into pupae. The results show that major changes in cuticle structure and composition characterize, and may be the principal factor that permits, the adaptation of Ae. aegypti to brackish water.

### Sample Protocol
Origin and maintenance of the BW and FW laboratory colonies of Ae. aegypti collected as larvae from FW and BW sites in the Jaffna peninsula of Sri Lanka have been previously described (Ramasamy et al, 2014). FW and BW Ae. aegypti were maintained in 0ppt salt tap water and Jaffna lagoon water diluted to 10ppt salt in tap water.  Cuticles cast from L4 when they transformed into pupae in the 41st BW and 43rd FW generations after colony establishment were collected, rinsed 5x in distilled water and transferred to cryo-vials (~45 cuticles per vial). Cuticles were collected in triplicate and stored at – 80 °C. They were then freeze dried and couriered to BioPark in Archamps, France for analysis of cuticle proteins.  Proteins were extracted from mosquito cuticles following the protocol used by Masson and colleagues (Masson et al., Proteomics, 2018). Briefly, dried samples were incubated in pure hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) for 4 h at 4°C. HFIP was evaporated, and samples were incubated overnight at 4°C in NH4HCO3 50 mM (pH 7.8) supplemented with 0.1% RapiGest surfactant. Proteins were reduced with 30 mM DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 1h in the dark, at 56°C, prior to alkylation with 95 mM 4-VP for 1h in the dark at room temperature. Digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C by addition of 0.5 μg of trypsin. To stop proteolysis and cleave the RapiGest surfactant, samples were transferred into clean 1.5 mL LoBind tubes (Eppendorf), acidified with TFA and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. Finally, samples were dried under CentriVap vacuum and the dried pellets resuspended in 2% ACN/0.1% TFA final concentration prior to MS analysis. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis as described previously (Masson et al., 2018), nano-LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 nano-HPLC, coupled with a Q-Exactive Orbitrap high resolution mass spectrometer (unless stated otherwise, all hardware, software and consumables were from Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA). Samples were loaded onto a C18 PepMap100 precolumn (5 μm, 300 μm × 5 mm) at 10 μL min–1 and separated onto an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 column (3 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm) at a flow rate of 300 nL min–1. Peptides were eluted in a biphasic linear gradient of water/acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v), with 2–32% and of 32–65% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) in 100 and 5 min, respectively. The Q-Exactive mass spectrometer, equipped with a nanospray ion source, was used in positive mode and data-dependent acquisition. The voltage applied to the nano-tips was adjusted to produce 0.3 μA and the entrance capillary was maintained at 300°C. The Q-Exactive Orbitrap acquired a full-range scan from 380 to 2000 m/z (70,000 resolution, AGC target 3.106, maximum IT 200 ms) and then fragmented the top ten-peptide ions in each cycle (17,500 resolution, AGC target 2.105, maximum IT 100 ms, intensity threshold 4.104, excluding charge-unassigned ions, Normalized Collision Energy of 30). Parent ions were excluded from MS/MS for the next 15 s. The software Chromeleon Xpress and Xcalibur 2.2 were used to control the HPLC and the mass spectrometer, respectively. One-tenth of each digested sample was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis, and three technical replicates were acquired with each sample.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching and CPs Identification: Sequest HT was run by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to match the acquired MS/MS spectra to a protein database of the full mosquito taxon available from Uniprot, downloaded on April 1st, 2019 (UniprotKB + TrEMBL, total 237,216 entries). The following parameters were used: trypsin digest with two maximum missed cleavages; 6 and 144 amino acids as minimum and maximum peptide lengths, respectively; a tolerance of 10 ppm/0.02 Da for precursors and fragment ions, respectively; cysteine pyridylethylation was set as a fixed modification; C-terminal protein amidation, methionine and tryptophan oxidation were set as variable modifications. The identification confidence was set at a FDR of 1%. Proteins consistently identified across a series of three technical replicates were considered correctly identified. The sequences of the identified proteins were submitted online to CutProtFam-Pred tool (http://aias.biol.uoa.gr/CutProtFam-Pred/home.php), in order to retrieve a list of predicted cuticular proteins (Karouzou et al., 2007; Ioannidou et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Larval cuticle, Brackish water adaptation, Aedes aegypti, Anal papillae structure, Mosquito vectors, Salinity tolerance, Gene expression, Larval cuticle proteins

### Affiliations
ID-FISH Technology Inc., Milpitas, CA 95035, USA
Plateforme BioPark of Archamps

### Submitter
Sebastien Voisin

### Lab Head
Dr Ranjan Ramasamy
ID-FISH Technology Inc., Milpitas, CA 95035, USA


