### Accession
PXD017202

### Title
Cyclin B1-Cdk1 binds MAD1 and facilitates its release from the nuclear pore complex to ensure a robust Spindle Assembly Checkpoint

### Description
How the cell rapidly and completely reorganises its architecture when it divides is a problem that has fascinated for almost 150 years. We now know that the core regulatory machinery is highly conserved in eukaryotes but how these multiple protein kinases, protein phosphatases, and ubiquitin ligases are coordinated in space and time to remodel the cell in a matter of minutes remains a major question. Cyclin B-Cdk is the primary kinase that drives mitotic remodelling and here we show that it is targeted to the nuclear pore complex (NPC) by binding an acidic face of the kinetochore checkpoint protein, MAD1, where it coordinates NPC disassembly with kinetochore assembly. This localised Cyclin B1-Cdk1 activity is needed for the proper release of MAD1 from the embrace of TPR at the nuclear pore so that it can be recruited to kinetochores before nuclear envelope breakdown to maintain genomic stability.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (0.5% NP40 w/v 140 mM NaCl, 10mM KCl, 50 mM Hepes pH 7.2, 10% w/v glycerol, 1mM EDTA, HALT protease inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher Scientific). Supernatants from 11.000 x g centrifugation of cell lysates were incubated with anti-Cyclin B1 (GNS1, Pharminogen) or anti-MAD1 (9B10, Sigma-Aldrich) antibodies coupled to Protein G-Dynabeads (ThermoFisher Scientific) for 1 hour at 40C, and washed four times in lysis buffer, and eluted at 65°C for 5 min before analysis by SDS-PAGE and silver or Colloidal Blue staining, or immunoblotting. Silver staining was performed according to manufacturers’ instructions (SilverQuest, Sigma-Aldrich) and Colloidal Blue staining as previously described (Rowley et al., 2000). For MS analyses immunoprecipitates on Protein-G Dybabeads were washed 2x with TEAB Buffer (100mM) and incubated with Trypsin (Roche) at 370C for 18 hours. The tryptic peptides were collected and TMT-labelled according to manufacturers’ instructions (ThermoFisher Scientific). The TMT peptides were fractionated on a U3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher) using an XBridge BEH C18 column (2.1 mm id x 15 cm, 130 Å, 3.5 µm, Waters) at pH 10, with a 30min linear gradient from 5 - 35% acetonitrile (ACN)/NH4OH at a flow rate at 200 µl/min.  The fractions were collected at every 30 sec into a 96-wellplate by rows then concatenated by columns to 12 pooled fractions and dried in SpeedVac. The peptides were re-dissolved in 0.5% formic acid (FA) before LC-MS/MS analysis.  The LC-MS/MS analysis were performed on the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled with U3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system. Both instrument and columns used below are from Thermo Fisher. The peptides were first loaded to a PepMap C18 trap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100 Å, 5 µm) for 8 min at 10 µl/min with 0.1% FA/H2O, then separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 100 Å, 2 µm) at 300 nl/min and a linear gradient of 8-30.4% ACN/0.1% FA in 120 min /cycle at 150 min for each fraction. The data acquisition used the SPS5-MS3 method with Top Speed at 3s per cycle time.  The full MS scans (m/z 375-1500) were acquired at 120,000 resolution at m/z 200, and the AGC was set at 4e5 with 50 ms maximum injection time. Then the most abundant multiply-charge ions (z = 2-5, above 10,000 counts) were subjected to MS/MS fragmentation by CID (35% CE) and detected in ion trap for peptide identification. The isolation window by quadrupole was set m/z 0.7, and AGC at 10,000 with 50 ms maximum injection time.  The dynamic exclusion window was set ±7 ppm with a duration at 40 sec, and only single charge status per precursor was fragmented. Following each MS2, the 5-notch MS3 was performed on the top 5 most abundant fragments isolated by Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS). The precursors were fragmented by HCD at 65% CE then detected in Orbitrap at m/z 100-500 with 50,000 resolution for peptide quantification data.  The AGC was set 100,000 with maximum injection time at 105 ms.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using both SequestHT and Mascot search engines to search against the reviewed Uniprot protein database of Homo sapiens (2018) plus contaminate database.  The precursor mass tolerance was set at 15 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.5 Da. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides with maximum 2 miss-cleavages. TMT6plex (Peptide N-terminus, K) was set as static modification, and the dynamic modifications included Deamidation (N, Q), Oxidation (M) and Phosphorylation (S,T, Y). Peptides were validated by Percolator with q value set at 0.05 for the Decoy database search.  Phosphorylation site localisations were verified by ptmRS.  The search result was filtered by the Consensus step where the protein FDR was set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The TMT10plex reporter ion quantifier used 20 ppm integration tolerance on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. Co-isolation threshold was set to 100%.  Peptides with average reported S/N >3 were used for protein quantification.  Only master proteins were reported.

### Publication Abstract
How the cell rapidly and completely reorganizes its architecture when it divides is a problem that has fascinated researchers for almost 150 yr. We now know that the core regulatory machinery is highly conserved in eukaryotes, but how these multiple protein kinases, protein phosphatases, and ubiquitin ligases are coordinated in space and time to remodel the cell in a matter of minutes remains a major question. Cyclin B1-Cdk is the primary kinase that drives mitotic remodeling; here we show that it is targeted to the nuclear pore complex (NPC) by binding an acidic face of the kinetochore checkpoint protein, MAD1, where it coordinates NPC disassembly with kinetochore assembly. Localized cyclin B1-Cdk1 is needed for the proper release of MAD1 from the embrace of TPR at the nuclear pore so that it can be recruited to kinetochores before nuclear envelope breakdown to maintain genomic stability.

### Keywords
Human, Tmt, Ms3

### Affiliations
Institute of Cancer Research, London
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Institute of Cancer Research, London


