### Accession
PXD026685

### Title
VCP loss of function in neurons recapitulates FTLD-TDP pathology

### Description
Dominant mutations in unrelated genes cause fronto-temporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43 inclusions (FTLD-TDP) and include VCP, which is associated with multisystem proteinopathy (MSP).  Conditional inactivation of VCP in postnatal forebrain neurons (VCP cKO) caused cortical brain atrophy, neuronal loss, autophago-lysosomal dysfunction, TDP-43 inclusions and hyperactivity.  Quantitative proteomics and single nuclei RNA sequencing on VCP cKO brains identified synaptogenesis and the unfolded protein response as the most decreased and increased pathways respectively.  Conditional expression of a single MSP disease mutation, VCP-R155C, in cortical neurons similarly recapitulated features of VCP inactivation and FTLD-TDP.  Comparison of transcriptomic and proteomic datasets from genetically defined FTD patients revealed that profiles from GRN carriers were similar to VCP insufficiency.  These data support a deficiency in VCP dependent functions as the pathogenic mechanism of FTLD-TDP and reveal an unexpected pathogenic similarity with progranulin deficiency.  Enhancing VCP function may be therapeutic in MSP and related forms of FTLD-TDP.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse cortex samples were lysed using the lysis buffer from Thermo EasyPep Mini MS Sample Prep Kit. The Bradford assay were used to determine protein concentration, and 100 µg of proteins were digested and desalted by following the instruction of the same MS Prep Kit. Then the samples were resuspended in 0.1% FA solution, and the peptide concentrations were measured through Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay. The LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. 0.5 μg sample was loaded onto an Aurora UHPLC Columns (25 cm x 75 µm, 1.6 µm C18, AUR2-25075C18A, Ion Opticks) and separated over 136 min at a flow rate of 0.35 μL/min with the following gradient: 2-6% Solvent B (7.5 min), 6-25% B (82.5 min), 25-40% B (30 min), 40-98% B (1 min), and 98% B (15 min). Solvent A consisted of 97.9% H2O, 2% ACN, and 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B consisted of 19.9% H2O, 80% ACN, and 0.1% formic acid. MS1 scan was acquired in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution with a scan range of 350-1500 m/z, the AGC target was 4 x 105, and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude features after 1 time for 60 s with a 10 ppm mass tolerance. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was performed with 35% collision energy after quadruple isolation of features using 1.6 m/z isolation window, 1 x 105 AGC target, and a 35 ms maximum injection time. MS2 scans were then acquired by the IonTrap. Ion source settings were as follows: ion source type, NSI; spray voltage, 2400 V; ion transfer tube temperature, 275 °C. System control and data collection were performed by Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
The proteomic data processing was performed through Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) using Uniprot mouse database and the Byonic search algorithm (Protein Metrics). The search allowed for a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, a minimum peptide length of 6, and a minimum peptide sequences number of 1. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification; oxidation (M) was set as dynamic common modification; acetyl (protein N-term), Met-loss (Protein N-term M) and Met-loss+acetyl (Protein N-term M) were set as dynamic rare modifications. Percolator FDRs were set at 0.001 (strict) and 0.01 (relaxed). Normalization was performed on the total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
The pathogenic mechanism by which dominant mutations in VCP cause multisystem proteinopathy (MSP), a rare neurodegenerative disease that presents as fronto-temporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43 inclusions (FTLD-TDP), remains unclear. To explore this, we inactivate VCP in murine postnatal forebrain neurons (VCP conditional knockout [cKO]). VCP cKO mice have cortical brain atrophy, neuronal loss, autophago-lysosomal dysfunction, and TDP-43 inclusions resembling FTLD-TDP pathology. Conditional expression of a single disease-associated mutation, VCP-R155C, in a VCP null background similarly recapitulates features of VCP inactivation and FTLD-TDP, suggesting that this MSP mutation is hypomorphic. Comparison of transcriptomic and proteomic datasets from genetically defined patients with FTLD-TDP reveal that progranulin deficiency and VCP insufficiency result in similar profiles. These data identify a loss of VCP-dependent functions as a mediator of FTLD-TDP and reveal an unexpected biochemical similarity with progranulin deficiency.

### Keywords
Proteomic, Vcp/p97, Fronto-temporal lobar degeneration, Transcriptomic

### Affiliations
Caltech
BBE, Caltech

### Submitter
Shan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Tsui-Fen Chou
BBE, Caltech


