### Accession
PXD013488

### Title
Organising the cell cycle in the absence transcriptional control: Dynamic phosphorylation co-ordinates the Trypanosoma brucei cell cycle post-transcriptionally

### Description
The cell division cycle of the unicellular eukaryote Trypanosome brucei is tightly regulated despite the paucity of transcriptional control that results from the arrangement of genes in polycistronic units and lack of dynamically regulated transcription factors. To identify the contribution of dynamic phosphorylation to T. brucei cell cycle control we have combined cell cycle synchronisation by centrifugal elutriation with SILAC quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis. Cell cycle regulated changes in phosphorylation site abundance (917 sites, average 5-fold change) were more widespread and of a larger magnitude than changes in protein abundance (443 proteins, average 2-fold change) and were mostly independent of each other. Hierarchical clustering of co-regulated phosphorylation sites according to their cell cycle profile revealed a bulk increase in phosphorylation occurs across the cell cycle, with a significant enrichment of known cell cycle regulators and RNA binding proteins (RBPs) within the largest clusters. Cell cycle regulated changes in essential cell cycle kinases is temporally co-ordinated with differential phosphorylation of components of the kinetochore and eukaryotic initiation factors, along with many RBPs not previously linked to the cell cycle such as eight PSP1-C terminal domain containing proteins. The temporal profiles demonstrate the importance of dynamic phosphorylation in co-ordinating progression through the cell cycle, and provides evidence that RBPs play a central role in post-transcriptional gene regulation of the T. brucei cell cycle.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, SILAC labelled procyclic T. brucei cells were isolated in early G1 phase by centrifugal elutriation and placed back into culture to access five additional time points in the cell cycle, performed in biological triplicate. Different points in the cell cycle (light and heavy labelled) were combined with a medium labelled asynchronous population prior to FASP based solubilisation, reductive alkylation, and tryptic digest. FeIMAC was used to separate peptide from phosphopeptides, which were both processed in parallel. Off-line high pH reverse phase chromatography with concatenation to five fractionswas used to reduce the sample complexity prior to LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro with DDA, using MSA and technical duplicates for the phosphopeptides. In detail: SILAC labelling of T. brucei 427 Lister procyclic form cells were grown in SDM-79 SILAC media supplemented with either normal isotopic abundance L-arginine and L-lysine (Light) or 13C6 L-arginine and 4,4,5,5-D4 L-lysine (Medium) or 13C6,15N4L-arginine and 13C6,15N2 L-lysine (Heavy) for more than 7 cell divisions. Elutriation was performed essentially as described in Benz et al (DOI 10.1038/s41598-017-17779-z). Briefly, ~3 × 109 logarithmic phase Pcf cells were suspended in 20 ml Pcf elutriation buffer (PBS + 25% SDM-79), and an early G1 sample eluted at 18 and 20 ml/min and either processed directly for proteomic analysis or placed back into culture. 2 × 108 cells per time point were harvested by centrifugation at 1,000 × g for 10 min at 4 0C, and the supernatant removed. Following a wash with 1 × PBS, cells were lysed at 1 × 109 cells/ml in ice-cold lysis buffer (0.1 µM TLCK, 1 µg/ml Leupeptin, Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail II,1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Benzamidine) for 5 min at RT before transfer to -80°C for storage.   Synchronised samples from two time points (light- and heavy-labelled) and one asynchronous control sample (medium-labelled) were thawed and mixed (2 × 108 cells per sample, giving a total of 6 × 108 cells). The proteins were solubilized with SDS and tryptic peptides generated by an adaptation of the filter aided sample preparation procedure (DOI 10.1038/nmeth.1322). The digested peptide solution was then removed from the column, diluted to 3 ml with ABC and acidified with 0.1% TFA before desalting using a 500 mg C18 column, lyophilisation. Separation of peptides from phosphopeptides using Fe-IMAC was performed as described by Ruprecht et al (DOI 10.1007/978-1-4939-6747-6_5) with minor modifications, and fractions corresponding peptides and phosphopeptides were lyophilised and stored at -80 0C. Samples were fractionated using the High pH Fractionation using 2, 3, 4, 6, 10 and 50% MeCN, and the initial flow-through desalted using C18 microspin columns. The eluates were concatenated into five fractions as follows: F1 = 2% + 50% eluates, F2 = 3% eluate, F3 = 4% eluate, F4 = 6% eluate, F5 = 10% eluate + desalted flow through, and lyophilised prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS.    LC-MS/MS was performed on a fully automated Ultimate U3000 Nano LC System (Dionex) fitted with a 1 × 5 mm PepMap C18 trap column and a 75 µm × 15 cm reverse phase PepMap C18 nanocolumn. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 5 to 40% buffer B over 65 min. The HPLC system was coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nanospray ion source. For phosphoproteomic analysis, the mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode to perform a survey scan over a range 335 – 1800 m/z in the Orbitrap analyzer (R = 60,000), with each MS scan triggering fifteen MS2 acquisitions of the fifteen most intense ions using multistage activation on the neutral loss of 98 and 49 Thomsons in the LTQ ion trap. For proteomic analysis, the mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode with each MS scan triggering fifteen MS2 acquisitions of the fifteen most intense ions in the LTQ ion trap. The Orbitrap mass analyzer was internally calibrated on the fly using the lock mass of polydimethylcyclosiloxane at m/z 445.120025.   For IP experiments, 5 × 108 SILAC labelled cells were lysed at ice-cold lysis buffer plus 50 mM Tris, pH7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP-40, centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 10 min, and the supernatant incubated with anti-HA coupled magnetic beads for 3 h at 4°C. Following 3 washes with wash buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP-40), HA-tagged proteins were eluted by incubation with HA peptide for 2 × 15 minutes at 37°C. The elutions were combined according to the experimental regimen, reductively alkylated, treated with trypsin and the resulting peptides desalted, lyophilisation and analysed by LC-MS/MS as described above.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 which incorporates the Andromeda search engine. Proteins were identified by searching a protein sequence database containing T. brucei brucei 927 annotated proteins (Version 37, 11,074 protein sequences, TriTrypDB http://www.tritrypdb.org/) supplemented with frequently observed contaminants (porcine trypsin, bovine serum albumins and mammalian keratins). Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 6 ppm, an MS/MS tolerance at 0.5 Da and full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and N-pyroglutamate were allowed as variable modifications. The experimental design included matching between runs for the concatenated fractions in each experiment. Analysis of the multistage activation phosphoproteomic data used the same parameters, except for the addition of phosophorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues as variable modifications and the grouping of the two technical replicates together. Peptides were required to be at least 7 amino acids in length, with false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database.    SILAC ratios for phosphorylation sites were calculated using only data from the phosphoproteomic experiments, and SILAC ratios for proteins were calculated using only data from the proteomic experiments. SILAC ratios were calculated where at least one peptide could be uniquely mapped to a given protein group and required a minimum of two SILAC pairs. To account for any errors in the counting of the number of cells in each sample prior to mixing, the distribution of SILAC ratios was normalised within MaxQuant at the peptide level so that the median of log2 ratios is zero. The outputs were filtered to remove known contaminants and reverse sequences, and any SILAC ratios with greater ≥100% variation or phosphorylation sites with a localisation probability < 0.95 were excluded. Biological replicates were grouped into six cell cycle time points, averaged at each time point, and filtered to remove species not observed at all time points and normalised to the averaged EG1 sample (95-97% G1) to give ratios relative to the start of the cell cycle.

### Publication Abstract
The cell division cycle of the unicellular eukaryote Trypanosome brucei is tightly regulated despite the paucity of transcriptional control that results from the arrangement of genes in polycistronic units and lack of dynamically regulated transcription factors. To identify the contribution of dynamic phosphorylation to T. brucei cell cycle control we have combined cell cycle synchronisation by centrifugal elutriation with quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis. Cell cycle regulated changes in phosphorylation site abundance (917 sites, average 5-fold change) were more widespread and of a larger magnitude than changes in protein abundance (443 proteins, average 2-fold change) and were mostly independent of each other. Hierarchical clustering of co-regulated phosphorylation sites according to their cell cycle profile revealed that a bulk increase in phosphorylation occurs across the cell cycle, with a significant enrichment of known cell cycle regulators and RNA binding proteins (RBPs) within the largest clusters. Cell cycle regulated changes in essential cell cycle kinases are temporally co-ordinated with differential phosphorylation of components of the kinetochore and eukaryotic initiation factors, along with many RBPs not previously linked to the cell cycle such as eight PSP1-C terminal domain containing proteins. The temporal profiles demonstrate the importance of dynamic phosphorylation in co-ordinating progression through the cell cycle, and provide evidence that RBPs play a central role in post-transcriptional regulation of the T. brucei cell cycle. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD013488.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Cell cycle, Silac, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Biomedical & Life Sciences, Lancaster University UK
Lancaster University

### Submitter
Michael Urbaniak

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Urbaniak
Biomedical & Life Sciences, Lancaster University UK


