### Accession
PXD038942

### Title
TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. radicis-lycopersici treated with linalool

### Description
Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic analysis of tomato soil borne pathogen Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. radicis-lycopersici growth, and metabolism when treated with plant natural volatile organic compounds linalool. The Forl strain was cultured on PDA supplied with 0.8 mL/L linalool for 6 days at 25°C. The fungal strain on PDA supplied with only 0.1% Tween80 was cultured as the control. Three biological replicates were established for each treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The Forl strain was cultured on PDA supplied with 0.8 mL/L linalool for 6 days at 25°C. The fungal strain on PDA supplied with only 0.1% Tween80 was cultured as the control. Three biological replicates were established for each treatment. An appropriate amount of mycelia (100 mg) was taken and ground in liquid nitrogen. Protein were extracted using buffer and the protein mixture was reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with sufficient chloroacetamide, and digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were loaded on a C18 desalting column, and reconstituted in elution buffer (0.1% formic acid and 70% acetonitrile). The eluents of each sample were dried in a spin vacuum and reconstituted in 100 μL of 0.1 M TEAB buffer and 41 μL of TMT Plex labeling reagent (Thermo Scientific, USA). All labeling samples were mixed in an equal volume, desalted, and separated on a Rigol L3000 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system. Subsequently, the samples separated by chromatography were subjected to an EASY-nLCTM 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw spectral data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD 2.4, Thermo Scientific) and searched against the database (964533-Fusarium_oxysporum.FO2.pep.fasta, 17696 sequences) downloaded from Ensemble Genomes (https://ensemblgenomes.org/). The search parameters were: mass tolerance for the precursor ion was 10 ppm and the mass tolerance for the product ion was 0.02 Da. The identified peptide spectrum matched at least 1 unique peptide with credibility > 99%, and q-values ≤ 1% of the false discovery rate were retained.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Fusarium oxysporum f.</i> sp. <i>radicis-lycopersici</i> (<i>Forl</i>) is a destructive soil-borne phytopathogenic fungus that causes Fusarium crown and root rot (FCRR) of tomato, leading to considerable field yield losses. In this study, we explored the antifungal capability of linalool, a natural plant volatile organic component, against <i>Forl</i> and its role in controlling FCRR symptoms in tomatoes. Our results showed that <i>Forl</i> mycelial growth was inhibited by the linalool treatment and that the linalool treatment damaged cell membrane integrity, enhanced reactive oxygen species levels, depleted glutathione, and reduced the activities of many antioxidant enzymes in <i>Forl</i>. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses demonstrated that linalool also downregulated metabolic biosynthetic pathways at the transcript and protein levels, including redox, transporter activity, and carbohydrate metabolism in <i>Forl</i>. Moreover, linalool significantly decreased the expression of many <i>Forl</i> pathogenic genes, such as cell wall degrading enzymes (CWDEs) and G proteins, which is likely how a <i>Forl</i> infection was prevented. Importantly, exogenously applied linalool activated the salicylic acid (SA) and jasmonic acid (JA) defensive pathways to improve disease resistance and relieved the negative effects of <i>Forl</i> on plant growth. Taken together, we report that linalool is an effective fungicide against <i>Forl</i> and will be a promising green chemical agent for controlling FCRR.

### Keywords
Fusarium oxysporum, Linalool, Proteome, Tmt

### Affiliations
Shandong Agricultural University
Shandong Agricultual University

### Submitter
Xiuming Li

### Lab Head
Dr Qinghua Shi
Shandong Agricultural University


