### Accession
PXD018175

### Title
Complete loss of H3K9 methylation dissolves mouse heterochromatin organization

### Description
Histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) methylation is a central epigenetic modification that defines heterochromatin from unicellular to multicellular organisms. In mammalian cells, H3K9 methylation can be catalyzed by at least six distinct SET domain enzymes: Suv39h1/Suv39h2, Eset1/Eset2 and G9a/Glp. We used mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) with a conditional mutation for Eset1 and introduced progressive deletions for the other SET domain genes by CRISPR/Cas9 technology. Compound mutant MEFs for all 6 SET domain methyltransferase (KMT) genes lack all H3K9 methylation states, derepress nearly all families of repeat elements and display genomic instabilities. Strikingly, the 6KO H3K9 KMT MEFs no longer maintain heterochromatin organization and have lost electron-dense heterochromatin. This is the first analysis of H3K9 methylation deficient mammalian chromatin and reveals a crucial function for H3K9 methylation in protecting heterochromatin organization and genome integrity.

### Sample Protocol
After acid extraction of histones, histones samples were separated on 16% SDS Tris Glycine Wedge gels (Thermo Fisher) followed by colloidal coomassie staining (Instant Blue, Expedeon). Histone bands were excised and histone propionylation and subsequent protein digestion using trypsin (Promega) were performed essentially as described in Meert et al., 2016 (1) with minor modifications. In-gel propionylation prior to trypsin digestion was conducted two times employing the method  “H-42x” as described in Meert et al., 2016 (1) followed by the hydroxylamine-mediated reversal of over-propionylation.  Peptide samples were desalted using STAGE tips (2) and analyzed using LC-MS as previously described in (3) with minor modifications. Briefly samples were separated within 60 min with a linear gradient starting from 2% buffer B (80% acetonitril in 0.1% formic acid) to 60% buffer B at a flow rate of 250 nl/min, and this was followed by a washout step (80% buffer B, 5 min, 500 nl/min) and re-equilibration (2% buffer B, 5 min, 500 nl/min). Mass spectrometry was carried out using the “sensitive method” (data dependent acquisition) on Orbitrap QExactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described in (4).    1. Meert P, Dierickx S, Govaert E, De Clerck L, Willems S, Dhaenens M, Deforce D. Tackling aspecific side reactions during histone propionylation: The promise of reversing overpropionylation. Proteomics. 2016;16(14):1970–1974. 2. Rappsilber, J., Mann, M. & Ishihama, Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat. Protoc. 2, 1896–1906 (2007).  3. Musa YR, Boller S, Puchalska M, Grosschedl R, Mittler G. Comprehensive proteomic investigation of Ebf1 heterozygosity in Pro-B lymphocytes utilizing data independent acquisition. J. Proteome Res. 2018;17:76–85. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00369.  4. Kelstrup CD, Young C, Lavallee R, Nielsen ML, Olsen JV. Optimized fast and sensitive acquisition methods for shotgun proteomics on a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer. J. Proteome Res. 2012;11:3487–3497. doi: 10.1021/pr3000249.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were analyzed using Peaks Studio version 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.). MS raw files were searched using the Peaks de novo search algorithm and Peaks DB search against Mus musculus (mouse) UniprotKB protein sequence database (December 2015). Trypsin was selected as a cleaving enzyme, while a maximum of 4 missed cleavages, a minimum of 6 amino acids per peptide, 10 ppm MS peptide ion mass tolerance and 0.2 Da MS/MS tolerance were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas  the following modifications were set as variable modifications: acetylation at the protein N terminus and at lysine residues, deamidation of asparagine or glutamine, oxidation of methionine, propionylation of lysine and mono-methylated lysine residues, mono-methylation of lysine and arginine residues, di-methylation of lysine and arginine residues, tri-methylation of lysine residues, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. Maximum (allowed) variable PTMs per peptide were set to 4. The peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was set to a maximum of 0.01 using the decoy-fusion database search strategy implemented in Peaks Studio. Histone peptides intensities were exported and the sum of all peptide intensities (or features), belonging to each particular histone PTM (hPTM) mark, was calculated for histone H3 and histone H4 in each individual biological sample. This was followed by an inter-sample normalization to adjust the total intensity of all hPTMs to the same level in each biological replicate in each condition. To achieve this normalization, the summed peptide intensity of each particular hPTM was divided by the total intensity of a non-modified histone peptide, a histone peptide that is consistently identified and bears no hPTM mark throughout the whole experiment. Peptide “YRPGTVALR” and peptide “VFLENVIR” were used for normalizing mouse histone H3 (sequence: 41-49) and mouse histone H4 (sequence: 60-67), respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9) methylation is a central epigenetic modification that defines heterochromatin from unicellular to multicellular organisms. In mammalian cells, H3K9 methylation can be catalyzed by at least six distinct SET domain enzymes: Suv39h1/Suv39h2, Eset1/Eset2 and G9a/Glp. We used mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) with a conditional mutation for Eset1 and introduced progressive deletions for the other SET domain genes by CRISPR/Cas9 technology. Compound mutant MEFs for all six SET domain lysine methyltransferase (KMT) genes lack all H3K9 methylation states, derepress nearly all families of repeat elements and display genomic instabilities. Strikingly, the 6KO H3K9 KMT MEF cells no longer maintain heterochromatin organization and have lost electron-dense heterochromatin. This is a compelling analysis of H3K9 methylation-deficient mammalian chromatin and reveals a definitive function for H3K9 methylation in protecting heterochromatin organization and genome integrity.

### Keywords
Histone methyltransferases, Proteomic quantification of h3k9 methylation, Genome stability, Heterochromatin organization, Repeat silencing

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Proteomics Unit - Research Facility Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics Stübeweg 51 79108 Freiburg

### Submitter
Gerhard Mittler

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Mittler
Proteomics Unit - Research Facility Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics Stübeweg 51 79108 Freiburg


