### Accession
PXD012677

### Title
Proteomic and transcriptional profiling of rat amygdala following social play

### Description
Social play was performed on one cohort of adolescent rats. Other cohort was remaining naïve to behavioral testing. The rats were scarified following behavioral testing on postnatal day 38. Amygdala was isolated form the brain, homogenized the tissue, proteins were quantified, trypsin digested, and analyzed by LC ESI MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Collected amygdala tissue was lysed in NP-40 lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 0.5% NP-40) supplemented with 1mM of the serine protease inhibitor, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) using a MicrosonTM ultrasonic cell disruptor. The debris was removed by centrifugation at 21,000g at 4˚C for 30 min. The protein concentration was measured using a PierceTM BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific). From each sample, 100 µg of protein was precipitated by chloroform/methanol extraction. Briefly, the sample volume was adjusted to 200 µl using NP-40 lysis buffer. To each sample, 600 µl of methanol, 150 µl of chloroform, and 450 µl of milliQ-H20 were added, vortexed, and centrifuged at room temp for 1 min, at 21,000g. The upper aqueous phase was discarded and 450 µl of methanol was added to the lower phase, vortexed, and centrifuged under the same conditions for 2 min. The supernatant was discarded and protein digestion was performed by suspending the pellet in 33 µl of 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) containing 6 M urea. The samples were reduced with 1.6 µl of 200 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 45min at room temperature and alkylated with 6.6 µl of 200 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min at room temperature. The alkylation reaction was then quenched by adding 20 µl of 200 mM DTT for 45 min at room temperature. The urea concentration was reduced by adding 258 µl of milliQ-H20. Finally, the proteins were digested with trypsin (sequencing grade modified trypsin, Promega) at 1:50 ratio for 18 hr at 37˚C. Protein digestion was terminated by lowering the pH of each sample to <6 by adding concentrated acetic acid. The samples were desalted using C18 SepPak columns (Waters, USA). The sample was then dried down in speed vac. All samples were submitted to the University of Arizona Proteomic Consortium for analysis by tandem mass spectrometry coupled to liquid chromatography (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were extracted by Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, USA) using the Sequest algorithm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.3.0.339). Sequest was set up to search RattusNovergicus_UniprotKB assuming the digestion enzyme as trypsin. Fully tryptic peptides with up to 2 missed cleavage sites were selected. While searching with Sequest, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM were used. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. The results were also validated using X!Tandem, another search engine  and displayed with Scaffold v 4.5.1 (Proteome Software Inc., Portland OR), a program that relies on various search engine results (i.e.: Sequest, X!Tandem, MASCOT) and uses Bayesian statistics to reliably identify more spectra. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contain similar peptides and cannot be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Label-free protein quantitation using the sum of weighted spectra associated with a protein was performed in Scaffold. The proteins that passed the Fisher’s exact test with a p-value of ≤ 0.05 were used for biological interpretation. Differentially expressed proteins (DEP) were identified based on a fold change value, which was calculated by applying normalization in Scaffold. A minimum value of 0.2 was used for the samples in which a protein was not identified.

### Publication Abstract
This data article contains the proteomic and transcriptomic data of the amygdala of adolescent rats involved in social play compared to non-behavioural animals. Social play was performed on male Sprague Dawley rats on postnatal day 38 and protein and gene expression in the amygdala was determined following behavioural testing. The protein expression was measured by analysing trypsin digested protein samples using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer equipped with an Advion nanomate ESI source. The obtained tandem mass spectra were extracted by Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.3 and the data were displayed with Scaffold v 4.5.1. The transcriptomic data were generated by llumina HiSeq 4000 system. Cuffdiff (v2.2.1) program was used to calculate RNA-seq based gene expression levels. For further interpretation of data presented in this article, please see the research article 'Proteomic and Transcriptional Profiling of Rat Amygdala Following Social Play' (Alugubelly et&#xa0;al. 2019).

### Keywords
Amygdala, Social play, Protein expression, Behavio, Gene expression

### Affiliations
Mississippi State University

### Submitter
Navatha Alugubelly

### Lab Head
Dr Russell L.Carr
Mississippi State University


