### Accession
PXD007703

### Title
Cell type-specific metabolic labelling of nascent proteomes in vivo

### Description
Changes in protein expression drive both the acute responses and long-lasting adaptation of cells to internal and external stimuli. While advances in labelling strategies have made it possible to examine general proteome dynamics, it is still not possible to access the proteomes of specific cell types in vivo in vertebrates. Here we describe a transgenic mouse line where Cre-recombinase-induced expression of a mutant methionyl-tRNA synthetase (L274G) enables the cell type-specific labelling of nascent proteins with a non-canonical amino-acid and click chemistry. Using immunoblotting, imaging and mass spectrometry, we demonstrate the metabolic labelling of proteins in genetically-targeted neurons in brain slices and in vivo. Moreover, we discover over 200 proteins that are regulated in hippocampal excitatory neurons by exposing mice to an enriched environment. As such, this approach opens new avenues for the isolation, analysis and quantitative comparison of cell type-specific proteomes and their dynamics in healthy and diseased tissues.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry (MS) analyses, tissue was lysed in PBS supplemented with 0,5% Triton, 1% SDS, PI and benzonase, heated at 75°C for 15min and cleared by centrifugation. Cleared extracts were alkylated twice with 20mM iodoacetamide (3h at R.T in the dark). Samples were then cleaned by two passages on PD-SpinTrap G-25 columns (GE healthcare). Samples were then clicked in PBS pH7.8 supplemented with 0.06% SDS, 0.06% of Triton X-100, PI as described above with a cleavable biotin-S-S-alkyne (probe 14b in Szychowski et al., 2010). After click chemistry, excess biotin-alkyne was removed on PD-SpinTrap G-25 columns. Samples were then affinity purified with high-capacity Neutravidin agarose beads (Thermo) in PBS supplemented with 1% Triton, 0.15% SDS and PI (binding buffer) overnight at 4°C. Beads were then washed extensively at RT, first in binding buffer, then PBS + PI, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate + PI and finally eluted by incubation with 5% β-mercapto-ethanol, 0.03% SDS and PI for 30min at RT. Two consecutive elutions were performed. Eluted proteins were lyophilized, resuspended in water and processed for MS.  Eluted proteins were processed using a modified FASP workflow (Wisniewski et al., 2009 and Schanzenbaecher et al., 2016). In brief, protein extracts (whole samples for CaMK2a and Gad2) were cleaned and digested sequentially with Lys-C and trypsin on Microcon-10 filters (Merck Millipore, # MRCPRT010 Ultracel YM-10). Digested samples were desalted using ZipTips according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried in a Speed-Vac and stored at -20° C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Dried peptides were dissolved in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, and subsequently loaded using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano) on reverse phase columns (trapping column: particle size 3μm, C18, L=20mm; analytical column: particle size <2μm, C18, L=50cm; PepMap, Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted in gradients of water (buffer A: water with 5% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and acetonitrile (buffer B: 20% v/v water and 80% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). All LC-MS- grade solvents were purchased from Fluka. Gradients were ramped from 4% to 48% B in 178 minutes at flowrates of 300nl/min. Peptides eluting from the column were ionised online using a Thermo nanoFlex ESI-source and analysed in a Thermo “Q Exactive Plus” mass spectrometer or a Thermo “Orbitrap Elite” mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired over the mass range 350-1400m/z (Q Exactive Plus) or 350-1600m/z (Orbitrap Elite) and sequence information was acquired by computer-controlled, data-dependent automated switching to MS/MS mode using collision energies based on mass and charge state of the candidate ions. All samples were measured in (at least) triplicate LC-MS runs for each biological replicate.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed and analysed using MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2008). In brief, spectra were matched to a Mus musculus database downloaded from uniprot.org (reviewed and non-reviewed, downloaded on the 13/05/2016) and a contaminant and decoy database. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm, with fixed modification of Cys residues (carboxyamidomethylation +57.021) and variable modifications of Met residues (Ox +15.995), Lys residues (acetylation +42.011), Asn and Gln residues (deamidation +0.984) and of N-termini (carbamylation +43.006). Peptide identifications were calculated with FDR = 0.01, and proteins with one peptide per protein included for subsequent analyses. Peptide intensities were analyzed with MaxQuant and Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016, normalization of the intensities: mean centering; Volcano plots : two-side t-test, unpaired; segmentation analysis: number of clusters: 300, maximal number of iterations: 10). Proteins only identified by reverse peptides were removed. Protein intensities and LFQ intensities were averaged over technical triplicates and transformed to log 2. The full proteomes (cerebellum, hippocampus, glial cells) were analyzed by using proteins only quantified in two biological replicates or more. The protein intensities in each proteome were normalized by adjusting the mean protein intensity (measured over all biological replicates) to the value „10“. Proteins purified in the MetRS samples of the CaMK2a and Gad2 replicates were compared to the corresponding WT samples. The fold enrichment of each protein was calculated by subtracting the non-normalized MetRS intensity against the intensity measured in the paired WT sample. Only proteins detected exclusively in the MetRS samples or found to be ≥ 3 times enriched in MetRS in 3 replicates or more (≥ 2 replicates in Gad2) were retained for further analysis. The other proteins enriched or exclusively quantified in less replicates were analyzed separately to detect proteins exclusively detected in distinct proteomes (e.g. CaMK2a against Gad2). Proteins with no enrichment but quantified in ≥ 3 replicates of MetRS and WT were counted as overlapping proteins (overlap in Venn diagrams in Fig. 3, 4 and Fig. S7). Proteins enriched or exclusively detected both in different MetRS and WT replicates were also assigned to the overlap. Proteins enriched in MetRS were filtered, retaining only proteins with LFQ intensities in ≥ 3 replicates (or ≥ 2 replicates in Gad2). LFQ intensities were normalized by adjusting the mean LFQ intensity of each Gad2 experiment or the mean LFQ intensity of all CaMK2 replicates to „10“. Normalized LFQ intensities of the purified MetRS samples were analyzed against the full proteomes using proteins only quantified in all samples. For principal component analysis (without category enrichment), missing intensities were replaced by the LFQ intensities averaged over the biological replicates. LFQ intensities of each CaMK2 and Gad2 replicate were mean-centered and adjusted to „10“. Differentially regulated proteins in CaMK2-EE against CaMK2-HC, and Gad2 against CaMKHC were analyzed by a two-sided t-test (number of randomizations: 250, Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value <0.02, S0 = 0.1). Common proteins were hierarchically clustered using the Euclidean distance of averaged LFQ intensities (linkage) preprocessed with k-means (number of clusters: 50, max. 10 iterations).

### Publication Abstract
Although advances in protein labeling methods have made it possible to measure the proteome of mixed cell populations, it has not been possible to isolate cell-type-specific proteomes in vivo. This is because the existing methods for metabolic protein labeling in vivo access all cell types. We report the development of a transgenic mouse line where Cre-recombinase-induced expression of a mutant methionyl-tRNA synthetase (L274G) enables the cell-type-specific labeling of nascent proteins with a non-canonical amino-acid and click chemistry. Using immunoblotting, imaging and mass spectrometry, we use our transgenic mouse to label and analyze proteins in excitatory principal neurons and Purkinje neurons in vitro (brain slices) and in vivo. We discover more than 200 proteins that are differentially regulated in hippocampal excitatory neurons by exposing mice to an environment with enriched sensory cues. Our approach can be used to isolate, analyze and quantitate cell-type-specific proteomes and their dynamics in healthy and diseased tissues.

### Keywords
Funcat, Nascent proteomes, Boncat, Azidonorleucine, Anl, Metabolic labeling

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
MPI of Biophysics and MPI for Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian David Langer
MPI of Biophysics and MPI for Brain Research


