### Accession
PXD008020

### Title
Cadmium specific proteomic responses of  Pseudomonas aeruginosa san ai

### Description
Pseudomonas aeruginosa san ai resists a high concentration of up to 7.2 mM of cadmium. Leaving biomass of P. aeruginosa san ai exposed to sub-lethal concentration of cadmium (0.9 mM) adsorbed 75% of added cadmium after 48 hours, while remaining  25% in culture supernatant was adsorbed by exopollysaccaryde, implying a large biosorption potential of leaving biomass and its exopollysaccaryde. Inner cell response on the protein level was investigated by shotgun proteomics approach based on liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry coupled with bioinformatics to identify proteins in complex protein fractions obtained by size exclusion chromatography used to preserve native forms of metalloproteins and protein complexes. Using this approach a total of 59 proteins were observed as up-regulated in cadmium- amended culture. Almost a third of the total number of up-regulated were metalloproteins. P. aeruginosa san ai developed a complex mechanism to adapt to cadmium, based on: extracellular biosorption, bioaccumulation, the formation of biofilm, controlled siderophore production, enhanced respiration and modified protein profile. An increased abundance of proteins involved in cell energy metabolism, amino acid metabolism, cell motility and posttranslational modifications, primarily based on thiol-disulfide exchange, were observed.  Enhanced oxygen consumption of biomass  in cadmium- amended culture versus control was found. Our results signify that P. aeruginosa san ai has a great potential for application in bioremediation of cadmium polluted sites.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extract preparation The metal concentration selected for the proteomic analysis was 0.9 mM of cadmium, as with this sub-lethal concentration, P. aeruginosa san ai grows well, developing mechanisms of cadmium resistance (see results). Proteins were isolated from cadmium-amended biomass and control biomass, both in early stationary phase. Biomass was collected after 48 h of growth by centrifugation, frozen and homogenized in two volumes of buffer A (50 mM Tris buffer pH 7.5 supplemented with 0.1 mM PMSF and 0.5 mM DTT) in a glass teflon homogenizer, at 4°C. The resulting homogenates were treated at 80°C for 20 min and ultracentrifuged for 2 h at 100000 × g at 4°C using Beckman Coulter L5-65, rotor SW 28 (Beckman, Indianopolis, USA), (Suzuki et al. 1998). Three volumes of acetone were added to supernatant and precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation at 12000 × g for 10 min (microcentrifuge Force 12, Denver Instruments, New York, USA), (Park et al. 2002). Precipitate was dissolved in a minimal volume of buffer A and applied to Sephadex G-100 column (2.5 x 70 cm) equilibrated in buffer A. Fractions (volumes of 5.5 mL) were collected and absorbance at 280 nm was recorded. Fractions were pooled according to absorbance. Cadmium was determined in pooled fractions. Pooled fractions were lyophilized and kept in the refrigerator prior to use, when solutions of desired concentrations in water were prepared. The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method (Bradford 1976). Two temporary independent column separations were done. Metallothionein preparation  Metallothioneins were isolated using the method of Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2007). Trypsin digestion was performed overnight as described below and by microwave irradiation as suggested (Wang et al. 2007). In-solution trypsin digestion Urea (36 mg) and 7.5 µL of 1.5 M Tris buffer at pH 8.8 were added to 100 µL of protein solution, and the mixtures were incubated for 1 h at room temperature. The mixtures were reduced by addition of 2.5 µL of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and incubation for 1 hr at 37°C. Proteins were alkylated by 20 µL of 200 mM iodoacetamide and incubated in the dark for 1 h at room temperature, after which 20 µL of 200 mM of dithiothreitol was added. After incubation at room temperature for 1 h, 800 µL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 100 µL methanol (HPLC grade) were added to each tube. Protein was digested with trypsin (Promega Sequencing Grade modified Trypsin dissolved in 25 mM ammonium-bicarbonate) at a ratio of 1 trypsin: 50 protein (2 µg trypsin for 100 µg protein), (Karadžić et al. 2012). Digestion was performed overnight at room temperature and concentrated to near dryness in a vacuum concentrator Eppendorf Concentrator 5301 (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Proteins were desalted by Pierce C18 Spin columns (Pierce Biotechnology, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) according to manufacturer protocol.  Mass spectrometry and HPLC Peptide digests were analyzed by electrospray ionization in the positive mode on an ion trap instrument Amazon Speed (Bruker, Bremen, Germany), using captive spray source. Two analytical replicates of every sample were done. Peptides were separated by nanoflow HPLC (NanoAdvance, Bruker, Bremen, Germany). UHPLC Nanotrap (100 µm i.d. x 25 mm long) packed with 200 A C18 stationary phase (5 m, C18AQ, Michrom) was used for peptide trapping. Analytical columns (100 m x 150 mm long) packed with 200 A C18 stationary phase (3 m, C18AQ, Michrom) were coupled to the mass spectrometer (MS).  Peptide mixtures obtained after tryptic digestion were applied to the precolumn at a flow rate of 5 µL•min-1 in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides were eluted by a linear gradient of A (water, 0.1 % formic acid) and B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), as follows: 0 min - A (98%), B (2%); 50 min - A (5%), B (95%); 50-55 min - A (5%), B (95%) with flow rate of 400 nL min-1. Ion source conditions were optimized with a calibration solution according to the instrument provider. All MS survey scans were performed from m/z 400-1400 with enhanced resolution. Data analysis was performed by selection of the five most abundant precursors rejecting singly charged ions.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing and database search Tandem mass spectral data were acquired and processed automatically using Hystar 3.2 and Data Analysis 4.2 software (Bruker, Germany). Deconvoluted .mgf spectra were searched by Easy Prot, a platform for mass spectrometry data processing and protein identification, available at: http://easyprot.unige.ch/ (Gluck et al. 2013). Search parameters were set as follows: taxonomy-Pseudomonas group ID 136841; scoring model - esquire 3000; modifications - methionine oxidation and cysteine aklylated by iodacetamide as variable; enzyme-trypsin, missed cleavages - 2; precursor tolerance - 0.5 Da; peptide: length 6, score 4.0; coverage 15%, series of b; b++;y; y++ were used. To avoid false protein identifications False Discovery Rate (FDR) was kept at l%.  Metallothionein identification was additionally attempted using the Mascot database search tool (version 2.3.02) by querying MS data against a custom metallothionein database. The custom database was assembled out of 2518 protein sequences found to be related to metallothioneins and is listed within the Uniprot knowledgebase. Mascot search parameters were set as follows: enzyme- trypsin, missed cleavages- 6, modifications- cysteine carbamidomethylation (global) and methionine oxidation (variable), precursor mass tolerance - 1.2 Da, MS/MS mass tolerance- 0.6 Da, ions with monoisotopic m/z value and +2 and +3 charge state were tested. Only top hit compounds with significance threshold of p < 0.01 were considered.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> san ai is a promising candidate for bioremediation of cadmium pollution, as it resists a high concentration of up to 7.2 mM of cadmium. Leaving biomass of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> san ai exposed to cadmium has a large biosorption potential, implying its capacity to extract heavy metal from contaminated medium. In the present study, we investigated tolerance and accumulation of cadmium on protein level by shotgun proteomics approach based on liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry coupled with bioinformatics to identify proteins. Size exclusion chromatography was used for protein prefractionation to preserve native forms of metalloproteins and protein complexes. Using this approach a total of 60 proteins were observed as up-regulated in cadmium-amended culture. Almost a third of the total numbers of up-regulated were metalloproteins. Particularly interesting are denitrification proteins which are over expressed but not active, suggesting their protective role in conditions of heavy metal exposure. <i>P. aeruginosa</i> san ai developed a complex mechanism to adapt to cadmium, based on: extracellular biosorption, bioaccumulation, the formation of biofilm, controlled siderophore production, enhanced respiration and modified protein profile. An increased abundance of proteins involved in: cell energy metabolism, including denitrification proteins; amino acid metabolism; cell motility and posttranslational modifications, primarily based on thiol-disulfide exchange, were observed. Enhanced oxygen consumption of biomass in cadmium-amended culture <i>versus</i> control was found. Our results signify that <i>P. aeruginosa</i> san ai is naturally well equipped to overcome and survive high doses of cadmium and, as such, has a great potential for application in bioremediation of cadmium polluted sites.

### Keywords
Pseudomonas aeruginosa san ai

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, Department of Chemistry
Faculty of Medicine Department of Chemistry Belgrade Serbia

### Submitter
Ivanka Karadzic

### Lab Head
Dr Ivanka Karadzic
Faculty of Medicine Department of Chemistry Belgrade Serbia


