### Accession
PXD038191

### Title
Modelling organ-specific metastatic colonization of cholangiocarcinoma organoids in decellularized lung and lymph nodes

### Description
Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a type of liver cancer with an aggressive phenotype and dismal outcome in patients. Current treatment options are limited, with surgical resection or transplantation the only possibility with curative intent. This becomes unavailable if CCA metastasizes to distant organs, most commonly lung and lymph nodes, which in turn drastically reduces overall survival. Clinically, these metastatic sites have a distinct impact on prognosis and survival, however mechanistic insight is lacking. This is partly due to currently available models that fail to mimic the complexity of tissue-specific environments for metastatic CCA. To create an in vitro model in which interaction between epithelial tumor cells and their surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM) can be studied in a metastatic setting, we combined patient-derived CCA organoids (CCAOs) (n=3) with decellularized human lung (n=3) and decellularized human lymph node (n=13). Decellularization resulted in removal of cells while preserving ECM structure and retaining important characteristics of the tissue origin. This includes a tissue-specific ECM protein signature and macro and micro-scale mechanical properties, which reveal the local heterogeneity of the ECM. After recellularization, gene expression analysis showed metastasis-related processes, including epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, cancer stem cell plasticity, and ECM production, are significantly influenced by the ECM in an organ-specific manner. Furthermore, we find that CCAOs exhibit significant differences in migration and proliferation dynamics depending on metastatic site, the original patient tumor, and donor of target organ. Thus, CCA metastatic outgrowth is dictated both by the tumor itself as well as by the ECM of the target organ. In conclusion, convergence of CCAOs with its organ-specific location of metastasis, obtained by decellularization, provides a valuable tool for research on metastatic colonization in CCA.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation  100 µL 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) was added to the dECM scaffolds and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, followed by homogenizing using a dismembrator. The sample was heated in a thermomixer for 5 min at 95 °C. 90 µL 50 mM Tris-HCl and 5 µL 100 mM of 1,4-Dithiothreitol were added and the sample was incubated at 50 °C for 60 min. Subsequently, 5 µL 200 mM of 2-Chloroacetamide was added and the sample was incubated at RT for 30 min. Then, 100 µL 50 mM Tris-HCl and 10 µL PNGase F (500 units/mL) was added and the samples were further incubated at 37 °C for 4 h, followed by 5 min at 95 °C. Finally, 25 µL Sodium Deoxycholate and trypsin was added (1:100, trypsin:protein) and incubated in a thermomixer O/N at 30 °C and 1100 RPM. The next day, 25 µL 10 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the sample, followed by 2X washes with ethylacetate: 300 µL ethylacetate (H2O saturated) was added, the mixture was mixed vigorously and then centrifuged for 2 min at 5,000 rpm. The upper layer was removed, followed by 45 min in the SpeedVac Vacuum Concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to evaporate the solvent and reduce the sample volume. The protein digest was desalted using C18 stage tips. This was repeated for the flow through. The stage tip was then washed with 100 µL 0.1 % TFA, centrifuged for 10 min at 2,000 rpm, followed by 2X elution of the peptides with 75 µL 50 % acetonitrile (AcN) and centrifugation for 8 min at 2,000 rpm. Next, peptides were dried in the speedvac and reconstituted in 25 µL 2 % AcN, 0.5 % formic acid . Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) was performed on an EASY-nLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo), operating in positive mode. Peptides were separated on a ReproSil-C18 reversed-phase column (Dr Maisch; 15 cm × 50 μm) using a linear gradient of 0–80% acetonitrile (in 0.1% formic acid) during 90 min at a rate of 200 nl/min. The elution was directly sprayed into the electrospray ionization source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode by HCD.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data processing Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software suite (ThermoFisher Scientific). The Mascot search algorithm (version 2.3.2, MatrixScience) was used for searching against the Uniprot database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens). The peptide tolerance was typically set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. A maximum number of 2 missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed and carbamidomethylated cysteine and oxidized methionine were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Typical contaminants were omitted from the output tables.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metastatic colonization; decellularization; cholangiocarcinoma; tumor organoids;

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC


