### Accession
PXD042572

### Title
The effect of inhibition of receptor tyrosine kinase AXL on DNA damage response in ovarian cancer

### Description
AXL is a receptor tyrosine kinase that is often overexpressed in cancers. It contributes to pathophysiology in cancer progression and therapeutic resistance, making it an emerging therapeutic target. The first-in-class AXL inhibitor bemcentinib (R428/BGB324) has been granted fast track designation by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in STK11-mutated advanced metastatic non-small cell lung cancer and was also reported to show selective sensitivity towards ovarian cancers (OC) with a Mesenchymal molecular subtype. In this study, we further explored AXL’s role in mediating DNA damage responses by using OC as a disease model. AXL inhibition using R428 resulted in the increase of DNA damage with the concurrent upregulation of DNA damage response signalling molecules. Furthermore, AXL inhibition rendered cells more sensitive to the inhibition of ATR, a crucial mediator for replication stress. Combinatory use of AXL and ATR inhibitors showed additive effects in OC. Through SILAC co-immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry, we identified a novel binding partner of AXL, SAM68, whose loss in OC cells harboured phenotypes in DNA damage responses similar to AXL inhibition. In addition, AXL- and SAM68-deficiency or R428 treatment induced elevated levels of cholesterol and upregulated genes in the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway. There might be a novel protective role of cholesterol in shielding cancer cells against DNA damage induced by AXL inhibition or SMA68 deficiency.  

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labelling, cells were incubated in DMEM or RPMI (-Arg, -Lys) medium containing 10% dialyzed foetal bovine serum supplemented with 42 mg/l 13C615N4 L-arginine and 73 mg/l 13C615N2 L-lysine (Cambridge Isotope) for DMEM, 84 mg/l 13C615N4 L-arginine and 50 mg/l 13C615N2 L-lysine (Cambridge Isotope) or the corresponding non-labeled amino acids, respectively. Successful SILAC incorporation was verified by in-gel trypsin digestion and MS analysis of heavy input samples to ensure an incorporation rate of >98%.   Cells were lysed in ice cold co-immunoprecipitation lysis buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCL (pH7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40, 0.25% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.5 mM EDTA (pH8.0) supplemented with 100X protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 50 units/mL benzonase (Millipore) and 2 mM MgCl2 for 45 mins at 4oC. Supernatants were obtained by pelleting cell debris at 13,500 rpm for 15 mins at 4oC. 500 µg of protein was incubated with 1 µg of antibody and rotated at 4oC overnight. Following, samples were incubated with 1% (v/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Sigma Aldrich) blocked Pierce™ Protein A/G Agarose (25 L packed bead volume) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 45 mins at 4oC. Beads were washed with a co-immunoprecipitation buffer and bound proteins were released by boiling in a 2X gel loading buffer.   Labelled cell lines were fractionated to obtain the nuclear fraction and Co-IP was performed prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were boiled at 95°C prior to separation on a 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris precast gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 10 min at 170 V in 1x MOPS buffer, followed by gel fixation using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For in-gel digestion, samples were destained in destaining buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50% ethanol), reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digestion was performed in a 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 105-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 and searched against the human Uniprot database (95,934 entries) with preset standard settings for SILAC labelled samples and the re-quantify option was activated. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants, protein groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed and only proteins were kept that were quantified by SILAC ratios in both ‘forward’ and ‘reverse’ samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Combination treatment, Axl, Cholesterol biosynthesis, Dna damage

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore (CSI), National University of Singapore (NUS)


