### Accession
PXD026431

### Title
Protein N-glycosylation of SARS-CoV-2 infection

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 extensively N-glycosylates its spike proteins, which are essential for host cell invasion, target of vaccines, and immunotherapy. These N-glycans are predicted to help mediate spike binding to the host receptor. We investigated the essentiality of the host N-glycosylation pathway and virus N-glycans for infection.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were obtained from the via FASP Protein Digestion Kit (catalog # ab270519, Abcam, Cambridge, MA), using trypsin (Proteomics Grade, catalog # T6567, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Lyophilized intact protein samples # 1-6 (141-478 g protein) were redissolved in 200 l 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.0, containing 8 M urea (urea sample solution, USS). Protein digestion was performed with 100 l of each sample and transferred to a 1.5-mL microtube containing 200 µL USS. 100 mM DL-dithiothreitol (catalog # D0632, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each sample to reduce protein disulfide bonds and achieve complete protein unfolding. Samples were vortexed for 30 sec and then kept swaying on a nutating mixer (Nutator Mixer Model 117, TCS Scientific Corp, ) for 45 min at room temperature (RT), prior to proteome extract digestion protocol. Samples were transferred to a 30-kDa Spin Filter (FASP Kit), previously assembled on a collection tube and centrifuged for at 14,000xg for 15 min at RT. 200 µL USS was added to each Spin Filter and centrifuged at 14,000xg for 15 min RT. Flow-through from the collection tube was discarded and 100 µL of freshly prepared 10 mM iodoacetamide in USS was added to the Spin Filter and samples were subsequently subjected to incubation without mixing for 20 min in the dark at RT for alkylation. After incubation, the Spin Filters were centrifuged at 14,000xg for 10 min, at RT. 100 µl of USS was added to the Spin Filter and samples were centrifuged at 14,000xg for 15 min at RT. This step was repeated twice. Flow-through was again discarded. 100 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution (ABS) was added to the Spin Filter and the sample was centrifuged at 14,000xg for 15 min, at RT. This step was repeated twice. After USS removal by ABS, Spin Filter containing protein sample was transferred to a new collection tube and 100 µL trypsin was added to the Spin Filter, at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50.

### Data Protocol
The following parameters were used in the PD analysis: HCD MS/MS; fully tryptic peptides only; up to 2 missed cleavages; parent-ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm (monoisotopic); and fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da (in Sequest) and 0.02 Da (in PD 2.1.1.21) (monoisotopic). A filter of two-high confidence peptides per protein were applied for identifications. PD dataset was further processed through Scaffold Q+ 4.8.2 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) to obtain the protein quantification and further analysis of the MS/MS spectra. A protein threshold of 95%, peptide threshold of 90%, and a minimum of 1 peptide were used for protein validation by manual inspection of each MS/MS spectrum.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Coronavirus, Covid-19, Drug repurposing, Viral infection, N-glycosylation inhibition

### Affiliations
University of Texas at El Paso
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine: Liverpool, England,GB. Senior Lecturer (Parasitology and Vector Biology)

### Submitter
Brian Grajeda

### Lab Head
Dr Álvaro Acosta-Serrano
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine: Liverpool, England,GB. Senior Lecturer (Parasitology and Vector Biology)


