### Accession
PXD028987

### Title
Hypoxia-induced aquaporins and regulation of redox homeostasis by a trans-plasma membrane electron transport system in maize roots

### Description
Hypoxia-induced aquaporins and regulation of redox homeostasis by a trans-plasma membrane electron transport system in maize roots

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and further mass spectrometry (MS) analysis were done as described before (Hofmann et al. 2020). In short, PMs of control and stressed samples (biological replicates, n = 3) were enriched, 100 µg PM protein were washed and digested with lysine and trypsin before MS analysis. Peptides were washed and dried using ZipTips (Co. Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA) according to manufacturer´s protocol.

### Data Protocol
The samples (1 µg) were applied on a C18 column (15 cm, 50 mm, column, PepMapR RSLC, 2 mm particle size, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Measurement was done on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Proteins were identified and quantified using a UniprotKB FASTA download for Zea mays (UP000007305) and the software MaxQuant v1.6.5.0. The resulting data matrix was filtered so that there are label-free quantification (LFQs) values in more than four replicates (biological and/or technical replicates) of at least one of the treatments. Missing values were corrected with COVAIN (Sun & Weckwerth 2012). The LFQ intensities of two technical per three biological replicates were averaged for statistical analyses. Standard deviation and student´s t-test were used to determine significant changes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plant growth regulators, Root, Zea mays l., Redox homeostasis, Plasma membrane, Hypoxia, Electron transport system, Antioxidant, Aquaporin

### Affiliations
Molecular Systems Biology
University of Vienna, Dept. of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology, Div. Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Stefane Wienkoop

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Wienkoop
University of Vienna, Dept. of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology, Div. Molecular Systems Biology


