### Accession
PXD009178

### Title
Modification of the ubiquitinome by Vps11 and Vps18

### Description
We quantified by SILAC the modification of the ubiquitinome in human HEK293T cells that overexpressed Vps11 or Vps18

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC). Isotope-labeled amino acids (13C615N2-L-lysine, 13C615N4-L-arginine, >99%, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (CIL), Andover, MA) were included in the heavy SILAC medium at 100 mg/l, whereas proline was supplied at 180 mg/l (a 9-fold excess over its standard concentration in RPMI medium) in all media. Heavy or light-SILAC labeling was achieved by culturing the cells for a minimum of 2 weeks to allow for at least 5 cell divisions. Before the start of the experiments, tests were carried out to verify that heavy labeling was greater than 98% and Arg to Pro conversion was lower than 3%. Heavy-SILAC labeled cells were transfected with Vps11- or Vps18-coding plasmids and light-SILAC-labeled cells were transfected with the empty vector pCMV5 and used as a control. 4 hours before harvesting the cells, the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 and the lysosomal inhibitor Chloroquin were added to each cell dish at a final concentration of 5 µM and 10 µM, respectively.  Cell lysis, protein digestion and enrichment of GlyGly-modified peptides. 1.2 × 10e8 cells per conditions were used, which yielded approximately 11 mg of total protein. Cells were harvested, washed twice with PBS and lysed by pulse sonication in 8 M Urea, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5 and Phos-stop™ phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). After clarification by centrifugation at 15,000 ×g, heavy and light extracts were quantitated and mixed molarly 1:1 to obtain 22mg of total protein before proceeding with digestion essentially as specified in the protocol for the PTMscan system (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA). Briefly, proteins were reduced by incubation with 4.5 mM DTT for 1 h at room temperature followed by alkylation of cysteines with 30 mM chloroacetamide in the dark at room temperature. After dilution of the solution to 2 M urea, digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C by adding 1:55 (400 µg) TPCK-treated bovine trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich). A second aliquot of trypsin (60 ug)  and Lys-C (30 ug, Promega) were added to reach a final protein:enzyme ratio of 1:45 and the digestion was continued for 6 h at 37 °C. Completeness of digestion was verified by SDS-PAGE. After acidification, digests were desalted on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges, peptides were eluted with 6.0 ml of 40% acetonitrile and lyophilized.  Enrichment of GlyGly-modified peptides was carried out with the Ubiquitin remnant motif PTMscan kit (Cell Signaling Technology) according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer. Peptides after elution and lyophilization were resuspended in 1.4 ml of buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl), centrifuged and the supernatant was incubated 30 min with 80 µl of beads-bound antibody. The resin was washed and bound peptides were eluted with 2 × 55 µl of 0.15% TFA. The eluate was desalted C18 StageTip (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile for injection.   Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis Samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion trihybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced via a nanospray source to a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Peptides were separated on a custom packed nanocolumn (75 µm ID × 40 cm, 1.8 µm particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch) with a gradient from 5 to 55% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in 120 min. Full MS survey scans were performed at 120,000 resolution. All survey scans were internally calibrated using the 445.1200 background ion mass. Every sample was analysed three times with three different peptide fragmentation methods. A first general higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) method targeted peptide charge states 2+-5+ with a normalized collision energy of 32%. As most ubiquitinated peptides are charged 3+ or more, a second method was used, which selected only charge states 3+-5+. A third injection was done using a method that performed EThCD fragmentation, also on charge states 3+-5+, with activation energies at 25% (HCD) and 34% (ETD).  All data were pooled per each sample.  In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher), a maximum number of precursor ions was selected within a maximum cycle time of 3.0s. All tandem MS spectra were measured in the Orbitrap at 15’000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion of precursors was for 60s.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis. Data was analyzed and quantified using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30, which uses the Andromeda search engine [34]. The human subset of the release 2015_12 of the UNIPROTkb database was used, together with a collection of sequences of common contaminants. Mass tolerances were of 4.5 ppm (after recalibration) for the precursor and 20 ppm for tandem mass spectra. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications in addition to Lys Gly-Gly modification. Cleavage specificity was trypsin (cleavage after K, R) with two missed cleavages. Protein identifications were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) established by MaxQuant against a reversed sequence database. Sets of protein sequences which could not be discriminated based on identified peptides were listed together as protein groups and are fully reported in the tables. Details of peak quantitation and protein ratio computation and normalization by MaxQuant are described elsewhere. GlyGly modification sites were filtered by applying an Andromeda score cutoff of 40. The FDR for GlyGly sites with the parameters used was 1.07% against reverse sequences and no further filtering was applied. As the enrichment of modified peptides was only partial, it was possible to determine with MaxQuant SILAC total ratios for a certain number of proteins (2145 with a minimum of 2 peptides) present in the samples with unmodified peptides.  All subsequent filtering steps, statistics and annotation enrichment analyses were performed using the Perseus software.  A complete description of the data processing steps performed can be found in the ProteomeXchange repository , together with complete raw MaxQuant output tables.

### Publication Abstract
In response to extracellular signals, many signalling proteins associated with the plasma membrane are sorted into endosomes. This involves endosomal fusion, which depends on the complexes HOPS and CORVET. Whether and how their subunits themselves modulate signal transduction is unknown. We show that Vps11 and Vps18 (Vps11/18), two common subunits of the HOPS/CORVET complexes, are E3 ubiquitin ligases. Upon overexpression of Vps11/Vps18, we find perturbations of ubiquitination in signal transduction pathways. We specifically demonstrate that Vps11/18 regulate several signalling factors and pathways, including Wnt, estrogen receptor &#x3b1; (ER&#x3b1;), and NF&#x3ba;B. For ER&#x3b1;, we demonstrate that the Vps11/18-mediated ubiquitination of the scaffold protein PELP1 impairs the activation of ER&#x3b1; by c-Src. Thus, proteins involved in membrane traffic, in addition to performing their well-described role in endosomal fusion, fine-tune signalling in several different ways, including through ubiquitination.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Vps18, Ubiquitin, Vps11, Ptmscan

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Department of Cell Biology Université de Genève Faculté des Sciences Sciences III 30, quai Ernest-Ansermet CH - 1211 Genève 4 SWITZERLAND

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Didier Picard
Department of Cell Biology Université de Genève Faculté des Sciences Sciences III 30, quai Ernest-Ansermet CH - 1211 Genève 4 SWITZERLAND


