### Accession
PXD037765

### Title
C4PR_LIV: The SARS-CoV-2 ORF3C protein interactome in Vero cells

### Description
The SARS-CoV-2 genome encodes a multitude of accessory proteins. Using comparative genomic approaches, an additional accessory protein, ORF3c, has been predicted to be encoded within the ORF3a sgmRNA. Expression of ORF3c during infection has been confirmed independently by ribosome profiling. Despite ORF3c also being present in the 2002-2003 SARS-CoV, its function has remained unexplored. Here we show that ORF3c localises only to mitochondria during infection, where it inhibits innate immunity by restricting IFN-β production, but not NF-κB activation or JAK-STAT signalling downstream of type I IFN stimulation. We find that ORF3c acts after stimulation with cytoplasmic RNA helicases RIG-I or MDA5 or adaptor protein MAVS, but not after TRIF, TBK1 or phospho-IRF3 stimulation. ORF3c co-immunoprecipitates with the antiviral proteins MAVS and PGAM5 and induces MAVS cleavage by caspase-3. Unlike early lineage SARS-CoV-2 strains, delta variant strains lack intact ORF3c and do not cleave MAVS to the same extent. Together, these data provide insight into an uncharacterised mechanism of innate immune evasion by this important human pathogen. We suggest a model whereby ORF3c inhibits PGAM5-induced mitophagy and instead induces apoptosis, accompanied by caspase-3 activation.  This repository contains data associated with the SARS-CoV-2 ORF3C SILAC AP-MS portions of this work.

### Sample Protocol
Vero cells were grown in high glucose DMEM lacking arginine and lysine (Life Technologies), with 10% dialysed (7 kDa MWCO) foetal calf serum and supplemented with light (R0K0), medium (R6K4) or heavy (R10K8) stable isotope labelled arginine and lysine. Cells were maintained in labelled medium for 6 passages before transfection and immunoprecipitation. Labels were switched for the different replicates to control for any impact of the different culture media on cell growth/gene expression as follows: replicate 1 (L: HA-3c, M: Control), replicate 2 (M: HA-3c, H: Control) and replicate 3 (H: HA-3c, L: Control).  Vero cells were transfected with ORF3c-HA as described above. At 24 h post-transfection, monolayers were washed in ice-cold phosphate buffered saline and co-immunoprecipitation of the HA-tagged protein and interacting proteins was performed using a commercially available kit (HA Tag Magnetic IP/Co-IP kit, Pierce). An input sample (10%) was retained for analysis by immunoblot prior to binding the lysates to the magnetic anti-HA beads. After removing the remains of the wash buffer (third and final wash), samples were heated to 95℃ for 5 min in buffer consisting of 200 mM HEPES pH 8, 1% SDS and 1% NP40. Beads were pelleted and the supernatant retained. Equal volumes of the control and HA-3c samples for each replicate were then combined and the samples were reduced, alkylated and trypsin-digested using the SP3 method (REF Hughes 2019 Nature Protocols).   LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted on a Dionex 3000 coupled in line to a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer. Digests were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 µm inner diameter, C18, 3 µm, 100 ˚A) at 5 µL per min in 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. After 3 min, the trap column was set in line with an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 15 × 50 cm inner diameter, C18, 2 µm, 100 ˚A) (Dionex). Peptides were loaded in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and eluted with a linear gradient of 3.8–50% buffer B (HPLC grade acetonitrile 80% (v/v) with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 95 min at 300 nL per min, followed by a washing step (5 min at 99% solvent B) and an equilibration step (25 min at 3.8% solvent). The Q-Exactive-HF was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z over a scan range of 350–2000 m/z. The top 16 most abundant ions with charge states +2 to +5 from the survey scan were selected for MS2 analysis at 60,000 m/z resolution with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, with a (N)CE of 30%. The maximum injection times were 100 and 90 ms for MS1 and MS2, respectively, and AGC targets were 3e6 and 1e5, respectively. Dynamic exclusion (20 s) was enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was conducted in MaxQuant 1.6.7.0 (REF Tyanova Nat Prot 2016). Options were set at default unless specified. Multiplicity was set at 3, with Arg6 and Lys4 set as ‘medium’ labels and Arg10 and Lys8 set as ‘heavy’ labels. Digestion was Trypsin/P, permitting up to two missed cleavages. Oxidation (M) and N-terminal protein acetylation were selected as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Under instrument settings, intensity was set to ‘total sum’. Fasta files containing the Uniprot African Green Monkey proteome (Chlorocebus sabeus, 19,223 entries, downloaded 16 May 2020) and a custom .fasta file containing HA-3c protein sequences were used for the search databases.  Downstream data analysis was conducted in Matlab R2019a from the MaxQuant proteinGroups output file. Reverse database hits and common contaminants (MaxQuant contaminant list) were removed. Within each replicate, data were first normalised for equal protein loading based on the median SILAC intensity of shared proteins. Rows with >3 missing values were removed. Missing data were imputed (knn), and data were converted to HA-3C/HA-only ratios for each replicate, and then re-normalised across the three replicates by dividing by column median. A one-sample t-test was used to determine statistical significance. Multiple hypothesis testing was controlled using the approach of Storey 2002 (REF Storey 2002), with all meeting a FDR < 0.05. The Matlab scripts used for all data processing and figure generation with this data are available from the Emmott lab Github page at: https://github.com/emmottlab/sars2_3c/.

### Publication Abstract
The SARS-CoV-2 genome encodes a multitude of accessory proteins. Using comparative genomic approaches, an additional accessory protein, ORF3c, has been predicted to be encoded within the ORF3a sgmRNA. Expression of ORF3c during infection has been confirmed independently by ribosome profiling. Despite ORF3c also being present in the 2002-2003 SARS-CoV, its function has remained unexplored. Here we show that ORF3c localizes to mitochondria, where it inhibits innate immunity by restricting IFN-&#x3b2; production, but not NF-&#x3ba;B activation or JAK-STAT signaling downstream of type I IFN stimulation. We find that ORF3c is inhibitory after stimulation with cytoplasmic RNA helicases RIG-I or MDA5 or adaptor protein MAVS, but not after TRIF, TBK1 or phospho-IRF3 stimulation. ORF3c co-immunoprecipitates with the antiviral proteins MAVS and PGAM5 and induces MAVS cleavage by caspase-3. Together, these data provide insight into an uncharacterized mechanism of innate immune evasion by this important human pathogen.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Virus, Ap-ms, Coronavirus, Ip, Orc3c

### Affiliations
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research, Dept. Biochemistry & Systems Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK

### Submitter
Ed Emmott

### Lab Head
Dr Ed Emmott
Centre for Proteome Research, Dept. Biochemistry & Systems Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK


