### Accession
PXD010550

### Title
A robust and universal metaproteomics workflow for research studies and routine diagnostics within 24 hours

### Description
A new workflow for metaproteomics is presented in this study and is shown to enable the analysis of a broad range of different samples in only 24 h. The standardized sample preparation includes the combined cell lysis and phenol extraction in a ball mill followed by FASP digestion. The bioinformatic workflow using the MetaProteomeAnalyzer software was expanded with new functionalities such as annotation of metaproteins via protein BLAST or an integrated compare tool. The new workflow was shown to produce at least two times the protein identifications than previous iterations. Through many individual improvements combined into a single standardized workflow, a drastic increase in the quantity and quality of generated results was achieved.

### Sample Protocol
FASP digestion (A4) For the FASP digestion [Additional file X SOP FASP Digest] 200 µg protein extract in 200 µL urea buffer were loaded on the FASP filter (Pall Nanosep 10K Omega, MWCO 10 kDa)) and centrifuged (10 -20 min, RT, 10.000). In particular, soil and human fecal samples required longer centrifugation time until all liquid passed through the FASP filter. Reduction and alkylation of proteins were carried out by addition of 100 µL DTT (20 min, 56 °C, 300 rpm) and 100 µL iodoacetamide (IAA) (20 min, RT, 300 rpm, in the dark). After each of these two steps the liquid was removed by centrifugation (5 min, RT, 10,000 g) and the flow through was discarded. Subsequently the proteins were washed for 2 min with 100 µL 8 M urea as well as three times with 100 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and centrifuged afterwards (5 min, RT, 10,000 g). After removal of the flow through, trypsin was added on the FASP filter (2 h, 37 °C, 300 rpm) in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1 to 100. Subsequently, the sample was centrifuged (5 min, RT, 10,000 g). Remaining peptides were rinsed through the filter by addition of 50 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50 µL ultrapure water (MILLIPORE Q-POD Merck, Darmstadt, Deutschland) as well as further a further centrifugation step (5 min, RT, 10,000 g) at a time. Finally, 30 µL were acidified by addition of 3 µL 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), centrifuged (10 min, 4 °C, 10,000 g) and transferred into a HPLC vial. In-gel digestion (B6) Protein fractions from the SDS-PAGE were cut out, cut into cubes of approx. 1 mm side length and transferred into a 2 mL reaction tube. For removal of the Coomassie dye the gel cubes were incubated in 900 µL washing solution twice, once overnight and once the next day for 1 h on a shaker (RT, 150 rpm). After a further washing step with 900 µL acetonitrile (10 min, RT, 150 rpm), the gel cubes were dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Digital Series SpeedVac SPD121P, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Reduction and alkylation of proteins was carried out by addition of 900 µL DTT (30 min, RT, 150 rpm) and 900 µL IAA (30 min, RT, 150 rpm, in the dark). After each of these two steps the gel cubes were incubated in 900 µL acetonitrile (10 min, RT, 150 rpm). Subsequently, the gel cubes were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (10 min, RT, 150 rpm) and acetonitrile (10 min, RT, 150 rpm). For the tryptic digestion of the proteins to the peptide 200 µL trypsin buffer was added over night (37 °C, 150 rpm). The next day the supernatant was collected into a new 2 mL reaction tube. Remaining peptides were washed out of the gel by incubation in extraction buffer 1 (30 min, RT, 150 rpm) and extraction buffer 2 (30 min, RT, 150 rpm). Both extracts were collected in a new reaction tube. Finally, the peptide solution was dried in the vacuum centrifuge and stored at -20 °C. In preparation for the LC-MS/MS measurement, dried peptides were dissolved in solvent A (98% ultrapure water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA), centrifuged (30 min, 4 °C, 13,000 g) and transferred into a HPLC via. LC-MS/MS measurement (A5, B7) Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nanosplitless liquid chromatography system coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite™ Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap MS/MS (MS) (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). After injection, peptides were loaded isocratically on a trap column (Dionex Acclaim, nano trap column, 100 μmi.d. x 2 cm, PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, nanoViper) with a flow rate of 7 μL/min chromatographic liquid phase A (98% ultrapure water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA) for desalting and concentration. Chromatographic separation was performed on a Dionex Acclaim PepMap C18 RSLC nano reversed phase column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter and 250 mm length) at 40 °C column temperature. A flow rate of 300 nL/min was applied using a binary A/B-solvent gradient (solvent A: 98% ultrapure water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 10% ultrapure water, 10% trifluorethanol, 0.1% formic acid) starting with 4% B for 4 min, continuing with a linear increase to 55% B within 29 min, followed by a column wash with 90% B for 5 min and a re-equilibration with 4% B for 25 min. For mass spectrometry acquisition a data dependent MS/MS method was chosen. For the conducted measurements MS was operated in positive ion mode and precursor ions were acquired in the orbital trap of the hybrid MS at a resolution of 30,000 and an m/z range of 350-2,000. Subsequently, fragment ion scan was proceeded in the linear ion trap of the hybrid MS with a mass range and a scan rate with “normal” parameter settings for the top 20 most intense precursors selected for collision induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification using the MPA (A7) Orbitrap Elite™ Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap MS/MS measurements raw data files (raw file format) were processed by the Proteome Discoverer Software 1.4 (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and were exported in the Mascot Generic File format (mgf). Subsequently, mgf files were uploaded into the MPA software in the new version 2.12 and the release version 1.0.5 that was previously published [Muth and Behne 2015].  Protein identification was carried out using X!Tandem [Craig 2004] and OMMSA [Geer 2004]. Furthermore, protein database searches were performed with MASCOT (version 2.5, Matrix Science, London, England) [Perkins 1999] through the ProteinScape software (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Deutschland, (version 4.0.3 315) [Chamrad 2007]. All protein database searches used the following parameters: enzyme trypsin, one missed cleavage, monoisotopic mass, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) as fixed modification, oxidation (methionine) as variable modifications, ±10 ppm precursor and ± 0.5 Da MS/MS fragment tolerance, 113C and +2/+3 charged peptide ions. The Mascot search results (dat file format) were uploaded to the MPA software (only version 2.12).  For all samples UniProtKB/SwissProt (release November 2017) was used as protein database. Moreover, four metagenomes were appended to the UniProtKB/SwissProt database resulting in four different protein databases. The four metagenomes were created from biogas plant samples [Schlüter 2008, Rademacher 2012, Wirth 2012, Zakrzewski 2012], human fecal samples [Qin 2012], soil samples [JGI 2015] and wastewater treatment plant samples [Aalborg ???]. Peptides found by X!Tandem and OMMSA searches, where associated with all proteins that contain them using a dedicated peptide database created from the four protein databases prior to searches. An FDR of 5% was applied to soil and compost samples and an FDR of 1% was applied to all other samples. In MPA version 2.12, identified proteins without taxonomic and functional classification were annotated with UniProtKB metadata by using protein BLAST (NCBI-Blast-version 2.6.0 [Altschul 1990]) against the UniProtKB/SwissProt database using an e-value cutoff of 10-4.  Subsequently, all protein BLAST proposals with the best identity were merged and used to annotate a protein. Metaproteins were generated using the shared peptide rule. Several statistics for each sample were collected using the MPA software [Additional file X ANALYSIS Sample Metadata] and the metaproteins and metaprotein taxonomies were exported as comma separated value files (version 2.12 and version 1.0.5) [Additional file X DATA Excel Import of Metaprotein Lists]. The Compare Panel feature of MPA version 2.12 was used to create metaproteins among all 54 samples and the resulting table was exported for later cluster analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The investigation of microbial proteins by mass spectrometry (metaproteomics) is a key technology for simultaneously assessing the taxonomic composition and the functionality of microbial communities in medical, environmental, and biotechnological applications. We present an improved metaproteomics workflow using an updated sample preparation and a new version of the MetaProteomeAnalyzer software for data analysis. High resolution by multidimensional separation (GeLC, MudPIT) was sacrificed to aim at fast analysis of a broad range of different samples in less than 24 h. The improved workflow generated at least two times as many protein identifications than our previous workflow, and a drastic increase of taxonomic and functional annotations. Improvements of all aspects of the workflow, particularly the speed, are first steps toward potential routine clinical diagnostics (i.e., fecal samples) and analysis of technical and environmental samples. The MetaProteomeAnalyzer is provided to the scientific community as a central remote server solution at www.mpa.ovgu.de.

### Keywords
Sample preparation, Environmental proteomics, Microbial communities, Software, Mass spectrometry, Bioinformatics

### Affiliations
Otto-von-Guericke-University / Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems, Magdeburg, Germany
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg

### Submitter
Kay Schallert

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Benndorf
Otto-von-Guericke-University / Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Technical Systems, Magdeburg, Germany


