### Accession
PXD006436

### Title
Exhaled breath condensate biomarkers for the early diagnosis of lung cancer using proteomics

### Description
The present study explored whether the proteomic analysis of exhaled breath condensate (EBC) may provide potential biomarkers for their use in non-invasive screening strategies for the early detection of lung cancer (LC). EBC was collected from 192 individuals (49 control volunteers, 49 risk factor-smoking volunteers, 46 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients and 48 LC patients). Using LC-MS/MS a total of 348 different proteins with a different pattern among the four groups were identified in EBC samples. Despite the great variability observed among individuals, significantly more proteins were identified in the EBC from LC patients compared to other groups. Furthermore, the average number of proteins identified per sample was significantly higher in LC patients and Receiver Operating Characteristic curve analysis showed an area under the curve of 0.8, indicating diagnostic value. Proteins frequently detected in EBC, such as dermcidin and hornerin, along with others much less frequently detected, such as hemoglobin and histone isoforms, were identified. Cytokeratins (KRTs) were the most abundant proteins in EBC samples and levels of KRT6A, KRT6B and KRT6C isoforms were significantly higher in samples from LC patients. Moreover, the amount of most KRTs in EBC samples from LC patients showed a significant positive correlation with tumor size. Finally, we used a random forest algorithm to generate a robust model using EBC protein data for the diagnosis of patients with LC. Thus, this study demonstrates that the proteomic analysis of EBC samples is an appropriated approach to develop biomarkers for the diagnosis of lung cancer.

### Sample Protocol
EBC collection Exhaled breath condensate was collected by using the EcoScreen 2 device (FILT Lungen- und ThoraxdiagnostikGmbH, Berlin, Germany). Subjects breathed wearing a 136 nose clip at a normal frequency and tidal volume for a 15 minutes period through a disposable mouthpiece and a pneumotachograph to measure respiratory flow. This is connected to different valves to allow the separation 138 of inspiration from expiration, then the sample is led into the cooling device, condensed and separated into two disposable polyethylene bags at -20 ºC for physical separation between the air exhaled from the upper airways and the distal airways. This configuration makes saliva contamination  highly unlikely. Moreover, the device had a protection filter (Scharlab, Barcelona,  Spain) over the inlet air valve to avoid the entrance of exogenous compounds and  particles from the room atmosphere. To collect the EBC, the fluid was concentrated in  one corner of the bag and was pierced with a syringe with a needle, the condensate  was then transferred to 1.5 ml tubes in 100 μl aliquots and immediately stored at -80 ºC  for subsequent analysis. Sample preparation   In all groups, 400 μl of EBC from distal airways was used for analysis. Samples were dried by evaporation centrifugation and dissolved with 20 μl of 60 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate(ABC). Cysteine residues were reduced by 2 mM DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60ºC for 20 min. Sulfhydrygroups were alkylated with 5 mM Iodoacetamide (IAM) in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. IAM excess was neutralized with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature. Sample was subjected to trypsin digestion with 260 ng (100 ng/μl) of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 60 mM ABC at 37ºC overnight. The reaction was stopped with Trifluoroacetic Acid (TFA) at a final concentration of 0.1%. The final peptide mixture was concentrated in a speed vacuum to a final volume of 6μl. Mass spectrometry analysis  For liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) 5 μl of  each sample were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3μ C18-CL,  350umx0.5mm; Eksigen) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3μl/min during 5 min. The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column 165 (LC Column, 3 μ C18-CL,  75umx12cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% formic acid (FA).  Elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5-35% B in A for 30 min. (A: 0.1% FA;  B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were analyzed in a nanoESI  qQTOF mass spectrometer (6600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The tripleTOF was operated  in information-dependent acquisition mode, in with a 0.26s TOF MS scan from 350-  1250 m/z, was performed, followed by 0.05-s production scans from 100-1600 m/z on  the 50 most intense 2-5 charged ions. The system sensitivity was controlled with 2.5 fmol  of 6 proteins (LC Packings).

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot (ProteinPilot v4.6. search engine, ABSciex) default parameters were used to generate peak list directly from 5600 TripleTof wiff files. The Paragon algorithm  of ProteinPilot was used to search Expasy protein database (616203 sequences;  181334896 residues) with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation,  taxonomy restriction to Human, and the search effort set to through. To avoid using the  same spectral evidence in more than one protein, the identified proteins are grouped  based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein-Pilot Progoup algorithm. Thus, proteins  sharing MS/MS spectra are grouped, regardless of the peptide sequence assigned.  The protein within each group that can explain more spectral data with confidence was  the primary protein of the group. Only the proteins of the group for which there is  individual evidence (unique peptides with enough confidence) were also listed, usually  toward the end of the protein list.  Proteins showing unused score >1.3, which reflects the amount of total, unique  peptide evidence related to a given protein, were identified with confidence ≥ 95%,  according to the following equation: ProtScore = -log(1-(percent confidence/100).

### Publication Abstract
We explored whether the proteomic analysis of exhaled breath condensate (EBC) may provide biomarkers for noninvasive screening for the early detection of lung cancer (LC). EBC was collected from 192 individuals [49 control (C), 49 risk factor-smoking (S), 46 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and 48 LC]. With the use of liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry, 348 different proteins with a different pattern among the four groups were identified in EBC samples. Significantly more proteins were identified in the EBC from LC compared with other groups (C: 12.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.3; S: 15.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1; COPD: 14&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.6; LC: 24.2&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;3.6; <i>P</i> = 0.0001). Furthermore, the average number of proteins identified per sample was significantly higher in LC patients, and receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) analysis showed an area under the curve of 0.8, indicating diagnostic value. Proteins frequently detected in EBC, such as dermcidin and hornerin, along with others much less frequently detected, such as hemoglobin and histones, were identified. Cytokeratins (KRTs) were the most abundant proteins in EBC samples, and levels of KRT6A, KRT6B, and KRT6C isoforms were significantly higher in samples from LC patients (<i>P</i> = 0.0031, 0.0011, and 0.0009, respectively). Moreover, the amount of most KRTs in EBC samples from LC patients showed a significant positive correlation with tumor size. Finally, we used a random forest algorithm to generate a robust model using EBC protein data for the diagnosis of patients with LC where the area under the ROC curve obtained indicated a good classification (82%). Thus this study demonstrates that the proteomic analysis of EBC samples is an appropriated approach to develop biomarkers for the diagnosis of lung cancer.

### Keywords
Lung cancer, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Exhaled breath condensate

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Instituto Maimónides de Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain. Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en Cáncer (CIBER-ONC), Madrid, Spain Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Oncología Médica, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Spain.

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Rodríguez-Ariza
Instituto Maimónides de Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain. Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en Cáncer (CIBER-ONC), Madrid, Spain Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Oncología Médica, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Spain.


