### Accession
PXD017449

### Title
comprehensive SAAVs detection in PANC-1 cell line

### Description
Three different strategies were applied for SAAVs detection. We predicted deleterious SAAVs using online AssVar and confirm 3 SAAVs using SRM

### Sample Protocol
All samples were frationed with Pierce high pH reversed phase peptide fractionation kit or low-pH nano RPLC. The samples were meausred in Orbitrap Fusion or Q-Exactive HF. SRM were performed in TSQ Vantage.

### Data Protocol
Three strategies were applied in this study. One is SEQUEST algorithm using Swiss-CanSAAVs database. Another one is Mascot, SAVControl algorithm using CanProVar 2.0. The third one is MetaMorpheus algorithm using RNA-seq database.

### Publication Abstract
Identifying single amino acid variants (SAAVs) in cancer is critical for precision oncology. Several advanced algorithms are now available to identify SAAVs, but attempts to combine different algorithms and optimize them on large data sets to achieve a more comprehensive coverage of SAAVs have not been implemented. Herein, we report an expanded detection of SAAVs in the PANC-1 cell line using three different strategies, which results in the identification of 540 SAAVs in the mass spectrometry data. Among the set of 540 SAAVs, 79 are evaluated as deleterious SAAVs based on analysis using the novel AssVar software in which one of the driver mutations found in each protein of KRAS, TP53, and SLC37A4 is further validated using independent selected reaction monitoring (SRM) analysis. Our study represents the most comprehensive discovery of SAAVs to date and the first large-scale detection of deleterious SAAVs in the PANC-1 cell line. This work may serve as the basis for future research in pancreatic cancer and personal immunotherapy and treatment.

### Keywords
Panc-1, Lc-ms/ms, Saavs, Srm

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Surgery, University of Michigan

### Submitter
Zhijing Tan

### Lab Head
Dr David M. Lubman
Department of Surgery, University of Michigan


