### Accession
PXD027919

### Title
Cross-species analysis of viral nucleic acid interactors identifies TAOKs as immune regulators

### Description
The cell intrinsic antiviral response of multicellular organisms developed over millions of years and critically relies on the ability to sense and eliminate viral nucleic acids. Here we used an affinity proteomics approach in evolutionary distant species (human, mouse and fly) to identify proteins that are conserved in their ability to associate with diverse viral nucleic acids. This approach revealed a conserved core of proteins targeting viral genetic material and species-specific interactants. Functional characterization of the influence of 181 candidates on replication of 6 distinct viruses in human cells and flies identified 128 nucleic acid binding proteins with an impact on virus growth. We identified the family of TAO kinases (TAOK1, -2 and -3) as dsRNA-interacting antiviral proteins and show their requirement in type-I interferon induction. Depletion of TAO kinases in mammals or flies led to an impaired response to virus infection characterized by a reduced induction of interferon stimulated genes in mammals and impaired expression of srg1 and diedel in flies. Overall, our study reveals a by far larger interaction space between viral genetic material and host factors than anticipated so far, attesting to the ancestral roots of innate immunity and to the lineage-specific pressures exerted by viruses.

### Sample Protocol
Plasmids coding for truncated (amino acids 1-993) and affinity-tagged (C-terminal V5 tag) wild-type rat TAOK2 or mutated (R702C or D151A) rat TAOK2 variants, or coding for V5-tagged control baits, EGFP and PGAM5, were transfected (PEI) into HEK293T cells. Following induction of bait expression with doxycycline for 1 day, cells were left untreated or stimulated by transfection (PEI) of 5 µg/ml poly(I:C) for 4 hours. For each bait and condition, quadruplicate affinity purifications were performed as described previously 56. Briefly, cell pellets from two 15-cm dishes were lysed in TAP lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2% (v/v) NP-40, 5% (v/v) glycerol, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 0.5% (v/v) 750 U/μl Sm DNase) and sonicated (5 min, 4 °C, 30 s on, 30 s off, low settings; Bioruptor, Diagenode). Following normalization of protein concentrations, cleared lysates were incubated with 20 µl anti-V5-agarose affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich, A7345) with constant agitation for 3 h at 4 °C. Non-specifically bound proteins were removed by four subsequent washes with lysis buffer followed by three detergent-removal steps with washing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 5% (v/v) glycerol). Enriched proteins were denatured by addition of SDC lysis buffer (4% SDC, 100 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.5), followed by reduction and alkylation for 5 min at 45 °C with TCEP (10 mM) and CAA (40 mM) and digested overnight at 37 °C using trypsin (1:100 w/w, enzyme/protein, Sigma-Aldrich) and LysC (1:100 w/w, enzyme/protein, Wako). Peptides were desalted and concentrated using SDB-RPS StageTips (Empore). In brief, samples were diluted with 1% TFA in isopropanol to a final volume of 200 μl and loaded onto StageTips, subsequently washed with 200 μl of 1% TFA in isopropanol and 200 μl 0.2% TFA/ 2% ACN. Peptides were eluted with 75 μl of 1.25% ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH) in 80% ACN and dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Eppendorf, Concentrator Plus). Peptides were resuspended in buffer A* (0.2% TFA, 2% ACN) before LC–MS/MS analysis. A fraction of the cell pellets used for affinity purification was further prepared for full proteome analysis. To this end, cell pellets were lysed in SDC lysis buffer (4% SDC in 100 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.5) for 5 min at 95°C and sonicated (15 min, 4 °C, 30 s on, 30 s off, high settings; Bioruptor, Diagenode). Following normalization of protein concentrations, proteins were reduced and alkylated for 5 min at 45 °C with TCEP (10 mM) and CAA (40 mM), and digested overnight at 37 °C using trypsin (1:100 w/w, enzyme/protein, Sigma-Aldrich) and LysC (1:100 w/w, enzyme/protein, Wako). Peptides were purified with SDB-RPS StageTips as described for TAOK2 AP-MS samples. Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase column (50 cm, 60 °C; 75 μm inner diameter; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm silica beads; Dr. Maisch) and separated using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 5% to 30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over a period of 120 min. Eluting peptides were directly analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data-dependent acquisition included repeating cycles of one MS1 full scan (300–1650 m/z, resolution (R) of 60,000 at m/z 200) at an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3×106, followed by 15 MS2 scans of the highest abundant isolated and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmented peptide precursors (R of 15,000 at m/z 200). For MS2 scans, collection of isolated peptide precursors was limited by an AGC target of 1×105 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. Isolation and fragmentation of the same peptide precursor was eliminated by dynamic exclusion for 20 s. The isolation window of the quadrupole was set to 1.4 m/z and HCD was set to a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27 %. All data was acquired in profile mode using positive polarity.

### Data Protocol
RAW files of the TAOK2-AP dataset were processed with MaxQuant (v.1.6.14.0) using the standard settings, label free quantitation (LFQ) and match between runs enabled. Spectra were searched against forward and reverse sequences of the reviewed human proteome including isoforms (Uniprot KB) as well as EGFP protein sequences by the built-in Andromeda search engine. The MaxQuant output was further analyzed using Perseus (version 1.6.15.0).

### Publication Abstract
The cell intrinsic antiviral response of multicellular organisms developed over millions of years and critically relies on the ability to sense and eliminate viral nucleic acids. Here we use an affinity proteomics approach in evolutionary distant species (human, mouse and fly) to identify proteins that are conserved in their ability to associate with diverse viral nucleic acids. This approach shows a core of orthologous proteins targeting viral genetic material and species-specific interactions. Functional characterization of the influence of 181 candidates on replication of 6 distinct viruses in human cells and flies identifies 128 nucleic acid binding proteins with an impact on virus growth. We identify the family of TAO kinases (TAOK1, -2 and -3) as dsRNA-interacting antiviral proteins and show their requirement for type-I interferon induction. Depletion of TAO kinases in mammals or flies leads to an impaired response to virus infection characterized by a reduced induction of interferon stimulated genes in mammals and impaired expression of srg1 and diedel in flies. Overall, our study shows a larger set of proteins able to mediate the interaction between viral genetic material and host factors than anticipated so far, attesting to the ancestral roots of innate immunity and to the lineage-specific pressures exerted by viruses.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology, Technical University Munich
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Urban

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany


