### Accession
PXD032798

### Title
Human foreskin proteome with aSTI

### Description
There is scant data on the mechanisms through which asymptomatic STIs (aSTIs) alter risk of HIV acquisition in the male genital tract. Foreskin removal lowers the risk of HIV acquisition, but molecular events leading to this protection are unclear.  Here we show that an asymptomatic urethral infection with Chlamydia trachomatis significantly  alters  the foreskin epithelial proteome composition. We developed and optimised a shotgun liquid chromatography coupled tandem mass spectrometry  based proteomics approach and applied this to foreskins collected at the time of medical male circumcision from 16 aSTI+ cis-gender men and 10 age-matched STI- controls. We used a novel bioinformatic metaproteomic pipeline to detect differentially expressed proteins.  Gene enrichment ontology analysis revealed proteins associated with inflammatory and immune activation function in both inner and outer foreskin from men with an aSTI. Neutrophil activation/degranulation and viral-evasion proteins were significantly enriched in foreskins from men with aSTI whereas homotypic cell-cell adhesion proteins were enriched in foreskin tissue from men without an STI.  Collectively, our data show that an asymptomatic urethral sexually transmitted infection result in profound alterations in epitheial tissue that potentially causes depletion of barrier integrity and function and that may encourage HIV susceptibilty.

### Sample Protocol
Sixteen men (ages 15-24 years) with aSTIs ( 8 with Chlamydia Trachomatis only infection or Chlamydia Trachomatis and/or other aSTI ) were age matched to 10 control samples without any detectable aSTI. Men with symptomatic STI’s were excluded from the study and the presence of aSTI in urine samples was detected using real-time multiplex PCR (M-PCR) assays that detect Neisseria gonorrhoeae (NG), Mycoplasma genitalium (MG), Trichomonas vaginalis (TV), Chlamydia trachomatis (CT), and Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 & 2 (HSV 1 & 2).In solution digestion of FS tissue in Guanidine hydrochloride was performed and peptides mass spectra acquired in a data dependent manner on a Thermo Scientific Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used to analyse mass spectra using a metaproteome data generated using the MetaNovo pipeline. Statistical testing and relative quantification was perfomed using MSstats. Gene ontology was perfomed using the TopGO package in the FGNet framework.

### Publication Abstract
There is limited data on the role of asymptomatic STIs (aSTIs) on the risk of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) acquisition in the male genital tract (MGT). The impact of foreskin removal on lowering HIV acquisition is well described, but molecular events leading to HIV acquisition are unclear. Here, in this pilot study, we show that asymptomatic urethral infection with <i>Chlamydia trachomatis</i> (CT) significantly impacts the foreskin proteome composition. We developed and optimized a shotgun liquid chromatography coupled tandem mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics approach and utilized this on foreskins collected at medical male circumcision (MMC) from 16 aSTI<sup>+</sup> men and 10 age-matched STI- controls. We used a novel bioinformatic metaproteomic pipeline to detect differentially expressed (DE) proteins. Gene enrichment ontology analysis revealed proteins associated with inflammatory and immune activation function in both inner and outer foreskin from men with an aSTI. Neutrophil activation/degranulation and viral-evasion proteins were significantly enriched in foreskins from men with aSTI, whereas homotypic cell-cell adhesion proteins were enriched in foreskin tissue from men without an aSTI. Collectively, our data show that asymptomatic urethral sexually transmitted infections result in profound alterations in epithelial tissue that are associated with depletion of barrier integrity and immune activation.

### Keywords
Hiv, Foreskin, Mgt

### Affiliations
Division of Medical Virology, Department of Pathology
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
Nyaradzo Chigorimbo-Tsikiwa

### Lab Head
Dr Nyaradzo Chigorimbo-Tsikiwa
Division of Medical Virology, Department of Pathology


