### Accession
PXD028594

### Title
Radiotherapy changes the salivary proteome in head and neck cancer patients: evaluation before, during and after treatment

### Description
Objectives: Salivary glands are affected during radiotherapy in the head and neck region, leading to a reduction in salivary flow and changes its composition. Besides negatively affecting the oral soft tissues, this can also lead to dental impairment. Thus, we evaluated the effect of radiotherapy in the proteomic profile of the saliva in patients with head-and-neck-cancer (HNC). Materials and methods: HNC patients had their saliva collected before (BRT), during (2-5 weeks; DRT) and after (3-4 months; ART) radiotherapy. Saliva was also collected from healthy volunteers (control; C). Samples were processed for proteomic analysis. Results: In total 1.055 proteins were identified, among which 46 were common to all groups, while 86, 86, 286 and 395 were exclusively found in C, BRT, DRT and ART, respectively. Remarkably, alpha-enolase was increased 35-fold DRT compared with BRT, while proline-rich proteins were decreased. ART there was a 16-fold increase in scaffold attachment factor-B1 and a 3-fold decrease in alpha-enolase and several cystatins. When compared with C, salivary proteins of BRT patients showed increases cystatin-C, lysozyme C, histatin-1 and proline-rich proteins. Conclusion/Clinical revelance: Both HNC and radiotherapy remarkably change the salivary protein composition. Altogether, our results, for the first time, suggest investigating alpha-enolase levels in saliva DRT in future studies as a possible biomarker and strategy to predict the efficiency of the treatment. Moreover, our data provide important insights for designing dental products that are more effective for these patients and contribute to a better understanding of the progressive changes in salivary proteins induced by radiotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
The protocol previously standardized by our group was followed Ventura et al, 2018. However, in the present study, the analyses were done in biological triplicates, after pooling samples from 3 volunteers for each group. Briefly, the tubes containing the supernatants collected from the unstimulated saliva were defrosted immersed in ice. A pool of each group was performed in triplicate, containing 333.33 μL of saliva from each volunteer, which was transfered to new tubes. Therefore, each 3 saliva samples (from 3 different individuals) were pooled in order to obtain 3 samples with 1000 μL of saliva for each group tested (BRT, DRT, ART and C). The proteins from the saliva samples were extracted using a volume similar to the samples (1:1). Then 1000 μL of an extraction solution containing 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at pH 7.8 was added in the samples. Samples were vortexed for 10 min at 4 ° C, sonicated for 5 min and centrifuged at 20,817 xg for 10 min at 4 ° C. These extraction procedures were repeated one more time. After extraction, 50 mM NH4HCO3 (1.5 X sample volume) was added, in order to reduce the concentration of urea and thiourea and avoid interference in the digestion. The samples were concentrated with Amicon tubes (Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units - Merck Millipore®, Tullagreen, County Cork, Ireland) and centrifuged at 4,500 xg at 4 °C to a volume of approximately 150 μL.  The total protein quantification was performed by Bradford method (Bio-Rad Bradford Assays, Hercules, California, USA) and the samples were then reduced (5 mM dithiothreitol, Bio Rad Laboratories, Canada) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, Buckinghamshire UK). In sequence, 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.8 were added and then digestion was carried out for 14 h at 37 °C by the addition of 2% (w/w) trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce Trypsin Protease, Rockford, lL, USA). Digestion was stopped by the addition of 5% formic acid solution. Samples were desalted and purified using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, Illinois, USA). A 1-μL aliquot of each sample was removed for protein quantification by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad Bradford Assays, Hercules, Califórnia, USA). Samples were then resuspended in 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid for nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
and 0.1% formic acid for nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS. Data acquisition was performed by Xevo G2-S mass spectrometer coupled to the nanoACQUITY UPLC (booth from Waters, Manchester, UK) controlled by MassLynx v.4.1 (Waters, Manchester, UK). Data collection was in data independent acquisition mode (LC-MSE), and the mass range from 50 to 200 m/z, that system was used for the peptide analysis, exactly as previously described Ventura et al, 2017; Ventura et al, 2018. All samples were analyzed in technical triplicate, thus totaling 9 analyses for each group. The software ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) version 3.0 (Waters, Manchester, UK) was used to process and search for continuous LC-MSE data. The proteins were identified using the software's ion counting algorithm, and a search was performed on the Homo sapiens database (revised only, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot) downloaded in October 2019 from UniProtKB (http: //www.uniprot .org).  Protein Lynx Global Service software (PLGS, v 3.0, Waters, Manchester, UK) was used for analyzing nine raw MS files from each group for the label-free quantitative analysis. In the quantitative analysis, the proteins identified with a confidence score higher than 95% were included. The identical peptides from each triplicate by sample were pooled according to mass accuracy (<10 ppm) and the retention time tolerance <0.25 min, using the clustering software included in the PLGS. The difference in expression between the groups was analyzed by t test (p <0.05) Ventura et al, 2017; Taira et al, 2018. The following relevant comparisons were performed: DRT x BRT; ART x BRT; ART x DRT; BRT x C; DRT x C; ART x C. Sample identification: 1 to 3: C, control; 4 to 6: BRT; 7 to 9: DRT; 10 to 12: ART.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dental caries, Biomarkes, Proteomics, Head and neck cancer, Radiotherapy, Saliva

### Affiliations
University of São Paulo, Bauru Dental School
Department of Biological Science - Laboratory of Biochemistry. Bauru School of Dentistry - University of São Paulo.

### Submitter
Talita Ventura

### Lab Head
Dr Talita Mendes Oliveira Ventura
Department of Biological Science - Laboratory of Biochemistry. Bauru School of Dentistry - University of São Paulo.


