### Accession
PXD018718

### Title
Co-option of Plasmodium falciparum PP1 for egress from host erythrocytes

### Description
Asexual proliferation of the Plasmodium parasites that cause malaria follow a developmental program that alternates non-canonical intraerythrocytic replication with dissemination to new host cells. We carried out a functional analysis of the Plasmodium falciparum homolog of Protein Phosphatase 1 (PfPP1), a universally conserved cell cycle factor in eukaryotes, to investigate regulation of parasite proliferation. PfPP1 is indeed required for efficient replication, but is absolutely essential for egress of parasites from host red blood cells. By phosphoproteomic and chemical-genetic analysis, we isolate two functional targets of PfPP1 for egress: a HECT E3 protein-ubiquitin ligase; and GCalpha, a fusion protein composed of a guanylyl cyclase and a phospholipid transporter domain. We hypothesize that PfPP1 regulates lipid sensing by GCalpha and demonstrate that phosphatidylcholine stimulates PfPP1-dependent egress. PfPP1 acts as a key regulator that integrates multiple cell-intrinsic pathways with external signals to direct parasite egress from host cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis was carried out as described with modifications. PfPP1 DD parasites were synchronized as described above using MACs purification of schizonts and was treated with sorbitol (5% w/v in water) after 1.5 hours of invasion into uninfected erythrocytes to eliminate remaining schizonts and isolate freshly re-invaded rings. Approximately 10x1010 synchronous ring-stage PfPP1-HA-DD parasites in Shld1 (0.3 µM) were cultured to 44 hpi with a preceding change of warm media at ~24 hpi, washed extensively and replated in warm (37º C) complete-RPMI at ~5x106 parasitized erythrocytes per ml of culture +/-0.3 µM Shld1. At 48 hpi, for each Shld1 condition, 2 technical replicates each with or without Shld1 (~1x1010 parasitized erythrocytes per replicate) were centrifuged at room temperature (500 g), and the pellet was frozen at -80º C for downstream processing. Remaining cultures (3 technical replicates, each with or without Shld1) were supplemented with E64 (15 µM) for further culture until 55 hpi for collection as described above. Further protein extraction steps for each of 10 samples were carried out in solutions supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitors (Roche) and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche). We released parasites with 0.05% saponin in PBS administered over several washes, for a total of ~6.5 volumes of buffer for 1 packed erythrocyte volume of frozen pellet. Following additional washes in PBS without saponin, we added >1 volume of 8 M urea lysis buffer (100 mM NaCl, 25 mM Tris-HCl/pH 8), and subjected each sample to 5x freeze (-80ºC)-thaw cycles before centrifugation at room temperature to separate protein-containing supernatant from pelleted cellular debris. Yields for each of the 10 samples ranged from 5-7 mg as assessed with the Pierce BCA (Bicinchoninic acid) protein assay. We reduced disulfide bonds with 5 mM tris(2-chloroethyl) phosphate (TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature, alkylated cysteines with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, and quenched excess iodoacetamide by treatment with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 15 min at room temperature. We precipitated protein in chloroform-methanol before resuspension (8 M urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5) and before dilution of urea to 1 M (50 mM HEPES pH 8.5) for digestion with LysC protease (1:100 protease-to-protein ratio, 3 h at 37 °C) before the addition of trypsin (1:100 protease-to-protein ratio) and continued digestion overnight at 37 °C. We quenched the reaction with 1% formic acid, carried out C18 solid-phase extraction (Sep-Pak, Waters), and precipitated peptides with vacuum-centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed with a SEQUEST-based pipeline. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were carried out a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), and filtered as previously described with minor modifications. To quantify the TMT-reporter ion, in each channel (0.003 Th range to distinguish reporters) we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass. For proteomic analysis, PSMs (1% FDR) were collapsed to whole proteins (1% FDR). We used principles of parsimony to assemble the protein set, aiming to identify the smallest number of distinct polypeptides required to explain the observed PSMs. Relative protein levels were quantified by calculating the sum of reporter ion counts across associated PSMs. MS3 spectra represented in <2 TMT channels, and MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed spectra of <100, or no MS3 spectra, were not considered for further analysis. Protein quantitation values were exported to Microsoft Excel. To normalize for variations in sample loading, within each TMT reporter ion channel, each parasite protein was normalized to the total signal of the P. falciparum proteome measured in that channel. For phosphoproteomics, the signal intensity of each phosphopeptide in a single TMT channel was normalized to the level of the parent protein in the same experimental condition (average of normalized values for technical replicate measurements from proteomics). We did not apply this adjustment for the <2% of phosphopeptides that could not be mapped to a parent protein in proteomics.

### Publication Abstract
Asexual proliferation of the Plasmodium parasites that cause malaria follows a developmental program that alternates non-canonical intraerythrocytic replication with dissemination to new host cells. We carried out a functional analysis of the Plasmodium falciparum homolog of Protein Phosphatase 1 (PfPP1), a universally conserved cell cycle factor in eukaryotes, to investigate regulation of parasite proliferation. PfPP1 is indeed required for efficient replication, but is absolutely essential for egress of parasites from host red blood cells. By phosphoproteomic and chemical-genetic analysis, we isolate two functional targets of PfPP1 for egress: a HECT E3 protein-ubiquitin ligase; and GC&#x3b1;, a fusion protein composed of a guanylyl cyclase and a phospholipid transporter domain. We hypothesize that PfPP1 regulates lipid sensing by GC&#x3b1; and find that phosphatidylcholine stimulates PfPP1-dependent egress. PfPP1 acts as a key regulator that integrates multiple cell-intrinsic pathways with external signals to direct parasite egress from host cells.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Sps-ms3, Tmt, Isobaric tagging

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Department of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School Boston, MA 02115


