### Accession
PXD041777

### Title
Removal of senescent cells reduces the viral load and attenuates pulmonary and systemic inflammation in SARS-CoV-2-infected, aged hamsters

### Description
Older age is one of the strongest risk factors for COVID-19 morbidity and mortality. Here, we sought to determine whether age-associated cellular senescence contributes to the severity of COVID-19 by studying the well-established golden hamster model of SARS-CoV-2-driven lung disease. We found that aged hamsters (22 months of age) accumulate senescent cells in the lungs and that the senolytic drug ABT-263, a B cell lymphoma-2 family inhibitor, depletes these cells at baseline and during a SARS-CoV-2 infection. Relative to young hamsters (2 months of age), aged hamsters had a greater viral load during the acute phase of infection and displayed higher levels of sequelae during the post-acute phase. Interestingly, early treatment with ABT-263 was associated with a significantly lower pulmonary viral load, an effect associated with lower expression of angiotensin converting enzyme 2, the receptor for SARS-CoV-2, and an amelioration of COVID-19-like lung disease in aged (but not young) animals. ABT-263 treatment of aged animals was also associated with lower pulmonary and systemic levels of senescence-associated secretory phenotype factors. Furthermore, early removal of senescent cells reduced the longer-term pulmonary inflammation. These data demonstrate the causative role of age-associated pre-existing senescent cells on the pathologic severity of experimental COVID-19. As several senolytics have recently moved into early-stage clinical trials, our present findings have clear clinical relevance.

### Sample Protocol
Young (2-month-old) and aged (22-month-old) Syrian golden hamsters (Janvier Laboratory, Le Genest-Saint-Isle, France) were acclimated to the biosafety level 3 facility at the Institut Pasteur de Lille (Lille, France) for at least 7 days. ABT-263 (Clinisciences, Nanterre, France) was dissolved in DMSO for preparation of stock solutions and kept at -20C. For in vivo treatments, 10% ABT-263 was formulated in 30% polyethylene glycol 400, and 60% Phosal 50 PG.  To assess the potential efficacy of ABT-263 treatment in SARS-CoV-2-infected aged hamsters, animals were administered by oral gavage (200 l) with ABT-263 (65 mg/kg) or vehicle (DMSO) control one day before infection and then daily until the sacrifice at 7 days post-infection (7 dpi). The infection procedure was as follows. Briefly, anesthetized animals were intranasally infected with 2x104 TCID50 of SARS-CoV-2 (hCoV-19_IPL_France strain). Blood and lungs were collected at 7 dpi.  Serum and lung extracts were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH8, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate and 0.1% SDS supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland) heated at 95°C for 20 min, and centrifuged at 10000 g for 10 min. Proteins in supernatants were quantified using the PierceTM BCA protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific).  Proteins were loaded on SDS-PAGE gels, with gel slice trypsin digestion for each sample. Extracted peptides were fractionated with three acetonitrile increments (7.5%, 12.5%, and 50%) (according to the manufacturer’s instructions) in 0.1% triethylamine on a High pH Reversed-Phase - Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluates were dried with a vacuum centrifuge and resolved in 0.1% formic acid. An UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to separate the eluates. Peptides were automatically fractionated onto a commercial C18 reversed phase column (75 μm × 500 mm, 2-μm particle, PepMap100 RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) maintained at 55 °C) and trapped for 4 min at 5 μL/min, with aqueous 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The peptides were eluted using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient separation was 3 min at 3% B, 170 min from 3% to 20% B, 20 min from 20% B to 80% B, and 15 min at 80% B. The column was equilibrated for 17 min with 3% buffer B before the next sample analysis. The peptides eluted from the C18 column were analyzed using Q-Exactive instruments (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The electrospray voltage was 1.9 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C. Full mass spectroscopy (MS) scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the m/z 400–1200 range, with a 70,000 (m/z 200) resolution. The target value was 3.00E+06. The 15 most intense peaks with a charge state between 2 and 5 were fragmented in the higher-energy collision-activated dissociation cell with a normalized collision energy of 27%, and the tandem mass spectrum was acquired in an Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 17,500 (m/z 200). The target value was 1.00E+05. The ion selection threshold was 5.0E+04 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 250 ms for full MS scans and 100 ms for MS/MS. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw nanoLC–MS/MS data were converted into an *.mgf peak list format, using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS data were analyzed using the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) installed on a local server. With a mass measurement tolerance of 10 ppm for precursors and 0.02 Da for fragment ions, we searched a composite target-decoy database (32348*2 total entries) built from the Uniprot Mesocricetus auratus dataset (taxonomy 10036, December 2021, 32230 entries) fused with the sequences of recombinant trypsin and a standard list of contaminants (118 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and cysteine propionamidation were searched for as variable modifications. Up to one missed trypsin cleavage was allowed.  The identification results were imported into Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr) for validation. Peptide spectrum matches taller than 9 residues and ion scores >10 were retained. The false discovery rate was then optimized to be below 1% at the protein level using the Mascot Modified Mudpit score. Spectral counting analyses were performed with Proline 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
Older age is one of the strongest risk factors for severe COVID-19. In this study, we determined whether age-associated cellular senescence contributes to the severity of experimental COVID-19. Aged golden hamsters accumulate senescent cells in the lungs, and the senolytic drug ABT-263, a BCL-2 inhibitor, depletes these cells at baseline and during SARS-CoV-2 infection. Relative to young hamsters, aged hamsters had a greater viral load during the acute phase of infection and displayed higher levels of sequelae during the post-acute phase. Early treatment with ABT-263 lowered pulmonary viral load in aged (but not young) animals, an effect associated with lower expression of ACE2, the receptor for SARS-CoV-2. ABT-263 treatment also led to lower pulmonary and systemic levels of senescence-associated secretory phenotype factors and to amelioration of early and late lung disease. These data demonstrate the causative role of age-associated pre-existing senescent cells on COVID-19 severity and have clear clinical relevance.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Proteomics, Aging, Senolytics, Systemic inflammation

### Affiliations
Univ. Lille, CNRS, INSERM, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, US 41 - UAR 2014 – PLBS, F-59000 Lille, France
Institut Pasteur de Lille

### Submitter
SALIOU Jean-Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-michel Saliou
Univ. Lille, CNRS, INSERM, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, US 41 - UAR 2014 – PLBS, F-59000 Lille, France


