### Accession
PXD041029

### Title
Desmocollin-1 is associated with pro-metastatic phenotype of luminal A breast cancer cells and is modulated by parthenolide

### Description
Desmocollin-1 (DSC1) is a desmosomal transmembrane glycoprotein that maintains cell-to-cell adhesion. DSC1 was previously associated with lymph node metastasis of luminal A breast tumors and was found to increase metastatic potential of MCF7 cells in vitro. To delineate DSC1 role in breast cancer metastasis and evaluate possibilities of DSC1 modulation, we investigated the effect of DSC1 overexpression on morphology, cell survival, transcriptome, proteome and interactome of MCF7 cells, a luminal A breast cancer model, stably transduced with lentiviral vector carrying DSC1 gene (MCF7-DSC1-GFP). We moreover identified inhibitor parthenolide to decrease DSC1 protein levels and to modulate the molecular mechanisms associated with DSC1 in MCF7 cells. This PRIDE project includes quantitative analysis results for the total proteome LC-DIA-MS/MS experiment evaluating DSC1 overexpression and parthenolide treatment in MCF7 breast cancer cell line, and results of pulldown analysis of DSC1-interacting proteins in MCF7 cells with and without parthenolide treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteome: Cells were washed two times with cold PBS on ice and lysed using 200 µl of lysis buffer (6M guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM Na-phosphate pH 6.6, 1% Triton X-100), scraped and needle sonicated on ice (50W, 30 × 0.1 s, 30s pause, 30 × 0.1 s). After 75-minute incubation at RT, lysates were centrifuged (14,000 g, 4°C, 20 min.) and the supernatant was collected. The protein concentration was determined using RC-DC protein assay kit (Bio-Rad). Samples were stored at -80°C.  Pulldown: Cells were scraped, centrifuged (1,000 g, 4°C, 5 min), washed with PBS and with with 2x concentrated Complete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Switzerland) in 1x PBS, and the pellets were frozen at -80°C. Pellets placed on ice were resuspended in 1 ml HNN-lysis buffer (0.5 % NP40, 0.2 M Na3VO4, 1 mM PMSF, 1x Complete™, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Switzerland), 1.2 µM avidine). Cell suspension was incubated for 10 min on ice and centrifuged for 20 min at 13 000 x g, 4 °C. During centrifugation, Micro BioSpin® 6 Columns (BioRad, USA) were equilibrated using 250 µl HNN-lysis buffer. 100 μl High Capacity Streptavidin Agarose Resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was resuspended in 750 μl HNN-lysis buffer. Supernatants from samples were mixed with 200 μl streptavidin beads per sample. Samples were incubated on rotation wheel for 15 min at 4 °C. Samples were subsequently transferred on equilibrated columns and washed twice with 1 ml HNN-lysis buffer and three-times with 1 ml HNN-buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF) without protease inhibitors and detergents. All washing steps were performed using gravity flow. Samples were finally eluted using 200 μl 2.5 mM biotin solution in HNN-buffer without protease inhibitors and detergents. Elution step was performed three times. Total proteome and pulldown samples were submitted to trypsin digestion using Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) method (PMID: 21526778) and desalted as previously described (PMID: 19053527). Briefly, proteins were transferred to the Microcon filter device, cut-off 30 kDa (Millipore), reduced by tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (Sigma-Aldrich) in 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, alkylated using iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), digested by trypsin (Promega) in the ratio 1:30, and peptides were desalted on MicroSpin columns C18 (Nest Group). The dried peptides were solubilized using 50 µl of 2.5% formic acid (FA) in 50% ACN and 100 µl of pure acetonitrile and concentrated using SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to 20 µl. Finally, the concentrated samples were diluted into LC-MS vials to get peptide concentration of 0.8 µg/µl with addition of 1 µl 0.01% of polyethylene glycol in water, 1 µl of stock iRT peptides standard (Biognosys), 2 µl of 5% FA and filled into 10 ul by MiliQ water (Merck). Two µg of peptides mixture was injected for each sample.  LC-MS/MS analyses were done using RSLCnano system online connected to Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (100 μm × 30 mm) filled with 3.5-μm X-Bridge BEH 130 C18 sorbent (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto analytical column Acclaim Pepmap100 C18 column (3 µm particles, 75 μm × 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) by the following gradient program (mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN; flow 300 nl/min): the gradient elution started at 5 % of mobile phase B and began increase in the 5th min to 37 % during the 109 min, then reached to 80 % of mobile phase B in the next 6 min and remained at this state for the last 10 min. Equilibration of the trapping column and the analytical column was done prior to sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source. ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed. MS data were acquired in a data-independent mode (DIA). Orbitrap analyzer and quadrupole mass filter were employed for survey scan detection (350 – 1650 m/z). The MS scan resolution was 120 000 (at 200 m/z) with a target value of 2×105 ions and maximum injection time of 100 ms. After the MS scan, defined m/z segments were isolated by quadrupole mass filter and HCD fragmentation was done with a target value of 5×105 ions. MS/MS spectra after HCD fragmentation (default charge state is 2 and 28% collision energy) were recorded in Orbitrap with a resolution of 30 000 (at 200 m/z) in scan range of 200 – 1800 m/z. The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
DIA data were analyzed in Spectronaut software (Biognosys) version 13.6 for total proteome experiment and 13.9 for pull-down experiment, both in directDIA mode. UniProt/SwissProt database version 2019_07 downloaded on 2019-09-16 limited to human entries containing 20431 sequences was used for database searches. Carbamidomethylation (C) was used as fixed modification, oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) were used as variable modifications. q-value at both precursor and protein levels were set to 0.01. For the total proteome experiment, data based on q-value 0.25 percentile (identified in 3 of 12 total runs) were involved in the final dataset. For the pull-down analysis, data based on q-value 0.33 percentile (identified in 3 of 9 total runs) were involved in the final dataset. Analysis of differential protein abundance was performed using t-test implemented in Spectronaut with false discovery rate correction. Default settings were used for other parameters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pulldown, Proteomics, Breast cancer, Metastasis, Dia, Dsc1

### Affiliations
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science

### Submitter
Pavel Bouchal

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Bouchal
Masaryk University, Faculty of Science


