### Accession
PXD021398

### Title
Deep learning boosts immunopeptidomics one mass spectrum at a time

### Description
Characterizing the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) bound ligandome by mass spectrometry (MS) holds great promise for developing vaccines and drugs for immune oncology. Still, the identification of such non-tryptic peptides presents substantial computational challenges. To address these, we synthesized >300,000 peptides within the ProteomeTools project representing HLA class I & II ligands and products of the proteases AspN and LysN and analyzed these by multi-modal LC-MS/MS. The resulting data enabled training of a single model using the deep learning framework Prosit that shows outstanding prediction accuracy of fragment ion spectra for tryptic and non-tryptic peptides. Applying Prosit demonstrates that the identification of HLA peptides can be improved by 50-300% on average, that proteasomal HLA peptide splicing may not exist and that additional neo-epitopes that elicit an immune response can be identified from patient tumors. Together, the provided peptides, spectra and computational tools substantially expand the scope of immunopeptidomics workflows.

### Sample Protocol
For training we used the publicly available ProteomeTools data (PRIDE Dataset PXD004732,  PXD010595 and PXD0xxxxxx). Rescoring analysis presented in this repository is based on data generated by previous publication.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol for rescoring of external datasets consisted of a database search using either MaxQuant, Mascot, MSFRagger or SpectrumMill without applied confidence filters, then rescoring of all candidate PSMs using Prosit predictions and FDR calclation by Percolator.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deep learning, Proteasomal splicing, Ligand, Fragmentation prediction, Spliced peptide, Proteometools, Hla peptide, Rescoring, Hla class i, Spectra prediction, Prosit

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany
Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Daniel Zolg

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technical University of Munich, Germany


