### Accession
PXD028912

### Title
Ubiquitin remenants identification following  in vitro assay of 20S and 26S proteasome using naked and ubiquitined cyclin

### Description
A systematic and comparative study of the proteolysis products generated by purified human 26S and 20S proteasome following the in vitro cleavage of non-modified (naked), mono-ubiquitinated and poly-ubiquitinated cyclin B.

### Sample Protocol
Degradation assay included 20 nM of human 26S or 20S proteasomes and 4 μM of unmodified CyclinB1-NT and ubiquitinated CyclinB1-NT conjugates in a molar ratio of 1:150. The 26S proteasome assay buffer contained 25 mM TRIS (pH 7.4), 10 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 1 mM ATP and 1 mM DTT. The 20S proteasome assay buffer contained 25mM TRIS (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol without MgCl2 and ATP. All degradation reactions were carried out at 37°C and reactions were terminated by heating mixtures at 95°C for 5 min. Then, the mixture was passedthrough 30 KDa cut-off Amicon® Ultra - 0.5 mL Centrifugal Filter unit (Merck-Millipore). The flow-through was collected and desalted by C18 StageTip column (PMID:17703201. Desalted peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography coupled mass spectrometry using Q-Exacitive-Plus (Thermo-Fisher) coupled to nano HPLC. The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 × 180 mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed-phase material (Dr. Maisch; GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with a linear 30 min gradient of 5–28%, followed by a 15 min gradient of 28–95%, and a 10 min wash at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water (at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min).Mass spectrometry analysis was in positive mode using a range of m/z 300–1800, resolution 70,000 for MS1 and 17,500 for MS2, using repetitively full MS scan followed by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Identification of cyclin peptides that contain ubiquitin remnants was performed by a series of search iterations using MSFragger version 3.1.1 (PMID: 28394336) via FregPipe version 14.0 (https://fragpipe.nesvilab.org/). These searches were conducted using MSFragger's “non-specific peptidome” configuration against the same database used for the other in vitro cleavage reactions analyses. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20ppm, fragment mass tolerance was set to 25ppm with non-specific protein digestion, peptide length was set to be between 7 to 35 amino acids. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. In addition, for each search iteration, we set a different variable modification on lysine residue representing a different putative ubiquitin remnant generated following non-specific cleavage. These modifications include either: no modification, G (+ 57.021460), GG (+114.04292), GGR (+270.144039), GGRL (+383.228103), or GGRLR (+539.329214).  Peptide validation for each modification (1% FDR) was done following PeptideProphet (PMID: 12403597) and iProphet (PMID: 21876204) analyses and modification, and localization were validated and using PTMProphet (PMID: 31290668). The results that were obtained from the search with no modification on lysines were used to generate the sequence coverage of FLAG-ubiquitin and modified cyclin B1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, 20s, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Technion
Faculty of Biology Technion-Israel Institute of Technology Rooms 433-4, Biology Building Technion City, Haifa 3200003, Israel

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Oded Kleifeld
Faculty of Biology Technion-Israel Institute of Technology Rooms 433-4, Biology Building Technion City, Haifa 3200003, Israel


