### Accession
PXD042354

### Title
Aqueous and DMSO extracts from Annona muricata leaves protect from ferroptosis to both HT-1080 fibrosarcoma cells and HMEC-1 endothelial cells.

### Description
Graviola (Annona muricata) is a tropical plant with many traditional ethnobotanic uses and pharmacologic applications. A metabolomic study of both aqueous and DMSO extracts from Annona muricata leaves recently allowed us to identify dozens of bioactive compounds. In the present study, we use a proteomic study to reveal new bioactivities of these leave extracts on both conditioned media and extracts of HT-1080 fibrosarcoma treated cells. Our results reveal the complete sets of deregulated proteins after treatment with aqueous and DMSO extracts from An-nona muricata leaves. Functional enrichment analysis of proteomic data suggests deregulation of cell cycle and iron metabolism, which are experimentally validated. Additional experimental data reveal that these extracts protect from ferroptosis to both HT-1080 fibrosarcoma cells and HMEC-1 endothelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation, protein extraction and clean-up  After treatments, culture media were collected, centrifuged to remove cell debris and supernatants were immediately frozen at -80°C for further lyophilization. Meanwhile, cells were washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and kept frozen at -80°C in the culture flasks until further processing. Keeping the sample on ice, each cell layer was solubilized in 200 uL of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS buffer and then sonicated on a cold ultrasound bath for 5 min. Cell extracts were then centrifuged at 14,000 g at 4°C for 5 min to remove insoluble debris.  Both proteins from culture media and cell extracts were purified by a modified trichloroacetic acid protein precipitation procedure (Clean-Up Kit; GE Healthcare, München, Germany). The resulting protein pellets were dissolved in 100 uL of water. After thoroughly vortexing the samples, they were sonicated on an ultrasound bath for 5 min and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 5 min, and the supernatant transferred to a clean tube. Finally, sample concentration was quantified by a Bradford assay [9].     In-gel digestion and peptide extraction  Then we carried out a gel-assisted proteolysis entrapping the protein solution in a polyacrylamide gel matrix. Samples (45 uL) were thoroughly mixed with 14 uL of 40% acrylamide monomer solution and 2.5 uL of 10% ammonium persulfate and 1 uL of TEMED were quickly added. The mixture was allowed to completely polymerize for 20 min before performing an in-gel digestion. Using scalpel, gel plugs were cut into 1-2 mm cubes and treated with 50% acetonitrile/25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were dehydrated and desiccated with acetonitrile (ACN) before reduction with 10 mM DTT in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 56ºC. Excess DTT was removed, and cysteine residues were carbamidomethylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. After carbamidomethylation, the gel pieces were dehydrated again, proteins were digested by rehydrating the gel pieces in trypsin solution at 10 ng/uL (Promega) and thereafter incubated at 30ºC overnight. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with ACN/0.1% formic acid (FA) for 30 min at room temperature. The samples were dried in a SpeedVacTM vacuum concentrator to remove ACN and residual Ammonium bicarbonate and then re-dissolved in 50 uL of 0.1% FA, and were sonicated for 3 min and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 5 min. Finally, the samples were quantified again in a NanoDropTM (Thermo Scientific) and 0.1% FA was added to equalize all samples at an identical protein concentration before being transferred to the injection vial.

### Data Protocol
Liquid Chromatography High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry  Samples were injected onto an Easy nLC 1200 UHPLC system coupled to a hybrid linear trap quadrupole Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Software versions used for the data acquisition and operation were Tune 2.9 and Xcalibur 4.1.31.9. HPLC solvents were as follows: solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. From a thermostated autosampler, 2 uL that correspond to 100 ng of the peptide mixture were automatically loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 um x 2cm, C18, 3 um, 100 A, ThermoFisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 20 uL/min and eluted onto a 50 cm analytical (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 um, 100 A, 75 um x 50 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were eluted from the analytical column with a 120 min gradient ranging from 2% to 20% solvent B, followed by a 30 min gradient from 20% to 35% solvent B and finally, to 95% solvent B for 15 min before re-equilibration to 2% solvent B at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ Velos ESI Positive Ion Calibration Solution (Pierce, IL, USA) was used to externally calibrate the instrument prior to sample analysis, and an internal calibration was performed on the polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120024 from ambient air. MS1 scans were performed from m/z 300–1750 at a resolution of 120,000. Using a data-dependent acquisition mode, the 20 most intense precursor ions of all precursor ions with +2 to +5 charge were isolated within a 1.2 m/z window and fragmented to obtain the corresponding MS/MS spectra. The fragment ions were generated in a higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell with a fixed first mass at 110 m/z and detected in an Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000. The dynamic exclusion for the selected ions was 30 s. Maximal ion accumulation time allowed in MS and MS2 mode was 50 ms. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap and was set to 3x106 ions and 105 ions for a full MS and MS2 scan, respectively.  Data analysis for protein identification MS/MS2 spectra were searched against SwissProt Homo sapiens protein database canonical version 2021.09.30 (20,315 sequences). The acquired raw data were analyzed in Proteome DiscovererTM 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) platform with the SEQUEST® HT engine using mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Two missed tryptic cleavage site was allowed. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, whilst carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, were set as fixed modification. Peptide spectral matches (PSM) and consecutive protein assignments were validated using the Percolator® algorithm [10], based on a target-decoy approach using a reversed protein database as the decoy by imposing a strict cut-off of 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Peptide identifications were grouped into proteins according to the law of parsimony and results were filtered to contain only proteins with at least two unique peptide sequences.  Label-free relative quantification for differential expression analysis Label-free quantitation was implemented using the Minora feature of Proteome DiscovererTM 2.5, setting the following parameters: maximum retention time alignment of 10 min with minimum of S/N of 5 for feature linking mapping. Abundances were based on precursor intensities. Normalization was performed based on total peptide amount, and samples were scaled on all average (for every protein and peptide the average of all samples is 100). The normalized and scaled relative abundance of every protein was expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD) of three biological replicates. Protein abundance ratios were directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances. Abundance ratio p-values were calculated by ANOVA based on the abundances of individual proteins or peptides. Only proteins with ANOVA p¬<0.01 and higher ratio than 2:1 or smaller than 1:2 for treatment:control were considered as significantly deregulated.   Bioinformatics analysis The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) (https://www.string-db.org, accessed on 21 April 2023) was used to perform a protein-protein interaction networks functional enrichment analysis. Functional pathways were analyzed using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http:// www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html, accessed on 29 November 2022).

### Publication Abstract
Graviola (<i>Annona muricata</i>) is a tropical plant with many traditional ethnobotanic uses and pharmacologic applications. A metabolomic study of both aqueous and DMSO extracts from <i>Annona muricata</i> leaves recently allowed us to identify dozens of bioactive compounds. In the present study, we use a proteomic approach to detect altered patterns in proteins on both conditioned media and extracts of HT-1080 fibrosarcoma cells under treatment conditions, revealing new potential bioactivities of <i>Annona muricata</i> extracts. Our results reveal the complete sets of deregulated proteins after treatment with aqueous and DMSO extracts from <i>Annona muricata</i> leaves. Functional enrichment analysis of proteomic data suggests deregulation of cell cycle and iron metabolism, which are experimentally validated in vitro. Additional experimental data reveal that DMSO extracts protect HT-1080 fibrosarcoma cells and HMEC-1 endothelial cells from ferroptosis. Data from our proteomic study are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD042354.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Ferroptosis, Annona muricata

### Affiliations
Departament of Molecular Biologi and Biochemistry, Faculty of Sciences, University of Malaga, 29071 Malaga, Spain
University of Malaga

### Submitter
Casimiro Cardenas

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel Angel Medina
Departament of Molecular Biologi and Biochemistry, Faculty of Sciences, University of Malaga, 29071 Malaga, Spain


