### Accession
PXD010024

### Title
An unprecedented binding mode of vitamin B12 in the predicted transporter BtuM

### Description
BtuM binds vitamin B12 (cyano-cobalamin) in an unprecedented way. Structural and spectroscopic data indicate that the unusual thiolate coordination allows for chemical modification of the substrate, which is decyanation of the compund. We use mass-spectrometry to show the loss of the 26 Da moiety with various BtuM versions and cyano-cobalamin and dicyano-cobinamide.

### Sample Protocol
BtuMTd proteins were diluted in a 1:1 (v/v) ratio with 0.1% formic acid and 5 μl were injected into an Ultimate 3000-UPLC system (Dionex), connected to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 2.1mm x 50mm Acquity UPLC BEHC18, 1.7 μm (Waters). Solvent A was H2O with 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. The following mobile phase gradient was delivered at a flow rate of 0.6 ml/min starting with a mixture of 60% solvent B for 1 minute. Solvent B was increased to 90% over 5 minutes with a linear gradient and kept at this concentration for 5 minutes. Solvent B was reduced to 60% in 0.1 minute and kept for 3.9 minutes resulting in a total elution time of 15 minutes. The column temperature was kept constant at 40°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode. Full scan MS spectra were acquired for 10 minutes from m/z 1000 to 2000 at a target value of 1×106 and a max IT of 500 ms with a resolution of 140000 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
Scans were averaged using Xcalibur 4.0.27.42 Qualbrowser and the isotopically resolved MS spectrum was de-convoluted using the built-in Xtract algorithm. The mass-spectra showed the masses of apo and substrate bound BtuM. The difference of the two masses was calculated to show decyanation.  Because the data is mass-spectrometry for the full-length, purified protein there was no search done. Instead the results from Xcalibur are provided.

### Publication Abstract
Uptake of vitamin B12 is essential for many prokaryotes, but in most cases the membrane proteins involved are yet to be identified. We present the biochemical characterization and high-resolution crystal structure of BtuM, a predicted bacterial vitamin B12 uptake system. BtuM binds vitamin B12 in its base-off conformation, with a cysteine residue as axial ligand of the corrin cobalt ion. Spectroscopic analysis indicates that the unusual thiolate coordination allows for decyanation of vitamin B12. Chemical modification of the substrate is a property other characterized vitamin B12-transport proteins do not exhibit.

### Keywords
Btum, Decyanation

### Affiliations
University of Groningen
1Groningen Biomolecular and Biotechnology Institute (GBB), University of Groningen, 9474AG Groningen, The Netherlands 2Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Groningen, 9747AG Groningen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Stephan Rempel

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Jan Slotboom
1Groningen Biomolecular and Biotechnology Institute (GBB), University of Groningen, 9474AG Groningen, The Netherlands 2Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Groningen, 9747AG Groningen, The Netherlands


