### Accession
PXD027051

### Title
Proteomic analysis of NK3.3-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
Our study investigates the features and anti-tumor function of extracellular vesicles (EVs) isolated from our well described NK cell line - NK3.3 - the only published clonal, normal human cell line to date.  Natural killer (NK) cells, critical for proper immune function, destroy tumor cells primarily through the release of granules containing potent cytolytic molecules.  NK cells also release these molecules within membrane-bound exosomes and microvesicles collectively known as EVs.  We show that NK3.3 EVs contain the cytolytic molecules perforin, granzymes A and B, and granulysin, and an array of common EV proteins.  We previously showed that the E3 ubiquitin ligase identified by our laboratory, natural killer lytic-associated molecule (NKLAM/RNF19b), is localized to NK granules and is essential for maximal NK killing; our current study shows NKLAM situated within the NK3.3 EV membrane.  Analysis of NK3.3 EV contents also identified multiple RNA species including miRNAs associated with anti-tumor activity.  We demonstrate that treatment of an array of hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic tumor cell lines with NK3.3 EVs inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis and cell death while leaving normal cells unaffected.  Taken together, our study suggests that NK3.3 EVs have the potential to be effective immunotherapeutic agents.

### Sample Protocol
SAMPLE DESCRIPTION-- EV precipitates were isolated from the media of clonal normal human NK3.3 natural killer cells stimulated with IL-2 and PMA with ionomycin for degranulation, resuspended in buffer, and then filtered through a purification column (ExoQuick-TC ULTRA, System Bioscience).  Protein concentration was determined by Qubit fluorometry (Invitrogen).  A 10μg sample was processed by SDS-PAGE, the migration line excised, and in-gel digestion performed using trypsinization.  Analysis was performed using nanoLC-MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive.  Peptide sequence data was searched using Mascot software and filtered using Scaffold software.

### Data Protocol
DATABASE SEARCHING-- Tandem mass spectra were extracted by Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system.  Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed.  All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.0).  Mascot was set up to search the SP-Human-010118_20180101 database (unknown version, 40752 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme strict trypsin.  Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM.  Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification.  Gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 10.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 96.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins were annotated with GO terms from NCBI (downloaded Nov 8, 2018). (Ashburner, M et al Nat. Genet. 2000;25(1):25-9).  All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.0). Mascot was set up to search the SP-Human-010118_20180101 database (unknown version, 40752 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme strict trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 10.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 96.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Natural killer (NK) cells are critical mediators of immune function, responsible for rapid destruction of tumor cells. They kill primarily through the release of granules containing potent cytolytic molecules. NK cells also release these molecules within membrane-bound exosomes and microvesicles - collectively known as extracellular vesicles (EV). Here we report the characterization and anti-tumor function of EVs isolated from NK3.3 cells, a well described clonal normal human NK cell line. We show that NK3.3 EVs contain the cytolytic molecules perforin, granzymes A and B, and granulysin, and an array of common EV proteins. We previously reported that the E3 ubiquitin ligase, natural killer lytic-associated molecule (NKLAM), is localized to NK granules and is essential for maximal NK killing; here we show it is present in the membrane of NK3.3 EVs. NK3.3-derived EVs also carry multiple RNA species, including miRNAs associated with anti-tumor activity. We demonstrate that NK3.3 EVs inhibit proliferation and induce caspase-mediated apoptosis and cell death of an array of both hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic tumor cell lines. This effect is tumor cell specific; normal cells are unaffected by EV treatment. By virtue of their derivation from a healthy donor and ability to be expanded to large numbers, NK3.3 EVs have the potential to be an effective, safe, and universal immunotherapeutic agent.

### Keywords
Natural killer cell, Ubiquitin ligase, Exosome, Nklam, Leukemia, Nk3.3, Rnf19b, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Saint Louis University - Department of Pathology
Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, United States

### Submitter
Allyson Cochran

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jacki Kornbluth
Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, United States


