### Accession
PXD020084

### Title
Cryo-EM structures of dynactin’s shoulder and pointed end show their complex architecture and reveal conserved cargo adaptor binding sites

### Description
Dynactin is a 1.2 MDa complex that activates the molecular motor, dynein, for ultra-processive transport along microtubules. In order to do this it forms a tripartite complex with dynein and a coiled-coil adaptor. Dynactin consists of an actin-related filament whose length is defined by its flexible shoulder domain. Despite previous cryo-EM structures, the molecular architecture of the shoulder and pointed end of the filament is still poorly understood due to the lack of high-resolution information in these regions. Here we combine multiple cryo-EM datasets and define precise masking strategies for particle signal subtraction and 3D classification. This overcomes domain flexibility and results in high resolution maps into which we can build the shoulder and pointed end. The unique architecture of the shoulder positions the four identical p50 subunits in different conformations to bind dynactin’s filament, as well as to securely house the p150 subunit. The pointed end map allows us to build the first structure of p62, and reveals the molecular basis for cargo adaptor binding to different sites at the pointed end.

### Sample Protocol
200 μg dynactin at 3 μM in GF150 buffer was crosslinked with 1.5 mM BS3 for 2 hours at 4°C. The reaction was then quenched using 160 mM Tris pH 7.4. The crosslinked samples were cold-acetone precipitated and resuspended in 8 M urea and 100 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Following alkylation, proteins were digested with Lys-C (Pierce) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 for 4 h at 22 °C and, after diluting the urea to 1.5 M with 100 mM NH4HCO3 solution, and further digested with trypsin (Pierce) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:20. Digested peptides were eluted from StageTips and split into two for parallel crosslink enrichment by strong cation-exchange chromatography (SCX) and size exclusion chromatography (SEC), and were dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). For SCX, eluted peptides were dissolved in mobile phase A (30% acetonitrile (v/v), 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 3) before strong cation exchange chromatography (100 × 2.1 mm Poly Sulfoethyl A column; Poly LC). The separation of the digest used a gradient into mobile phase B (30% acetonitrile (v/v), 10 mM KH2PO4, pH 3, 1 M KCl) at a flow rate of 200 µl min−1. Ten 1-minute fractions in the high-salt range were collected and cleaned by StageTips, eluted and dried for subsequent liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. For peptideSEC, peptides were fractionated on an ÄKTA Pure system (GE Healthcare) using a Superdex Peptide 3.2/300 (GE Healthcare) at a flow rate of 10 µl min−1 using 30% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid as mobile phase. Five 50-µl fractions were collected and dried for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples for analysis were resuspended in 0.1% v/v formic acid, 1.6% v/v acetonitrile. LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted in duplicate for SEC fractions and triplicate for SCX fractions, performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample was separated and ionized by a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and mobile phase B of 80% v/v acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid. Flow-rate of 0.3 μl min−1 using gradients optimized for each chromatographic fraction from offline fractionation ranging from 2% mobile phase B to 45% mobile phase B over 90 min, followed by a linear increase to 55% and 95% mobile phase B in 2.5 min, respectively. The MS data were acquired in data-dependent mode using the top-speed setting with a three second cycle time. For every cycle, the full scan mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 in the range of 400 to 1,600 m/z. Ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 7+ were isolated and fragmented. Fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) employed a decision tree logic with optimized collision energies. The fragmentation spectra were then recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60-s exclusion duration.  A recalibration of the precursor m/z was conducted based on high-confidence (< 1% false discovery rate (FDR)) linear peptide identifications. The recalibrated peak lists were searched against the sequences and the reversed sequences (as decoys) of crosslinked peptides using the Xi software suite (v.1.6.745) for identification. The following parameters were applied for the search: MS1 accuracy = 3 ppm; MS2 accuracy = 10 ppm; enzyme = trypsin (with full tryptic specificity) allowing up to four missed cleavages; crosslinker = BS3 with an assumed reaction specificity for lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N termini; fixed modifications = carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications = oxidation on methionine, hydrolyzed/aminolyzed BS3 from reaction with ammonia or water on a free crosslinker end. The identified candidates were filtered to 2% FDR on link level using XiFDR v.1.1.26.58.

### Publication Abstract
Dynactin is a 1.1 MDa complex that activates the molecular motor dynein for ultra-processive transport along microtubules. In order to do this, it forms a tripartite complex with dynein and a coiled-coil adaptor. Dynactin consists of an actin-related filament whose length is defined by its flexible shoulder domain. Despite previous cryo-EM structures, the molecular architecture of the shoulder and pointed end of the filament is still poorly understood due to the lack of high-resolution information in these regions. Here we combine multiple cryo-EM datasets and define precise masking strategies for particle signal subtraction and 3D classification. This overcomes domain flexibility and results in high-resolution maps into which we can build the shoulder and pointed end. The unique architecture of the shoulder securely houses the p150 subunit and positions the four identical p50 subunits in different conformations to bind dynactin's filament. The pointed end map allows us to build the first structure of p62 and reveals the molecular basis for cargo adaptor binding to different sites at the pointed end.

### Keywords
Dynactin, Crosslinking ms

### Affiliations
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany
TU Berlin

### Submitter
Francis O'Reilly

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
Bioanalytics, Institute of Biotechnology, Technische Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany


