### Accession
PXD031097

### Title
Oligomerization, trans-reduction, and instability of mutant NOTCH3 in inherited vascular dementia

### Description
Cerebral small vessel disease (SVD) is a prevalent disease of aging and a major contributor to stroke and dementia. The most commonly inherited SVD, CADASIL, is caused by dominantly acting cysteine-altering mutations in NOTCH3. These mutations change the number of cysteines from an even to an odd number, but the impact of these alterations on NOTCH3 protein structure remain unclear. Here, we prepared wildtype and four mutant recombinant NOTCH3 protein fragments to analyze the impact of CADASIL mutations on oligomerization, thiol status, and protein stability. Using gel electrophoresis, tandem MS/MS, and collision-induced unfolding, we find that NOTCH3 mutant proteins feature increased amounts of inappropriate disulfide bridges, reduced cysteines, and structural instability. Presence of a second protein factor, an N-terminal fragment of NOTCH3 (NTF), is capable of further altering disulfide statuses of both wildtype and mutant proteins, leading to increased numbers of reduced cysteines and further destabilization of NOTCH3 structure. In sum, these studies identify specific cysteine residues alterations and quaternary structure induced by CADASIL mutations in NOTCH3; further, we validate that reductive factors alter the structure and stability of this small vessel disease protein.

### Sample Protocol
In solution digestion. 5ug of WT and CADASIL mutant protein samples were purified, as described earlier. Cysteines were labeled with 10mM NEM and unreacted NEM was removed by dialysis. Protein samples were submitted for further processing and analysis at the Mass spectrometry Facility of the Department of Pathology at the University of Michigan. Cysteines were reduced by adding 10mM DTT and incubating at 45ºC for 30 minutes. Samples were cooled to RT and alkylation of cysteines was achieved by incubating samples with 65mM 2-chloroacetamide, under darkness, for 30 minutes at RT. An overnight digestion with sequencing grade, modified trypsin (enzyme: substrate ratio of 1:50; Promega) was carried out at 37ºC with constant shaking in a Thermomixer. Digestion was stopped by acidification and peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges according to manufacturer’s protocol (Waters). Samples were completely dried using vacufuge (Eppendorf).   In-gel digestion. NTF was added to 5ug of WT and CADASIL mutant protein samples at a 25:1 molar ratio for 1 hour at 37ºC. Cysteines were labeled with 10mM NEM and samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with SimplyBlue SafeStain (ThermoFisher). NOTCH3 bands were excised and submitted for processing and analysis at the Mass Spectrometry Facility of the Department of Pathology at the University of Michigan. Gel slices were destained with 30% methanol for 4 hours. Upon reduction (10mM DTT) and alkylation (65mM 2-Chloroacetamide) of the cysteines, proteins were digested overnight with 500ng of sequencing grade, modified trypsin (Promega) at 37ºC. Peptides were extracted by incubating the gel with 150uL of 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA for 30 minutes at RT. A second extraction with 150uL of 100% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA was also performed. Both extracts were combined and dried in a vacufuge (Eppendorf).   MS/MS. Resulting peptides were dissolved in 9uL (for in-gel digest) or appropriate volume of 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile solution (to achieve ~500ng peptide/uL) and 2uLs of the peptide solution were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50cm, ThermoScientific) using a 0.1% formic acid/ 2% acetonitrile (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid/ 95% acetonitrile (Buffer B) gradient at 300nL/min over a period of 90 min (2-25% Buffer B in 45 min, 25-40% in 5 min, 40-90% in 5 min followed by holding at 90% Buffer B for 5 min and re-equilibration with Buffer A for 30 min). Eluent was directly introduced into Q exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA) using an EasySpray source. MS1 scans were acquired at 60K resolution (AGC target=3x106; max IT=50ms). Data-dependent collision induced dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired using Top speed method (3 seconds) following each MS1 scan (NCE~28%; 15K resolution; AGC target 1x105; max IT 45ms).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the data against a custom protein database containing WT and mutant NOTCH3 protein and NTF fragment appended with common contaminant protein list (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP) using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Scientific). Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.1 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation and N-ethylmaleimide modification of cysteine, oxidation of methionine, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, were considered as potential modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebral small vessel disease (SVD) is a prevalent disease of aging and a major contributor to stroke and dementia. The most commonly inherited SVD, CADASIL, is caused by dominantly acting cysteine-altering mutations in NOTCH3. These mutations change the number of cysteines from an even to an odd number, but the impact of these alterations on NOTCH3 protein structure remain unclear. Here, we prepared wildtype and four mutant recombinant NOTCH3 protein fragments to analyze the impact of CADASIL mutations on oligomerization, thiol status, and protein stability. Using gel electrophoresis, tandem MS/MS, and collision-induced unfolding, we find that NOTCH3 mutant proteins feature increased amounts of inappropriate disulfide bridges, reduced cysteines, and structural instability. Presence of a second protein factor, an N-terminal fragment of NOTCH3 (NTF), is capable of further altering disulfide statuses of both wildtype and mutant proteins, leading to increased numbers of reduced cysteines and further destabilization of NOTCH3 structure. In sum, these studies identify specific cysteine residues alterations and quaternary structure induced by CADASIL mutations in NOTCH3; further, we validate that reductive factors alter the structure and stability of this small vessel disease protein.

### Keywords
Disulfides, Notch3, Cadasil

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Departments of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI  48109-5622, USA. Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI  48109-5622, USA Neurology Service, VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA

### Submitter
Kelly Young

### Lab Head
Dr Michael M. Wang
Departments of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI  48109-5622, USA. Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI  48109-5622, USA Neurology Service, VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA


