### Accession
PXD021033

### Title
Nuclear Translocation of Glutaminase GLS2 in Human Cancer Cells Associates with Proliferation Arrest and Differentiation

### Description
Glutaminase (GA) catalyzes the first step in mitochondrial glutaminolysis playing a key role in cancer metabolic reprogramming. Humans express two types of GA isoforms: GLS and GLS2. GLS isozymes have been consistently related to cell proliferation, but the role of GLS2 in cancer remains poorly understood. GLS2 is repressed in many tumor cells and a better understanding of its function in tumorigenesis may further the development of new therapeutic approaches. We analyzed GLS2 expression in HCC, GBM and neuroblastoma cells, as well as in monkey COS-7 cells. We studied GLS2 expression after induction of differentiation with phorbol ester (PMA) and transduction with the full-length cDNA of GLS2. In parallel, we investigated cell cycle progression and levels of p53, p21 and c-Myc proteins. Using the baculovirus system, human GLS2 protein was overexpressed, purified and analyzed for posttranslational modifications employing a proteomics LC-MS/MS platform. We have demonstrated a dual targeting of GLS2 in human cancer cells. Immunocytochemistry and subcellular fractionation gave consistent results demonstrating nuclear and mitochondrial locations, with the latter being predominant. Nuclear targeting was confirmed in cancer cells overexpressing c-Myc- and GFP-tagged GLS2 proteins. We assessed the subnuclear location finding a widespread distribution of GLS2 in the nucleoplasm without clear overlapping with specific nuclear substructures. GLS2 expression and nuclear accrual notably increased by treatment of SH-SY5Y cells with PMA and it correlated with cell cycle arrest at G2/M, upregulation of tumor suppressor p53 and p21 protein. A similar response was obtained by overexpression of GLS2 in T98G glioma cells, including downregulation of oncogene c-Myc. Furthermore, human GLS2 was identified as being hypusinated by MS analysis, a posttranslational modification which may be relevant for its nuclear targeting and/or function. Our studies provide evidence for a tumor suppressor role of GLS2 in certain types of cancer. The data imply that GLS2 can be regarded as a highly mobile and multilocalizing protein translocated to both mitochondria and nuclei. Upregulation of GLS2 in cancer cells induced an antiproliferative response with cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution proteolytic digestion Two micrograms of the purified GLS2 protein sample were digested with trypsin or chymotrypsin (1:100 w/w) using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as previously described with minor modifications64,65. All digests were desalted and concentrated with customized reversed-phase C18 stage tips66. Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 5% formic acid and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  LC–MS/MS analysis using Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF Mass spectrometry was performed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) using the Xcalibur version 2.1.0 coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow system via a nanoelectrospray ion source using liquid junction (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Solvents for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry separation of the digested samples were as follows: solvent A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and solvent B consisted of 0.4% formic acid in 70% methanol and 20% isopropanol. From a thermostatic micro-autosampler, 8 μL of the tryptic peptide mixture were automatically loaded onto a trap column (Zorbax 300SB-C18 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, Agilent) with a binary pump at a flow rate of 45 μL/min. 0.1% TFA was used for loading and washing the precolumn. After washing, the peptides were eluted by back-flushing onto a 16 cm fused silica analytical column with an inner diameter of 50 μm packed with C18 reversed phase material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The peptides were eluted from the analytical column with a 27 min gradient ranging from 3 to 30% solvent B, followed by a 25 min gradient from 30 to 70% solvent B, and, finally, a 7 min gradient from 70 to 100% solvent B at a constant flow rate of 100 nL/min. The analyses were performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode using a top 15 CID or HCD method. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 60 s. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed. The maximal ion accumulation time for MS in the Orbitrap and MS2 in the linear trap was 500 and 50 ms, respectively. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the ion traps. For MS and MS2, automatic gain control was set to 106 and 5,000 ions, respectively. Peptides were detected in MS mode at a resolution of 60000 (at m/z 400). The threshold for switching from MS to MS2 was 2,000 counts. All samples were analyzed as technical, back-to-back replicates.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were interpreted using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and proteins were identified using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK). Spectra were matched against the SwissProt/UniProt human (Homo sapiens) protein database. The MS/MS ion search parameters were the following: the number of maximum missed cleavages for trypsin was 2; peptide mass tolerance was ±10 ppm (#13C = 1) and fragment mass tolerance was ±0.1 Da; carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were determined as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Additional search using hypusine, deoxyhypusine and acetylhypusine modifications on lysine residues was performed. The significant threshold for matched peptides was given as p < 0.05. Protein identity was considered as verified if it was present at least with two unique peptide sequences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gls2

### Affiliations
Private Medical University of Salzburg
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Fernando J. Sialana

### Lab Head
Dr Fernando Sialana
Private Medical University of Salzburg


