### Accession
PXD009953

### Title
Biomechanical and proteomic characterization of scaffold-free non-hypertrophic cartilage made of human adipose stem cell spheroids

### Description
Objective: We attempted to obtain a non-hypertrophic cartilage using ASC spheroids. In this study, several techniques were used to identify potential biomarkers of our in vitro model of chondrogenesis, supporting a phenotype of non-hypertrophic cartilage in induced ASC spheroids.

### Sample Protocol
Suspensions of adipose stem/stromal cells (ASCs) and cartilage progenitor cells (CPCs) were seeded into micromolded nonadhesive hydrogel. ASC spheroids were analyzed for diameter measurement, immunohistochemistry, fusion and biomechanical capacity. After their dissociation, immunophenotype for mesenchymal cell surface markers, cell viability, and quantitative real-time PCR were performed. Both targeted (interleukins and TGF-quantification using CBA and multiplex) and non-targeted (quantitative mass-spectrometry analysis) characterizations were also performed on the culture supernatants. Each sample is treated by a classical iTRAQ or TMT protocol and analyzed by LC-MSMS in DDA TOP20 acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists (.mgf files) were generated with the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) version 5.0 [23, 24] and used for database searches with MASCOT 2.4.1. Mass spectrometry data were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (release 2017_03, 40 500 entries including reversed decoy sequences) with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, proline hydroxylation and iTRAQ or TMT labeling of the N-terminus and lysines were fixed as variable modifications. Two missed cleavages were allowed and trypsin cleavage specificity was selected.A secondary peptide and protein validation was achieved with the TPP and quantitation was achieved using the LIBRA tool of the TPP (default parameters). The final protein lists were compiled using ProteinProphet with a probability of 0.8 resulting in low error rates of 2 %. For iTRAQ/TMT proteomics, log2(condition1:condition2) was calculated for each protein and normalized. Proteins were considered to be differentially expressed in two conditions when the corresponding normalized ratios were < 0.5 or > 1.5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cartilage, Lc-msms, Adipose stem/stromal cells, Secretome, Scaffold-free, Spheroids

### Affiliations
CNRS UMS3444 Protein Science Facility
CNRS UMS3444-Protein Science Facility

### Submitter
Frederic DELOLME

### Lab Head
Dr DELOLME frederic
CNRS UMS3444-Protein Science Facility


